War Expenditure

although the clamour of the agriculturists has been silenced, for a
time, by the return of comparatively high prices; and although the
questions to which it gave rise have lost that peculiar interest, which
temporary circumstances had conferred upon them; we deem no apology
necessary for laying before our readers a review of a pamphlet, in which
are propounded, and from no mean authority, not only the most incorrect
views on the causes of agricultural distress, but various errors of a
more general nature, and affecting the vital parts of the science of
political economy.

Mr. Blake begins his pamphlet by the following words:

There never, perhaps, was a period which presented to the political
economist so many interesting objects of enquiry as that which has
occurred during the continuance, and since the termination of the late
war. Peace, instead of its accustomed attendant blessings, seems to have
brought calamity and distress upon almost every class of society; and
the circumstances in which we are placed appear to be so peculiar and
anomalous, as scarcely to admit of a satisfactory solution. We have seen
landed proprietors without rents; farmers and manufacturers without a
market; the monied capitalist ready to lend, and the merchant not
wanting to borrow; a redundant capital, yet a redundant population; and
the industrious poor compelled to apply, like mendicants, at the parish
workhouse. (P. 1.)

Before broaching a theory to explain an alleged fact, it would have been
better if Mr. Blake had first ascertained whether the fact itself was
real. To us he appears to have pursued a contrary course. He first
started a theory; and because it suited his theory that there should be
universal distress, he persuaded himself that universal distress
existed. We confess, however, that it has hitherto escaped our
observation. We neither saw nor heard it, except in the cant of the
agriculturists. Distress among the landlords, there undoubtedly was: as
much distress as is implied in the necessity of contracting the expenses
to which they had become habituated in the days of that good fortune,
which was altogether unlooked-for and unearned, and of which, had they
studied general principles, instead of scoffing at them, they would have
foreseen the speedy termination. All classes, however, not directly or
indirectly connected with the land, were so far from partaking in
Edition: current; Page: [4] the agricultural distress, that they were
actually in the enjoyment of unexampled prosperity. A few years before,
the manufacturers complained of distress: but then, rents were high, and
landlords insolent. Similar vicissitudes of distress and
prosperity—to-day, agricultural prosperity and manufacturing
distress—to-morrow, agricultural distress and manufacturing prosperity,
may be expected to recur again and again without end, unless our corn
laws should be repealed, or the seasons should cease to vary. But,
although we are aware that, in the estimation of a great majority of
members of parliament, the “landed interest” is the nation, and
agricultural distress is national ruin, it is not so in ours; and we are
very sceptical as to that universal distress, of which, at one time, we
heard so much. Even Mr. Blake cannot assert it without contradicting
himself. “A redundant capital, yet a redundant population:” in other
words, too much to eat, and too many mouths to eat it.

The great fluctuations, however, which have taken place during the last
thirty years, in the prices of agricultural produce, are highly
interesting phenomena, and every plausible attempt to explain them is
worthy of some attention. The ability, moreover, which Mr. Blake has
displayed, even in the support of what we deem erroneous doctrines, and
his general acquaintance, in which he is excelled by few, with the
science of political economy, give an importance to his errors, even
greater than they derive from the nature of the subject: since, if it
can be shewn that even he could urge in their defence no arguments which
may not be satisfactorily refuted, the true doctrines on this subject
may be considered as placed beyond the reach of dispute.

There are three causes, to some one, or more, of which, the fluctuations
in prices have been attributed:

1st. The alterations in the currency.

2dly. War, and the transition from war to peace.

3dly. The varieties of the seasons.

Mr. Tooke, in his excellent work on High and Low Prices, enters into a
detailed examination of these three suppositions; and arrives at the
conclusion, that the variations in prices were owing, in some degree, to
the alterations in the currency, but mainly to the seasons, and in no
degree to war, except in as far as it tended to obstruct the supply of
imported commodities. In this opinion we fully coincide. To take even a
cursory view of the evidence upon which it is founded, forms no part of
our present purpose, and we must be content with referring the reader to
Mr. Tooke’s work.*

Edition: current; Page: [5]
Mr. Blake has adopted the theory of war demand: and upon this
hypothesis, he endeavours to account, not only for that portion of the
fluctuations in prices, which Mr. Tooke ascribes to the seasons, but
even for that portion which Mr. Tooke (in conjunction, we believe, with
all other political economists, except Mr. Blake) ascribes to the
alterations in the currency. Mr. Blake, in fact, denies that any
depreciation whatever took place during the Bank restriction: and to
prove this, is the ostensible object of his pamphlet.

There can be no doubt, [says he,] that, subsequently to the restriction
on cash payments in 1797,[*] every symptom that indicates an over-issue
of paper circulation, and an alteration in the value of the currency,
has manifested itself. We have witnessed a depression of the exchanges,
to a degree, and for a continuance, that has been unexampled. We have
had the market price of gold exceeding the mint price, far beyond the
limits that could have occurred if the Bank had been paying in specie.
We have seen the legislature compelled to pass an act to make Bank notes
a legal tender, in order to prevent an avowed difference between
payments in gold, and payments in paper. And all this accompanied by a
general rise of price in most of the articles of consumable produce.

Now, I have no hesitation in admitting, that all the symptoms just
enumerated, are indications of an excess of currency, and of
depreciation: and, further, that an over-issue of currency could not
exist for any length of time, without producing these symptoms.

I have, however, perfectly convinced my own mind, that all the results
above specified, may have arisen from causes not necessarily connected
with an alteration in the value of the currency; and moreover, that such
other causes are not hypothetical merely, but have been in actual
operation. (Pp. 3-4.)

These other causes, it seems, are to be sought for in the war
expenditure of government.

I have very little doubt that the whole of these appearances may be
traced, and will be found to have originated, in the enormous
expenditure occasioned by the late war, the extent of which has perhaps
had no parallel either in degree or duration, and never before has been
combined with a restriction on payments in specie by the Bank. By object
is, to shew, that these effects not only may have arisen, but must have
arisen, from such an enormous and continued expenditure, although the
currency had remained in its most perfect state, and had been invariably
kept to the due proportion which it ought to bear in relation to the
commodities to be circulated by it. (Pp. 4-5.)

In order not to perplex the argument, [he continues,] it will be
advisable to divide the subject into two distinct parts: in the first of
which, I shall endeavour Edition: current; Page: [6] to prove that the
adverse exchanges, and the excess of the market price above the mint
price of bullion, were mainly caused by the large foreign expenditure of
government:—and in the second, that the general rise in the price of all
consumable produce was the necessary effect of circumstances connected
with the war, and the increased internal expenditure of government. (Pp.
5-6.)

Mr. Blake has divided his work into two parts, corresponding with these
two divisions of his subject. As the second part is of far greater
importance than the first, because it includes the peculiar features of
Mr. Blake’s theory, and because some of the fallacies urged in it are
very commonly received, we shall hasten to the discussion of it, after
bestowing upon the first part as few words as possible, beyond what is
absolutely necessary for a satisfactory exposition.

Mr. Blake ascribes the high premium on foreign bills to the increased
demand for them on the part of government during the war, for the
purpose of foreign payments. In corroboration of this theory, he states,
that the news of Buonaparte’s landing from Elba, produced in one day an
advance of ten per cent in the price of bills, arising solely from the
anticipation of an increased government demand.[*]

It might be asked, Why, after the premium on foreign bills had risen so
much as to exceed the expense of transmitting bullion, when debtors
would of course find it more advantageous to discharge their debts by
the transmission of bullion than of bills, bullion was not sent abroad,
and the equilibrium by that means restored? In answer to this objection,
Mr. Blake admits, that if the Bank Restriction Act had not then been in
operation, the process which we have described would actually have taken
place. As, however, no gold could be procured at the Bank, it was
necessary to apply to the bullion-broker; who would consider that, by
exporting bullion, and drawing a bill against it, which he could sell at
a premium, he would gain the difference between the premium and the cost
of carriage. If, therefore, instead of exporting his bullion, he
consented to sell it to an exchange broker for exportation, it must be
at a price which would afford him at least equal profit. And thus,
according to Mr. Blake, bullion rose in price, and gave rise to the
supposition that our paper currency was depreciated; whereas in fact, it
was not paper which fell, but gold which rose.*

Edition: current; Page: [7]
This reasoning, we fear, will not bear examination. There can be no
doubt that an absorption of bullion, either from a sudden government
demand, or from any other cause, may raise the price of bullion, and
depress the exchanges for a few days, or even for a few weeks; but it is
well known by what process these effects are corrected. A sudden
enhancement of the value of the precious metals, which is tantamount to
a sudden fall in the bullion values of all commodities, infallibly
remedies itself, by causing an increase of exports, and a proportional
diminution of imports. The steps of this process are so very generally
understood, that we shall not weary the reader by tracing them. Mr.
Blake himself does not call in question the general principle. But he
endeavours to prove this case to have been an exception. His argument
principally rests upon the obstacles thrown in the way of exportation by
the anti-commercial decrees of the French government. Because these
obstacles greatly enhanced the cost of conveying goods from this country
to the continent, he assumes that they counteracted the effect which the
rise in the value of bullion would otherwise have had in promoting
exportation.

Some estimate, [says he,] of the extent of these difficulties, and of
the expenses of sending goods to the continent, may be formed from the
fact that during the Milan decrees, the insurance against the risk of
seizure in the ports of the Baltic could not be effected for a less
premium than from 20 to 30 per cent. (Note to p. 32.)*

The expense of exportation may have attained any amount, and the
argument might not be affected by it. The question is, not what was the
expense, but whether the profit exceeded the expense.

It is necessary here to call in some chronological considerations. Down
Edition: current; Page: [8] to the year 1809, the difference between
paper and gold was a mere trifle. So early as the close of the year
1807, the obstacles to direct commercial intercourse between this
country and the continent, were as great as at any subsequent period.
From these facts, two inferences may be drawn. First, that, at a period
when the alleged cause of a high price of gold was in full operation,
namely, a great foreign expenditure, combined with great difficulties of
exportation, the alleged effect nevertheless did not take place, or, at
least, only to a trifling extent; while two years afterwards, without
any perceptible increase of the cause, the effect sustained a great and
sudden augmentation; the price of gold having been, in April and May
1809, as high as £4. 10s. per oz. This renders Mr. Blake’s theory, to
say the least, improbable: but there is another consideration which, in
our opinion, is still more decisive.

In the years 1807 and 1808, notwithstanding the enhanced expenses of
transit, exportation proceeded not only to its usual extent, but to an
extent rather exceeding the average of the preceding four years: as is
apparent from the following table.

_Total_ official _value of exports from Great Britain in the Years
ended_ 5_th January,_ 1804, 1805, 1806, 1807, 1808, _and_ 1809
Years ending 5th January
Total value
[*]Cf. Tooke, _Thoughts and Details,_ 2nd ed., Appendix to Part II, p.
1.
1804
£31,578,495
1805
34,451,367
1806
34,954,845
1807
36,527,184
1808
34,566,571
1809
34,554,267[*]

At the end of this period, it is to be observed, that the exchange was
nearly at par, and gold nearly at the mint price. Then came, according
to Mr. Blake, a sudden rise of the value of bullion, not only relatively
to paper, but relatively to commodities: a rise, let us suppose, of 10
per cent, equivalent to a fall of 10 per cent in the bullion values of
commodities. There can be no doubt, that if this 10 per cent were the
whole of the profit upon exportation, and the charges exceeded 10 per
cent, no exportation could take place. But, in the present case, the 10
per cent, instead of being the whole of the profit, was exactly 10 per
cent superadded, to a profit already sufficient. Nothwithstanding the
obstructions to commerce, goods could be exported and sold with the
ordinary profit, while they remained at their Edition: current; Page:
[9] former value in the home market. It follows, that when goods fell 10
per cent below their former value, the profit upon their exportation
must have been increased by 10 per cent. They could already be exported
with the ordinary profit; they could now be exported with the ordinary
profit, and 10 per cent more. It will not be maintained, that an
occurrence took place which must necessarily have added 10 per cent to
the profit upon exportation, and that an increase of exportation was not
the consequence. A rise of three, two, or even one per cent, in the
value of bullion, would have sufficed to produce such an exportation of
goods, as would have speedily sunk bullion to its former level.

This reasoning appears to us conclusive. It proves that gold neither
did, nor could, experience a rise of any duration as compared with
commodities, by reason of the government expenditure. The conclusion,
however, does not rest solely upon this basis, strong as it is.

Let it be supposed for a moment, that gold rises in this country 10 per
cent; or which is the same thing, that all commodities fall 10 per cent,
as compared with gold. This effect would correct itself, partly, as we
have observed, by promoting exportation; but partly also by discouraging
importation. If some commodities, which were before too dear, are now
cheap enough, to be exported; there are some commodities also, which
were imported before, but which, having fallen in the home, without
falling in the foreign market, can be imported no longer. The exports
therefore would be increased, the imports diminished, and gold would be
imported, until prices, in both countries, were restored to their former
level. Suppose, now, that from any cause whatever, an increase of
exportation should become impossible: the same result which was formerly
brought about by two causes, increased exportation and diminished
importation, would now be brought about by the latter cause only.
Merchants might be prevented from exporting at a profit, but they could
not be forced to import at a loss. The imports must be diminished: and
as the inducement to diminish them would only cease, when the influx of
gold had sunk the metal to its former value, a much greater diminution
would be necessary, than would have been required if the current of gold
had been swelled by an increase of exportation.

If then we were to grant to Mr. Blake the full value of his assertion,
that the obstructions to commerce prevented any increase of exports, the
refutation would not be, on that account, the less complete. He will
scarcely contend that anti-commercial decrees prevent commerce from
being diminished, however much they may prevent it from being increased.
He may urge, indeed, that the imports were not in fact diminished, or
not to the extent which would have been necessary to restore the value
of gold. This we admit: and we regard it as a decisive reductio ad
absurdum of his Edition: current; Page: [10] own argument. It must, we
think, be allowed, that if bullion rose in value, and the exports were
not increased, the imports must have been diminished. If then it be true
that the imports were not diminished, one of two things must necessarily
follow. Either bullion did not rise, or, bullion having risen, the
exports were increased. Both suppositions are equally fatal to the
hypothesis of Mr. Blake.

If Mr. Blake should still hold out against arguments to all appearance
so convincing, there is one fact, which we think, even he himself will
acknowledge to be decisive.

In the years 1813 and 1814, all obstacles to exportation were removed;
and in consequence of speculations on supplying the continental market
with goods which had long been partially excluded from it, exportation
was going on to an extent almost unexampled. If, therefore, Mr. Blake’s
theory be correct; if the high price of gold was owing to the
obstructions to exportation; we should expect that, in 1814, when those
obstructions were removed, gold would fall to its ordinary price. Yet so
far was this from being the case, that gold was in that year at its
highest elevation, being nearly 25 per cent above the mint price. On
what principles can Mr. Blake explain this? We leave it for his
consideration.

There is one fact, to which Mr. Blake attaches the greatest importance:
we mean, the sudden fall of the exchanges, on the news of Napoleon’s
landing from Elba. This, however, only proves what no one ever denied;
that a great and sudden disturbance in the ordinary state of the
interchange between two countries, does not rectify itself all at once.
The fall of the exchanges was evidently owing to a speculation upon the
profit to be derived by supplying government with bills at a high
premium, for immediate transmission to the continent. It was a
speculation such as no one who could trace the connexion of cause and
effect would have made, since it was easy to foresee that the foreign
payments would eventually be performed, by the transmission, not of
bullion, but of goods. Had the war continued somewhat longer than it
did, this would soon have been experimentally proved. But in consequence
of the speedy termination of the war, the foreign expenditure of
government did not take place to the extent which had been anticipated,
and the exchanges and the price of gold speedily returned to their
former level.

The attempt, therefore, to prove that the high price of gold and the low
exchanges were the effect of war expenditure, in whatever light we
regard it, appears equally abortive.

Not content with maintaining his own position, Mr. Blake steps out of
his way to combat one of the most important principles in the theory of
foreign commerce, as laid down by Mr. Ricardo; a principle which, by the
way, we are almost led to doubt whether he fully comprehends.

Edition: current; Page: [11]
Mr. Ricardo, whose opinions upon subjects connected with political
economy will always be received with the deference due to one whose
writings have so much contributed to the advancement of the science,
entertains such very peculiar notions on the subject of exchanges, that
I do not see how he can attain a correct view of the bearings of this
question: for he seems to maintain, in all his publications, that the
variations of the exchange arise solely from the variations in the
comparative value of the currencies of different countries, and does not
admit that the exchange is dependent upon the balance of debts and
credits. (P. 26.)

Now we will take upon ourselves to assert that Mr. Ricardo never
maintained so preposterous a doctrine, as that the exchange is not
dependant upon the balance of debts and credits. What he maintained was,
that the balance of debts and credits among the countries of the world,
is dependant upon the comparative values of their currencies, and in the
ordinary state of the intercourse between one nation and another, when
their mutual transactions are of a purely commercial nature, and when
neither goods nor gold are exported and imported for any other purpose
than that of deriving profit from them; the proposition of Mr. Ricardo,
is, in our opinion, strictly true. And this, we think, a very slight
consideration will suffice to show.

There is a certain state of the precious metals throughout the world, to
which they have a constant tendency to approximate: a state in which
their value, although not equal in all countries, differs only in
proportion to the unavoidable differences in the cost of conveying them
from the mines, and in which, therefore, they cannot be exported from
one country to another with advantage. When the precious metals are
distributed in this manner among commercial countries, their imports and
exports exactly balance one another, and the exchange is at par. Let us
now suppose that the exchange between England and some other country,
say France, has become unfavourable to England: and let us consider,
what may be inferred. In the first place, it is evident, that a balance
of the precious metals is due from England to France. England,
therefore, must have imported more than she has exported: in other
words, it does not suit her to pay for the whole of her imports by means
of goods. Now this is in itself a proof that the habitual distribution
of the precious metals has been disturbed. Had it been otherwise, it
would still have been, as before, more profitable for England to pay for
her imports in goods than in gold. She now exports gold; formerly she
exported goods only: gold, which was before a disadvantageous
remittance, has now become an advantageous one. One of two things,
therefore, must have happened: gold must either have fallen in England,
or risen in France. In either case, the variation in the exchange is
caused by a variation in the comparative values of the two currencies.

It does not enter into our present purpose, to refute all the objections
which have been brought against this theory; but one objection, which
has Edition: current; Page: [12] been urged by Mr. Blake, as it is
extremely plausible, is worthy of a concise refutation.

It is easy to conceive an intercourse between trading nations of the
following description. England might send hardware to Spain, Spain might
send wool to France, and France send wine to England; in which case the
respective debts and credits would be liquidated through a circuitous
remittance, known technically by the term arbitration of exchange. The
direct exchanges, however, between England and Spain would be in favour
of England; between Spain and France, in favour of Spain; and between
France and England, in favour of France. If these exchanges are to be
considered as indicating a corresponding difference in the value of the
respective currencies, it would follow that the currency of England was
more valuable than that of Spain; that of Spain more valuable than the
currency of France; and the currency of France more valuable than that
of England: that is, A greater than B, B greater than C, and C greater
than A, which is evidently impossible. (P. 29, note.)

This reasoning, as it appears to us, is wholly founded upon a
misconception of the facts. The case is, that the exchange between
England and Spain would not be in favour of England, nor that between
France and England in favour of France. The exchange would, in all the
three countries, be at par. And we are surprised that Mr. Blake, who is
not only an acute reasoner but a practical man, should not be aware that
this would necessarily be the case. The exchanges in any country, in
England for instance, do not depend upon the balance of her commercial
transactions with one country, but upon the balance of her total
commercial transactions with all countries. England may export to Spain,
without importing any thing in return: she may also import from France,
without exporting the value of a farthing to that country. But it does
not follow, either that her exchange with Spain would be favourable, or
that her exchange with France would be unfavourable. She would pay her
debt to France with bills upon Spain: and it is abundantly manifest,
that if the balance due by Spain to England, was exactly equal to the
balance due by England to France, the supply of bills would precisely
equal the demand, and the exchanges would neither be favourable nor
unfavourable to England, but would be exactly at par.

The first part of Mr. Blake’s argument being now disposed of; we shall
next turn our attention to the second.

Having proved, as he thinks, that the high price of gold, and the
depression of the exchanges, do not afford any conclusive evidence of a
depreciation, Mr. Blake informs us, that the only remaining circumstance
from which the existence of a depreciation was inferred, the high range
of general prices, remains to be accounted for.

One of the causes which he considers to have been instrumental in
producing this phenomenon, is taxation: but, if we may judge from the
very elaborate attempt which follows, to trace up the greater part of
the effect Edition: current; Page: [13] to a very different cause, Mr.
Blake himself does not attach much weight to the influence of taxation,
in occasioning the high prices. We shall therefore content ourselves
with repeating a remark which has been made by Mr. Tooke,[*] and which
is, on this point, a decisive answer to Mr. Blake. The whole of the
taxes, which existed during the war, including land-tax, tithe, and
poor-rate, with the exception of the income-tax, continued without any
diminution, down to the summer of 1822. The lowest point in the
depression of prices was thus attained, before a single tax, by which
prices could possibly be affected, was taken off. If taxation had raised
prices, taxation would have prevented them from falling. How can that be
the cause of the high prices, which equally subsisted when prices were
at the lowest?

The cause, however, to which Mr. Blake principally ascribes the high
range of general prices, affirmed to have existed during the war, is a
supposed extra demand, which he considers to have been produced by the
war expenditure of government. The following is the substance of his
argument:—[†]

Upwards of five hundred millions of capital were borrowed and spent by
government from 1793 to 1815 inclusive. This sum was employed, partly in
the purchase of commodities, partly in the hiring of soldiers, sailors,
and various other classes of unproductive labourers. The large sums thus
expended in the purchase of commodities, would not, he thinks, have been
so expended, but for the war; and he considers it to have raised prices.
The sum which was expended in the purchase of labour raised wages; and
the increased funds thus placed at the command of the labourer,
constituted in his hands an additional source of demand, which still
further raised the prices of commodities. A strong stimulus was thus
given to production, and a great extension to consumption. On the peace,
this stimulus ceased: the extra demand generated by the war expenditure
no longer had any existence: prices fell; producers were ruined; and the
consequence was, a great diminution of production.

Two fallacies are involved in this reasoning: first, that of supposing
that expenditure, as contradistinguished from saving, can by any
possibility constitute an additional source of demand: and secondly,
that of conceiving that capital which being borrowed by government
becomes a source of demand in its hands, would not have been equally a
source of demand in the hands of those from whom it is taken.

A mass of capital which is lent to government, and an equal mass which
remains in the hands of the capitalist, are both consumed, and both,
possibly, within the same space of time. The difference is, that the
first, when consumed, leaves nothing behind it, the other, leaves in its
place another Edition: current; Page: [14] capital not only equal, but
greater: for, having been productively consumed, it has been re-produced
with a profit. Both, while the consumption is going on, are equally
sources of demand: but no sooner is the one consumed, than the demand
which it afforded ceases to exist: the other continues to afford a
demand, which instead of diminishing, continually increases, as often as
the capital is re-produced with a profit.

From this it may be seen, how fallacious every argument is, which
proceeds upon the supposition that a fund becomes a source of demand by
being spent, while it would not have become so by being saved. A loan is
a mere transfer of a portion of capital from the lender to the
government: had it remained with the lender it would have been a
constant and perennial source of demand: when taken and spent by the
government, it is a transitory and fugitive one.

Mr. Blake maintains, that the capital borrowed by government is not
removed from a productive employment, but would have lain dormant in the
hands either of the lender or of some one else, in the shape of goods
for which no market could be found. This he considers himself to have
proved by a species of reductio ad absurdum.[*] The argument is
ingenious, and has only one defect, that of not touching the question.
He argues that if a sum amounting to upwards of twenty millions had been
annually withdrawn from productive employments,—if the whole of the five
hundred millions which were expended by government during the war, had
been really subtracted from the capital of the country, production would
have been diminished to that extent, wages would have been lowered,
millions of people thrown out of employment, and misery and desolation
would have overspread the kingdom.

Such a state of affairs, [says he (pp. 53-4)] is not only utterly
inconceivable, but is at absolute variance with all our past experience.
The funds which gave subsistence to twenty millions of people, cannot
have disappeared without our being aware of the loss; and during a
period when, instead of distress from want of employment, we have
witnessed the greatest activity in every department of industry, every
symptom of increasing capital, increasing wages, and increasing
population, affording the strongest evidence of prosperity and wealth.
There must either be some gross and radical error in the theory that
leads to such absurd results, or, in making the application of the
theory to the actual circumstances of the country, some material fact
must have been overlooked that has either corrected or mitigated the
desolation that would otherwise have ensued.

From this language it may be inferred, that Mr. Blake is ignorant of the
arguments of those whom he professes to refute. They have never
contended that the capital of the country was actually diminished to the
extent of the funds spent by government. Their assertion has always
been, that the Edition: current; Page: [15] accumulation going on in the
hands of individuals was sufficient to counteract the effect of that
wasteful expenditure, and to prevent capital from being diminished. The
same accumulation would have sufficed, but for the government
expenditure, to produce an enormous increase.

It being evident, that the capital expended by government is not a new
fund suddenly called into existence, but a fund which already existed,
in the hands of the producers; Mr. Blake is forced, as we have seen, to
assert, that it existed in the form of goods, for which there was no
demand. This compels him to maintain the fallacy of the universal glut:
a fallacy of so much consequence, that a more than ordinary degree of
attention is required for its examination.

To avoid the suspicion of misrepresenting any part of Mr. Blake’s
argument, we shall quote it in his own words:—

The political economists of the present day have endeavoured to shew
that profits never permanently fall in consequence of the competition of
capitalists, lowering price by over-production. They admit that there
may be a partial glut of particular commodities, from miscalculation of
the wants of the market; but that over-production can never induce a
general glut, and that profits will not fall from this cause, but will
be regulated by the rate of wages, and the rate of wages by the quality
of the last land taken into cultivation.

This doctrine, I think, has been pushed a little too far. It proceeds
upon the assumption that every addition to capital necessarily creates
its own demand; but in applying the theory to the actual circumstances
of mankind, some inseparable conditions appear to me to have been
overlooked. It takes for granted, that new tastes, new wants, and a new
population, increase simultaneously with the new capital; a supposition
which is not consonant with the fact. The advocates of this theory
contend, that demand and supply are correlative terms, and must always
exactly balance each other. That any commodity being in excess proves
the efforts of the capitalists to have been misdirected, and that there
must be a corresponding deficiency in other things.

Nothing can be more clear than that, in order to make a demand, you must
have an equivalent to offer in exchange. Something must be produced to
demand with. In other words, the terms demand and supply merely express
that one sort of supply is exchanged against another sort of supply.
This is perfectly true as far as both sorts of supply are wanted for
consumption. If one set of capitalists produce a given quantity of cloth
beyond their own immediate wants, and another set of capitalists produce
an equivalent quantity of corn, also beyond their wants, the surplus
quantity of corn may be exchanged against the surplus quantity of cloth,
and thus afford a profitable market to each other. But this proposition
implies that there is not more corn and cloth in the whole than the two
classes of capitalists want to consume. If more than that is produced,
the surplus is absolute waste on both sides; and all the labour thrown
away. I shall be asked, no doubt, does not this arise from
miscalculation on the part of the producers? Undoubtedly it does, but it
is not an excess of one commodity, and a deficiency in another. It is an
excess of both. Why then were the corn and the cloth produced? For this
plain reason: neither the corn grower, nor the cloth maker, could know
that there would be an excess, till the excess occurred. Each Edition:
current; Page: [16] depended upon a market, and was mistaken. If every
thing could be foreseen, mankind would not miscalculate, and there would
be no overstocking of the market. But they do miscalculate, and the
market is overstocked. When savings are devoted to re-production, each
manufacturer employs the additional capital in fabricating that class of
commodities which he has been in the habit of making. But if there was
already more than sufficient, the addition must still further increase
the excess. How is it possible for this process to continue without a
fall in prices, and a lower rate of profit to the capitalist? (pp.
58-60.)

The argument which proves that there never can be that general want of
market which is described in the above passage, possesses a greater
degree of cogency than is often found in the moral sciences. It is not a
deduction of probabilities. It possesses all the certainty of a
mathematical demonstration: for it is involved in the very meaning of
the words, demand and supply.

The demand of a country is made up of the demand of every individual in
the country. The supply of a country is the aggregate of the supply of
every individual. If, therefore, it can be proved, that every person’s
demand exactly equals his supply, it will be established that the demand
of the whole country, and its supply, exactly balance one another.

When an individual comes to market, he brings with him a supply
consisting of all the commodities which he has to dispose of. But he
also brings with him a demand, of exactly the same amount. His only
reason for wishing to sell is, that he may be enabled to buy. The means
which he possesses of buying are measured by the quantity of commodities
which he brings to sell.

The same reasoning may be applied to a nation. The supply of a nation
consists of its commodities. But those commodities are also the measure
of its purchasing power. A nation, therefore, has always a power of
purchasing, equal in amount to the whole of the commodities which it has
to sell.*

Mr. Blake admits this argument to be unanswerable, provided it be
granted, that new tastes and new wants spring up with the new capital.
We think it will appear, upon a slight consideration, that this is a
misconception of the state of the question. He has assumed two things,
first, that there is a limit beyond which human desires do not go, a
quantum of enjoyment which mankind do not wish to exceed; and secondly,
that if all their desires are satisfied, they will still continue to
produce. We should be prepared to dispute the first point with Mr.
Blake; but we are contented to rest our case upon the second.

It would be absurd to suppose, that men would forego the satisfaction of
present desires in order to have the means of gratifying wants which
they do not feel. New tastes and new wants may, or may not, spring up
with new Edition: current; Page: [17] capital; but it is quite certain,
that if a man continues to produce, he has either acquired new tastes
and wants, or some of his old ones still remain unsatisfied. Thus, for
instance, taking the case most favourable to Mr. Blake, that in which
all mankind are supposed voluntarily to confine their consumption to the
necessaries of life; let us, with Mr. Blake, exclude from the argument
all commodities except corn and cloth. It is true, that the demand of
both sets of producers for corn and cloth is limited; and that if more
is produced of both commodities than they wish to consume, the surplus
is absolute waste. But how can we suppose than the corn grower, after he
has produced as much corn as he himself wishes to consume, and likewise
as much as will enable him to purchase the requisite quantity of cloth,
will continue to take the trouble of producing for no purpose?

The following is the plausible manner in which Mr. Blake disposes of
this argument:—

Whenever savings are made from revenue, it is clear that the person
entitled to enjoy the portion saved, is satisfied without consuming it.
It proves that the industry of the country is capable of raising more
produce than the wants of the community require. If the quantity saved
is employed as capital in re-producing a value equivalent to itself,
together with a profit, this new creation, when added to the general
fund, can be drawn out by that person alone who made the savings; that
is, by the very person who has already shown his disinclination to
consume. (P. 56.)

This argument refutes itself. For if it be correct, it proves that there
can be no addition to capital, without producing a glut. All
accumulation is from saving. If it be true, that he who saves shows his
disinclination to consume, it follows, that an increase of produce can
never find a market, since no one else has the means of increasing his
consumption, and he who accumulates, has not the will. Every increase of
wealth would, on this supposition, be an increase of poverty. An
argument which leads to such a result cannot be without a flaw.

The fallacy of Mr. Blake’s argument lies in the last phrase. He who
saves from revenue, far from shewing any disinclination to consume that
which he saves, demonstrates conclusively that he wishes to consume not
only that but more. If he had not wished to consume it, he never would
have produced it; but by abstaining from consuming it, for the purpose
of adding it to his capital, he shews, that he desires to consume
something more than it will purchase for him, and that in order to
obtain this something more, he is willing to forego the consumption of
that which he saves. The saving, therefore, instead of proving that the
industry of the country is capable of raising more produce than the
wants of the community require, proves the direct contrary. Men
miscalculate, it is true; but it is concerning the desires of others,
never concerning their own. Every man knows what he himself Edition:
current; Page: [18] wishes for. If any man produces more, it must be
because he desires more; not more cloth, or corn, perhaps, but more of
something: and if all produce more, it is because all desire more. The
requisites for demand are, the wish to consume, and the means of
purchasing. By increasing their supply, they prove themselves to have
the desire, and they obtain the means, of consuming.

We, therefore, conclude, that the funds, which were appropriated by
government and spent during the war, were not lying dormant before that
period for want of a market. The only remaining supposition, then, since
they were not a new creation, is, that they must have been withdrawn
from a productive employment; an employment in which they were expended
in the purchase of goods, and of labour, just as completely as they
afterwards were; and constituted fully as sufficient a source of demand.

Mr. Blake’s attempt, therefore, to prove that the government expenditure
created an extra demand for commodities and labour, a demand which would
not otherwise have existed, entirely falls to the ground; and with it,
the whole of the theory which ascribes to that expenditure the high
prices which prevailed during the war.

In addition to the general arguments which we have now examined, Mr.
Blake has a number of facts, upon which we shall slightly touch; not for
the sake of adding any thing to the evidence upon which our opinion is
founded, but to shew how utterly fruitless are all attempts to prove, by
particular facts, that which cannot be proved upon general principles.

Mr. Blake asserts that the rate of interest has usually been high in
time of war and low during peace;[*] and from this he infers that
profits have been subject to the same law. We admit the fact, as far as
regards the rate of interest; but we are not equally prepared to allow
the correctness of the inference. The rate of interest is governed in
the long run, and on the whole, by the rate of profit; but from this
rule there are occasional deviations. When government comes into the
market, year after year, and takes off that floating capital which is
usually disposed of in loans, the money market is kept constantly
under-supplied; and so long as this state of things continues, interest
may remain at a higher rate than the existing rate of profits would
account for. Thus, during the American war, when trade and profits were
considered to be at a very low ebb, the public funds were low, and the
rate of interest high.

Mr. Blake also urges the eagerness for new speculation, as a proof that
there may be a general want of market:—

That capital exists in a dormant state, and is capable of being called
into increased activity by the application of the proper stimulus, there
cannot be the Edition: current; Page: [19] smallest doubt. Every day’s
experience affords practical evidence of it. No sooner is a market, or
supposed market, opened at Buenos Ayres, or elsewhere, than cargoes to
an immense amount are shipped to take advantage of it. The trade with
India is thrown open, and instantly the different presidencies are
glutted with English goods without any diminution in the supply of the
home market. (Pp. 66-7.)

Is it not clear that a period when the interest of money is low, as,
from whatever cause, it is at present, is precisely the period, when the
tendency to all speculations appearing to hold out a chance of high
profits, may be expected to be the strongest?

Mr. Blake, in various parts of his work, appeals to practical men.

The difficulty of finding employment for new capital is acknowledged by
all practical men. They continually feel and complain that every channel
is full. [P. 60.] Examine the evidence of Alderman Rothwell, Mr.
Rous,[*] and various other witnesses who all agree, that, during the
war, there was both greater production and greater consumption. [P. 67.]

A reasoner must be hard pressed, when he is driven to quote practical
men in aid of his conclusions. There cannot be a worse authority, in any
branch of political science, than that of merely practical men. They are
always the most obstinate and presumptuous of all theorists. Their
theories, which they call practice, and affirm to be the legitimate
results of experience, are built upon a superficial view of the small
number of facts which come within the narrow circle of their immediate
observation; and are usually in direct contradiction to those principles
which are deduced from a general and enlarged experience. Such men are
the most unsafe of all guides, even in matters of fact. More bigotted to
their own theories than the most visionary speculator, because they
believe them to have the warrant of past experience; they have their
eyes open to such facts alone as square with those theories. They are
constantly confounding facts with inferences, and when they see a
little, supply the remainder from their own imaginations.

In this instance, the appeal to practical men, is peculiarly
unfortunate: for the only practical men whose authority is of any
weight, those who join to their personal experience a knowledge of
principle, certainly range themselves on any side rather than that of
Mr. Blake.

In this class Mr. Tooke stands pre-eminent: and we observe, that the
pamphlet before us has elicited from this gentleman (in the second
edition, just published, of his work on High and Low Prices) a most
complete refutation of the facts upon which Mr. Blake’s theory is
founded.[†] He has Edition: current; Page: [20] proved, to our minds
most conclusively, that of scarcely any commodity whatever, except those
which are the peculiar object of war demand, naval and military stores,
was there either greater production, or greater consumption, during the
war, than there has been since the peace. Production increased, it is
true; for even the almost boundless expenditure of the war, could not
altogether counteract the tendency to accumulation: but it was
increasing equally fast before the commencement of the war, and has
increased much faster since its close.

Were the question to be decided by authority, Mr. Tooke might safely be
set up against Alderman Rothwell, Mr. Rous, et hoc genus omne. But he
has not suffered a single fact to rest upon his own authority. All his
statements are given under the sanction of official documents.

The following table contains a summary of Mr. Tooke’s statements. It is
extracted from the second edition of his work, p. 202: and shows the
rate of the increase of production during the twenty years of war, as
compared with the rate of increase before, and after that period:—

_Average Annual Amount of the Tonnage of British Shipping cleared out
from the different Ports of Great Britain; of the Official Value of
Imports and Exports; of the imported Raw Materials of some important
Branches of Manufacture_ (_deducting Re-exports_); _of Tea sold at the
East India Company’s Sales; of various Commodities charged with Excise
from_ 1783 _to_ 1823, _assuming_ 100 _as the amount for the Ten Years
ending in_ 1792, _compared with the Amount of the Population at
different Periods_
BRITISH SHIPS CLEARED OUT
OFFICIAL VALUES
IMPORTED RAW MATERIALS (DEDUCTING RE-EXPORTS)
Tonnage
Total imports
Total exports
British exports
Imports ded. re-exp.
Cotton
Wool
Raw Silk
Flax
Tea sold
10 years to 1792
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
3 years to 1792
118
113
122
125
117
137
129
118
117
118
10 years to 1802
104
149
167
152
127
159
197
97
133
148
10 years to 1812
119
178
207
206
165
318
292
127
157
165
10 years to 1823
172
207
298
310
183
535
640
230
198
183
3 years to 1823
174
213
307
330
210
614
745
310
258
189

COMMODITIES CHARGED WITH EXCISE
POPULATION
Candles
Soap
Beer
Tallow
Sperm Wax
Hides
Malt
Hard
Soft
Bricks
Numbers
Years
10 years to 1792
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
1790
3 years to 1792
109
109
131
105
104
111
101
125
104
1795
10 years to 1802
114
120
154
109
101
129
91
94
106
1801
10 years to 1812
110
139
206
128
92
165
126
131
121
1811
10 years to 1823
112
162
251
127
96
174
181
137
{141
1821
3 years to 1823
114
178
254
128
104
230
215
155

Edition: current; Page: [21]
After what has been done by Mr. Tooke, we should not have thought it
necessary to say any thing farther, had our object been limited to the
refutation of Mr. Blake. No general reasoning could have added to the
conviction which every one must feel, who has perused Mr. Tooke’s detail
of facts, that Mr. Blake’s theory is totally erroneous. What cannot,
however, be proved by any detail of facts, but which it is of the
highest importance to prove, is, that a state of war cannot, under any
circumstances, generate an extra demand. This proposition can be proved
only by general reasoning. If we have done any thing to render the
evidence for it more clear to the mind of any of our readers, our end is
attained.

It is, indeed, a most important proposition. For, although Mr. Blake
contrives, by we know not what process, to evade all the consequences to
which his reasoning, if correct, must necessarily lead, and to arrive by
a round-about course at the very same conclusions, as if he had started
from directly contrary premises, we cannot expect that his disciples, if
he has any, will be equally careful to avoid drawing mischievous
inferences, where those inferences legitimately follow from the
principles which they acknowledge.

Mr. Blake protests (p. 85) against the supposition that he considers the
Bank restriction to have been practically beneficial. Yet the only
ground upon which that measure has ever been censured, is, that it
caused the currency to vary in its value: and Mr. Blake is of opinion,
that instead of causing a variation, it prevented that which would
necessarily have taken place, if the currency had continued on a level
with its nominal standard. We ourselves, if we could believe the Bank
restriction to have had this effect, should be among the warmest of its
defenders and supporters. And we cannot but feel surprise that Mr. Blake
should rank among its mischievous consequences, that of preventing
creditors from receiving a greater value than they lent.*

There is another and a still more mischievous effect, to which the
conclusions of Mr. Blake, should they ever obtain vogue, could not fail
to be made subservient. We have heard before now the fallacy of the
universal glut adduced in justification of enormous taxation, of
extravagant government expenditure, and particularly of wars. How
convenient to all who are interested in these abuses, is such a theory
as that of Mr. Blake! Here, they may say, is a portion of capital,
which, if it remains in the hands of the Edition: current; Page: [22]
producers, must lie dormant in the shape of goods, yielding no advantage
to the owners: let the government take it, to be expended in hiring
soldiers and sailors, and in purchasing naval and military stores; and a
new demand will suddenly be created for all sorts of produce; prices
will rise, the producers will be enriched, the labourers will obtain an
increase of wages, industry will be vivified, and production itself will
be stimulated by that very expenditure, which the people, in their
“ignorant impatience of taxation,” believe to be a calamity.

These conclusions do not follow the less logically from Mr. Blake’s
theory, that he does not alarm us by stating them. If he really is not
aware of the practical inference from his doctrine, we hope that now,
when his attention has been directed to it, he will be induced to
re-consider the grounds upon which that doctrine is founded. That such a
man should, at this time of day, stand forward as the supporter of
refuted, and now almost forgotten, errors, is greatly to be deplored:
and we should feel pride, in contributing any thing towards recalling to
sound principles, one who ought never to have been found on any other
side.

Edition: current; Page: [23]


THE QUARTERLY REVIEW ON POLITICAL ECONOMY
 1825

Edition: current; Page: [24]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Westminster Review, III (Jan., 1825), 213-32. Unsigned; not republished.
Original heading: “Art. IX. The Quarterly Review, No. LX. Art. 1. On the
Essay on Political Economy, in the Supplement to the Encyclopaedia
Britannica.” Running heads: “Periodical Literature.—Quarterly
Review./Political Economy.” Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “A
review of an Article on Political Economy in the Quarterly Review—in the
fifth number of the Westminster Review” (MacMinn, 6). The article is not
mentioned in JSM’s Autobiography; it is identified as JSM’s in the
Somerville College copy, without corrections or variants.

The article in the Quarterly is by Malthus; the essay in the Britannica
is by McCulloch. JSM’s review is part of the continuing attack on the
Quarterly and the Edinburgh which helped establish the reputation of the
Westminster. The tone of the article suggests that JSM is being
consciously ironical in accusing the “Reviewer” (Malthus) of not being
sufficiently Malthusian; there is, however, no external evidence to
support the suggestion.

Edition: current; Page: [25]


The Quarterly Review on Political Economy

had this article been particularly good, we might have left it to work
its way by itself. Had it been bad, after the usual manner of the
Quarterly Review, begging every question on the side of power, we should
not have thought it necessary to add any thing to the exposure which we
have already given of this branch of the aristocratic logic. It happens,
however, that while the article is as bad as might naturally be
expected, considering the quarter from which it comes, there are
peculiarities in its badness, which take it out of the ordinary run of
Quarterly Review articles.

The object of the writer, as described by himself, is, to upset what he
terms the “new school of political economy;”[*] of which school he is
pleased to consider the very able essay* which he has taken for his
text, as the manual. His predictions, with respect to the future fate of
this school, are sufficiently appalling. He threatens them with a
downfal similar to that of the French Economists, between whose system
and theirs, he has discoverd that there is a remarkable similarity; a
piece of information which is as new to us as his menaces are alarming.
We learn that they, to their unspeakable confusion, have set at nought
the wisdom of their ancestors, and “altered the theories of Adam Smith
upon pure speculation”[†] (it would, indeed, have been somewhat
surprising if they had altered them on any other ground). It was fitting
that such unparalleled Edition: current; Page: [26] temerity should not
escape unchastised. Happily, the old and orthodox faith was not left
altogether destitute, for our author remained. It was reserved for him
to carry back the science to its fountainhead—to restore the legitimate
rule of Adam Smith, or, as he afterwards expresses it, of “Adam Smith
and Mr. Malthus.”[*]

A writer who praises what is old and condemns what is new, is exactly
suited to the Quarterly Review; and, considering him merely in the
capacity of a Quarterly Reviewer, we are only surprised that he should
have pitched upon Adam Smith as the object of his idolatry; a writer
who, whatever may be his other merits, cannot lay claim to that of being
two centuries old; and who not only did his utmost to promote an object
so alien to the conceptions and wishes of a Quarterly-Reviewer, as the
improvement of the great mass of mankind, but pursued that object by
means which he cannot but regard as abominable; by pointing out the
defects of existing institutions, and suggesting remedies. If it was
absolutely necessary to have a system, to set up in opposition to the
new-fangled doctrines of later times, a purer source might have been
found from whence to derive it; and the writings of St. Athanasius, St.
Jerome, and St. Augustin, if read with faith, would, doubtless, have
afforded thirty-nine articles of political economy, untainted with the
poison of modern sedition and impiety. Unfortunately, however, man is
presumptuous, and will use his reason, unconscious that he is playing
with edge-tools, and unmoved by the dangers with which he is threatened
by his masters in this world and by his pastors in the next. In vain
does the anxious tenderness of the Quarterly Review represent to him,
that the reason, on which he so arrogantly prides himself, was given by
a benevolent Providence on purpose to delude and mislead him; that the
only safe standard of belief is the faith of his fathers; and that,
although the insufficient records of early times do not permit us to
mount up to the creation of the world, and ascertain what were the
opinions of Adam on the subject of political economy, it is our duty to
approach as near to that summit of orthodoxy as we can. Instead of
listening to these pious exhortations with the reverence and submission
which they deserve, the reader breaks out into a blasphemous laugh, and
shuts the book; for we live in an incredulous age, and we are even
informed that there are some (we say it with horror) who doubt the whole
Athanasian creed, and dispute the divine authority of tithes. Being
unable, therefore, to do what they would, the Reviewers wisely content
themselves with doing what they can. Being unable to drag back the
public mind five thousand years, they are fain to try whether they can
drag it fifty.

To do them justice, they resisted Adam Smith, as long as they could do
so without falling into utter contempt. When the reputation of the
“Wealth Edition: current; Page: [27] of Nations”[*] was not so well
established as it now is, they called it “a tedious and hard-hearted
book, greatly over-valued, even on the score of ability;”[†] it
considered man (they said) in the light of a “manufacturing animal,” and
estimated his importance by the gain which can be extracted from him;
nay, we almost shudder at the treatment which it inflicted upon him,
since it actually “plucked the wings of his intellect,” and “stripped
him of the down and plumage of his virtues.”[‡] Mr. Malthus, too, at
that period surpassed, if possible, even Adam Smith in criminality; and
it was with difficulty that they could find language adequate to express
guilt of so black a dye. They described his reputation as disgraceful to
the age; they made a collection of the most approved epithets,
expressive of all the varieties of wickedness or folly, and heaped them
on his devoted head.* Unfortunately, however, both Adam Smith and Mr.
Malthus proved too strong for the Quarterly Review; and now that the
public mind has got beyond them, the Quarterly Review courts an alliance
even with such monsters of depravity, rather than tolerate that unholy
spirit of progression which is so unhappily conspicuous in the human
species.

This, we say, is quite in character, and can surprise no one; and if the
present article had contained nothing more extraordinary, we should not
have thought it worthy of a lengthened notice in our pages. But this is
far from being the case; and the article is altogether so great a
curiosity, that we could not refrain from drawing to it the attention of
our readers.

When we commenced the perusal, we were considerably startled at the
remarkable similarity of the style to that of Mr. Malthus himself; nor
was our surprise lessened when we found the Reviewer to be a professed
advocate of several opinions, which we had hitherto imagined to be held
by Mr. Malthus exclusively. Whatever suspicions, however, we might have
formed at the beginning of the article, they were effectually dispelled
before we arrived at the close; nor was it long before we discovered
that this writer, under the mask of a devoted adherent of Mr. Malthus,
is, in reality, his concealed enemy, and affects to defend his
doctrines, merely to have an opportunity of exhibiting them and him in a
ridiculous and contemptible attitude. In this attempt, candour
constrains us to own that he has completely succeeded: for the article
is precisely such as the bitterest enemy of Mr. Malthus would have
wished him to write; and the imitation is so close, that even we, who
believe ourselves to be tolerably well versed in Mr. Edition: current;
Page: [28] Malthus’s writings, were, for a time, deceived by it. Not
having heard, however, that Mr. Malthus has yet publicly disavowed the
opinions which are here put forward as his, or disclaimed connexion with
the Reviewer, whom he probably deems altogether unworthy of his notice,
we are apprehensive lest some incautious reader, misled by the confident
tone of the Reviewer, and by the air of sincerity which finely
characterises his irony, should unguardedly conclude that he is in
earnest, and should mistake this grave piece of raillery for a serious
exposé of Mr. Malthus’s opinions. Few persons are inclined to allow a
larger scope to wit and ridicule than ourselves; but when wit and
ridicule assume so malignant a form, we should be wanting in our duty,
if we did not come forward to unmask the cheat and put the public on
their guard.

Among not a few other difficulties, however, with which we shall have to
contend in the execution of our design, one, and that one not the least
considerable, is the impossibility of making the malicious accuracy of
the imitation perceptible to those who are but imperfectly acquainted
with the original; a description of persons including, we are greatly
apprehensive, a very considerable proportion of the public. Few, we
fear, of our readers can boast, like ourselves, of having effected the
reading of Mr. Malthus’s “Measure of Value,”[*] and of his “Principles
of Political Economy.”[†] It is indeed a task by no means lightly to be
engaged in, and upon which we cannot advise any person to enter without
being aware what it is which he undertakes. For if Mr. Malthus excels in
any thing, it is not certainly in smoothing the road to knowledge; and
if any truths are contained in the works to which we have alluded, they
must be of the number of those truths which lie hidden in the bottom of
a well.

On reflection, however, it occurred to us, that if few have read Mr.
Malthus, it is only the more necessary that some person who has read him
should step forward to vindicate his reputation from the calumnious
insinuations of this pretended disciple; who not only puts forward Mr.
Malthus’s peculiar doctrines in such a manner as actually to direct the
assailant to all the points most open to attack; but affects to consider
as the opinions of Mr. Malthus, opinions utterly inconsistent with, and
even contrary to, those which that gentleman has always professed to
hold: nor does he stop here, but while he copies implicitly all the
mistiness of Mr. Malthus’s style, he never lets slip an opportunity of
throwing in, by a side wind, some concealed joke at Mr. Malthus’s
expense.

Thus, because certain Political Economists differ somewhat from Mr.
Edition: current; Page: [29] Malthus, he dubs them the “new school,”
thereby intimating, that Mr. Malthus’s doctrines are exploded and out of
date; and he takes a malicious pleasure in coupling Mr. Malthus with
Adam Smith; a compliment for which Mr. Malthus cannot be too grateful,
as it implies that all the discoveries of modern Political Economists
are thrown away upon him, and that he has not yet advanced beyond the
founder of the science. It may appear presumptuous to suppose, that so
great a master of ridicule as this writer can stand in need of any
suggestions that we can give, for the better amusement of his readers;
but, we think, that in attempting to twist the systems of Mr. Malthus
and of Adam Smith into concordance, to be serious would have been by far
the best joke which he could have devised. The difficulty of serving God
and Mammon is proverbial, but it is a mere trifle in comparison with
that of reconciling Mr. Malthus and Adam Smith: the former difficulty,
whatever it may once have been, the experience of modern times has
proved to be by no means insuperable.

The Reviewer proceeds, with well-feigned gravity, to criticise the
doctrines of the “new school.” To say that he attempts to criticise them
without knowing any thing about them, would be to say very little: since
it would, on the contrary, be much more surprising, were a
Quarterly-Reviewer to be found, who did know any thing about any subject
which requires any intellect, or is of any importance to mankind. It is
not, therefore, the blunders of this writer, which we wish especially to
be remarked, but the sang-froid with which he lays all of them to the
charge of Mr. Malthus, by pretending to fight on his side, and to be the
enemy of his enemies.

The main principles, [says he,] which more especially characterize the
new school of political economy, appear to be three.

1. That the quantity of labour worked up in commodities determines their
exchangeable value.

2. That the demand and supply have no effect upon prices and values,
except in cases of monopoly, or for short periods of time.

3. That the difficulty of production on the land is the regulator of
profits, to the entire exclusion of the cause stated by Adam Smith;
namely, the relative abundance and competition of capital. (Pp. 307-8.)

He afterwards (p. 332) continues:

We are inclined, however, to think, that these differences may be still
further concentrated; and that it will not be incorrect to state, that
all the peculiar doctrines of the new system directly and necessarily
flow from the first of these new principles; namely, that the
exchangeable value of commodities is determined by the quantity of
labour worked up in them. It follows directly and necessarily from this
principle, that neither the demand, compared with the supply, nor the
relative abundance and competition of capital, can have more than a mere
temporary effect on values and profits.

Edition: current; Page: [30]
We have been accustomed to believe that political economy, which was
left, even by Adam Smith, in a state of great vagueness and uncertainty,
had been raised to the rank of a science chiefly by three discoveries:
the principle of population, the theory of rent, and Mr. Ricardo’s
theory of foreign commerce. If these discoveries be thought to
constitute a school, Mr. Malthus must certainly be considered a leading
member of that school: of the first, and most important of the three
principles which we have named, he is generally believed to have been
the discoverer; of the second he has furnished one of the earliest
expositions. Doctrines which make such havoc with the faith of our
fathers, might naturally have excited the wrath of the Quarterly Review:
and the duller geniuses among the orthodox, who cannot understand a
joke, will wonder that in a professed attack upon the “new school,” it
should have passed over the most essential doctrines of that “school;”
but it is easy to see, that to refute their opinions, or any opinions,
was the last thing which this writer had any thought of: all he sought
was to ridicule Mr. Malthus, whom he wished to represent as actually not
knowing what their essential doctrines are.

As for the three propositions which the Reviewer has hit upon, to
distinguish the “new school” from that of Adam Smith and Mr. Malthus,
the two last, as here stated, never were maintained by them at all:
while the first, into which he resolves both the others, and which he
holds up as the most important of all their doctrines, happens to be the
least important; and so far is it from being true, as he asserts, “that
all the peculiar doctrines of the new system directly and necessarily
flow” [p. 332] from this proposition, that not one of their doctrines,
nor, so far as we know, of any other doctrines, flows from it at all; it
being, in truth, more a question of nomenclature and classification than
one from which any important consequences are deduced. Granting,
therefore, that the Reviewer has completely demolished these three
propositions—two of which, indeed, we freely concede to him—all the
fundamental principles of the “new school” remain untouched.

It must be owned, indeed, that Mr. Malthus is peculiarly sensitive on
every thing which regards his measure of value; a discovery, indeed,
which he appears to cherish the more fondly, as no one, except himself,
seems to be capable of appreciating it: but it is too much to attempt to
persuade the public that Mr. Malthus is so wrapt up in the importance of
his supposed discovery, as actually to believe that these insignificant
disputes about value are the most important questions in political
economy, questions upon which every thing depends—questions of more
consequence than the theories of rent, profits, and foreign trade!

We will now go a little deeper into the subject, and see what this
pseudo-Malthusian has to say on each of the topics aforesaid. For this
purpose Edition: current; Page: [31] we will follow his example, and
begin with the first of the three principles; “That the quantity of
labour worked up in commodities determines their exchangeable value.”
[P. 307.]

The doctrine which our Reviewer comes out with, in opposition to this
principle, proves how accurately he has imitated his great original: for
it is no less than Mr. Malthus’s favourite doctrine, with which all who
have read his “Measure of Value” are familiar—that value depends upon
labour and profits:[*] a proposition which he supports in the following
terms:—

If, for instance, a useful stone inclosure, built from materials on the
spot, were constructed in eight days by fifty common masons paid at
half-a-crown a day, the inclosure, when completed and fit for use,
would, on account of the very small quantity of profits concerned, be
worth but little more than the labour employed upon it, that is, 400
days, or, in money, fifty pounds. Now, if we suppose a pipe of wine to
be worth, when it is first put into the cask, exactly the same quantity
of labour and money, but that it is to be kept two years before it is
used, and that the rate of profits is fifteen per cent, it is obvious,
that, at the expiration of that time, it must be sold at about £65, or
its value must be above 520 days instead of 400 days labour, in order
that the conditions of its supply may be fulfilled. We have here, then,
two commodities, which, by the hypothesis, have had the same quantity of
labour employed upon them, and yet the exchangeable value of one of them
exceeds that of the other above 30 per cent, on account of the very
different quantity of profits worked up in each.

Now let us suppose, that the rate of profits falls from 15 per cent to 6
per cent, then the value of the article, in which profits had very
little concern, would remain nearly the same, the conditions of its
supply being nearly the same; while the conditions of the supply of the
wine will have so essentially altered, without the slightest alteration
in its quality, that, instead of being worth about 30 per cent more than
the walls, it would now only be worth a little above 12 per cent more.
(P. 310.)

Now this is all very true, but “we think we have heard all this before:”
it is, in truth, the old doctrine, about the influence of time on value;
and we think our readers will admit that it is at least as clearly and
as forcibly stated in the following passage, as it is by the Reviewer:—

It is hardly necessary to say, that commodities which have the same
quantity of labour bestowed on their production, will differ in
exchangeable value, if they cannot be brought to market in the same
time.

Suppose I employ twenty men at an expense of £1000 for a year in the
production of a commodity, and at the end of the year I employ twenty
men again for another year, at a further expense of £1000, in finishing
or perfecting the same commodity, and that I bring it to market at the
end of two years, if profits be 10 per cent, my commodity must sell for
£2,310; for I have employed £1000 capital for one year, and £2,100
capital for one year more. Another man employs precisely the same
quantity of labour, but he employs it all in the first year; he employs
forty men at an expense of £2,000, and at the Edition: current; Page:
[32] end of the first year he sells it with 10 per cent profit, or for
£2,200. Here then are two commodities having precisely the same quantity
of labour bestowed on them, one of which sells for £2,310, the other for
£2,200.

Now, to what author does the reader suppose we are indebted for this
passage? To Mr. Malthus, or to Adam Smith? No: to Mr. Ricardo!*

So much for the novelty and importance of the Reviewer’s first objection
to Mr. Ricardo’s doctrine of value. His second objection is, that “the
quantity of profits which enters into the composition of commodities is
greatly increased in all cases of an increase of fixed capital as
compared with circulating:”[*] this also, he himself admits to be
“universally acknowledged:”[†] indeed, Mr. Ricardo says, “This
difference in the degree of durability of fixed capital, and this
variety in the proportions in which the two sorts of capital may be
combined, introduce another cause, besides the greater or less quantity
of labour necessary to produce commodities, for the variations in their
relative value: this cause is the rise or fall in the value of labour.”
Principles of Political Economy [3rd. ed.], pp. 25-6.

So far, then, it seems, all parties are agreed; and further objection,
under this head, our Reviewer has none.

What then is this great question upon which we are to believe that the
whole science depends? simply, as we have already observed, a question
of nomenclature: the question, whether these facts, about which all are
agreed, shall be contained in one expression or another; whether this
effect of time, and this effect of fixed capital, are ultimately
resolvable into labour, and are included in the simple expression that
value depends upon quantity of labour, or not: a question of pure
curiosity, and of no practical use whatever. Yet this is the question
upon which our pseudo-Malthusian pretends to believe, that the whole of
the peculiar doctrines of the “new school” depend!*

It is very well, if a Reviewer chuses to make a great noise about
nothing. Edition: current; Page: [33] It is no novel practice,
certainly, with Reviewers; and as little so with Quarterly, as with any
other Reviewers; but it is hard that Mr. Malthus should be held
responsible for all the ignorance and confusion of ideas which the
Reviewer chuses to impute to him, and should be deemed incapable of
distinguishing between a question about words and a question about
things, merely to afford a good joke to a Quarterly-Reviewer.

We have already remarked, that the second of the three propositions
which the Reviewer puts into the mouth of the new school, “that demand
and supply have no influence on prices and values except in cases of
monopoly, or for short periods of time”,[*] never was maintained by them
at all. They not only allow that demand and supply have some influence
on value, but they assert that nothing else has any influence whatever,
except in as far as it may be calculated to affect either the demand or
the supply. When they say that cost of production regulates value, it is
only because cost of production is that which regulates supply. If there
be two commodities, produced by equal cost, what is the reason that they
exchange for one another? The reason is, because if one of the two bore
a higher value than the other, when the cost of production is the same,
the profits of the two producers would be unequal, and it would be the
interest of one of them to withdraw a portion of his capital from his
own business and transfer it to that of the other; thus increasing the
supply of the dearer commodity, diminishing that of the cheaper, until
the equality of values is restored: and restored, as the reader will
observe, not in contradiction to the principle of demand and supply, but
in consequence of it. “It thus appears,” says Mr. Mill (Elements of
Political Economy, 2nd Ed. pp. 88-9) “that the relative value of
commodities, or, in other words, the quantity of one which exchanges for
a given quantity of another, depends upon demand and supply, in the
first instance, but upon cost of production ultimately, and hence, in
accurate language, upon cost of production entirely.”

It is true that a variation in productive cost frequently takes place,
and produces a corresponding variation in value, without any actual
alteration of supply; that an increase, for instance, of the productive
cost of an article, raises its value without necessarily diminishing the
supply, because all the parties concerned, whether as sellers or as
purchasers, know that if the rise of value does not take place without a
limitation of supply, it must take place by such a limitation. If, for
example, a duty of a shilling per yard were imposed upon cloth, the
dealers, in all probability, would quietly lay an additional shilling
upon every yard of cloth which they might sell; and it would not
necessarily follow that any capital would be withdrawn from the
manufacture of cloth; unless indeed the higher price had the effect of
narrowing the demand, which is not improbable, but is altogether
extrinsic Edition: current; Page: [34] to the question. Although,
however, there would be no actual, there would even here be a potential
limitation of supply; upon which potential limitation, not only
something would depend, but every thing would depend; since cost of
production itself would have no influence on value without it.

It is usual, indeed, to say that a fluctuation in demand and supply
cannot have more than a temporary effect upon value: but this is merely
because the fluctuation in the demand and supply must itself be
temporary, unless accompanied by a change in cost of production. Could
we suppose a permanent change in the proportion of the demand and supply
to one another, independently of productive cost, value also would
permanently vary, and cost of production would cease to have any
influence over it. This, however, is to suppose the absence of free
competition: an element which, in political economy, is always taken for
granted unless otherwise expressed. There is not the smallest
foundation, then, for the assertion, that the “new school” deny that
values depend upon supply and demand.

But the malicious ingenuity of this Reviewer will not suffer Mr. Malthus
to talk common sense, even when he is on the right side of the question:
and though he is fighting shadows, yet even shadows baffle him, and
drive him completely out of the field.

He begins by saying, that demand and supply, though they have no
influence on labour, which is one of the ingredients of value, have an
influence on profits, which is the other ingredient.[*] To this
proposition we shall not say whether we assent or not; for this reason,
that previously to committing ourselves for or against a proposition, we
usually endeavour to attach some meaning to it, which, in this case, we
confess our inability to do. We think we know what is meant by the
influence of demand and supply; the demand and supply of cloth have an
influence on the value of cloth; the demand and supply of corn have an
influence on the value of corn; but what is meant by “demand and supply”
in the abstract, or what demand and supply it can be, which has an
influence on profits, is a mystery which we cannot fathom.

When it has been our fate to peruse any of Mr. Malthus’s lucubrations on
the more intricate subjects of political economy, we have remarked, that
although they are in general sufficiently obscure, yet if there is one
part of them which is more obscure than another, it is where he attempts
anything like explanation or illustration. This peculiarity of Mr.
Malthus our satirist has very happily seized; and so invariably has he
adhered to the rule, that so soon as he begins to speak of throwing
light upon a subject, from that moment we lose all hope of ever
understanding it. Thus, under pretence of explaining the above
proposition, which we thought had been of itself sufficiently
incomprehensible, he has contrived to throw as thick a mist Edition:
current; Page: [35] round it as would have sufficed to obscure the
clearest demonstration in Euclid.

He begins by saying, that Mr. Ricardo has proved, that profits are
determined by the proportion of the whole produce which goes to labour;
this we at first thought we had understood; for we have read Mr.
Ricardo’s work, and we know that he has proved that profits are
determined by the proportion of the produce, which goes to the payment
of wages: but we soon found what an egregious mistake we had committed,
and how little we were capable of comprehending the fineness of our
author’s satire. This, he goes on to state, is “only one important step
in the theory of profits, which, of course, cannot be complete till we
have ascertained the cause which, under all circumstances, regulates
this proportion of the whole produce which goes to labour, immediate and
accumulated.”[*] Now, as he himself has expressly excluded (p. 309) all
consideration of rents, we were not a little puzzled by this last
proposition; since, in our humble conception, the whole of the produce,
with the exception of rent, goes to the payment either of immediate or
accumulated labour—either of the labourer or of the capitalist: it is
evident, therefore, that in using the expression, “the proportion of the
whole produce which goes to labour,”[†] he cannot have meant, the
proportion which goes to the payment of wages, but that in this
mysterious phrase there lurks some recondite meaning, to which the
Reviewer, oracle-like, withholds from us the key.

To ascertain, then, what it is which regulates the proportion of the
whole produce which “goes to labour,” is his next object. The prevailing
opinion he declares to be, that it depends upon the “greater or less
demand for labour,”[‡] compared, as we suppose, with the supply: in
short, that wages depend upon the ratio between population and capital.
This, however, we learn to be a vulgar error: the proportion of the
produce which “goes to labour,” really depending not upon the demand and
supply of labour, but upon the demand and supply of produce. “The
specific reason which occasions a larger or smaller proportion of the
produce of a given quantity of labour to go to labour, is the fall or
rise in the value of the whole produce of such labour, resulting from
the temporary or ordinary state of the supply, compared with the demand”
(pp. 315-16).

We had been accustomed to believe, as we thought on pretty good grounds,
and certainly in conformity with the doctrines of Mr. Malthus, in his
Essay on Population,[§] that the ratio between population and capital
Edition: current; Page: [36] had been the regulator of wages: but we now
learn it to be the value of the whole produce. Our satisfaction at the
receipt of this new and unexpected information is greatly alloyed by the
difficulty of comprehending it. We can understand what is meant by the
value of cottons; namely, the quantity of other commodities for which a
given quantity of cottons will exchange: we can understand in what
manner cottons may rise or fall in value; namely, when a given quantity
of cottons comes to exchange for a greater or less quantity of other
commodities than before: but what is meant by the value of the whole
produce, or how the whole produce of the land or labour of a country, or
of the world, can be said to rise or fall in value, is a problem, of
which we must leave it to wiser heads than our own to discover the
solution. Value is a relative term: if it is not this, it is nothing: if
any one talks about absolute value, or any other kind of value than
exchangeable value, we know not what he means. One commodity may rise or
fall in value, with respect to another; all commodities cannot rise or
fall in value, with respect to themselves.

The Reviewer, however, thinks it incumbent upon him to know better, and
the reader, we are sure, will join with us in admiring the originality
and relevancy of the fact upon which his theory is founded. If cottons,
says he, fall in value from abundant supply; of the cottons produced by
the same quantity of labour, a greater proportion will be required to
pay for that labour, and a smaller proportion will therefore remain for
the capitalist; and, on the other hand, if cottons rise in value, from a
diminished supply, a smaller proportion will suffice to pay the
labourer, and a larger proportion will remain as profits to the
capitalist.[*] This is not only in itself altogether novel and of the
highest importance, but seems to prove that (strange to relate!) the
producer is benefitted by a high price of his goods—injured by a low
one. The Reviewer next proceeds to generalize upon this grand discovery.
The proportion, says he, of the whole produce which goes to labour,
depends upon the value of produce.[†] We at first regretted that he had
not condescended to unfold to us the hidden process by which such a
conclusion is drawn from such premises; but we speedily consoled
ourselves with the reflection, that we have not lost much, since if he
had, it is probable that we should not have understood him; nor, indeed,
is there any just cause for wonder, that we should be unable to
understand how a proposition is proved, when we cannot even comprehend
the proposition itself.

In this chain of words, for we will not call them arguments, the
experienced reader will not fail to recognize an exaggerated likeness of
Mr. Malthus. Our anxiety, however, to convince him that we do not
purposely Edition: current; Page: [37] conceal from him the connexion of
ideas, but that we really give him the benefit of whatever meaning we
can extract from those outward and visible signs of inward ideas, which,
like other signs, frequently show themselves, when the reality which
they are supposed to indicate does not exist, has induced us to withhold
from him the best part of the joke; namely, a disquisition, of and
concerning the “measure of value,” which the Reviewer has contrived to
intermix with the above exposé, as a remedy apparently for its
unnecessary clearness. The disquisition itself certainly leaves no
reason for complaint on the score of too great perspicuity; nor indeed
on that of logic; from the rules of which, this writer holds himself
completely exempt. He begins by laying down as a principle the
proposition which he has undertaken to prove; and though this one
assumption ought in all conscience to have been sufficient, he does not
stop here, but bravely reiterates it in a variety of shapes in every
succeeding sentence to the close. The proposition, and the logic by
which it is proved, are worthy of one another; and there could not be a
more bitter piece of satire, both upon the principle itself and upon its
author.

We now approach the third of the propositions which “more especially
characterize the new school of political economy.”[*] This is, as our
readers have already been informed, “that the difficulty of production
on the land is the regulator of profits, to the entire exclusion of the
cause stated by Adam Smith, namely, the relative abundance and
competition of capital.”[†]

That the “new school” do not believe the “relative abundance and
competition of capital” to be the regulator of profits, is no doubt
true; nor do they even comprehend how there can be such a thing as
competition of capital, unless it be competition for labour. Adam Smith
supposed, that, when capital increased, the competition of capitalists
induced them to lower their prices, and, by a necessary consequence,
their profits. The “new school” dissent from this doctrine; first,
because prices depend not upon the competition of capital, but upon the
quantity of money in the country, compared with the quantity of
commodities to be circulated, and the rapidity of circulation; and
secondly, because, even granting that, as Adam Smith supposes, all
prices would be lowered, profits would not be affected; for this very
reason, because all prices would have fallen; in consequence of which
every capitalist would be able to command, less money, it is true, but
precisely the same quantity of all commodities which he desired to
purchase, as before. The competition of capital, therefore, can, in no
conceivable manner, operate to lower profits by lowering prices: and
here Mr. Malthus is just as far from agreeing with Adam Smith as Mr.
Ricardo himself. That there may be, and always is, a competition of
capital for Edition: current; Page: [38] labour, is most true: this is
the only competition of capital which Mr. Malthus acknowledges; and this
competition has undoubtedly a tendency to raise wages, and, therefore,
to lower profits; the limit to the rise of wages being the ratio between
capital and population; wages, therefore, depend upon the ratio between
population and capital, and profits depend upon wages: and this is the
real doctrine of the “new school.” Where the Reviewer found the
doctrine, that “the difficulty of production on the land is the
regulator of profits,” he himself best knows.

The satire is here less refined than usual; for even had Mr. Malthus
been capable of so grossly misunderstanding the doctrines of his
opponents, he would scarcely, in that case, have been so simple as to
expose his ignorance by quoting. Yet this the Reviewer has done (p.
320). “This principle” (that the difficulty of production on the land is
the regulator of profits), “which is adverted to in various parts of the
treatise” (meaning Mr. McCulloch’s Essay on Political Economy), “is
broadly laid down in the last section of the third division, in the
following passage.” A quotation follows; in which, after an attentive
perusal, the passage most like the above proposition, which we can find,
is the following:—

“The fall of profits, which invariably takes place as society advances
and population becomes denser, is not owing to competition, but to a
very different cause; to a diminution of the power to employ capital
with advantage, resulting either from a decrease in the fertility of the
soil which must be taken into cultivation in the progress of society, or
from an increase of taxation.”[*]

Here is a manifest insinuation, that Mr. Malthus is not only ignorant of
the most elementary principles of the science, but that he is unable to
understand a plain statement, conveyed in plain language. It is evident
enough that Mr. McCulloch, in the above passage, not only did not assert
that the difficulty of production on the land is the sole regulator of
profits (if he had he would have been the first man who ever maintained
so preposterous a doctrine), but never intended even to speak of any
fluctuation in profits, excepting that fall “which invariably takes
place as society advances, and population becomes denser;” that his
meaning, in short, was, that whatever other causes might affect profits
by affecting wages, there is one cause, namely, the increasing
difficulty of producing the necessaries of the labourer, which must
always ensure a rise of wages, and a consequent fall of profits, as
population increases and cultivation is extended. Does the Reviewer deny
this? Mr. Malthus surely does not.

We pass over all that the Reviewer says, to prove that corn wages are
not the same at all times and in all places; never having heard of any
body Edition: current; Page: [39] who asserted that they were, we think
that he might have spared this portion of his labours. It is just as
little to the purpose, that he triumphantly asks, how the fall of
profits, which has taken place during the last eight or nine years, can
be ascribed to the difficulty of production on the land; as if it had
ever been asserted, that profits could never fall from any other cause.
But mark how the Reviewer himself accounts for the fall of profits.
“What, then,” says he, (p. 323) “was the cause of the fall of profits?
It was obviously a fall in the value of produce!” and not only this, but
“a fall in the value of produce, owing to the abundance and competition
of capital!”

The reader probably thinks that we have said enough on the subject of
the “value of produce;” but it is here that, for the first time, we get
an incidental glimpse of what the phrase is intended to mean. This
inveterate wag, who will never have done jeering Mr. Malthus, contrives
once more to bring in our old acquaintance, the “measure of value.” By a
fall, it seems, in the value of produce, he all along meant a fall in
the exchangeable value of commodities, relatively to labour; in short,
what any one else would have called a rise of wages: which is precisely
the cause to which the “new school” ascribes the fall of profits. It is
not to be supposed, however, that Mr. Malthus and the “new school” can
be permitted to agree, on any one point. The sallies of our author’s wit
here become particularly lively. Only mark the figure which Mr. Malthus
is made to cut, by this pretended disciple. This abundance and
competition of capital, says he (p. 323), lowers profits by occasioning
a different division of what was produced, and awarding a larger
proportion of it to the labourer, and a smaller to the capitalist. Yet,
though the labourer obtains both a greater quantity of commodities, and
a greater proportion, he does not obtain higher wages.

Innumerable facts concur to show, that this increased proportion awarded
to the labourer continually takes place without being accompanied with
any circumstances which indicate either an increased demand for labour,
or an increase in the value of the same quantity of labour. (P. 325.)

It is universally allowed, that the money price of corn and commodities
has fallen during the last nine years more than the money price of
labour; and while the merchant sees, that on this account the workmen
whom he employs are paid a larger proportion of the commodities which
they produce, we believe that there is not a single unsophisticated
person in business who would not at the same time acknowledge, that this
was not owing to the scarcity and increased demand for labour, but to
the abundance and cheapness of the commodities produced, occasioned by
the abundance and competition of capital in every department of
industry. (Pp. 324-5.)

Nothing can be droller than the whole of this passage; nor any thing
more sarcastically humourous than the appeal to “unsophisticated persons
in business.” It only remains to intrust some competent person with the
Edition: current; Page: [40] privilege of determining what “persons in
business” are unsophisticated, and what the reverse; a privilege which
he seems to think can be confided to no one, with so great propriety as
to himself.

But this inveterate enemy of Mr. Malthus is not even yet satisfied; and
having already made him, for the sake of his “measure of value,” explain
away almost all the fundamental principles of the science, he next
proceeds to make him explain away the principle of population itself.
Mr. McCulloch had said, that an increase of capital, if unaccompanied by
an increased difficulty of producing the necessaries of the labourer, is
not likely to occasion a permanent fall of profits; because, by raising
the wages of labour, it stimulates the increase of population, so as, in
all probability, to lower wages, and raise profits to the same rate as
before. This opinion the Reviewer now finds to be erroneous: an increase
of capital, provided it comes upon a slack demand for produce (that is,
an eagerness on the part of the labourers to toil; none to enjoy), does
not stimulate population.[*] True it is, that it gives more and better
food, clothing, and lodging, more necessaries, comforts, and enjoyments,
to every labourer; which we had hitherto believed to be the only way in
which a rise of wages could possibly stimulate population; but the
labourers, to whatever degree better fed, clothed, and lodged, will not
multiply. For why? because there is a slack demand for produce, and
because they have not got a greater value than before.

It would have been satisfactory had the Reviewer informed us in what
manner, upon this principle, a rise of wages can by possibility take
place at all. If wages cannot rise, unless the labourer gets a greater
value for his labour, and if commodities can never have a greater value
unless they can command more labour, the supposition of a rise of wages
involves a contradiction; since, whatever quantity of food, clothing,
and lodging a day’s labour may command, it can never command more than
the value of a day’s labour. Although, however, it is not possible for
wages to rise, it is possible for them to fall; and (what is somewhat
remarkable), it is when the labourer obtains the greatest quantity of
necessaries, comforts, and enjoyments, and the greatest proportion of
the produce, that his wages are lowest. The supposed increase of
capital, instead of increasing, as we should have expected, the demand
for labour, actually diminishes it, “and the mass of these funds would
not be adequate to set so many people to work as before” (p. 327). Now
we have shewn that whatever is true of an increase of capital under the
circumstances supposed, must necessarily be true of an increase of
capital under any circumstances. If, therefore, capital continues to
increase, and wages to rise, the demand for labour will continually
diminish, and we may in time expect to see capital so plentiful and
Edition: current; Page: [41] wages so high, that there will be no demand
for labour at all! At the close of this lucid exposition, the Reviewer
cracks a bitter joke upon Mr. Malthus. “The theory on the subject,” says
he, “is very simple and clear.”[*] The reader, perhaps, thinks that the
Reviewer himself has afforded as striking a proof as could be desired of
the clearness and simplicity of the subject; since, in spite of all his
attempts to explain it, he has not succeeded in rendering it altogether
unintelligible.

Although the three great fortresses of the “new school” are now utterly
demolished, there remain, it would appear, certain outworks, from which
it is still deemed necessary to dislodge them. One of these is the
doctrine of the impossibility of a general glut. Having gone into this
question at some length, in the article on War Expenditure in our third
number,[†] we shall not at present repeat the arguments which we then
urged; but the contrary side of the question is here supported by an
argument which, for its strictness and relevancy, is worthy of notice.
Mr. McCulloch having said that for every excess in one commodity there
must be a deficiency in another,[‡] the Reviewer observes, that this
strikes him as peculiarly illustrative of the impracticability and
inapplicability of some of the doctrines of the new school.

For, [says he,] we would appeal to the experience of every person who,
without being biassed by some previous prejudice, had turned the
smallest attention to the subject, whether at the time when a general
glut was talked of, there was the least ground for the assertion, that,
although the state of the trade in cottons was ruinous, the capitalist
engaged in making broad cloths or silks, or some other article which
would absorb a large capital, was in the most prosperous and flourishing
state, and inviting additional stock by high prices and high profits.
This assertion of corresponding deficiency, as applied to what is known
to have taken place since the peace, appears to us, [he facetiously
observes,] as strange as if it were gravely asserted, that every man in
the streets of London who was observed to have his head covered, would
be found upon examination to have his feet bare. . . . We will venture
to say, no one ever heard, as a matter of fact, from competent
authority, that for some years together since the peace there was a
marked deficiency of produce in any one considerable department of
industry. (Pp. 329-30.)

The naïveté with which he thus proposes to rebut demonstration by
testimony, is truly amusing. There is nothing, says Cicero, so absurd as
not to have been maintained by some philosophers;[§] and it may be said
with equal truth, that in political economy there is no opinion, however
absurd, Edition: current; Page: [42] whether on a question of fact or of
principle, which may not easily be proved from “competent authority.” We
are bold enough, however, in spite of “competent authority,” to think
that every one desires to consume to the extent to which he produces. If
he did not wish to consume either that which he produces or an
equivalent, he would cease to produce. But the demand of the community
is made up of the demands of individuals: and if every individual have a
demand exactly equal to his supply, so also must the demand of the whole
community be equal to its supply. To say that there can never be a
greater sum total of commodities produced than the community wishes to
consume, is merely to say in other words, that people will not consent
to labour without a motive. The commodities, therefore, which are
produced, cannot, collectively considered, be in excessive quantity,
though they may be of the wrong kind. Too much may be produced of one
commodity; because, though all want some commodity, all may not want
that commodity. But as there cannot be an excess on the whole, if there
be too much of one commodity, there must be too little of another. This
reasoning is so clear and convincing, that the idea of disproving it by
a reference to “competent authority” could have occurred to no one but a
Reviewer, who wishes to aim a side blow at the cause which he professes
to defend, and in behalf of which he insinuates (in this instance
justly) that there was nothing better to be said.

There is an attempt to prove, in opposition to Mr. McCulloch, that
labour, employed in agriculture, is more productive than labour employed
in any other branch of industry;[*] which, if it be meant as a joke, is
so very dull a one, that if we could reconcile ourselves to a
supposition which speaks so little for his intellect, we should be half
inclined to suspect that the writer is in earnest. By wealth, we can
understand nothing but necessaries, comforts, and enjoyments. How is it
possible to say whether agriculture, or manufactures, be most productive
of wealth? unless it is pretended to determine whether food or clothing
be most essential to the happiness of man. But manufacturing capital, it
seems, yields no more than the ordinary profits of stock; while
agricultural capital yields not only profits but rent. True; but rent
(if Mr. Malthus’s explanation of it be correct) is the effect, not of
the greater fertility of the soil, but of the unequal fertility of
different soils; not of the superior productiveness of agricultural,
over every other capital, but of the unequal productiveness of one
agricultural capital and another. So far is rent from being a proof of
the superior productiveness of agriculture, that rent is highest when
the productiveness of agricultural capital is the least; and when that
productiveness is greatest, that is, when none but the best land is in
cultivation, and when the return to capital from that land is at its
highest, there is no rent at all. At that Edition: current; Page: [43]
time, according to the Reviewer, the productiveness of agricultural and
manufacturing capitals should be equal, and it is afterwards that they
become unequal: but in what manner? Does agricultural industry become
more productive, or manufacturing industry less productive? Quite the
contrary. As cultivation advances, the capital first applied to the land
does not become more productive than at first, while all capital
subsequently applied is less so; nor is the productiveness of
manufacturing capital diminished, but, on the contrary, it is probably
increased by the invention of machinery and other expedients for
abridging labour. If, then, at a time when there is no rent,
agricultural capital, even that portion of it which yields the greatest
return, is not more productive than capital employed in manufactures, it
is difficult to see how the case should be altered by a mere change in
the distribution; when the whole produce is no longer retained by the
capitalist, but a part of it is given to the landlord.

We are aware, that, by arriving at this conclusion, we have laid
ourselves open to the charge of “sweeping generalizations,” which our
author deems “fatal to all clear explanation” (p. 306). However
well-founded this censure may be, we think our remarks may bear, to say
the least, a favourable comparison with his, in this respect; for,
whatever may be our propensity to “sweeping generalizations,” we doubt
whether we have produced any thing so “fatal to all clear explanation”
as some of his paragraphs. We have already had occasion to remark on the
peculiar taste which this gentleman seems to entertain for the
incomprehensible; we might easily have adduced a greater number of
specimens, but we have not room to transcribe the whole article into our
pages. If, indeed, it be a merit to puzzle what is plain, to render
intricate that which is simple, obscure that which is clear, and
difficult that which is easy, it would be hard to find, in the whole
circle of Political Economists, one with whose merits he might not vie.

But our readers have probably had enough of this merry writer; and so
have we. We cannot, however, conclude, without expressing (together with
our sincere gratitude for the amusement which he has afforded to us) our
anxiety (which, we hope, he will not consider unpardonable) to know
whether he excels as highly in the serious as he does in the jocular
mood. We hope that his genius will not prove to be of that kind, which
can shine only in a single department of the field of human attainments.
Having shown, when he unbends himself, and condescends to be facetious
at the expense of a brother economist, what a pitch of perfection he can
attain; perhaps, when he next takes up the pen, to indite an article for
the Quarterly Review, he may agreeably surprise us by writing common
sense.

Edition: current; Page: [44] Edition: current; Page: [45]


THE CORN LAWS
 1825

Edition: current; Page: [46]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Westminster Review, III (Apr., 1825), 394-420. Unsigned; not republished
by JSM. Appears, presumably without his permission, as an Appendix to
Godfrey Higgins, An Address to the Houses of Lords and Commons, in
Defence of the Corn Laws (London: Sherwood, Ridgway, 1826), 38-60;
Higgins attempts to refute JSM’s argument, and incidentally attacks
James Mill. Original heading: “Art. VI. A Letter on the Present State
and Future Prospects of Agriculture. Addressed to the Agriculturists of
the County of Salop. By W. W. Whitmore, Esq. M.P. Second Edition, with
some Additions. Hatchard and Son. 1823. pp. 111. Observations on the
Existing Corn Laws. By John Hays. London. Richardson. 1824.” Running
head: “The Corn Laws.” Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “An article
on the Corn Laws . . . in the sixth number of the Westminster Review”
(MacMinn, 6). This article is not specifically mentioned in JSM’s
Autobiography, but he refers to “corn laws” as one of his special
subjects in the early years of the Westminster (Autobiography, Columbia
ed., 68). The article is identified as JSM’s in the Somerville College
copy, without corrections or variants.

Edition: current; Page: [47]


The Corn Laws

if the task of the philosopher and of the philanthropist were at an end,
when the great truths which he teaches have been once demonstrated, and
their bearings upon the great interests of mankind once pointed out, it
might appear superfluous to return, at the present day, to so hackneyed
a subject as the impolicy of our Corn Laws;[*] for, after the thorough
sifting which this question has repeatedly undergone, and particularly
after the very able manner in which it has so frequently been handled in
the Edinburgh Review, it would be vain for us to hope that we could add
any thing to what is known on the subject; and we can scarcely aspire
even to the humbler praise of presenting in a new light that which is
already known. We shall not, however, be deterred from calling the
attention of the public once more to so important a subject, because it
may be that we shall say nothing which they have not heard before. It is
not enough that they should be made to think on the subject; they must
be made to think of it continually; there must be “line upon line, and
precept upon precept;”[†] and it will then be time to think that enough
has been said, when that which has been said shall have begun to be
acted upon. We are far, indeed, from supposing, that among the
enlightened and thinking part of the public, there are, or will ever be
hereafter, two opinions on the question: and if we now revert to the
subject, it is not with any hope of rendering their conviction stronger
than it is, but because, in order to triumph over the prejudices of the
interested and the ignorant, it is necessary that those who are without
prejudice should proclaim their opinions with a loudness and
perseverance which may overawe those whom they cannot hope to convince.

There is one part of the argument, however, which, at this time of day
we hope and believe that we may safely omit. It will scarcely, we
imagine, be any longer deemed necessary to demonstrate the beneficial
tendency of free trade in general, or to prove that it is for the
interest of a nation to purchase its commodities where they are cheap,
and not where they are dear. Self-evident as this proposition may
appear, it is one of the most Edition: current; Page: [48] modern of all
modern discoveries, and has had to make its way against all the
resistance which strong interests and still stronger prejudices could
oppose to it. It has made its way, however; and has penetrated even to
the cabinets of ministers, usually the last retreat of thread-bare and
discarded errors. And, unless the honourable member for Sussex be an
exception,* we are not aware that there is now any one who stands up for
the principle of monopoly in the abstract, or maintains that a nation
can grow rich by paying a high price for its goods. It is something
gained for enlightened principles, that every one should acknowledge
freedom to be the general rule, though almost every one should make an
exception in his own favour.

Two things, therefore, may be assumed: that it is desirable that
commodities should be cheap; and that the sure way to have them
cheapest, is to let the public buy them wherever they please. It may
likewise be assumed, that the effect of the Corn Laws is, to make corn
dear; since this is the sole purpose for which they exist, and is
necessarily implied in every defence which can be set up for them. It
remains to be considered, what reason there is why that which would be
an evil in the case of any other commodities, should, in the case of
corn, be regarded as a good; or, if it be an evil, by what preponderant
benefit the evil is compensated.

It is compensated by that which, in the eyes of the landlords, is a
benefit far outweighing the evil to the community—high rents. That
whatever raises the average price of corn, raises rent, is a proposition
so conformable to ordinary ideas, that we are under no inducement to
spend much time in proving it. A rise in the price of corn must
evidently redound to the benefit either of the farmer or of the
landlord. But the farmer is effectually prevented, by the competition of
other capitalists, from obtaining more than the ordinary profits of
stock. The benefit, therefore, of the increase of price can belong to
nobody but the landlord. Or, more shortly, rent is all that portion of
the produce of the soil which remains after replacing the capital
expended, together with the ordinary profit: and this surplus must
obviously be greater when corn is dear (the quantity of corn being the
same) than when it is cheap.

So far, then, the question, between the people on the one side and the
landlords on the other, would appear to be this—whether it is better
that the landlords should submit to a reduction of rent, or that the
whole people of Great Britain should pay a high price for their corn:
whether, in short, Edition: current; Page: [49] the landlords can make
out a case for taxing the community to put money into their pockets? And
this, as being the aspect of the question most favourable to the
landlords, is that which we shall first consider.

The language which we usually hear from the landlords on this question
is not remarkably definite or precise, and presents little that is
tangible in the form of a reason why their interest should be preferred
to that of the public at large. Instead of proving (what their language
implies) that rich landlords are more conducive to the happiness of the
community than cheap corn, they talk vaguely about the necessity of
protecting agriculture: thus endeavouring to make the public forget that
this idol called agriculture, when narrowly inspected, proves to be no
other than themselves. This artifice of identifying themselves with an
abstract term is not without example. When the Roman Catholic priesthood
attempted to establish their supremacy over the civil power, they said
it was for the good of religion: it was for the good of nobody but
themselves. If Ferdinand the 7th is to be believed, it is for the sake
of social order that he is now labouring to clear his country of all the
educated part of its inhabitants: and indeed so it is in his sense of
the word, which makes social order synonymous with his own despotism. It
might, perhaps, be admitted, that the Corn Laws are beneficial to the
landlords, but in what sense they can be said to be beneficial to
agriculture, unless the landlords be agriculture, it is not easy to see.
The artifice, however, is not without its use: “Protect agriculture,”
has a better sound than “Give me your purse:” and many a man will
readily do for the “protection of agriculture,” that which he would have
hesitated to do for the mere purpose of enriching the landlords.

There is a fallacy involved in the phrase “protection to agriculture,”
which it is of the utmost importance that the public should fully
understand. Under the words “agriculture,” and “agricultural interest,”
are included not only the landlords, but the farmers, a class whose
gains are of an entirely different nature from those of the landlords,
and are governed by different laws. The exclusion of foreign corn may
be, and probably is, beneficial to the landlords, though, we think, not
to so great an extent as has been supposed. But so far is it from being
beneficial to the farmers, that there is no class to whom it is more,
and few to whom it is equally, injurious. Not only is the interest of
the farmers not the same with that of the landlords, but no two
interests are more diametrically opposite.

There is no fact in political economy better established than the
tendency of every tax on the necessaries of life, to produce a rise of
wages. We do not mean that it adds any thing to the comforts and
enjoyments of the labourer; on the contrary, its ultimate effect is
almost infallibly to diminish them, since by reducing the rate of
profit, it retards the accumulation of capital, on which the demand for
labour wholly depends. The labourer, Edition: current; Page: [50]
however, is not benefited, and the capitalist is injured; the labourer
continues to receive the same quantity of commodities, or, as it has
been sometimes called, the same real wages as before; for the tax,
though it affects the future accumulation of capital, does not alter its
present amount, and it is upon the present amount of capital (as
compared with population), and not upon its future accumulation, that
wages depend. While, however, the labourer continues to receive the same
quantity of necessaries as before, corn (the most important of those
commodities) has risen in value. He must, therefore, receive a greater
value, in order to command the same quantity: his money wages must rise.
The manufacturers and other capitalists are thus compelled to give a
greater value to their labourers, without having a greater value for
themselves. They are, therefore, obliged to forego a portion of their
profits. And thus we see that a high price of corn, which is a cause of
high rent, is a cause of low profits. It is as prejudicial to the
capitalist as it is beneficial to the landlord.

The farmer, however, is a capitalist, and his gains cannot be
permanently greater than those of other capitalists. Unless during the
currency of a lease, he has no interest whatever in high prices, because
competition will effectually prevent him from deriving more than a very
temporary advantage from them. He has, however, in common with all other
capitalists, a very strong interest in high profits; and it is not
possible that profits should be high when a great value is given to the
labourers.

A high price of corn, therefore, not only is not beneficial to the
farmer as such, but it is positively injurious to him. He is injured in
two ways: first, as a consumer of corn, in common with the rest of the
community, by having to consume a dear instead of a cheap commodity;
and, secondly, he is injured, in a still greater degree, as an owner of
capital, by being compelled to give higher wages to all the labourers
whom he employs.

Having proved the Corn Laws to be injurious to all the rest of the
community, and beneficial to the landlord alone, we might here close our
remarks, since this alone, had we nothing else to urge, is of itself
sufficient to decide the question. For if, in any case, the principle
could be admitted of taxing the whole community for the benefit of a
particular class, the landlords assuredly are not that class. To the
public, collectively speaking, it is of very little consequence whether
rent be high or low. But it is of the greatest importance to the public
in general, that profits should be high. Profits are the reward of the
industrious—rent, of the idle. It is the rate of profits which
constitutes the inducement to accumulation, and, whatever be the
advantage of a rapid accumulation, the advantage of high profits is the
same. But it is on the accumulation of capital that the advancement of
the national wealth is wholly dependant. A policy, therefore, which
consists in Edition: current; Page: [51] lowering profits for the
purpose of raising rents, must be, at best, of very doubtful expediency.

If, however, there were nothing in the whole process but a transfer; if
whatever is lost by the consumer and by the capitalist were gained by
the landlord; there might be robbery, but there would not be waste;
there might be a worse distribution of the national wealth, but there
would be no positive diminution of its aggregate amount. The evil of the
Corn Laws admits not even of this alleviation: they occasion in all
cases an absolute loss, greatly exceeding the gain which can be derived
from them by the receivers of rent; and for every pound which finds its
way into the pockets of the landlords, in consequence of the Corn Laws,
the community is robbed of several.

Rent, it must be remembered, is only a part of the total produce of the
soil, on many lands only a small part. There are some lands which yield
no rent; there are many which yield very little; and even on the best of
all, the rent, probably, does not greatly exceed one half of the
produce.

Now, without disputing that it is the effect of the Corn Laws to give to
the landlord a greater quantity of corn, as well as to enhance its
value, it must be remembered that all which he receives is still no more
than a part; another part is appropriated to the payment of labourers, a
third to the maintenance of agricultural cattle and the purchase and
repair of instruments of husbandry, a fourth is reserved for seed, and a
fifth belongs to the capitalist as his profit. The increase in the cost
of the production of corn, which is the consequence of the Corn Laws,
operates to the benefit of the landlord only in so far as it goes to
enhance the value of that portion of the produce which he receives as
rent. Could all the rest of the produce retain its former value, and
that portion alone rise which is paid to the landlord, the gain to him
would exactly equal the loss to the rest of the community. While,
however, it is only from the rise in the value of a portion of the
produce, that the landlord derives any benefit, it is necessary, in
order to the rise of that portion, that the whole should rise. It is
necessary that an increased price should be paid, not only for that
portion of the produce which goes to the payment of rent, but also for
that far greater portion which goes to replace the capital, and pay the
profits, of the farmer.

The able author of the article “Corn Laws and Trade,” in the Supplement
to the Encyclopædia Britannica,[*] estimates the total rent of all the
land in the country, compared with the total produce, at one-fifth. Let
us make a liberal concession to our antagonists, and take it at
one-third. In order then Edition: current; Page: [52] that the landlord
may obtain an extra price for a single third of the produce; the
purchasers, not only of that third, but of the other two-thirds, are
compelled to pay that extra price, for every quarter of corn which they
consume!

What, then, it may be asked, becomes of the extra price, which is paid
by the consumers of the two-thirds? It does not go to the labourer; for
though he receives a greater value, his condition not only is not
improved, but, in most cases, it is ultimately deteriorated. It does not
go to the farmer; for he, as we have seen, instead of gaining any thing,
suffers, in two ways; as a consumer of corn, and as a payer of wages.
What, then, becomes of it? We answer, it is entirely swallowed up in the
increased expenses of cultivation. By the effect of the Corn Laws, a
portion of the labour and capital of the country is diverted out of a
more into a less advantageous employment: a quantity of labour is
employed in growing corn, which would otherwise have produced, not only
cloth, or hardware, sufficient to purchase the same quantity of corn in
the foreign market, but much more. That corn which could be obtained
abroad, in exchange for the produce of the labour of 100 men, is
compelled to be produced at home, by that of 120, 130, or 140; the
labour of 20, 30, or 40 men in every 100 is expended in pure waste, and
all which they might have produced is entirely lost to the community.
The consumer is taxed, not only to give a higher rent to the landlord,
but to indemnify the farmer for producing, at a great expense, that corn
which might be obtained from abroad at a comparatively small one.

If the landlords were to require, that the whole people of Great Britain
should contribute a certain sum annually in direct taxes for their
benefit, who is there that would not raise his voice against so impudent
a demand? Yet this would surely be a much more modest request, than
that, in order to put a certain annual number of pounds sterling into
their pockets, the people of Great Britain should consent to pay three,
four, or five times as many.

We seriously propose, therefore, as a great improvement on the present
system, that this indirect tax should be commuted for a direct one;
which, if it still gave an undue advantage to the landlords, would, at
least, give them this advantage at a smaller cost to the public: or that
the landlords should make an estimate of their probable losses from the
repeal of the Corn Laws, and found upon it a claim to compensation.
Some, indeed, may question how far they who, for their own emolument,
imposed one of the worst taxes upon their countrymen, are titled to
compensation for renouncing advantages which they never ought to have
enjoyed. It would be better, however, to have a repeal of the Corn Laws,
even clogged by a compensation, than not to have it at all; and if this
were our only alternative, no one Edition: current; Page: [53] could
complain of a change, by which, though an enormous amount of evil would
be prevented, no one would lose.

We have hitherto taken it for granted, that the effect of the Corn Laws
is, to force the cultivation of inferior soils; and that, therefore, if
those laws were repealed, we should become a regularly importing
country, our lowest soils would be thrown out of cultivation, and the
cost of production, and consequently, the average price, would be
lowered. We have assumed this, because we believe it to be true;
although the contrary opinion is maintained in a very able article in
the eighty-first number of the Edinburgh Review.[*]

Though it were conceded to the Edinburgh Reviewer, that if the ports
were constantly open, the average price of wheat would not fall short of
60s. per quarter;[†] arguments enough would remain, to prove the
mischievousness of the Corn Laws, and the necessity of their repeal; a
measure which, in that case, no one would have more reason for promoting
than the landlords, since they would gain all the advantage of a steady
price, without incurring the disadvantage of a low one. Great, however,
as the benefit to the community would be, even though the average price
of corn should remain unchanged; we are convinced that this is not the
whole of the benefit of which the repeal of the Corn Laws would be
productive, and that the price would not be steadier only, but lower,
under a free trade.

It is admitted by the Edinburgh Reviewer, that when there is no direct
foreign demand, a quarter of wheat can, in ordinary years, be put on
ship board at Dantzic for 35s.; and that allowing 8s. per quarter for
the expenses of freighting, warehousing, &c. the price to the importer
would be about 43s. They suppose, however, that a regular demand from
this country would raise the ordinary price in the Dantzic market, from
35s. to 50s. which together with the freight and other expenses, would
give in this country, a price of about 58s. per quarter.[‡]

The assumption, that a regular demand from this country would
permanently raise the price at Dantzic from 35s. to 50s., is wholly
founded upon the evidence of Mr. Solly, before the Agricultural
Committee of 1821.[§] This gentleman’s evidence is a strange mixture of
hypothesis and fact. For matters of fact, coming within the compass of
his experience, Mr. Solly’s evidence may be as good as any other; and we
have the less reason to doubt the credibility of his testimony, as it is
entirely in accordance with Edition: current; Page: [54] the most
authentic information which we have been able to procure from other
sources. But the rise in price which is expected to be the consequence
of a regular exportation, is plainly not a fact, but an inference. The
same person may deserve great credit for his facts, and very little for
his inferences; and, at any rate, no man’s inferences are entitled to be
received, like matters of fact, upon his authority. How far Mr. Solly is
qualified to draw correct inferences on subjects similar to the present,
the following extract from his evidence may help us to judge:

If the English ports were open for the free importation of corn, at this
moment, what rise do you think would take place in the price of wheat in
the Prussian ports? I should think about 15s.

Which would make the price in the Prussian ports how much? On board,
50s. for the best wheat; they would make their calculation on obtaining
60s. here for it.[*]

We can easily conceive, that a sudden demand, before there is time to
raise a corresponding supply, may raise the price at Dantzic 15s. per
quarter, or much more; but what follows?

Supposing the ports to be constantly open for the free importation of
corn, do you think the price abroad, on the average, would be above or
below 50s. in the Prussian ports? It would be regulated by the price in
England.

What is your opinion of the effect which the demand under such
circumstances would have upon the price in those ports? I think that the
price would rise about 15s. as already mentioned.

Although the demand should be permanent? Even then, the price would be
regulated by the price here.[†]

This is true of the market price, but certainly not true of the average.
The market price at any given moment in Poland, would doubtless be
regulated by the market price in this country, because it is the price
here, which by determining the exportation, would regulate the supply in
the market of Poland itself; but to suppose that the average price in
Poland—which is of most consequence to the producer—would be regulated
by the price here, or by any thing whatever except the cost of
production, implies an ignorance of the most obvious principles of
political economy. On the average, and making abstraction from the
temporary fluctuations of the market, it is the price in Poland, which
would regulate the price here; not the price here which would regulate
the price in Poland. The average price in Poland, with the expenses of
importation, and the profits of the importer, would determine the
average price, at which wheat could be sold in the English market. The
mere unsupported conjecture of one who is ignorant Edition: current;
Page: [55] of this very obvious truth, is a very slight foundation for
such a conclusion as the Edinburgh Reviewer has founded upon it.

Before it can be admitted, that the repeal of our Corn Laws would raise
the average price of wheat at Dantzic from 35s. to 50s.; it is necessary
for Mr. Solly to prove, that the cost of production would be increased
in that proportion. The only cause (taxation apart) which can raise the
cost of production, is the necessity of cultivating inferior lands, or
of applying capital with diminished return to those which are already in
cultivation. And on this, as a necessary effect of an increase of
demand, Mr. Solly lays great stress.

They want their land, [he says,] for the cultivation of corn, for
cattle, and fuel for their own inhabitants. They have in Prussia about
eleven millions of inhabitants; and it contains sixty-seven millions of
English acres, or five thousand square miles; and they require almost
all the arable land to grow corn for their own inhabitants; the
principal corn that is grown and consumed, is rye; and I question, if
they had to supply England with wheat corn, it would be in their power;
they have not the soil, and I do not think they would be able to
increase the quantity of wheat to any great amount in Prussia. [P. 317.]

This he afterwards accounts for, from the nature of the soil, which he
states to be for the most part sandy, and unfit for wheat. That this may
be the case in those districts of Prussia, with which Mr. Solly is
acquainted, we have no reason to doubt: that it is not the case in the
great corn districts of Poland, we have the best possible authority for
asserting. All competent witnesses agree in declaring, that so far from
needing all their arable land to raise corn for their own consumption,
the Polish cultivators have been reduced to the extremity of distress in
the last few years, by the cessation of foreign demand. We are informed
by Mr. Behrend, of the house of Almonde and Behrend, great corn
merchants at Dantzic, that fully one-third of the fertile corn lands are
entirely waste, that great tracts of land, admirably fitted for wheat,
have been thrown into pasture, merely for want of a market, and that
great quantities of corn are consumed by cattle, and in various other
ways among the cultivators themselves, which, on the opening of our
ports, would be brought to market immediately. So great an effect does
Mr. Behrend ascribe to this last circumstance, that Poland, in his
opinion, could export three times as much wheat as at present, without
raising one bushel more than is already produced (it is true, that her
exports have of late years been comparatively small); and if to this we
add the great quantity of wheat which could be raised on the excellent
lands which are now in pasturage, or entirely waste, Mr. Behrend is of
opinion, that Poland could supply this country with from 200,000 to
300,000 quarters of wheat, without any material advance of price, beyond
that which is a remunerating price to the Polish cultivator at present,
viz. 35s. in the greater Edition: current; Page: [56] part of Poland,
and 38s. in Volkynia, from which province the best Polish wheat is
chiefly drawn.* Now, if it be considered from how large a surface we
should draw our foreign supplies, if we became a regularly importing
country, it can hardly be supposed that we should, in ordinary years,
import from Poland a greater quantity than 200,000 or 300,000 quarters;
say 400,000, and suppose the last 100,000 to raise the price from 35s.,
or 38s. to 40s., or even 42s., which is an ample allowance; adding 8s.
for freight and other expenses, this will give 50s. for the probable
average price of wheat in this country, if importation were permitted at
all times, duty free.

With regard to Odessa, the facts adduced by the Reviewer are singularly
scanty. The following passage contains all that he says on the subject:—

The prices of wheat at the market of Odessa, on the Black Sea, the only
port† in Southern Europe from which any considerable supplies of wheat
can be obtained, are extremely fluctuating and various. In 1821, the
price of wheat at Odessa amounted, according to Mr. Tooke, to about 30s.
a quarter; and we are informed, by the same excellent authority, that
the charges necessarily attending the importation of wheat from Odessa
to London, would not fall short of 22s. 6d. a quarter. (Report,[*] p.
226.) It must be further kept in view, that if the average price of
English wheat was 60s., Odessa wheat would not, on account of its
inferior quality, be worth above 48s. or, at most, 50s.: so that it
would be impossible to bring Odessa wheat into competition with English
wheat worth 60s., unless its prime cost was rather below 27s., which is
very rarely, if ever, the case, with such qualities as are fit for
exportation.” (Pp. 61-2.)

It appears, however, from Mr. Tooke’s evidence, that the price, at the
time of which he spoke, was unusually high, there being a great demand
for exportation, and the supply being deficient. The fact is, that
whatever may have been the price at the period to which Mr. Tooke’s
evidence Edition: current; Page: [57] referred (April 1821), the average
price of the whole year did not exceed 25s.

We have received from the best mercantile authority at Odessa, a table
of the average prices of hard and soft wheat in that market, for almost
every week, from the beginning of 1817 to the end of 1824. From this
statement, estimating the rouble at 9¾d. and reckoning 100 chetwerts as
equivalent (which is nearly the fact) to 70¼ quarters, we have extracted
the following table of the average prices of average Odessa wheat in
sterling money for the last eight years:—

Years
_s._
_d._
1817
37
3¾
1818
26
10¾
1819
17
1
1820
18
6
1821
24
10½
1822
22
6¾
1823
16
7¼
1824
15
0¼

The average of these eight years is 22s. 4½d. Allowing 22s. 6d. for
freight and other expenses attendant on importation, the price at which
Odessa wheat, of average quality, could be sold in Mark-lane, will
appear to be rather below 45s. Odessa wheat being inferior to English
wheat by about one-sixth, it may be concluded from the authentic
statements which we have given, that Odessa wheat would come into
competition with English wheat whenever the latter sold at a higher
price than from 53s. to 54s. per quarter.

It may be well to add, that whatever foundation there might be for the
supposition, that an increase of exportation would permanently raise the
price of wheat in Poland; on the side of Odessa, at least, such an
apprehension is chimerical. There are vast tracts of fertile land in the
Ukraine, Podolia, and the countries adjoining the Crimea, at present
uncultivated, or in pasturage; and from which corn might be supplied,
perhaps for centuries, at the same low price at which it is now supplied
from Odessa. We are even informed by the gentleman to whom we have
before alluded, that, in the neighbourhood of Odessa itself, so great is
the abundance of fertile soil that the same piece of land is rarely
cultivated for more than two or three years together. When one piece of
land is exhausted, the cultivators withdraw to another, as was the case
among the Germans of old, and as we know to be the case at this day, in
the back settlements of North America.

With regard to New York, the Reviewer has given us the prices by which
the value of the wheat exported has been calculated at the Treasury
Department for five years,[*] the greater number of which, if these
prices be Edition: current; Page: [58] correct, were years of unusually
high price, and which give an average that even he would admit to be far
too high. We know not what degree of reliance is to be placed upon the
calculations on which these statements are founded; if they are as
inaccurate as the official valuations at our Custom-house, there cannot
be a worse authority.

We have received from a great commercial house at Liverpool the
following statement, extracted from the New York prices current, of the
average price of wheat at New York, from 1820 to 1824 inclusive:—

Year
Price in Cents per Winchester Bushel
1820
87
1821
100
1822
131
1823
130
1824
110

The average of these five years gives 38s. per quarter.* Omitting 1820,
a year of extraordinary depression, the average of the last four years
gives 40s. per quarter, for the price of wheat at New York, the dearest
port in the Union. In Virginia and Maryland wheat is usually from 16 to
20 cents per bushel, or about 6s. per quarter, lower than at New York.
To the price at the latter port, add 12s. or 14s. the expense (as
estimated by the Reviewer)[*] of importation, and from 52s. to 54s. will
appear to be the average price at which wheat imported from New York
could be sold in Mark-lane. In this case no deduction is to be made for
difference in quality, average American being fully equal to average
English wheat.†

Besides, America exports flour as well as corn, and the carriage of the
less bulky commodity being so much less expensive, it is probable that
American flour would come into competition with English flour, at a much
lower comparative price than American corn.‡

But the facts which we shall now adduce, with regard to the price of
wheat at Rotterdam, from 1815 to 1824 inclusive, are perfectly decisive.
Edition: current; Page: [59] Holland, as is well known, has long been in
the habit of importing a very great proportion of the corn which she
consumes. She draws her supplies from a very wide surface; she is at
nearly the same distance as Great Britain from the principal exporting
countries; and there is, therefore, no reason why we should not obtain
corn from those countries at the same price as she does. The following
table of the average prices of wheat at Rotterdam for the last ten years
is derived from the very highest mercantile authority:—

Years
Price in Guilders per last of 86 Winchester Bushels
1815
257
1816
390
1817
574
1818
396
1819
284
1820
235
1821
221
1822
193
1823
197
1824
147

These prices, being reduced to sterling money at the average rates of
exchange for the several years, give the following as the average
prices, per Winchester quarter, for those years:—

Prices per Quarter
Years
_s._
_d._
*These fluctuations are greater than could have been anticipated in a
country which, at the period referred to, enjoyed almost a free trade in
corn: but it must be remembered that in the years of greatest elevation
(1817 and 1811), the price had been artificially raised by our great
importations, which carried off a portion of that grain which had been
produced for other markets.
1815
47
8¼
1816
60
11¼
1817
93
0¾*
1818
66
8
1819
46
6½
1820
36
10½
1821
33
5
1822
29
9¼
1823
30
3
1824
32
10¼

The average of the ten years is 47s. 9¾d.

It is true that, in these ten years, there were several seasons of very
general abundance. It will be observed, however, that there were two
years Edition: current; Page: [60] (1816 and 1817) of very general
deficiency. In 1815, before the scarcity began, and in 1819, between the
end of the scarcity and the beginning of the glut, the price seems to
have very nearly approximated to the average that we have assigned; and
this circumstance adds to the presumption, that the average of these ten
years is a fair criterion of the ordinary price.

The advocates of the opinion which we are combating lay great stress
upon the circumstance, that the returns of average prices include all
qualities of wheat, and not the best qualities only; forgetting that
since it is average English wheat, and not the best English wheat alone,
which is our standard of comparison, it would be unfair to ground our
calculations on the price, in the Dutch market, of any description of
wheat which is of higher quality than average English wheat. It is not
with Holland as it is with Odessa. Average Odessa wheat is inferior to
average English wheat, by about one-sixth. The average of the wheat
which is sold in the Dutch markets is inferior to average English wheat,
by three or four shillings per quarter at the utmost. The statements
which we have exhibited give something less than 48s. as the average
price of the average wheat which is sold in the market of Rotterdam. To
this, add 4s. for the difference in quality between that average and the
English: and this calculation gives 52s. for the price at which, in
ordinary years, wheat equal to average English wheat, could be imported.
And this is the same conclusion at which we had previously arrived, from
a calculation founded on an estimate of the remunerating prices in the
principal exporting countries.

The average price of wheat would therefore be reduced eight or nine
shillings per quarter, by the opening of the trade. This fall of price,
though quite sufficient to give a great relief to the consumer, is
nothing compared to that which we were taught by the agriculturists to
expect as the inevitable consequence of a free importation of corn.
These gentlemen, indeed, in their pathetic appeals to the compassion of
the public for protection against the utter ruin in which they would
have it believed that the repeal of the Corn Laws would involve them,
seem to have forgotten that this kind of argument cuts two ways; that if
it tells in their favour, it tells still more strongly against them;
that if the price of corn really is kept, in consequence of the Corn
Laws, so much higher than it would otherwise be, these laws are only by
so much the more insufferable a nuisance, and their repeal only by so
much the more imperatively required.

Without disguising our opinion that the repeal of the Corn Laws would
lower the average price of corn, we can supply the landlords with topics
of consolation which, if duly appreciated, are fully sufficient to make
them readily acquiesce in this most important of all commercial reforms.
For if it be of consequence to them to have a high price, it is also of
very great consequence to have a steady one; and it may fairly be
doubted, whether Edition: current; Page: [61] they gain so much, by a
higher average rent, as they lose by the constant fluctuations which are
the necessary effect of the exclusion of foreign corn.

A country which freely admits the corn of all nations into its market,
is scarcely ever exposed to either of the opposite evils of excessive
dearth or ruinous depression. If there be a bad harvest in one country,
there is a good one in another; and the surplus produce of the latter
supplies the deficiency of the former, thus saving the one country from
the evils of famine, and relieving the agriculturists of the other from
the ruin attendant on an extraordinary depression of price. But a nation
which denies itself the power of supplying its wants from the resources
of foreign countries, becomes dependent for its supply of corn, not upon
the annual produce of the whole world, which may be regarded as
tolerably uniform in its quantity, but upon the goodness or badness of
the harvest in a particular country, which, from the vicissitudes of the
seasons, may vary so much as to occasion the most distressing
fluctuations of price.

There is nothing in political economy more certain, than that a small
variation in the supply of such a commodity as corn, produces a much
more than proportional variation in price: a proposition which Mr.
Tooke, who has explained so many of the complicated phenomena of prices,
has shown to be as conformable to observed facts, as it is to sound
reasoning.

In most other commodities an increase of price induces the purchasers in
general to restrict their consumption, and the rise of price, therefore,
is little more than proportional to the falling-off in the supply. But
corn is a commodity of which, whatever may be its price, all are
desirous of consuming the same quantity as before; being willing to
renounce almost every other comfort, rather than diminish their
consumption of so important a necessary of life. They bid, therefore,
against one another, until the poorer competitors are driven out of the
market from mere necessity. If the deficiency be considerable, the
amount of misery produced baffles all calculation. Wages do not rise in
proportion, for wages are affected only by permanent variations in
price; the whole weight of the evil is, therefore, thrown upon those who
are least able to bear it. The poorest class of labourers are deprived
of the food which is absolutely essential to well-being, and the class
immediately above them are compelled to sacrifice almost all their other
comforts, in order to obtain their usual quantity of bread.

Though the farmers, in bad seasons, have less corn to sell, yet if
foreign supplies be excluded, the value of their produce is increased,
more than its quantity is diminished, and it is more profitable to them
to sell a million of quarters, at 100s. per quarter, than 1,200,000 at
60s. These accordingly are the halcyon days of agricultural prosperity.
If the high prices, from a succession of bad seasons, continue (as
during the late war) for a number of years, the farmers grow rich, rents
are punctually paid, new leases are Edition: current; Page: [62] granted
at increased rents; both farmers and landlords are tempted to increase
their domestic expenses; the farmers, allured by the prospect of high
prices, continue to apply additional capital to the soil; commons are
inclosed, new and expensive modes of cultivation are introduced, and a
foundation is laid for that ruin which necessarily follows on the
successive return of two or three abundant harvests.

For it is not more certain that a small deficiency produces a great
enhancement of price, than that a trifling excess often occasions an
inordinate depression. No doubt, when any class of the community was
before insufficiently provided with food, an increased consumption is
the probable consequence of a fall in price; the increase of
consumption, however, is rarely, if ever, proportional to the excess of
supply, since they, who already had food enough, are under no inducement
to consume more. In a state of freedom the surplus produce would find a
market abroad, as soon as the price had fallen sufficiently to indemnify
the exporter for the expenses of transit. But, when by a system of
restriction the average price of corn has been raised in any country
much above that which is the average price in other countries, an
abundant harvest becomes not only a curse to the farmer, but a curse
from which there is no relief. His corn is raised at an expense far
exceeding the cost of production abroad, and that which is a
remunerating price to the foreigner, would to him be absolute ruin. If
he exports, he must submit not only to the payment of the expenses of
exportation, but to the loss of all the difference between the cost of
production at home, and the price abroad. If the average home price is,
by the effect of the Corn Laws, kept 10 per cent above the price abroad,
he can obtain no vent for his surplus produce in the foreign market, but
by a sacrifice of 10 per cent and the cost of carriage in addition.

To a period, therefore, of dearth and agricultural prosperity, succeeds
a period of plenty and agricultural ruin. The inferior lands are thrown
out of cultivation, and the capital which has been expended on them is
utterly lost; the poorer class of farmers become insolvent; the
landlords receive no rent, or if they receive any, receive it out of the
capital of the tenants; the provisions for children, and other fixed
charges, which were a moderate burden upon their former incomes, now
swallow up the whole; and the ruin both of landlords and of tenants is
accelerated by their inability to renounce in adversity those expensive
habits which the former high prices had encouraged them to contract.

As if it had been resolved that all possible varieties of absurdity
should meet together in a single enactment, even the subordinate
arrangements are nearly the worst which could be derived, for that very
class whose interests they are intended to promote. If importation were
permitted at all times, subject to a high duty, the evils of great
fluctuation would indeed be Edition: current; Page: [63] unavoidable;
the agriculturists would be ruined in periods of abundance; but they
would at least be assured of prosperity in periods of scarcity. But now,
when importation is prohibited until corn shall have attained a certain
price, and even then permitted only for a few months, the importers
being compelled to hurry their corn into the country, without having
time to form a judgment as to the causes of the scarcity, its extent, or
probable duration, have no means of ascertaining how much corn is
wanted, and much more than is wanted is frequently brought; the price is
proportionally, or more than proportionally depressed, and at a time
when the farmer, having an unusually small quantity, has the greatest
occasion for a high price, he is forced to content himself with what
would not perhaps be an adequate remuneration even in an average year.*

If the landlords would attend a little to these, and some other effects
of the restrictive system, we should no longer hear them clamouring, as
so many of them have done, for a protecting duty of 20, 30, or 40
shillings. Can it be doubted that a steady price, though at a somewhat
lower average, is better for the landlord than an alternation of famine
and glut, of exorbitant gains and absolute ruin?

Granting that his rents will be higher; granting that, for a few years,
he may receive a larger sum than he would have done if no such monopoly
had existed; still it will be difficult of proof, that a system by which
his tenant is injured can be a beneficial one to him. Let us look at his
situation; he has a large income, perhaps, and lives in a corresponding
style of splendor and comfort; his establishment is upon a proportionate
scale; his agencies, his allowances to his children, his subscriptions,
in short, all the various charges of this description are settled
accordingly. During the period of deficiency, his rents are paid; but
the period of abundance is as alarming to him as to the farmer, for then
his account is made up of small actual receipts and a long column of
arrears; but his expenses remain for some time undiminished; and as he
also considers this state of things temporary, he is not willing to make
such an alteration, as, if permanent, he would be compelled to do. Some
of his out-goings cannot be diminished; if he before lived up to his
income, it is quite clear, this year, he must live much beyond it. The
frequent recurrence of such periods would place the landed interest of
this country in the same situation as the West-India planter; and
whoever really wishes to promote their welfare, would choose any
Edition: current; Page: [64] other state than that, to which to
assimilate theirs.*—But supposing a proprietor to have his land thrown
upon his hands; supposing it beggared, impoverished, and exhausted;
supposing his buildings without repair, his hedges and gates neglected,
to all which the distress of the farmer must tend; how can the system be
a permanently beneficial one to him? (Whitmore, pp. 58-60.)

It should also be remembered, that the corn which we might import, would
not be gratuitously bestowed upon us by the foreign producers: it would
be well if it were, but unhappily they are not so generous. They demand
our manufactures in exchange; and if the raw material of those
manufactures be of home growth, the production of that material would
open a new channel for the profitable employment of agricultural
capital. Suppose that we were regularly to import corn from Dantzic or
Odessa, and pay for it in Yorkshire cloths, the produce of English wool;
much of the land, which they tell us would lie waste, might be
profitably laid out in sheepwalks for the production of this wool. Not
to say that it would all be ultimately employed in this or some other
way equally advantageous to the landlord, since the repeal of the Corn
Laws could not fail, by raising profits, to stimulate accumulation and
promote the increase of population to such a degree, that all but our
very bad lands would speedily be wanted for pasturage, and for the
growth of such products as must necessarily be grown at home, though
every quarter of corn which we might require should be imported. The
free importation of corn in this respect resembles an improvement in
agriculture, which, though it may lower rent for a time, is ultimately
beneficial even to the landlord himself.

The landlord should consider, that if he has an interest opposed to that
of the community, he has also an interest in common with them: that, if,
on the one hand, he may prosper at their expense, he cannot fail, on the
other hand, to be a sharer in their prosperity also. It is his interest,
as well as theirs, to eat cheap corn; it is his interest, as well as
theirs, not to be burthened with a heavy parochial assessment, to
provide for the starving labourers in seasons of dearth. And if all
these considerations should fail of convincing him that he would not be
to any great extent a loser by cheapness of corn; let him throw the
happiness of thousands and millions of his countrymen into the scale.

To those landlords, however, in whose minds inveterate habit has created
so intimate an association between the robbery of the public and gain to
themselves, that if they can but make others pay, they find it not
possible to conceive that they should not be gainers by it, we have only
to say, if they will have it, that if what is a blessing to all the rest
of the community, is an Edition: current; Page: [65] injury to them,
they must even pocket the loss, and make the best of it that they can.
For the stale sophisms, which answered very well formerly, will go down
with few people now; so few, that it is scarcely necessary for us to
notice them: since, however, this inquiry would not be complete, were we
not to make some mention of the more prominent among these sophisms, we
will trespass somewhat longer upon the patience of the reader for that
purpose.

They say, then, that there is danger in depending for any part of our
supply of so important an article as corn upon the will of foreigners,
with whom we may be at war, and who would have it in their power, by
prohibiting exportation, to involve us in all the miseries of famine.
“This argument,” says Mr. Mill (Elements of Political Economy, 2nd ed.
pp. 197-8), “implies an ignorance, both of history and of principle; of
history, because, in point of fact, those countries which have depended
the most upon foreign countries for their supply of corn, have enjoyed,
beyond all other countries, the advantage of a steady and invariable
market for grain: of principle, because it follows unavoidably, if what,
in one country, is a favourable, is in other countries an unfavourable
season, that nothing but obtaining a great part of its supply from
various countries can save a nation from all the extensive and
distressing fluctuations which the variety of seasons is calculated to
produce. Nor is the policy involved in this argument better than the
political economy. It sacrifices a real good, to escape the chance of a
chimerical evil; an evil so much the less to be apprehended, that the
country from which another derives its supply of corn is scarcely less
dependent upon that other country for a vent to its produce, than the
purchasing country is for its supply. It will not be pretended that a
glut of corn in any country, from the loss of a great market, with that
declension of price, that ruin of the farmers, and that depression of
rents, which are its unavoidable consequences, is an immaterial evil.”

Mr. Whitmore makes on this subject (p. 87) the following very pertinent
observations:—

Upon this subject, however, we may proceed upon proof and experience,
and need not, therefore, trust to general reasoning. It is well known
that this country constantly imports nearly all the hemp it uses; it is
equally clear, that, if deprived of it, the consequences to us, a
maritime and commercial people, would be to the last degree injurious.
If there be one article more than another, of which an hostile country
would wish to deprive us, it would be this very article of hemp, which
may fairly be considered the sinews of naval warfare. But were we ever
deprived of it? Was there ever any serious obstruction, either to our
naval armaments or to our commercial speculations, arising from a
deficiency of this important article? If not, it is chimerical to
imagine that we should ever be deprived of the corn we are in the habit
of importing.

Edition: current; Page: [66]
It is further alleged, that the various classes of manufactures are
protected from foreign competition, and for this reason it is contended
that the landlords ought to obtain a similar protection. To this
objection also we shall reply in the words of Mr. Mill—Elements [2nd
ed.], pp. 198-200.

In the first place, it may be observed, that if this argument is good
for the growers of corn, it is good for every other species of producers
whatsoever; if, because a tax is imposed upon the importation of
woollens, a tax ought to be imposed upon the importation of corn, a tax
ought also to be imposed upon the importation of every thing which the
country can produce; the country ought, in short, to have no foreign
commerce, except in those articles alone which it has not the means of
producing. This is a reduction to absurdity which appears conclusive.
The argument moreover supposes that an extraordinary gain is obtained by
the manufacturer, in consequence of his supposed protection; and that a
correspondent evil is sustained by the corn-grower, unless he is
favoured by a similar tax. The ignorance of principle is peculiarly
visible in those suppositions, in neither of which is there a shadow of
truth.

The man who embarks his capital in the woollen or any other manufacture,
with the produce of which that of the foreign manufacturers is not
allowed to come into competition, does not, on that account, derive a
greater profit from his capital. His profit is no greater than that of
the man whose capital is embarked in trades open to the competition of
all the world. All that happens is, that a greater number of capitalists
find employment in that branch of manufacture; that a portion, in short,
of the capitalists of the country employ themselves in producing that
particular species of manufacture, who would otherwise be employed in
producing some other species, probably in producing something for the
foreign market, with which that commodity, if imported from the foreign
manufacturer, might be bought.

As the man who has embarked his capital in the trade which is called
protected, derives no additional profit from the protection; so the
grower of corn sustains not any peculiar loss or inconvenience. Nothing,
therefore, can be conceived more groundless than his demand of a
compensation on that account. The market for corn is not diminished
because a tax is laid upon the importation of woollens; nor would that
market be enlarged, if the tax were taken off. His business, therefore,
is not in the least degree affected by it.

Not only is the existence of other monopolies no reason why the corn
monopoly should be kept up, but the mutual support which every monopoly
lends to every other, is one of the strongest reasons why they should
all be destroyed. Every monopoly annihilated, takes one member from the
confederacy; leaves one restriction less to be appealed to as a
justification for others; adds something to the number and strength of
those interested in freedom of trade, and takes something from the mass
of interest enlisted on the side of restraint. The Corn Laws are not
merely to be viewed as the cause of those evils which directly and
immediately flow from them. They are to be judged, not only by the evil
which they do, but by the good which they prevent from being done. If
the landlords had no longer a monopoly of their own, they would no
longer, perhaps, uphold the monopolies of others. Edition: current;
Page: [67] It is no more their interest than it is that of the public,
to pay dear for their goods; and the protection of manufactures might
find fewer supporters in a certain honourable House, were it not for the
necessity of conceding something to those who might be dangerous enemies
to the protection of agriculture.

Nor are the mischievous consequences of our Corn Laws confined to this
country. Who can know to what extent they may have served as a motive or
as an apology for equally pernicious monopolies in other countries? But
for the parliamentary slang of protecting agriculture, America might
never have conceived the ridiculous idea of protecting manufactures;
since this is the cant word which custom has appropriated to those
measures by which a nation renounces the benefit of all the peculiar
advantages which nature has bestowed upon her in the production of
particular commodities. The late Russian Tariff is believed to have been
partly intended as a measure of retaliation upon us; and the last Corn
Circular of Messrs. Almonde and Behrend observes, “It has been rumoured
that our government intends to retaliate, or at least to meet the
present prohibitive system of the Western countries by a similar measure
as regards several expensive articles of importation which are not in
the number of the immediate necessaries of life; but little good,” they
add, “is expected from such a measure, as it would, perhaps, tend to
annihilate trade altogether.”

Were the exclusion of foreign goods a real advantage instead of a
positive evil, it would yet be expedient for a commercial country to
sacrifice this advantage, in order to obtain in its turn a similar
concession from other countries; on the same principle on which every
man would find it his interest, even if there were no laws, to refrain
from picking his neighbour’s pocket, lest by so doing he should provoke
his neighbour to perform a similar manœuvre upon his.

We are continually calling ourselves a trading nation; and we boast of
our commerce, no doubt very justly, as one of the grand sources of our
wealth. Yet, who ever heard of a commerce which was not mutual? How can
we expect to export without importing?* or of what advantage would it be
to us if we could? since, demonstratively, it is the imports alone, from
which the benefit of foreign commerce is derived. Nobody is enriched by
giving any thing away. Should we grow rich by exporting all that we
have, and importing nothing? How truly, then, do we misunderstand our
own Edition: current; Page: [68] interest, if we attempt to sell our own
commodities to foreigners, and yet refuse to take theirs in exchange!

We wonder that it has never occurred to those governments, from whose
territories we draw our foreign supplies of corn, to punish us for
refusing to take their corn regularly, by not permitting us to take it
at all. The foreign agriculturist, as he can never reckon upon our
demand, of course never produces a corresponding supply; and we, if our
price rises to 70s. rush in and carry off part of a crop which was not
more than sufficient, perhaps was not sufficient, for the supply of the
country from whence it was drawn. The extent to which this evil may be
carried is little conceived in this country. Mr. Behrend informs us,
that the cessation of our demand for Polish corn, since 1818, has caused
such a falling-off in the supply, that were it suddenly to become known
that 600,000 quarters of wheat would be speedily wanted for importation
into England, he should expect the price in the Dantzic market to mount
up at once to 120s. or 140s. And at no price, he says, in the present
state of cultivation, could Poland furnish us with as much corn as she
did in 1816. Thus, if our Corn Laws should not be repealed, two or three
bad harvests may be expected to bring on us all the evils, not of dearth
alone, but perhaps of actual famine.

It has been said, that although the home-growers have no claim to be
more favoured than the importers, they have a claim to be equally so:
that the home-grower is subject to many taxes, from which foreign corn
is exempt; and that a countervailing duty ought, therefore, to be laid
upon the importer, equal to all the taxes which fall on corn of British
growth.

If, in this country, raw produce were the only article subject to a tax,
this argument would be perfectly just. It is now acknowledged that
taxation should be so regulated as to disturb as little as possible that
distribution of capital, to which the interests of individuals would
lead in a state of perfect freedom. A premium should be given neither on
importation nor on home production. A law which forces us to import our
corn is as bad as a law which forces us to grow it at home. In both
cases, the effect is, that we pay dearer for it than we ought.

But when other commodities are taxed as well as corn, we think, with the
writer of the article already referred to in the Edinburgh Review, that
the agriculturists are not entitled to a countervailing duty, unless
they can show that they are more heavily taxed than other classes of
producers; nor ought the duty even then to exceed the difference between
the burthens of the agriculturists and those of others. The reason is,
that if all commodities of home production are taxed exactly alike, even
without countervailing duties, it is the same thing, with respect to
trade, as if they were not taxed at all; since prices are not higher
than if there were no tax, and there is no motive therefore to import
any thing, which there would not be a Edition: current; Page: [69]
sufficient motive to import in a state of perfect freedom. A protecting
duty, in that case, would be a premium on home production, and,
therefore, injurious. But if commodities are taxed unequally, those
which are most highly taxed, rise in price, and there is an immediate
motive to import them from abroad, paying for them in those which are
less heavily burthened. To prevent this, therefore, there is need of a
countervailing duty, equal to the difference between the two rates of
taxation.

Should it appear, then, that agricultural produce is subject to higher
taxation than manufactured goods, a countervailing duty would be
required. The Edinburgh Reviewer is of opinion, that an ad valorem duty
of 10 per cent would be amply sufficient.[*] This would be equivalent to
five or six shillings per quarter. But a fixed is obviously preferable
to an ad valorem duty, as the latter, increasing with the price, falls
heaviest in dear years, when it is of the greatest consequence that
importation should be free. Should the time come, as come it must, when
the tithe-tax shall cease to exist, the import duty may be totally
discontinued.

Mr. Ricardo, who concurred in Mr. Whitmore’s recommendation of a fixed
duty of 10s. per quarter, advised, however, as a measure of indulgence
to the agriculturists (to give them time for gradually withdrawing their
capital from the land), that the duty should be originally fixed at 20s.
and lowered 1s. every year until reduced to 10. We shall be believed
when we say, it is with the greatest hesitation we presume to differ
from so great an authority; but we fear, that, in general, these gradual
changes, which are intended as a boon to the producers, are felt rather
as an evil than as a good, even by those for whose benefit they are
designed. On a recent occasion, when, to save the silk manufacturers
from loss, the period of the reduction of the silk duties was postponed
for a year, the silk manufacturers themselves very generally complained,
that they would have suffered less from the immediate operation of the
measure, than they did from the stagnation of business which was the
consequence of the delay; and we suspect, that if the gradual reduction,
proposed by Mr. Ricardo, were adopted, the anticipated fall of price
would occasion so general an indisposition to lay in any quantity,
beyond what was wanted for immediate consumption, as might involve the
producers in all the evils of a glut. We believe, therefore, that the
introduction at once of that system which is intended to be permanently
established, is the most desirable course for the agriculturists, as it
certainly is for the rest of the community.

We cannot conclude these observations without again reminding our
readers, that if ever there was a time when it was of importance that
the public opinion should strongly and loudly declare itself upon this
question, it is now. Mr. Whitmore has pledged himself to bring the
subject before Edition: current; Page: [70] parliament in the present
session.[*] The good disposition of a portion of the ministry on this
question is well known; of that enlightened portion to whom we are
already indebted for the abolition of that worst of taxes, the duties on
law proceedings; for the opening of the silk trade; for the free, or
virtually free exportation of wool; for the partial abandonment of that
ludicrous policy, which forms the basis of our navigation laws; and (in
a great degree) for the repeal of those barbarous statutes, which were
expressly designed to keep down the wages of labour.[†] Ministers who
have done thus much, will do more; and on the subject of the Corn Laws,
they have already expressed the soundest opinions. Unfortunately,
however, they are not all powerful in the cabinet; they will not always
be in office, and should they continue as long in power as it is our
wish that they may, they will need all the support which public opinion
can give, to carry the repeal of the Corn Laws against half the cabinet,
and the whole of the landed aristocracy.

We have given our praise, as we shall always give our censure, where we
feel it to be deserved; nor is there any inconsistency in praising
ministers, and censuring those institutions, under which such men are
prevented from wishing all the good which they might do, or from doing
even all that which they wish. Measures, not men, is our motto; and, had
we a government constituted as we desire, we should not wish its
administration to be placed in better hands. Freed from the trammels of
sinister interest, they would then follow where their better
inclinations would lead. And when we consider what is the ordinary
effect of power upon the human mind, and what sort of beings ministers
usually are; that persons situated as they are should have the smallest
sympathy with the public, is a degree of merit which we scarcely know
how sufficiently to praise. Should they succeed in relieving the
community from the intolerable scourge of our Corn Laws, they will be
justly considered as the wisest and best ministers whom this country has
ever produced.

Edition: current; Page: [71]


PAPER CURRENCY AND COMMERCIAL DISTRESS
 1826

Edition: current; Page: [72]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Parliamentary Review. Session of 1826. London: Longman, Rees, Orme,
Brown, and Green, 1826, 630-62. Unsigned; not republished. Original
heading: “Paper Currency;—Commercial Distress.” Running heads: “Finance
and Trade.—Paper Currency./Finance and Trade.—Commercial Distress.”
Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “An article on Paper Currency and
Commercial Distress which appeared in the Parliamentary Review for the
session of 1826.” In his account of the Parliamentary History and Review
in his Autobiography (83), JSM describes the article as “an elaborate
Essay on the commercial crisis of 1825 and the Currency Debates.”

The Parliamentary History and Review was designed by the Radicals to
provide a comprehensive record of the debates in parliament and the
parliamentary committees, with extensive critical comment on the
proceedings and the issues. One volume of “History” and one of “Review”
appeared in 1826, covering the session of 1825 (6 Geo. IV), and later in
the same year another two volumes appeared, covering the session of 1826
(7 Geo. IV). The final issue was of one volume of “Review” in 1828,
covering the session of 1826-27 (7 & 8 Geo. IV); the “History” was
dropped because the debates had by that date become more readily
available.

Edition: current; Page: [73]


Paper Currency and Commercial Distress

the opening of Parliament in February, 1826, found the nation still in
the crisis of one of those commercial revulsions, to which all
commercial countries are liable, but which, partly from the unrivalled
magnitude of our commercial transactions, partly from vicious
legislation, are more frequent and more ruinous in our own country than
in any other.

This great calamity engaged the immediate attention of Parliament, and
led to the adoption of certain legislative measures, into the expediency
of which we shall now inquire. Before, however, we can be competent to
pronounce upon the efficacy of the supposed remedies we must be sure
that we clearly understand the cause of the disease.

The proximate cause of the commercial crisis was speculation. It is not
here intended to stigmatize all speculative transactions. Among the
transactions so designated, are to be found many of the most useful
operations of commerce. By speculations, we understand all mercantile
transactions attended with more than ordinary risk: by rash
speculations, those in which the risk is great, and the prospect of gain
not a sufficient equivalent. The years 1824 and 1825 abounded in
speculations of this latter description. Very rarely, at any former
period, have mercantile miscalculations been carried to so great a
length. A vast majority of these enterprises failed; but not until, for
the purpose of carrying them on, many persons had come under
engagements, which nothing but the success of the speculation could
enable them to fulfil. The speculations proving unsuccessful, these
persons became insolvent; and their ruin drew after it that of many
others, who had not speculated, but who were dependent, for the means of
fulfiling their engagements, upon the fulfilment of engagements towards
themselves by persons who had.

Speculation, then, was the cause of the revulsion. But what was the
cause of the speculation? This is evidently a most important question;
and it is one which we shall find the means of answering without much
difficulty. The cause of the late speculations, as of most former
speculations, was anticipated deficiency in supply.

Edition: current; Page: [74]
This solution will appear strange to those who imagine that the events
of last year were something peculiar and unprecedented—something so
entirely novel that they could not have arisen but from causes which had
never been experienced before. This is an opinion, however, which can be
entertained by no one who is even moderately conversant with our
commercial history. Not to look back to the calamitous periods of 1784
and 1793; the present is the fourth commercial revulsion of the same
kind, which has happened within the last sixteen years alone. The first
took place in 1810 and 1811; the second in 1814 and 1815. Both were
preceded by an immense increase of speculation. The same phenomena
occurred, though to a less terrific extent in 1819.*

There was, it is true, the appearance of more speculation at the recent
period, than at any of those above cited; because there were more
projects: and the projects, or bubbles, as they were called, although
they in reality bore a very small proportion to the totality of the
speculations, were almost the only part of them which the more
mercantile portion of the public saw, or dreamed of. But we ascribe
little agency to these projects, comparatively speaking, in producing
the distress. The speculations in shares extended only to a small
portion of the mercantile community. Moreover, the projects which were
really bubbles, that is, which were fraudulent, and were never intended
to be prosecuted, mostly burst while the amount of the instalments which
had been paid was as yet moderate; generally, we believe, not exceeding
1l. or 2l. per share. Of the bonâ fide projects, a great proportion
still continue to be carried on; and may yet turn out, some of them
undoubtedly will turn out, advantageous investments of capital. During
the general infatuation, exorbitant premiums, it is true, were given for
shares in the more promising of these undertakings; and to those who
purchased when shares were at the highest, the profits of the enterprise
will never yield any thing like an adequate remuneration. It could,
however, be no secret to the most sanguine projector, that the returns,
even to the most successful of these schemes, must be distant. With this
knowledge, it is extremely improbable that the honest purchaser should
have invested a larger sum in shares, than he could afford, at least, to
wait a considerable time for the repayment of. And as for those who
bought shares at a price which they knew that no rational calculation
would warrant, in the hope of finding dupes, or knaves of their own
stamp, to purchase them again at a further advance, we cannot say we
greatly regret that their plans should have been thwarted, though it be
at the expense of some loss and some inconvenience to themselves.

Edition: current; Page: [75]
The speculations, by the failure of which so large a portion of the
mercantile community has been brought to the brink of ruin, and so many
actually ruined, were of a different kind. Their character was, not the
investment of capital in new enterprises, but an enormous and
improvident extension of dealings in many of the established lines of
business. The proper name for these speculations is over-trading. The
phenomena of over-trading are so little understood out of the mercantile
circles, that a short exposition of them will be read with interest; and
without it, we fear that much of our subsequent reasoning would scarcely
be intelligible.

It is well known that there are dealers who are constantly upon the
watch for every symptom either of an actual or a prospective increase of
demand, or deficiency, in the supply of any article of general
consumption. The moment any such symptom is perceived, these dealers
come into the market and purchase, in order to profit by the rise of
price which will take place when the deficiency, or the increase, of
demand becomes known. Their purchases produce an immediate rise. The
articles hence appear to be looking up: expectation is excited that they
will rise still higher; and additional speculative purchases are made
upon this prospect. In this manner, the prices of the articles which are
the subjects of speculation, undergo a progressive rise; which will be
greater or less, according to the strength of the impulse which has been
given to the spirit of speculation. If the expected increase of demand,
or deficiency of supply, be moderate, and not calculated to inspire
great hopes of immense or rapid gains, the rise of price is probably not
more than sufficient to call forth the required addition to the supply,
and to produce, in the meantime, the necessary limitation of
consumption. In this case, no loss is sustained, and the effects of the
speculation are purely beneficial. But if the expected increase of
demand, or deficiency of supply, be so considerable, as to produce
anticipations of a great and rapid rise of price; and if these
anticipations extend to several articles of general consumption at once;
they give rise to what is frequently, though erroneously, called general
over-trading. The few who watch prospectively the signs of future supply
and demand, anticipating a great rise of price, make considerable
purchases. These purchases produce a considerable immediate rise: and
this in its turn tempts the many, who look no further than to the
immediate turn of the market, to purchase in expectation of a still
greater advance. These speculative purchases produce the very effect, in
anticipation of which they were made. A progressive and rapid rise takes
place; the holders of all the articles to which the speculation extends,
appear to be making fortunes; and a general rush of capital takes place
into those employments. Increased speculative purchases raise the price
far beyond what the prospect of deficiency, or of increased demand, will
justify. Immense orders are sent abroad, if the Edition: current; Page:
[76] articles belong to the class of imported commodities; thus raising
their price in the foreign market: if they be articles produced at home,
equally extensive orders are given to our own manufacturers. Every one
calculating upon being before-hand with all his competitors, provides
himself with as large a stock as he thinks that the market will take
off; not reflecting that others, equally with himself, are engaged in
adding to the supply, nor calculating upon the fall of price which must
take place as soon as this increased quantity is brought to market. The
deficiency is soon changed into an excess. The first who come into the
market realize at the high prices, and make, or appear to make, enormous
gains. An additional stimulus is thus given to the frenzy, and prices at
length rise to such a height, as to induce a considerable number of the
holders to think of realizing. Then commences the fall of prices. This
operates as a signal to all the other holders to hurry their stocks to
market, in order to secure what they can before the price relapses to
its original level. The recoil is hence almost instantaneous. Not only
do prices fall to the level from which they rose, but, from the
increased quantity which has been imported or produced, they fall lower;
commonly much lower. Of those who have bought largely at the high
prices, a great proportion are ruined. Those who have contracted to take
large additional quantities from the manufacturers, are unable to
perform their contract; and the stocks remain in the warehouses of the
producers, many of whom become unable to fulfil their engagements, or
obtain the means of fulfiling them by forced sales, at an enormous loss.
The failure of a few great commercial houses occasions the ruin of many
of their numerous creditors. A general alarm ensues, and an entire stop
is put for the time to all dealings upon credit: many persons are thus
deprived of their usual accommodation, and are unable to continue their
business. It is unnecessary to multiply details.

Such is the rationale of a period of over-trading. Every merchant, who
remembers the commercial revulsions of 1810-11, and 1815-16, will
testify that such are the events which always follow the opening of new
markets, the expectation of deficient supplies, every thing, in short,
which excites a confident hope of rapid gains. The additional supplies
necessary are enormously over-estimated, enormous over-production and
over-trading take place, the market is glutted, the holders suffer
immense losses, many of them become insolvent, and their ruin draws
along with it the ruin of many among the many others, who have given
them credit, confiding in the enormous wealth which they appeared to
have the power of realizing during the continuance of those high prices
of which their own purchases were in a great measure the cause.

The speculation and over-trading of the years 1824 and 1825, had their
origin in a state of circumstances precisely similar. They are thus
explained Edition: current; Page: [77] by Mr. Tooke, in his work
intituled “Considerations on the State of the Currency:”

The close of each year is the period at which, by annual custom, the
stocks of goods on hand, and the prospects of supply and consumption for
the coming season, are stated and reasoned upon by merchants and
brokers, in circular letters addressed to their correspondents and
employers. By these circulars it appeared, that of some important
articles the stock on hand fell short of that at the close of the
preceding year. From this the conclusion was more or less plausibly
deduced, that the rate of the annual consumption of these articles was
outrunning the rate of the annual supply, and that an advance in price
ought to take place; at the same time there were, as in the case of
cotton and silk, confident reports of failure of crops, or other causes,
which would inevitably diminish the forthcoming supply. Expectation of
scarcity was thus combined with actual deficiency in exciting the spirit
of speculation. . . . . The impulse to a rise having been given, and
each succeeding purchaser having realized, or appearing to have the
power of realizing, a profit, a fresh inducement appeared at every step
of the advance, to bring forward new buyers. These were no longer such
only as were conversant with the market; many persons were induced to go
out of their own line, and to embark their funds or stretch their
credit, with a view to engage in what was represented to them by the
brokers as a certain means of realizing a great and immediate gain.
Cotton exhibited the most extraordinary instance of speculation carried
beyond all reasonable bounds. Silk, wool, and some other articles, in
which some advance was justified by the relative state of the supply and
demand, became the subject of a speculative anticipation, and advanced
much beyond the occasion.*

It is evident, that what is lost to one person, in these fluctuations,
is gained by another. In the view of national wealth, therefore, except
to the extent of that portion of the gain which falls to the share of
foreigners, together with the loss of interest on the capital which lies
unemployed during the stagnation, the evil of such vicissitudes is
small. In the view of national happiness, it is undoubtedly great; and
the legislature, therefore, would be highly culpable in not applying a
remedy, if a remedy were within the reach of legislation. But the cause
of the evil is one which legislation cannot reach—the universal
propensity of mankind to over-estimate the chances in their own favour.
While this propensity subsists, every event which stimulates hopes, will
give rise to extensive miscalculation; and every miscalculation upon a
sufficiently extensive scale, will terminate in the ruin of multitudes.
All that we are entitled to hope is, that as the world grows older it
may grow wiser; that the time may come, when, in addition to reading,
writing, and arithmetic, it may be thought not unnecessary for a young
man who enters into a merchant’s counting-house, to possess some
knowledge of the circumstances which regulate the prices of commodities;
that when improved education shall have been followed by improved
Edition: current; Page: [78] mental habits, and when the liberation of
trade from the restraints under which it now labours, and which so
greatly aggravate all fluctuations, shall have given sober calculation a
solid ground to rest upon, sober calculation may gradually take the
place of gambling; that traders may one day acquire sufficient prudence
to abstain from risking their own property in rash speculations, and
sufficient probity to abstain from risking in any speculations the
property of others.

His Majesty’s Ministers saw the subject in another light. The root of
the evil, in their opinion, lay much nearer the surface. According to
them, the over-trading, and the revulsion which succeeded it, were
either produced, or greatly heightened, by the system of our currency.
Two laws were accordingly passed, by means of which, changes of
considerable importance were made in the system of our currency. By the
one, it was enacted, that no promissory notes, under the value of five
pounds, should circulate beyond the 5th of April, 1829: By the other,
the exclusive privileges of the Bank of England were so far curtailed,
as to permit the establishment, at a distance not exceeding 65 miles
from London, of banking associations with an unlimited number of
partners.[*]

The observation which first suggests itself, on the subject of these
specimens of legislation, is, that they were enacted in a hurry.
Legislation, like most other kinds of business, when it is performed in
a hurry, is not very likely to be performed well. When, indeed, an
enactment does no more than carry into practice, principles, either
obvious in themselves, or universally admitted by all well-informed
persons who have directed their attention to the subject; provided,
also, that the applicability or inapplicability of those principles to
existing circumstances, depends upon facts, all of which are so obvious
and familiar, as to be in no danger of being either mistaken or
misinterpreted; it may then be safe to legislate, even in a hurry: And
we do not deny that there may be dangers so imminent, as to justify the
adoption even of an uncertain remedy, provided it be an immediate one.
But no such danger existed in the present case. Nor was the purpose of
this hasty legislation the mitigation of immediate suffering; which
might have been some excuse for precipitation. It was never contended
that the proposed measures had any tendency to alleviate the existing
distress. It was even admitted, that the small-note measure was
calculated to aggravate the distress, by discrediting an important part
of the circulation; by which means the currency was further contracted,
and additional force given to that recoil of prices, which was the
immediate cause of the distress. As little could it be said that the
suppression of the small notes was a measure borne out by received
principles. Its proposers themselves never asserted, that the received
principles were in its favour. They fully admitted that it was repugnant
to received principles; but maintained Edition: current; Page: [79] that
those principles, however plausible in theory, had been disproved by
recent experience. With these representations before it, Parliament knew
so little, or cared so little about received principles, that it was
quite contented to set them aside on mere hearsay; being perfectly
satisfied with the word experience, without giving itself any concern
about the thing, or taking even so much trouble as would have been
necessary to ascertain whether the supposed facts, on the ground of
which it was thus called upon to renounce its strongest convictions,
were really facts, or suppositions of the most unwarranted kind.

First appearances, indeed, had been sufficiently in favour of the
ministerial theory, to enlist in support of it a large proportion of the
public of all ranks, and of the public press. Long before the meeting of
Parliament, a loud cry had been raised for the suppression of the small
notes. Those who raised this cry, had seen, of the circumstances of the
case, just so much as they could not help seeing, namely, the failure of
banks, and the distress of many poor persons, who held the notes,
especially the small notes, of those banks. To have seen thus much,
required nothing but eyes; to see any thing further, required eyes, and
a mind, capable of directing those eyes. All, therefore, who possessed
the former, but were destitute of the latter, unanimously agreed, that
the small notes ought to be suppressed. Uncultivated minds, minds
unaccustomed to dwell upon any ideas beyond those of the immediate
objects of sense, always jump at once from the good or evil which they
see or feel, to the physical substance, the visible or tangible object,
which sight or touch exhibits to them in the character of an instrument.
In this point of view, there is no denying that the small notes were the
cause of whatever losses were sustained by the holders of those notes;
for certain it is, that, had there been no small notes, no person could
have lost any thing by holding them. But we submit, that whatever was
thus lost, was lost not by any pestilential quality in the piece of
paper itself, but simply by the insolvency of the issuers. If,
therefore, it be practicable to take perfect securities, that no person
shall issue notes who does not possess property more than sufficient to
meet their amount; it does appear, that the very possibility of loss to
the holders of the notes would be completely obviated. That it is
practicable to provide such securities, we have never yet found any
person to deny; and something, though by no means enough, was done by
one of the ministerial measures, towards providing them. Those members,
who introduced into the discussion on the small notes, pathetic
descriptions of the misery occasioned by the failure of a country bank,
might have reflected that the debate on the Bank Charter Act[*] was the
occasion on which such descriptions would have been in place.

We do not accuse ministers of having acted upon views so superficial as
Edition: current; Page: [80] those which, we are persuaded, alone
influenced the ignorant part of the public in the cry which it raised
against the small notes. Ministers were well aware that the question
turned upon far other considerations than these. But although they
confessed that they were abandoning the established principles, they do
not seem to have reflected, that to justify the abandonment of
established principles, the most perfect knowledge that was attainable
was not more than enough. After ascertaining the few facts which could
be got at by merely ordering a parliamentary return, they took every
other fact for granted, which the establishment of their theory
required.

Take, for example, the supposed fact, to which so much importance was
attached; that the currency had been increased for some time previous to
the commencement of any efflux of gold. No fact ever admitted more
easily of being proved or disproved before a committee; but ministers
had reasoned themselves, or rather had been persuaded by others, into a
belief that it must have been so; and, this settled, it was not
considered needful, though it were only for the purpose of silencing
adversaries, to ascertain whether or not, in point of fact, it had been
so. Take next the assumption, that the small notes had operated greatly
to facilitate the speculation and over-trading of 1824 and 1825. Against
this supposition no less than five counter-suppositions might be
suggested; not one of which was met, or could be met satisfactorily,
without that inquiry into the facts, which it was not thought necessary
to institute. The banks which issued small notes may not have
facilitated speculation at all. Or they may have facilitated it by their
large notes, and not by their small ones. Or they may have facilitated
it by their small notes, but, if the small notes were suppressed, they
might have it in their power to continue facilitating it by their large
ones. Or they might have power to facilitate it by means of some
substitute for notes, and without the assistance of notes, large or
small. Or, lastly, they may have facilitated it by their small notes,
and may not have power to facilitate it by any other means; but the
utmost facility which they may be able to afford to it may not be so
considerable, as to outweigh the counterbalancing advantages of a small
note circulation.

Had Parliament exerted all the means which it possessed of ascertaining
every fact material to the case, the discordance of the facts with the
theory would probably have rendered any other mode of combating it
superfluous. These means, however, were not exerted; and we must now
proceed to examine into the validity of the theory, by a method more
laborious in the process, though equally certain in the result; by
reasoning from the nature and properties of currency and trade. We are
persuaded, that even by this means, we shall be able to disprove the
theory in every one of its essential parts, and by arguments so cogent,
that the non-production of so Edition: current; Page: [81] many facts
will only injure the simplicity, without detracting from the
conclusiveness, of our reasoning.

We shall begin by exhibiting, in one view, the whole of the case which
was attempted to be made out against the small notes. It will be seen
that the principal arguments were, in substance, arguments, not against
a small-note currency in particular, but against a paper currency of any
description. The advantage which, it was stated, would result from the
suppression of the small notes, was, that there would be less paper, and
more gold: and all which was said against the small notes resolved
itself into this, that paper money was bad, but that the worst sort of
paper money was the small paper.

The following, then, were the objections to a paper currency.

1. That even in non-speculative periods, a paper currency, although
convertible into specie, by law, at the option of the holder, is yet
liable to over-issue.

2. That in speculative periods there is always an over-issue, which, by
producing a general tendency of prices upwards, heightens and prolongs
the spirit of speculation: That, when at length the revulsion arrives,
the destruction of the extra paper which has been called into existence
by the speculation, renders the recoil of prices more violent, and for
this reason more destructive: And that these circumstances have actually
taken place during the last three years.

3. That when the paper currency is suddenly increased, (at least if it
be a paper currency issued, as ours is, chiefly through the medium of
loans), a fall takes place in the rate of interest, which, by
diminishing the incomes of the owners of small capitals, induces them to
engage in hazardous speculations: and that this also actually happened
during the last three years.

We shall now proceed to examine the evidence of these three
propositions, one by one.

1. Over-Issue.—The first proposition is, That even in non-speculative
periods, a paper currency, although convertible into specie at the
option of the holder, is yet liable to over-issue.

The whole force of this argument lies in the word over-issue.
Over-issue, however, is a thing oftener talked of than understood. What
is meant by over-issue? Unless there be some standard by which it may be
judged what is over-issue, and what is fit and proper issue, it cannot
be determined whether a paper currency is liable to over-issue or not.

Over-issue, is any issue whatever, which depreciates the currency. We
are aware that we are not using the word depreciation in its strict
sense. We use it as a short expression for lowering the value of the
currency; or, what is the same thing in other words, raising general
prices. We assert, then, that however extensive the issues may be,
unless the value Edition: current; Page: [82] of the currency is
lowered, there is no over-issue. If this be doubted, which we can
scarcely believe, let the reader merely revolve in his mind what
possible harm can arise (while the issuers are solvent) from any issue
of paper which does not raise prices, or lower the value of the
currency.

This being assented to, we next ask, how the value of the currency can
be lowered by any issue of paper which displaces an equal quantity of
gold? If the answer be, as it must be, not at all; and if it be further
admitted, as it universally is, that every issue of paper displaces an
equal quantity of gold, so long as there is an equal quantity of gold in
the circulation to displace; the inference must be, that while there is
an ounce of coined gold in the country, there is proof positive of the
non-existence of any over-issue.

Most assuredly the speakers in Parliament did not state the case to
themselves in this way. In the minds of most of them there seemed to be
a disposition to regard any issue of paper whatever as an over-issue.
Loud and incessant were the complaints, that one-pound notes and
sovereigns would not circulate together. The Bank of England and the
country banks, were charged with a dereliction of duty, in not
contracting their issues when the exchanges indicated that they were
driving gold out of the country. Now, if it be a sufficient objection
against paper that it displaces gold, there ought not to be any paper
whatsoever. Every note of the thirty or forty millions of paper which
are now circulating in this country, displaced, when it was first
issued, an equal quantity of gold. This is so obvious, and now so
perfectly familiar to the merest tyro in the theory of money, that it
does not stand in need either of illustration or of proof.

Since the paper, which costs nothing, performs all the functions of
currency as well, the large notes indeed much better, than gold; while
every sovereign exported causes the importation of a sovereign’s worth
of productive capital, or consumable produce; the country gains, by the
substitution, the whole value of the gold. There is a gain to the
currency in cheapness, while there is no loss in steadiness of value.
The currency is altogether in a more perfect state than before. When an
issue of paper ceases to displace a corresponding quantity of gold,
then, and not till then, is the currency depreciated; then, and not till
then, is there an over-issue. But this, by universal admission, cannot
happen while the Bank continues to pay in specie on demand.

The above argument may be thus briefly recapitulated:

No issue of paper can be called an over-issue, which does not depreciate
the currency:

It cannot depreciate the currency, if it displaces as much coin from the
circulation as it adds paper:

By universal admission every issue of paper has this effect, so long as
there remains a single sovereign in the country:

Edition: current; Page: [83]
Therefore, so long as there remains a sovereign in the country, there
has been no over-issue.

Thus far, the argument has nothing in it particularly complicated, or
difficult of apprehension. We must here, however, observe, that to
understand the rest of the discussion, the reader must keep constantly
in view the principles already established; and, to be sure of keeping
them in view, must dwell upon them before proceeding further, till they
are quite familiar. Nothing less will be just to the writer, or entitle
the reader to expect either profit or pleasure from the ensuing part of
the argument.

With this remark we resume the thread of the argument.

An objection has been made to the above reasoning. Admitting that every
million of notes issued causes the export of a million of coin, it is
contended that this effect does not take place till after a considerable
interval; during which interval the currency is actually increased to
the extent of the extra million; its value, consequently, depreciated to
that extent; and whatever bad consequences arise from a depreciation of
the currency (of which speculation is asserted to be one) take place
during that interval.

If the matter of fact involved in this objection were correct, the
inference from it would be indisputable. If it be true that a
considerable interval must elapse before the increase of the currency is
carried off by the export of gold, all the evils arising from a
depreciated currency must be experienced in the meantime. We maintain,
however, that the interval is very inconsiderable. And upon this point
we join issue with the opponents of a paper currency.

We shall proceed to state the reasons which have been assigned for the
opinion that a considerable time must intervene between the issue of
paper and the consequent export of gold. These reasons will be taken
from the ablest publications on that side of the question. We should
have preferred to take them from the speeches in Parliament, had the
speeches in Parliament afforded them. But the only reason which was
urged in Parliament was contained in one word—Experience: a reason,
which, so long as we are not informed what experience, proves nothing
whatever, except the ignorance of its propounder.

The reasoning of those, upon the authority of whose publications
Parliament adopted this opinion, was as follows:

Until the exchanges have turned sufficiently against us, or, in other
words, until foreign bills have risen to a sufficient premium, to yield
a profit on the exportation of the precious metals, they will not be
exported. But the exchanges turn against us, only when we have a balance
to pay to foreign nations. The only process, therefore, by which the
issue of paper can cause the exportation of coin, is the following. It
first lowers the value of money, and raises prices. In so far as this
rise of prices affects exported Edition: current; Page: [84]
commodities, it reduces the profit upon their exportation. In so far as
it affects imported commodities, it increases the profit upon their
importation. Importation is thus encouraged, and exportation checked;
the imports exceed the exports, a balance becomes due, the exchanges
fall, and gold is sent abroad. Every step of this process, it is
asserted, requires some time; and in particular, a considerable time
must elapse between the sending out orders for additional imports, and
the period when payment for them has to be made. During this interval,
therefore, the currency will be depreciated.

Our answer to this objection is as follows.

That some time is required to effect the process by means of which a
quantity of gold is carried off equal to the paper which has been
issued, cannot possibly be denied. But it is evident that, for the
purposes of the present inquiry, the only material question is, how
much? If it requires only a few days, or even one or two weeks, to carry
off the increase of the currency, any depreciation which can take place
during that interval, is of small moment. But if the depreciation
continues for many weeks, or months, its consequences may be very
serious indeed. Let us therefore consider by what circumstances the
length of the interval will be regulated.

The effect of the issue of paper, is to raise prices. We shall not here
inquire what period of time, if any, would elapse, before the rise of
prices took place. Suffice it to say, that until it has taken place, the
currency is not depreciated, and therefore no evil is as yet produced by
the issue. But as soon as there occurs a rise in the price of any of the
great articles of import, immediate intelligence is sent off to Paris,
or Hamburgh, and the merchants of those places immediately make their
arrangements for profiting by the rise. The celerity with which the
operations of commerce are performed when there is an adequate motive
for so performing them, is matter of universal notoriety. Extensive
shipments would probably be made within a week after the receipt of the
intelligence. Nor is it correct to say that these shipments would not
affect the exchange until the goods came to be paid for by the English
purchaser. They would affect it immediately. There are few merchants who
would be inclined to wait till the goods were sold, for a return to
their capital. There are many who could not. These would immediately
draw upon their correspondents, or agents, in London, to whom the goods
had been consigned, and carry the bill to a bill broker in Paris or
Hamburgh, to be cashed. This would bring bills on London to a discount;
or what is the same thing, the exchange would rise. The next post would
carry this intelligence to London, and without a day’s interval the
London exchange would undergo a corresponding fall.

That the exchange cannot rise on one side of the channel without
instantly Edition: current; Page: [85] falling on the other, it is quite
unnecessary to prove to any mercantile man. But to those who are not
familiar with the facts, we will explain in what manner the variation,
which had taken place at Paris, in the exchange between the two
countries, would communicate itself to London.

The speculators on the exchanges, hearing that bills on London were
selling in Paris at a discount, or, in other words, that English money
could be purchased at Paris for less than its worth, would immediately
send orders to their Parisian correspondents to invest as much money as
possible in bills upon London, at the favourable rate of exchange. In
directing their agent to make these purchases, they, of course, must, at
the same time, supply him with the means. For this purpose they would go
to a London bill broker, and demand bills upon Paris. This demand would
raise bills to a premium, in a word, lower the exchange.

Instead of a long interval, therefore, there is a very short interval
between a depreciation of the currency and a fall of the exchange. Two
days carry to Paris information of the rise of prices; eight or ten
days, at the utmost, suffice for the shipment of goods; bills are
immediately drawn upon London for the amount; the exchange rises at
Paris, and no sooner is this known in London, than a corresponding fall
in the exchange takes place there. As soon as the fall in the exchange,
or in other words, the premium on bills, becomes sufficient to cover the
expense of remitting gold, gold is exported for the sake of drawing
against it and gaining the premium.

The expence of remitting gold to France does not amount to one per cent:
a depreciation of the currency, therefore, to that extent, would be
sufficient, after an interval of a few days, to cause the export of
gold. The slightest excess above the expense of transit, is a sufficient
motive to those who speculate on the exchanges; a class of men
proverbially keen-sighted, and who are contented with very small gains,
on account of the rapidity and certainty of the return. The exportation
would in fact begin even before the exchange yielded such a premium as
would be necessary to render the speculation a profitable one. There are
transactions in anticipation of profit, as well as transactions for
immediate profit, in this line of business as in others. To give an
instance: Mr. Haldimand, in his Evidence before the Commons’ Committee
on the resumption of cash payments in 1819, mentions that in the October
preceding, when France had engaged for very large payments to foreign
powers, “the Paris bankers, anticipating a great demand for bills upon
all foreign countries, were remitting specie to meet the drafts which
they intended to negociate to the agents of all those foreign powers,
with a small advance upon their remittance.”[*]

Among the individuals who are constantly engaged in watching the
Edition: current; Page: [86] minutest indications of possible profit in
this line, it is sufficient to name Mr. Rothschild, in order to convince
the reader that neither immediate nor prospective gains are in any
danger of being overlooked.

Let us now recapitulate the substance of our argument against the first
proposition.

The proposition was, that a paper currency admits of over-issue. We have
seen, first, that there is no over-issue where there is no depreciation;
secondly, that there is no depreciation, where the paper issued drives
out of the country a corresponding quantity of gold; thirdly, that it
always does this, while the Bank continues to pay in specie: and does it
after an interval too short for the depreciation to be productive of any
material inconvenience while it lasts.

Having thus, as we think, completely disproved in theory the proposition
of our opponents, let us now revert to the phenomena of 1824-25: and
though, for want of evidence, we cannot trace accurately the connexion
of the events, we can prove at least, that what is known of them does
not afford any ground for adhering to an opinion, the fallacy of which
in theory has been so clearly shewn.

The great increase of the currency, which took place previously to the
commercial crisis, has always been ascribed, and with justice, to the
speculations of that year. It will be shewn presently, that the
prevalence of speculation always leads to an increase of the currency:
in the meantime, as this is an admitted fact, we shall consider it, and
reason upon it, as proved. The tendency to speculation first manifested
itself in a more than ordinary degree, in the spring of 1824. It
increased gradually during the remainder of that year, and reached its
greatest height during the first three months of 1825. Now it was also
in the spring of 1824, that the efflux of gold commenced. The exchanges
turned decidedly against us in July of that year: And we have the
authority of Mr. Tooke,[*] (on whose part it may be regarded as an
admission, since it makes against his theory), that a considerable
amount of gold had found its way out of the country by other channels,
some time previous to the turn of the exchanges. Here, then, is no proof
that the exportation of gold does not take place till a considerable
time after the increase of the currency. The evidence is not very
conclusive; but such as it is, it makes against this opinion, not in its
favour.

We may perhaps be told, that we do not make a fair statement of facts.
It may be admitted, that the exchanges turned, by the time that the
speculations had caused any increase of the currency. But the currency,
it may be said, had been increasing in amount, for a considerable time
previous to the speculations. The country banks had been extending their
issues ever Edition: current; Page: [87] since the year 1822: and had
increased them considerably before the spring of 1824. They are even in
the habit of increasing their issues as corn rises in price: and yet,
the increase never affects the exchanges, nor sends gold out of the
country.

These facts are undeniable: and they lead to the consideration of a law
of our currency, which has never been sufficiently attended to; this is,
the dependence of its value upon the Corn Laws.

A rise in the price of agricultural produce invariably increases the
issues of the country banks. The notes of the country banks are chiefly
issued in discounts, or other advances, to farmers and corn dealers.
When the articles in which these persons deal, appear to be rising in
price, they apply to their bankers for greater advances, in order to
obtain the means of holding back their stock till the price has reached
its height. If the rise continues for some time, the farmers need
greater advances, that they may be able to add to the supply; and all
speculators in corn, at the higher prices, require a greater quantity of
money to make their purchases. Add to this, that when corn is high, all
persons whose property is corn can give better security, and can
therefore more readily obtain whatever loans they require. In this
manner the issues of the country banks are increased, and, we admit,
without affecting the exchanges, or driving gold out of the country.

We maintain, however, that this is not the consequence of our paper
currency, but of those laws which injure us in so many other respects as
well as this—our Corn Laws. We affirm, that the country banks could not
thus extend their issues if the trade in corn were free; and that a
similar extension will take place, even under a metallic currency, while
that trade continues under restraint.

These assertions we shall now endeavour to prove.

A circumstance which must by no means be forgotten, is, that when
commodities rise in price, it really requires an increased quantity of
money to circulate them. When corn and other agricultural produce rise
in price, more money, by some means or other, must be had in the
agricultural districts; and if it be not permitted to be produced upon
the spot, it will be sent from London. This will cause a diminution of
the circulating medium in London, and a fall of prices there. As in
other cases, so in this, a fall of prices will produce an increase of
exportation. Under a perfectly free trade in corn, the increased exports
would be paid for, as they naturally and properly should be, by that
additional importation of corn which the rise in its price would
occasion: there would, therefore, be no increase in the amount of our
currency; it would only be differently distributed between town and
country. Under a restricted corn trade, the case is widely different.
Corn cannot be imported. Other imports will not be increased, but
diminished, from the fall of their price in our market. In what, then,
can Edition: current; Page: [88] the increased exports be paid for, but
in gold? And will not this gold be as real an addition to the currency,
as the country paper? Gold will flow in, until the vacuum is filled,
which was left in the London circulation by the country demands; since
the balance between the exports and imports will not be restored until
prices have again risen to their former level. The addition, therefore,
to the currency, and the fall in its value, will be precisely the same
in amount, whether under a paper currency, or under a metallic.

Lest this general explanation of the process by which depreciation would
be produced, even under a metallic currency, when corn was dear, should
not be deemed sufficiently intelligible, we will now enter more minutely
into the detail.

If, when corn is dear, there be need of additional loans in the
agricultural districts, (which is the fact assumed by both parties as
the basis of their arguments), the need would not be less under a
metallic currency than under a paper. The farmers and corn dealers would
still apply for increased advances; and as the country bankers are the
great money dealers, to them the application would still be made. The
country bankers, like the London bankers, would not cease to lend money,
even though it were money manufactured by other people; and if they
could not increase their issues, that would be no reason why they should
not, if the security were good, increase their loans. Suppose then that
they were prohibited from making loans in their small notes, in their
large notes, or even in bills on London, they would not give up the
point so long as any other medium was to be had; they would write to
desire their agents in London to remit to them a sufficient quantity of
Bank of England notes, or to exchange these notes at the Bank for
specie, and remit the specie.*

Edition: current; Page: [89]
If the Bank re-issue these notes, which it may safely do, here is an
increase of the currency, just as much as if the country banks had made
the increase themselves. If it do not, prices fall, and gold flows in,
by the process which we have already explained.

We have now, as it appears to us, completely disposed of that argument
against a paper currency, which is founded upon the fluctuations to
which it is supposed to be liable, in non-speculative periods. We have
shewn, that there is only one case in which the amount of our currency,
relatively to that of our commodities, can be increased, without turning
the exchange against us, and causing the immediate abstraction of the
superfluous part of the circulating medium:—that this one case is that
of a rise in the price of corn:—and that, although in fact our currency
rises and falls in amount, as the price of corn rises and falls, this is
a fluctuation by no means peculiar to a paper currency, but common to
every currency in a country where there are corn laws. It may
consequently be added to the already long catalogue of the evils to
which we are subjected by those pernicious enactments.

We are now prepared to pass to another head.

2. Speculation.—The second proposition is, That in speculative periods,
if there be a paper currency, it is sure to be over-issued, and by
producing a general tendency of prices upward, to heighten and prolong
the spirit of speculation.

To this argument the same reply cannot be made as to the last. It would
be in vain to say, that if the currency be increased in speculative
periods, the exchanges will turn, and carry off the increase; for the
increase of the currency which is produced by speculation, generally to
a certain degree extends itself to those countries with which our
principal commercial transactions take place;* and the exchanges,
therefore, will turn against us, and drive out gold, not to the extent
of the whole depreciation of our currency, but only to the extent of the
difference between the foreign depreciation and our own. Conformably to
this, it will be found, that the rise of prices during Edition: current;
Page: [90] the speculative period of 1824-25 was so great, as to
indicate an increase of the currency much above what would have been
sufficient to drive out the excess, if the currencies of other countries
had not been simultaneously increased; and although gold was at that
very time flowing out at a most rapid rate, prices continued for many
months at the same elevated range.

It cannot be denied, therefore, that our currency, as at present
constituted, is liable, in speculative periods, to a fluctuation in
value, of the nature of a depreciation.

What, however, may be maintained, and what we are prepared to shew, is,
that to this depreciation a paper currency is not more subject than a
metallic would be, if co-existent with so extended a system of
commercial credit as exists in this country: that every country in which
an extended system of credit exists, is liable to a depreciation of its
currency in periods of speculation; and that the only effect of
suppressing the country banks, would be, to cause the same depreciation
to take place by means of credits of a far more objectionable
description.

When it is supposed that paper-money is the cause of that depreciation
of the currency which commonly takes place during periods of
speculation, that property is overlooked, which speculation possesses,
of creating the medium in which it is itself carried on.

It seems to be supposed by persons unacquainted with business, and who
have paid no particular attention to the subject, that the whole of the
currency of this country consists either of coin, or of bank notes of
some description, issued either by the Bank of England, or by country
banks; and that the currency can be depreciated only by an undue
increase of one or other of these media. This, however, is a mistake.

A large portion of the circulating medium of a commercial country
consists of mercantile bills of exchange. And the functions of currency
are discharged, and the need of currency superseded, to a very great
extent, by mere credit.

In what manner bills of exchange perform the functions of currency, is
shewn in the following passage, from a work which has contributed more
than almost any other to the diffusion of sound principles on the
subject of currency:—

Let us imagine a farmer in the country to discharge a debt of 10l. to
his neighbouring grocer, by giving to him a bill for that sum, drawn on
his cornfactor in London for grain sold in the metropolis; and the
grocer to transmit the bill, he having previously indorsed it, to a
neighbouring sugar-baker, in discharge of a like debt; and the
sugar-baker to send it, when again indorsed, to a West India merchant in
an out-port, and the West India merchant to deliver it to his country
banker, who also indorses it, and sends it into further circulation. The
bill, in this case, will have effected five payments, exactly as if it
were a 10l. note payable to bearer on demand. It will, however, have
circulated in consequence Edition: current; Page: [91] chiefly of the
confidence placed by each receiver of it in the last indorser, his own
correspondent in trade; whereas, the circulation of a bank note is owing
rather to the circumstance of the name of the issuer being so well known
as to give to it an universal credit. A multitude of bills pass between
trader and trader in the country in the manner which has been described;
and they evidently form, in the strictest sense, a part of the
circulating medium of the kingdom.*

It is evident that if our currency is capable of being depreciated by an
increase of that portion of it which consists of bankers’ paper, it is
no less capable of being depreciated by an increase of that portion
which consists of mercantile paper.

Independently of the direct substitute for money presented by the
employment of bills of exchange in making purchases,—an increased use of
credit, whether given by means of bills or by mere entries in a book,
also supersedes the use of money, though in a less direct mode, and
consequently depreciates the currency. For the value of the circulating
medium does not depend upon its quantity merely, but upon its quantity
compared with the number and amount of the pecuniary transactions, in
the settlement of which, it is employed. When, therefore, by an extended
use of credit, the amount of transactions settled through the
intervention of money is diminished, the same numerical quantity of
money becomes relatively greater, and the value of the circulating
medium is reduced.

It is well known that every increase of speculation is accompanied by an
extended issue and circulation of mercantile paper, and with an extended
use of credit. A period of speculation is invariably marked by great
confidence. While prices are rising, every one seems to be growing rich,
and on the strength of his supposed riches, every one finds his
neighbour ready to give him credit. The speculator wishing, as the term
implies, to extend his transactions, avails himself of this facility of
obtaining credit, to the full extent which his speculations require. For
most purposes, it is evidently more convenient to obtain a banker’s
note, for the purpose of making purchases, than to make purchases with a
bill. Notwithstanding, however, the superior convenience of notes, a
large increase is constantly made, in periods of speculation, to the
quantity of mercantile paper performing the functions of currency. And
the same, or a still greater increase, takes place in the amount of
transactions which are settled without the intervention either of bills
or of money; by mere transfers in a banker’s or a merchant’s books.
These additions to the currency have the same effect in lowering its
value, which a similar increase in the issues of the country banks would
have.

Edition: current; Page: [92]
It is this unavoidable increase of the circulating medium, which renders
the recoil of prices so destructive after a period of speculation. The
speculation itself would only raise the prices of those articles which
were the original objects of speculation. But suppose an article to be
sold and resold ten times, (no uncommon event in speculative periods,)
and suppose a bill to be drawn by each successive seller upon the
purchaser, and all these bills to be added to the general mass of the
circulating medium employed in making purchases: the effect which this
must have in depreciating the currency, is most evident. By this
depreciation, prices in general are raised, and commodities in general
become objects of speculation.* The fresh speculations produce a fresh
addition to the circulating medium, and a fresh rise of prices; and so
long as this lasts, every person in business appears to be rapidly
making his fortune; until at last the articles which rose first and
highest begin to fall, from the increased supply which the high prices
have called forth, or perhaps from the mere desire of the holders to
realize their gains. This causes the ruin of a large proportion of the
holders of those articles: their paper becomes worthless, and ceases to
circulate: the circulating medium being thus diminished, the prices of
all other articles begin to fall at an accelerated pace, scattering ruin
as the fall proceeds, and not only annihilating the paper of all the
firms which successively become insolvent, but spreading a general
distrust, which renders every one unwilling to take even the customary
amount of private paper. The circulating medium is thus reduced, and
prices consequently fall to a much lower level than that from which they
previously rose.

All that fluctuation, therefore, in the value of the currency, which
takes Edition: current; Page: [93] place in periods of speculation, may
thus take place without the intervention of bankers’ notes, by
mercantile paper and credit alone.

In case it should be objected, that, if bankers’ notes were abolished,
at least that portion of the increase in the circulating medium would be
prevented, which takes place by the increased issues of the country
banks;—we will now shew, first, that if all bankers’ notes were this day
abolished, their place would be filled by an equal amount of mercantile
paper; and, secondly, that, in periods of speculation, the same addition
to the currency, which is now made by bankers’ paper, mercantile paper,
and mere credit, taken together, would be made by the two latter media
alone.

To the first of these propositions we have the evidence of reasoning,
and the evidence of fact; both of them of the most conclusive kind.

Country notes are issued in loans made by the country bankers to their
customers. Loans would still be wanted by their customers if country
notes were no more: and the country bankers would still be the persons
applied to, in order to furnish them. If they furnished these loans in
specie, they would be obliged not only to go to the expense of bringing
specie from London, but to go to the expense of procuring the specie
itself. They would, therefore, prefer to make the required advances by
granting bills upon their agents in London, which bills being sent to
London when due, would be exchanged without the intervention of money,
by the operations of the clearing-house.

Accordingly, in Lancashire, where there are no local banks of
circulation, bills on London, drawn by the bankers of that country on
their correspondents, constitute the great mass of the circulating
medium; as is proved by the following extracts from the evidence taken
before the Lords’ Committee on Scotch and Irish currency in the last
session:—

John Gladstone, Esq. M.P.—‘We sell our goods, not for payments in cash,
such as are usual in other places, but generally at credits from ten
days to three months, to be then paid for in bills on London at two or
three months’ date: these bills we pay to our bankers, and receive from
them bills or cash, when we have occasion for either to make our
payments.’ (P. 216.)[*]

Again: ‘We have a considerable portion of large Bank of England notes in
circulation: these are generally used for the payment of duties, and
also for the purposes of remittance; but the great mass of our
circulation is in bills of exchange; sovereigns and smaller bank notes
are only required for such objects as charges of merchandize, with
duties, freights, and other items. I believe the circulation in bills of
exchange is of great magnitude; the circulation of bank notes limited.’
(P. 219 [p. 513].)

Lewis Loyd, Esq. says, that before the notes of certain banks in
neighbouring counties found their way into Lancashire, the currency
consisted of ‘nine parts Edition: current; Page: [94] bills of exchange,
and the tenth part gold and Bank of England notes. I am inclined to
think the bills of exchange bore a still greater proportion.

The money [he was asked] which you suppose the manufacturer draws for
wages, you are in the habit of paying in gold or Bank of England
notes?—Yes, we are wholly.

If he draws upon his deposit account, and it is supposed not to be for
wages, how do you make payment upon that account?—It is generally made
in bills of exchange drawn on London, but we accommodate his wishes as
much as we can.

Some of these bills of exchange are drawn from one part of Lancashire on
another, are they not?—The bills of exchange called for by a
manufacturer in such a case as that put, are mostly drawn in Manchester
in his favour, and he uses them as he likes.

Supposing a manufacturer in Manchester were to have a deposit account
with you, and to make repeated demands for gold beyond what you thought
necessary for the payment of wages, what would be your conduct?—We
should say that we could not supply him. There is an understanding
between the manufacturer and the banker: the manufacturer is to be
supplied with what his wages require; but the ordinary demands of
business beyond wages are usually paid in bills of exchange; and if he
did not conform to that practice, we should complain, and object to his
manner of conducting his account.

Do those bills of exchange circulate from hand to hand in Manchester?
Yes; when a bill is drawn in favour of a manufacturer, he endorses it
usually to the person to whom he pays it, and the person to whom he pays
it pays it again to another, and it goes on often till it is covered
with endorsements.

So that in fact it forms a part of the circulating medium?—the principal
part.

Have you not seen bills of exchange of that nature, for the value of
10l. with fifty or sixty names upon them?—Yes; with twice that number. I
have seen slips of paper attached to a bill as long as a sheet of paper
could go, and when that was filled, another attached to that.’

Again: ‘Do you know any system adopted in Lancashire, from which there
arises a check upon the quantity of those bills of exchange that may be
issued?—The check upon them is their convertibility into Bank of England
notes; that is, the facility with which they are discounted in the
London market.

That is the only check, is it not?—Yes it is.’ (P. 299.)[*]

Mr. Henry Burgess, a manufacturer at Leeds.—‘What is the general
circulating medium of Lancashire, independent of those promissory
notes,’ (of the Blackburn and Macclesfield banks?)—‘the great mass of
the circulating medium of lancashire, as in all the manufacturing
districts in the North, is bills of exchange; a part of the circulation
is in gold and silver, and Bank of England notes.

Are not many of those bills of exchange for sums from 10l. to 30l.?—A
great portion certainly from 10l. to 30l.

Are there many below 10l.?—No.

What proportion do you suppose those bills of exchange bear in value to
the Bank of England notes and gold which circulate in Lancashire?—I
should say that on the first of December last those bills of the value
of 10l. and not exceeding 30l. amounted to four-fifths.

Edition: current; Page: [95]
If you do not confine your answer to bills of exchange under 30l. what
proportion does the gold and Bank of England notes bear to the bills of
exchange in Lancashire?—I should say that the bills of exchange were
more than twenty to one. I have this day received a letter from a bank
in Lancashire, who states the amount at much higher than that.

Have you any objection to state the name of that banker?—Mr. Roby, of
Rochdale, of the firm of Fentons and Roby.

At what does he state them?—He says they are as fifty to one.*

Do you know of any system by which an effectual check can be given to
the amount to which these bills of exchange may be circulated?—Inasmuch
as these bills of exchange all, or in great measure come to London, and
are exchanged at the clearing-house without the intervention of bank
notes, except in the proportion of about one-twentieth part, the check
is a very inefficient one.’ (P. 294 [ibid., p. 559].)

It would, no doubt, be easy for the legislature to abolish this kind of
paper currency also, if it were so minded. Parliament might not only
prevent credit from being given through the medium of the fittest
persons, the bankers, in the most convenient form, that of notes; it
might even prevent it from being given through the medium of those
fittest persons in any form whatever. But could it put a stop to credit
altogether? If not, is it not highly expedient that credit should be
given in a mode which admits of publicity, and in which all loss to the
lenders from the insolvency of the borrowers may be completely obviated?
You would prevent a company of opulent merchants, with a large capital,
from issuing notes which bear no interest, when you cannot prevent
John-a-Nokes, without any capital at all, from issuing notes which bear
interest, to any extent to which he can find persons to take them. You
would prevent a merchant from receiving bills or notes from his banker,
whose power to discharge them you may render certain, if you please;
when you cannot prevent two merchants, on the brink of insolvency, from
agreeing to draw bills to any amount upon one another, and with these
defrauding any number of dealers of their goods, under pretence of a
purchase.

After such testimony as the above, our first position, that if local
notes were abolished, their place would be supplied by bills of
exchange, can no longer be withstood. Our second, that in periods of
speculation the same Edition: current; Page: [96] depreciation would
take place by means of bills and credit, which now takes place by means
of bills, credit, and country notes together, will appear upon a little
consideration equally obvious.

The banks increase their issues in periods of speculation in the
following manner. The speculator draws a bill, which he carries to be
discounted in the banker’s notes. This he does, because the notes are
more convenient to him than the bill; but if he can find a banker to
discount a bill for him, we may rely upon it that he could find a dealer
to take the same bill in payment for goods. He who has credit enough to
obtain a loan from a banker, has credit enough to obtain goods from a
dealer. Whenever there is a disposition to give credit too easily, which
there always is in periods of great speculation, we may be quite certain
that this disposition is stronger among the other classes of the
community, than among the bankers. Other persons have other business to
attend to. The business of a banker consists hardly in any thing else,
except in learning all that is to be learned concerning the stability of
those with whom he has dealings. And though much has been said on the
subject of the anxiety of a banker to get out his notes, we should be
surprized if it were greater than the anxiety of a dealer to get out his
goods.

Supposing even that it were found impossible to pay wages and perform
the smaller retail purchases with bills, (though why small bills should
not answer as well as small notes, we are unable to divine); it is not
usually in paying wages, or in performing small purchases, that the
speculator lays out the money which he borrows to carry on his
speculations. And if one of the remote consequences of the speculation
be the employment of additional men by the manufacturers, the absence of
small notes would oppose no material obstacle to this, since the
necessary quantity of gold might easily be spared from the retail
transactions, by an extended use of bills in the latter; a change which,
in a period of confidence, would be unattended with difficulty.

Thus, then, it appears, that in periods of speculation, the addition to
the circulating medium and the depreciation of its value, are no greater
with a local bank paper than without it.*

Edition: current; Page: [97]
Metallic money, therefore, has no advantage over paper in periods of
speculation. But paper money has an immense advantage over metallic in
the revulsion which follows.

During a commercial crisis, credit almost entirely ceases. None but the
very best bills, and of the shortest dates, will pass current in the
market; and for all other payments, ready-money must be provided. Those
who have it, are unwilling to let it out of their hands; knowing that
nobody who has demands upon them, will receive payment in any other
medium. They therefore postpone all ready-money purchases. Thus, at the
very moment when money and nothing else will be received in purchases,
scarcely any money is offered; its purchasing power consequently is
prodigiously increased, prices fall ruinously low, and insolvencies are
multiplied a hundred-fold beyond what the mere destruction of the paper
of the original insolvents could have produced. Now then, if a supply of
paper, of undoubted security, can be poured into the market, sufficient
to compensate the undue contraction of the currency, all this
unnecessary evil is obviated. But if not, it must wait the tardy process
of importing bullion from abroad: which, after all, may perhaps be
hoarded as fast as it comes in.

If the distress of last winter was what it was, notwithstanding the
issue of several additional millions of Bank of England notes; what
might it not have been if the enormous contraction, natural at such a
crisis, had been suffered to continue?

We have now, we hope, fully answered the second great proposition of our
antagonists.

3. Rate of Interest.—The third proposition is, That when the paper
currency is suddenly increased, a fall takes place in the rate of
interest, which, by diminishing the incomes of the owners of small
capitals, drives Edition: current; Page: [98] them to engage in
hazardous speculations; and that this actually happened during the last
three years.

The first position which we think it necessary to lay down, is one
which, we presume, will be called theoretical; not because it is a
theory, for that is a character common to all general principles, but
because it differs from the theory of those who arrogate to themselves
the exclusive appellation of practical men. The practical men generally
imagine, that the rate of interest depends upon the quantity of the
circulating medium. Our proposition is, that it depends upon no such
thing; but purely upon the competition between the lenders and the
borrowers; and can be affected by no circumstance which does not
influence either the amount applied for by borrowers, or the amount
offered by lenders.

This surely is almost as obvious of itself, as any illustration can make
it. If, in one night, every piece of money in the country, of whatever
denomination, were doubled, whereby all prices would be doubled, and the
purchasing power of money reduced one-half; can any person suppose that
the rate of interest would be lowered? True it is, that all who lent
money would have twice as much to lend; but as it would now require
twice as much to perform any purchase, all who borrowed money would now
find it necessary to borrow twice as much. The lenders and the borrowers
would bear the same proportion to each other, and the rate of interest
would remain unchanged.

This error, which consists in supposing, that the quantity of the
currency regulates the rate of interest, and which is one of the most
common of the many errors constantly committed by mere men of business,
when they meddle with general reasoning, arises from that frequent
source of incorrect inference, ambiguous language. The word money is
used in two significations. In its common signification, money means
money; currency; the circulating medium: the quantity of money means the
quantity of currency; the value of money means its purchasing power. In
the language of commerce, on the contrary, money means money lent, or
rather money offered to be lent. The market for loans is called the
money-market; by the value of money, is meant the rate of interest:
great facility in obtaining loans is called plenty of money; great
difficulty in obtaining them, is called scarcity of money.

This equivoque would, it might be thought, be too obvious a one, to
impose even upon the most ignorant; nor do we believe that it would
impose upon any body except the practical men; who, because they know
better than other people a sort of facts which are not to the purpose,
think themselves entitled to remain in perfect ignorance of all those
which are. No other class of persons could have imagined, because
currency and loans happened to be called by the same name, that an
abundance of the one imported an abundance of the other. The practical
men, however, imagine that it does.

Edition: current; Page: [99]
But there is another and a more intelligent class of reasoners, who,
allowing that it is an increase of loans, and not an increase of the
currency, which operates to depress the rate of interest, affirm,
however, that from the manner in which our paper currency is issued,
exclusively through the medium of loans, an increase of the paper
currency almost necessarily imports an increase of loans. It is upon
this ground, that they ascribe to the paper currency, the speculations
of the last three years. Before the speculations began, there had been,
they contend, a greatly increased issue of paper, the whole of it in the
way of discounts or other advances, by the country banks. This lowered
the rate of interest, and by reducing the incomes of those who lived by
the interest of their capital, drove them into all sorts of hazardous
speculations. An increase of issues by the Bank of England afterwards
took place, and still farther heightened the evil.

This opinion, though less absurd in principle than the foregoing,
imports a misapprehension of the actual facts.

Allowing that an increase of lenders tends to lower the rate of
interest, it will not certainly be contended that every increase of
lenders has this effect. It is only when an increase of lenders takes
place, unaccompanied by a corresponding increase of borrowers, that it
produces a fall in the rate of interest. If an addition be made to the
loans, coincidently with an equal addition to the demand for them,—much
more, if the former addition is called forth by, and is the consequence
of, the latter,—we might more reasonably expect that this variation in
the state of the money-market, should be attended by a rise in the rate
of interest, than that it should be productive of a fall. And such, as
we shall prove by documentary evidence, was the character of that
increase of loans, which took place during the last three years. It
therefore was not, we may infallibly conclude, the cause of any
depression of the rate of interest.

The increased issues were made, partly by the country banks, and partly
by the Bank of England.

It is allowed on all hands, by what circumstance the increased issues of
the country banks were occasioned. They were occasioned by the rise
which had been gradually taking place since 1822, in the prices of all
descriptions of agricultural produce. Now, the only manner in which this
could cause an increase of issues, was by causing an increase of
applications for them. In what manner it does this has been explained in
a former part of this essay. The increase of lending, therefore, was
called forth by a previous increase of the desire to borrow. After the
speculations began, a further increase of issues was produced, by a
further increase of applications. The additional loans, therefore, did
not come into competition with any part of the capital previously lent:
and the increased issues of the country banks may be dismissed, as
having had no tendency, direct or indirect, to depress the rate of
interest.

Edition: current; Page: [100]
The increased issues of the Bank of England stand upon somewhat a
different ground. In the case of this establishment, the extension of
its loans was its own spontaneous act, for the purpose of carrying off
the superfluous quantity of specie in its coffers. And had its
additional loans been made in the ordinary mode, (the discount of
mercantile bills,) its tendency to lower, for a short time, the rate of
interest, would have been out of dispute. The new loans were, however,
made to a new borrower—the Government. They were made, in the purchase
of the Dead Weight, as it is called; that is, the military and naval
pension annuities.

Mr. Vansittart, when Chancellor of the Exchequer, finding that the
military and naval pensions pressed heavier upon our finances than
appeared to him to be pleasant or convenient, bethought himself of a
plan for taking a part of the load off the shoulders of the present
generation, and laying it upon posterity. This was to be effected by
prevailing upon somebody to take upon himself the great, but constantly
decreasing burthen of these pensions, upon condition of receiving, in
return, from the public, a fixed annuity for 45 years. This was
obviously equivalent to raising an annual loan to defray so much of the
annual expense of the pensions as exceeded the fixed annuity; the loan
to be repaid gradually, when, by the decease of a part of the
pensioners, the annuity should in its turn come to exceed the pensions.
To raise a loan, keeping up at the same time the mockery of a sinking
fund, was exactly of a piece with that system of trickery and juggle
which was the grand characteristic of Mr. Vansittart’s financial career.
But with this, or any other of the absurdities, with which this
extraordinary measure was chargeable, we have at present nothing to do.
The point essential to our argument is, that the Bank undertook the
payment of a certain portion of the pensions, on condition of receiving
from the public a fixed annuity of 558,740l. From the value of the
transaction, its advances, in the first years, of course, greatly
exceeded this annuity, and could not be made without either diminishing
its accommodation to individuals, or increasing the amount of its
issues. Its accommodation to individuals had already been greatly
reduced, by its refusal to discount, except at a rate of interest
exceeding the market rate. But still the reduction had not been
sufficient to admit of its making the new advances to Government,
without an increase of its issues; which accordingly took place.

So much for the facts. Now for the application. The Bank extended its
loans. But to the same extent to which it extended its loans, a new
borrower appeared, in the person of Government. The new loans displaced
no capital which was already invested, nor deprived any of its expected,
or customary, investment. If the advances had been made by private
capitalists, from funds which they had, previously, been in the habit of
lending to individuals, who does not perceive that there would have been
a considerable rise in the rate of interest? The effect of the extension
of the Bank Edition: current; Page: [101] issues, was to prevent this
rise. It produced no fall. From the nature of the case, it could not
produce any.

The Bank does not make returns of the amount of its discounts, and other
loans to individuals; and parliament was in too great a hurry to
legislate on the subject, to think of calling for much information
regarding it. They called, however, for returns of the amount of notes
in circulation for some years back, on the fifteenth days of February,
May, August, and November, in each year: periods chosen as being the
remotest possible from the payment of the quarterly dividends, which
always occasions a great temporary fluctuation in the amount of the
currency; and therefore indicating, more nearly than any other periods
which could be chosen, the average issues for the quarter. The annexed
Table exhibits these quarterly returns for the three years, 1823, 1824,
and 1825, compared with the average amount in circulation in 1822,
computed from the same returns; and contrasted with the advances which
the Bank had made, up to the same periods, on the dead weight. It will
thence appear, that, with one exception, at every one of the twelve
quarterly periods the advances on the dead weight exceeded, often
greatly exceeded, the increase of the Bank issues.

Average amount of notes in circulation during the year 1822, taken from
the quarterly returns . . . £18,042,925
Year
Notes in Circulation
Excess above average of 1822
Amount of advances on the Dead Weight
Greater or less than the increase of issues
1823
Feb. 15
£17,802,610
none
none}
Greater
May 15
18,501,370
£ 458,445
£ 885,719}
Aug. 15
19,892,810
1,849,885
2,110,719}
Nov. 15
20,353,130
2,310,205
1,885,719
Less
1824
Feb. 15
20,357,160
2,314,235
3,060,719}
Greater
May 15
19,961,900
1,918,975
2,835,719}
Aug. 15
20,960,530
2,917,605
4,010,719}
Nov. 15
21,184,420
3,141,495
3,745,719}
1825
}
Feb. 15
21,301,930
3,259,005
4,880,719}
May 15
20,046,070
2,003,145
4,615,719}
Aug. 15
19,676,010
1,633,085
5,746,094}
Nov. 15
17,980,620
none
5,453,224}

At all these periods, except one, the reader will perceive, that the
Bank had increased its loans to Government, more than it had increased
the totality of its issues; its loans to individuals, therefore, by
which alone the rate of interest (as we have shewn) could possibly have
been affected, Edition: current; Page: [102] were diminished; and the
effect, therefore, which the operations of the Bank were producing upon
the money market at all these periods, must have been to keep up the
rate of interest, instead of depressing it. The one period, which we
mentioned as an exception, was that of November, 1823; at which the
increase of issues did exceed the advances to Government by rather more
than 400,000l. How far so trifling a variation as this, which is not
greater than is happening, as the monthly returns shew, almost every
month, and which was almost immediately withdrawn, is entitled to be
considered as the cause of the fall in the rate of interest which took
place, we leave the reader to judge.*

But what, then, it will be asked, was the cause of the great fall, which
took place in the rate of interest, in 1823 and 1824?

We protest against the supposition, that we are under any sort of
obligation, because we negative an alleged cause, to assign the real
one. We will, however, make the attempt; premising that we do not
pretend to do more than conjecture; nor are we by any means certain that
in a case of this sort, any thing more than a conjecture can be made.

The rate of interest, like the prices of commodities, though it is
subject to casual variations, has nevertheless a point to which it
converges; and this point is regulated by the rate of profit upon
mercantile capital. The rate of interest, on the average of a
considerable number of years, always bears some proportion to the rate
of profit.† If therefore, we had the means of Edition: current; Page:
[103] ascertaining what rate of interest the ordinary rate of profit
would warrant, we should have the means of discriminating between these
fluctuations in the rate of interest which are casual and temporary, and
those which are permanent.

Now, to a criterion of this sort, though we cannot obtain it exactly, we
may distantly approximate. During the ten years of peace which followed
the American war, and during which the rate of interest seems to have
been tolerably steady, the average price of three per cent consols was
about 76;* and the rate of interest on the best security, measured by
this test, would appear to be somewhat under four per cent. This,
therefore, may be considered, with some plausibility, as the rate of
interest which was at that time warranted by the average rate of profit
upon capital. After this period ensued a war of 30 years. During war the
rate of interest is always higher, relatively to the rate of profit,
than during peace: because the immense loans which are then called for,
with a view to unproductive expenditure, and not to profitable
employment, render it necessary that a greater proportion of the holders
of capital should be induced to lend it, in preference to engaging it in
business: which inducement can only be held out by means of a rise in
the rate of interest. In the meantime, the great increase of our
population, combined with the Corn Laws, which have only come into
operation since 1815, has raised the price of the necessaries of life
greatly above the average of the years preceding the war. This has
raised nominal wages, and by increasing that part of the cost of
production of all commodities which consists of the subsistence of the
labourer, has lowered the general profits of stock. Adverting,
therefore, to the greatly increased prices of necessaries in the last
ten years, as compared with the ten years preceding 1793, we shall not
perhaps be far from the truth in conjecturing, that if 4 per cent. was a
rate of interest justified by the rate of profit in 1788, 3½ per cent.
is as much as is justified now.

This would show 85 or 86 as the natural and reasonable price of three
per cent consols at the present time, and probably for some years to
come. To this price, accordingly, the three per cents have always
gravitated. From the close of the war the funds gradually rose, until
their rise was checked by the commercial distress of 1819. Commercial
distress, by producing a great immediate demand for ready-money, always
lowers greatly the price of, in other words, increases the interest on,
all securities which are immediately convertible. The three per cents
fell in 1819 to 60¼. But they soon resumed their tendency upward, and on
the first of November, 1822, they Edition: current; Page: [104] stood at
82⅜. For a few months afterwards, they were slightly depressed, by
anticipations that this country might possibly become involved in the
war which was then commencing between France and Spain. When these
anticipations ceased, the rise of the funds recommenced, and on the
second of December, 1823, they were at 84⅛, not far from their present
price (in December, 1826).

Thus far the fall of the rate of interest is easily and naturally
accounted for, by supposing it to be a reasonable and proper fall, with
reference to the rate of profit at the time. The subsequent rise of the
funds from 84⅛ to 96⅝ in about five months, cannot be thus accounted
for. It would be absurd to suppose that in so short a time a fall took
place in the rate of profit sufficient to warrant so great a fall in the
rate of interest. But the truth is that no fall took place in the
general rate of interest, corresponding to this rise of the funds. We
are assured by persons possessed of the most authentic information, that
the rate of discount on the best bills never fell lower, during the last
four years, than 3½ per cent. To this level it had already fallen in
July, 1823, long before that sudden rise in the public securities, of
which we spoke. We have little doubt that this rise was merely the
effect of speculations on the Stock Exchange. It occurred at a period
when speculations were rife, and when, the funds having risen gradually
with little interruption for three years, the speculators were very
likely to calculate upon a further rise. At all events, from whatever
cause the rise may have begun, it was sure, when it did begin, to set
the speculators in motion, and to produce that ulterior rise from
speculative purchases, to which the funds are liable in common with all
other articles which are bought and sold.

We have now disposed of the three great arguments against a paper
currency in general: viz. first, that it is liable to over-issue;
secondly, that it affords facilities to speculation, when excited by
other causes; lastly, that the fluctuations in its amount, produce
fluctuations in the rate of interest, and that, when a fall of interest
is produced by this cause, speculation is the consequence.

If the foregoing deductions are as conclusive as they appear to us, it
has been established that these three objections either are not
applicable to a paper currency at all, or not in a greater degree than
to a metallic currency.

The expediency, therefore, of the suppression of the small notes, in so
far as it depended upon any of these reasons for its support, may be
pronounced to have been disproved.

Of objections applicable to the small notes, but not applicable to a
paper currency at large, two only have been alleged. The first is, that
the holders of small notes are the persons who suffer most from the
insolvency of the issuers: The second is, that the small notes are the
great cause of panics.

Edition: current; Page: [105]
The first of these objections would be obviated, if the insolvency of
banks of circulation were rendered, as it might be rendered, virtually
impossible. The second appears to us to be unfounded.

Under a system of banking so wretchedly constituted as ours, where that
general apprehension, which is called a panic, is often no more than a
very justifiable alarm—it may be that the alarm (although it does not
arise earliest) continues longest, and is most difficult to remove,
among the holders of the small notes. And under such a system it may be
said, with some plausibility, that the small notes are a cause of
panics. Under a secure banking system, on the contrary, it is not the
small notes, but the absence of small notes, which is apt to be a cause
of panics.

In Scotland, where there is no reason for a panic, (only two banks of
circulation, we believe, having there become insolvent in the last
hundred years), it is in evidence before the committees that the people
prefer notes to gold, because they feel themselves incapable of
discriminating between real and counterfeit coin. This will always be
the case, where the currency, with the exception of the subsidiary
coins, is wholly paper, and where no insolvencies occur to shake the
public confidence in the latter. If gold circulated in Scotland along
with notes, the probability of a panic, under a banking system so
perfectly secure, would even then not be considerable; but it is
difficult to believe that it would not be greater than at present.

While ministers and parliament were wholly taken up by the vain attempt
to remove the causes of mercantile revulsions, they neglected to apply
many of those palliatives, which legislative wisdom would have
suggested, to mitigate the destructiveness of those revulsions, when
they occur.

Against one of the most distressing features in the late crisis, the
failure of the country banks, they did indeed provide a partial remedy,
by permitting the establishment of banks with an unlimited number of
partners, in any part of the kingdom, beyond a circle of 65 miles round
London. The Bank of England would not consent to any greater sacrifice
of its exclusive privileges, except upon condition of a further
prolongation of its charter: to which condition, much to their credit,
ministers refused to accede; and England must, therefore, wait till the
year 1833, when the Bank charter will expire, for the establishment of
banks with more than six partners in and near London, or of banks with
limitation of the responsibility of any of the partners, in any part of
the kingdom. For what has been done, however, by ministers, to render
banking partnerships more secure, we are willing to give them the due
praise; and, in our opinion, much more has been done than many of the
speakers in parliament were disposed to allow.

It was argued, by Mr. Baring and others, that unless the measure
extended to the establishment of banks with limited responsibility,
either Edition: current; Page: [106] upon the principle of a commandite
or of a joint stock company, it would be nugatory; since very few banks
had hitherto availed themselves even of the full number of partners
allowed by law; and if even six persons had so rarely been willing to
risk their whole fortunes by embarking in a bank without limitation of
responsibility, it was, they argued, extremely improbable, that a still
greater number of persons should do so.

The readers of our former volume[*] are aware that we entertain an
opinion highly favourable to such an alteration in the law as shall
permit commandite partnerships, not only for banking purposes, but for
all others.

Yet, we are far from going along with Mr. Baring in the opinion, that
because this has not been done, nothing has been done. The difference,
either in stability or in credit, between a bank with five and a bank
with six partners, is a trifle: and the sixth place, being the last,
will generally be kept open until some person, with capital and credit
sufficient to be of material service, may offer himself to fill it. But
the difference both in stability and in credit between a partnership of
six and a partnership of sixty, is cæteris paribus very great; a bank,
therefore, which has no motive to increase itself to six, might have
abundant motive to increase itself to sixty partners, which it could the
more readily do, as the risk to each of the sixty would only be
one-tenth of what it now is to each of the six. The truth is, that
associations of from six to twenty partners are by many degrees more
unsafe than any other kind of partnerships. The majority of the
partners, though their whole fortune is at stake, cannot personally
superintend the management, and they are not sufficiently numerous to
appoint a committee for the express purpose of watching over their
interests. When the shareholders are more numerous, they appoint a Board
of Directors to superintend and control the managing partners or
officers; and that superintendence, which cannot be exercised by the
partners individually, is regularly exercised by those of their number
in whom they most confide.

It is difficult to conceive how Mr. Baring could assert, that persons
would not be found to enter as sleeping partners into banking companies
without limitation of responsibility; when he could not be ignorant of
the great number of mining and other associations which exist in London
without any such limitation; and when, (to say nothing of the
newly-established provincial banks in Ireland,) it is proved by the
returns made to parliament, that six of the Scotch banks,* without any
limitation of responsibility, consist of 112, 147, 202, 446, 521, and
1238 partners respectively; and Edition: current; Page: [107] that there
are five other Scotch unchartered banks, in each of which the number of
partners exceeds sixty—while, of the twenty-nine unchartered banks,
there are only five in which the partners amount to any number
intermediate between eight and sixty-one; a fact strongly corroborative
of our remark, that such partnerships hold out less advantages than any
others.

Nor is there more weight in another argument which has been urged by
some, to prove the unimportance of the late alteration in the law;
namely, that a considerable number of the Scotch banks consist only of a
small number of partners. It has never been asserted that the existence
even of chartered banking companies, was incompatible with the existence
of common banking partnerships. But it is incompatible with the
existence of banking partnerships whose credit is not equal to that of a
banking company; and this is surely as perfect a security as is
necessary. Accordingly, the banks with few partners have in Scotland
been found practically as secure as those with many.

The measure of ministers, therefore, was not only unobjectionable in
principle, but will prove, we doubt not, useful in practice. Still, it
was not the only security, which it would have been practicable and
useful to take against the insolvency of bankers. And, such as it is, it
will not, probably, come into full operation for some time. There is
another and a still more effectual check, which might have been brought
into operation immediately. It might have been rendered imperative upon
the country banks to make returns, at stated periods, of the whole
amount of their notes actually in circulation, together with the
property which, after satisfying all other demands, the concern
possessed, as the means of meeting those notes. These returns should,
like the returns for the purpose of the income tax, be liable to be
verified on oath, if required; and should include all the assets of the
concern, exclusively of the private fortunes of the partners. No banker,
to whose credit the publication of these statements would be favourable,
could feel any disinclination to furnish them; and while they would
render it absolutely impossible for a bank to issue more notes than it
possessed the means of paying, they would not be liable to the same
objections as the regulation which has been suggested, requiring all
banks of circulation to make deposits of stock, a plan which, to say
nothing of several other possible inconveniences, would probably cramp
exceedingly the power of the banks to afford accommodation to the
public. The same regulation would meet the objection which we have
sometimes heard against a currency consisting of small notes, that the
influence of the country bankers is such as to render them virtually
inconvertible. Under the present banking system this argument may have
some weight. We can readily conceive that it may be in the power of a
country banker to pass his notes among the poorer classes, although his
credit is not sufficient to give them general circulation. But the plan
which we have suggested would put an end Edition: current; Page: [108]
for ever to the circulation of country notes of inferior quality. The
quantity can never be unduly increased by the mere influence of the
country bankers. For there is always somebody in every district who is
beyond the sphere of that influence; and as soon as the amount of the
circulation has been increased beyond the due extent, it is the interest
of this somebody to buy up the notes and present them to the issuers for
payment.

The Bank of England likewise should be required to make periodical and
frequent returns of its issues; distinguishing according as the notes
were issued in discounts, in purchases of exchequer bills, advances to
Government, purchases of bullion, and so forth: not to obviate any
danger of the insolvency of that establishment, but in order that any
alteration in the amount either of its issues or of its loans, which
could affect either the money market, or the value of the currency,
might be known at the very earliest period possible. Such returns would
not only remedy all the real defects of our currency, but, even if the
defects were real, which we have shown to be imaginary, even to these
they would provide an effectual remedy.

Another measure, which parliament did not think proper to adopt, but
which, had it been adopted, would have done more to relieve the present,
and mitigate future distress, than any other measure that can be named,
is the repeal of the Usury Laws.

One of the chief peculiarities of a period of commercial distress is,
that every body wishes to borrow, while nobody is willing to lend. From
a fall of prices, or the failure of some one who is indebted to him, a
merchant is disappointed of a sum which he expected to receive, and
which was his only immediate means of meeting an engagement falling due
the same day. Failure to pay a bill when it becomes due, is an act of
insolvency; and a merchant will raise money at any sacrifice to avoid
it. When many persons are placed simultaneously in this situation, it
may be supposed for what an extraordinary amount, beyond the usual
quantity of loans, a demand is produced. But the same cause which
produces this desire to borrow, produces at the same time a
disinclination to lend: not only by reason of the little confidence
which at such a period is likely to be felt in the solvency of the
borrower; but because the fall in the public securities, and in the
prices of goods, occasioned by the same attempts to raise money
immediately, enables him who has funds at his command, to invest them at
a profit greatly exceeding the legal rate of interest. Who would lend to
a merchant at five per cent, at the risk of losing all by his
insolvency, when by buying into the three per cents at 75, he can obtain
immediately four per cent upon his money; and by selling out a year
afterwards, when they have risen to 83, realize a profit of about ten
per cent more, independently of the dividends accruing in the
intermediate period, amounting in all to a gain of fourteen per cent in
one year? The same persons might perhaps Edition: current; Page: [109]
be willing, if they were permitted, for the sake of the immediate gain,
to discount at short dates, at the rate of seven or eight per cent.
Thus, by not being permitted to borrow money for a few weeks, at two or
three per cent above the legal rate, many merchants have no doubt been
ruined; while a far greater number have possessed themselves of the
means of continuing their payments by the most enormous sacrifices in
other ways. For here the absurdity of the usury laws shines out in the
most glaring colours. The laws which prevent money from being raised by
borrowing, cannot prevent it from being raised by forced sales of stock,
or forced sales of goods. The same stagnation which renders it so
difficult to borrow money, renders it still more difficult to dispose of
goods, except at ruinously low prices. Mr. Tooke,* in his pamphlet on
the currency, states, that to his knowledge, during the late crisis,
extensive sales were made of stock, at a loss of twenty or thirty per
cent; and of goods for immediate money, at a still greater sacrifice.
Mr. John Smith† “knew an instance in which, for a very large sum, no
less than from 74 to 76 per cent had been paid. This, of course, had
been done by a bargain in selling out stock for money.” And Sir Henry
Parnell‡ stated, that “a banker had told him that instances had come to
his knowledge, in which,” by forced sales of goods, “a loss of 90 per
cent had been incurred.”

The opportunity was lost of ridding the country of the nuisance of these
laws, which, nugatory in periods of prosperity, exist exclusively to the
effect of aggravating the pressure of commercial distress.

The list of palliatives which might have been adopted, is far too long
for enumeration. We must, however, add one more, which we hold to be of
considerable importance. The notes of the country banks ought to have
been made payable in Bank of England notes only, and not in gold. It is
evident that so long as the Bank of England is solvent, the security of
its notes is equal to that of gold. By rendering them a legal tender in
exchange for country notes, not only would the nation be spared the
expence of keeping a reserve of gold in every country bank, but the
evils of a panic would be greatly mitigated. It is well known that the
great cause of the failure of so many London bankers in December 1826,
was the immense drain upon them for specie to meet the demands of their
country correspondents. The same demands produced that drain upon the
bank, which so very nearly produced a second suspension of its payments.

To the above catalogue of remedies omitted, may be further added the
repeal of the Corn Laws; which, as we have shown in a former place, are
the cause of the chief fluctuations to which our currency is liable, and
which, Edition: current; Page: [110] moreover, by lowering the rate of
ordinary mercantile profit, really produce that tendency to hazardous
speculations which is so erroneously, though so commonly, imputed to the
system of our currency.

If the views which have been promulgated in the preceding pages be
correct, it must appear that parliament, in its attempts to legislate
for the currency, and for the commercial crisis, has erred most widely,
both in what it has done, and in what it has omitted to do.

These errors did not take place without a cause; and the cause, which
led to such effects, must needs be one, which it is of no small moment
to us to investigate.

Interest, in this case, is chargeable with no part of the blame. Neither
Parliament, nor those who make the Parliament, had any interest in the
question, other than the general interest of the nation: and the
speakers from all sides of the two Houses demonstrated generally a
laudable freedom from party feelings and prejudices. Yet, though every
person obviously applied his mind to the subject with the most sincere
desire of being right, it not only happened, in our opinion, that the
great majority came to a conclusion which is wrong, but all who are even
moderately conversant with the subject must allow, that but a small
share of ability was displayed by either side, even in the statement of
its case. Nobody seemed to have made the subject a matter of study.
Nobody seemed to have made even an attempt at examining it in all its
bearings. They had come to the consideration of the facts of a very
complicated case, unprepared by a previous acquaintance with those
general principles, which would have taught them what were the facts,
among so great a number, which it was necessary to attend to. They
remained almost universally in ignorance of the material facts, for want
of knowing what facts were material; and attending only to the obvious
appearances, jumped from one seeming coincidence, to a crude
generalization. Even the most acute, for want of a clue to guide them,
could do no more than can be done by mere sagacity, unassisted by
knowledge; which is, to form a strong conception of some one or two of
the material circumstances, and to draw, from these one or two
circumstances, what would have been a just inference if there had been
no other circumstances to be taken into the account, but in which all
the other circumstances were overlooked. The crudeness of their
conceptions was strikingly demonstrated by the inability of any of them
to give any thing like a connected statement even of his own case. With
the exception of the Marquis of Lansdowne* on the one side, and Major
Maberly on the other, not a man could state the grounds of his opinion
in a manner which would be deemed creditable by any well-instructed
person who agreed with Edition: current; Page: [111] him. And even the
Marquis of Lansdowne only professed to state the argument as he found it
in Mr. Tooke’s pamphlet. It is true that he could not have taken it from
a better source: it is true, moreover, that he seems to have understood
the pamphlet, and therefore, although in our opinion misled, he was
misled by arguments by which it is no discredit to a man of sense to
have been led astray. There were few of the speakers on this question,
Whigs or Tories, in whose favour so much as this can be said.

This universal incapacity is not accidental, nor is it confined to this
question. It may be observed on all questions requiring any depth of
thought, or accuracy of knowledge; and it is only more conspicuous on a
subject like the present, because it is not quite so easy to make words
pass for ideas on such a topic, as on a question of government,
judicature, or law. Nor will this incapacity appear wonderful, when we
reflect, that the same cause which disables most of our public men from
coming to the right conclusion on one subject, disables them equally on
all—they have no general principles to guide them.

As there are quack physicians, and scientific physicians, so there are
quack politicians, and scientific politicians. The characteristics of
the quack are very seldom accurately conceived; and the word generally
expresses little more than a vague and unanalyzed feeling of contempt.
But the distinction between the man of science and the quack, is broad
and obvious. The man of science is he who knows and applies the general
principles, the theory, of his art. The quack, or empiric, is he who,
ignorant of principles, generalizes upon the few particular instances
which his own narrow experience has presented to him. Now, the general
principles of the physician are the general laws, according to which it
has been observed, or inferred, that the phenomena of the human body
regulate themselves. The general principles of the statesman are, in
like manner, the general laws, according to which it is observed, or
inferred, that the phenomena of human society regulate themselves. By
the diligent study of these laws, the philosophic stateman or physician
has learned, what causes, in the field of his inquiries, are followed by
what effects. By this knowledge, he is taught to look for the effect,
only when he has perceived the cause: while the empiric, on the
contrary, who is ignorant of the cause, expects the effect, whenever he
has observed that, once or twice, in circumstances not obviously
dissimilar, the same event, or something like it, has occurred.

The world has produced many scientific physicians, but few, very few
scientific statesmen: nor is there much in the education or pursuits of
our practical politicians, which warrants the expectation that many such
will arise in their ranks for a long time to come.

In the first place, every scientific statesman must, in the present
state of the world, be self-taught. In any established system of
education he will Edition: current; Page: [112] meet with few helps, and
many obstructions. He to whose skill the care of the human body is
confided, finds every where some provision made for teaching him, in the
best manner which the state of science in the age and country will
allow, the causes which determine the good or ill condition of the human
body. But he who is destined to direct the government of a nation, finds
nowhere any adequate provision for teaching him the causes which
determine the good or ill condition of the political body. In few
countries do the laws of human thought, and human action, the principles
of legislation, government, and political economy, form any part of the
established course of education. In the great public seminaries for the
education of the higher ranks of our countrymen in particular, not only
are these branches of knowledge not taught, but every thing that is
practicable is done to keep the mind of the student from turning towards
them; partly by direct discouragement, partly by holding out rewards and
honours exclusively to pursuits of a character diametrically opposite,
and the more trifling and unprofitable the better; thus drawing off, by
the appearance of intellectual exercise, those active minds, which are
ambitious of higher distinctions than that of being victor in a rowing
match, or in a horse race.

If the education of our statesmen and legislators does so little to fit
them for their business, their subsequent occupations do still less.

A part, after they leave the school or the university, enter into the
subordinate departments of the public offices, and serve their
apprenticeship to the highest functions of government by discharging the
lowest. If these have not acquired a taste for the study of the general
principles of political philosophy, before they enter upon this career,
they are little likely to acquire it amid the official drudgery in which
they are from that time immersed. It is not in the midst of such
occupations as these, that the mind learns to contemplate, on an
extended scale, the operation of the causes of national prosperity and
decline. Facts, of a certain description, they may have opportunities of
observing; statistical facts, which it is necessary that the stateman
should know, as it is necessary that the physician should know the
constitution of his patient, but which he can learn as well, or better,
from the testimony of others, as from personal observation. But it would
be as reasonable to expect that a bricklayer’s labourer, by piling up
bricks, should learn the principles of architecture, as that a clerk in
an office should learn, in the exercise of his calling, the principles
of good government. He who learns nothing but official details, knows
nothing but official details: and if he would know any thing else, he
must seek his knowledge elsewhere.

The next class from whom our legislators are drawn, is the mercantile
and manufacturing class. After a life spent in the inspection of balance
sheets, and prices current, they retire from ’Change, and frequent St.
Edition: current; Page: [113] Stephen’s, imagining themselves capable of
managing the state, because they have succeeded in managing the
counting-house. The circumstance which is most characteristic of this
class, is the persuasion which they have universally imbibed, that on
all subjects which concern the wealth or commerce of a nation, it
belongs to them to decide, and to the rest of the world to obey. These
pretensions they uphold by styling themselves practical men, and warning
off the ground, with no very mild denunciations, all persons who, under
any other title, venture to encroach upon it. The idea which, we
presume, they wish to convey when they call themselves practical men,
is, that as men of business they possess a practical knowledge of many
facts, not equally well known to others, which bear upon the particular
question under discussion. Even if this were true, it would not entitle
their opinion to any particular weight; because the knowledge of facts
does not necessarily impart any peculiar qualifications for drawing the
right inferences from these facts; and besides, if they know facts not
known to other people, let them state those facts; but let them not
complain because their inferences from facts are not taken for facts,
and received upon their authority. The assertion, however, that what are
called practical men, possess any peculiar acquaintance even with the
facts, on which the decision of great public questions usually turns, is
devoid of truth. A merchant, as such, is not necessarily acquainted with
any facts, except those which determine him to buy and sell: nor even
here is his knowledge necessarily very profound. Those who have been
behind the scenes know well, what an affair of mere routine mercantile
business usually is. To produce, purchase, or import, every year, about
the same quantity which was produced, purchased, or imported, the year
before, increasing or diminishing the quantity a little, as the market
appears to be looking up or down,—constitutes, pretty nearly, the sum
total of the art of commerce, as it is commonly practised. What the
chancellor Oxenstiern said of the government of the world, may be said
with almost equal correctness, of its trade, Quam parvâ sapientiâ
regitur! The moment these men of practice quit the beaten track, strike
out a path for themselves, and launch into the field of commercial
speculation, all becomes mere guess work: the sort of experience which
they have acquired is not of a nature to make them acquainted with the
remote causes of the events which they hear and see; and their ignorance
of these renders them mere gamblers; incapable of foresight, incapable
of calculation; staking their fortunes upon the chances of the market,
precisely as men of another description stake theirs upon the chances of
the card-table.

It is not to be denied that a merchant has peculiar opportunities, if he
knows how to employ them, of knowing some of the facts which bear upon
many great public questions. But these very opportunities of knowing
some of the facts, are apt to divert his attention from the remainder;
and by Edition: current; Page: [114] knowing half the facts, being
ignorant of the other half, he is still more likely to come to the wrong
conclusion, than he who is ignorant of the whole. He may, in general, be
trusted to, for judging, with tolerable correctness, of the effect which
any measure will have upon his own immediate interest. That ignorance of
remote causes, of which we spoke, disables him, in the majority of
cases, from judging correctly of the effect of the measure, upon even
his own ultimate interest: and of its effect upon the public interest,
he is usually a worse judge than other people, because his attention is
wholly fixed upon a different part of the subject. We might illustrate
this observation by numerous specimens of the part which has been taken
by the practical men on almost every great commercial question for the
last twenty years. As might be expected from the extremely narrow range
of their experience, they are in the habit of giving utterance to more
absurd theories than any other class of human beings, and are
notoriously the last persons who can be taught how to use their own
eyes, or to comprehend the most obvious signs of the most familiar
phenomena. At the time of the Bullion Report, they to a man maintained,
that a currency could never be depreciated, so long as it was issued
only in discounts at 5 per cent, upon bills of short date, and undoubted
security; and averred, that since, at that time, guineas were not at a
premium, it was a conclusive proof that the currency was not
depreciated. To the above opinions, a portion of them continue to
adhere.* The majority, having at length been shamed out of these
extravagances, by men who had never crossed the threshold of a
counting-house, and who were probably ignorant of the difference between
a day-book and a ledger, now stride at once to the opposite extremity of
the scale; imagine that this over-issue, which they had deemed
impossible, is the one and only source of every evil that befals the
country; and after giving the whole weight of their support to a
currency which was liable to excess, now join in raising the cry of
excess against a currency which is not.

There is yet another class, from which a large portion of our
legislators are taken—the country gentlemen; and these, having over the
two former the advantage of leisure, and of not having their minds
narrowed by exclusive devotion to one particular pursuit, would be,
beyond question, the fittest class for the functions of legislation,
were their education so directed as to give them either the
qualifications of a legislator, or a taste for the Edition: current;
Page: [115] acquisition of those qualifications. But—so exquisitely is
our system of education adapted to its end—to nine-tenths of them it
teaches nothing; to the remaining tenth, nothing but what they do not
want: and we consequently find that this class, in qualifications for
business, is only distinguished from the other two, by possessing in a
greatly inferior degree that diligence and attention, which, from early
habit, commonly adhere to those who have been trained in the routine of
the counting-house or of the office.

That a legislature thus composed should scarcely ever be able, even when
it is willing, to legislate for a great nation as the wants of a great
nation require, is a result which ought to excite neither disappointment
nor surprise. By what rule can he, who has no scientific knowledge of
the connexion between effects and causes in public affairs, distinguish
causation from mere casual coincidence? And what is the quack, but he
who confounds the latter with the former? And, accordingly, from time
immemorial, it has happened to this country as to others, that its laws
have been made by quack legislators, and its affairs administered by
quack statesmen; while it is only now and then, at immense intervals,
that a man has arisen, who made even an approach to the character of a
scientific statesman or legislator. But though this be the deplorable
picture which history exhibits to us, it holds out one great and
encouraging lesson: That the man of general principles, even though
imperfect, has ever thrown the men of tricks and expedients into the
shade: That in every age, he who has approached the nearest to the
character of a scientific politician, has been confessedly the first man
among his contemporaries, and the only one whose reputation as a
statesman has long survived him. What was it which made Edmund Burke,
with all his errors, (and few men have committed more grievous ones,)
soar so immeasurably above the vulgar orators, and still more vulgar
statesmen of his day? What, except that he was a man of general
principles? Imperfect, indeed, and in many important points erroneous,
those principles were; but they will cause his name to be remembered,
when the waters of oblivion shall have closed over the greatest and most
admired of his contemporaries, and when the very existence of such men
as Pitt and Fox, shall be remembered only by the places which they held.

From his time to our own, in so far only as Mr. Horner is an exception,
the only man of general principles who has made his appearance in public
life, was Mr. Ricardo. And the ascendancy, which, in the few short years
of his parliamentary career, this great man acquired, over the minds
even of those by whom he and his principles were abhorred, but who could
not avoid feeling the infinity of their littleness when beside him, is
an inspiring lesson to all who shall hereafter start in the same career
of excellence, and a salutary antidote to the benumbing counsels of
those preachers of indifference, who assiduously chaunt the parrot
strain that true greatness is Edition: current; Page: [116] never
appreciated, and who, by way of apology for their own firm determination
to make no attempt at benefiting mankind, strive with all their might to
persuade others that mankind are far too foolish and wicked, to render
the idea of benefiting them any thing but the dream of a madman.

Of the present ministers, a part have adopted the conclusions which Mr.
Ricardo had deduced by logical ratiocination from the most extensive and
best established laws of human action; and are so far superior to the
mere statesmen of routine. But men born when they were born, educated as
they were educated, and occupied as they have been occupied since they
entered into life, could scarcely be expected to have attained so clear
a conception of those general laws, or so much skill in following them
out to conclusions applicable with unerring certainty to the particular
circumstances of each particular case, as to be able to tread unassisted
in his path. They are so imperfectly acquainted with the principles from
which the opinions they have adopted are a deduction, that they are
continually liable to make mistakes in the application. So conscious are
they of this, that they always seem to be afraid of their ground, and
distrustful of their own opinions: ready to follow implicitly the
guidance of any plausible person, the general tenor of whose opinions
coincides with their own; but their confidence in others as easily
shaken as their confidence in themselves; vacillating; unsteady; and
quickly frightened (not by fear for themselves, but by an anxious desire
to do their duty, coupled with distrust in their own judgment) into the
abandonment even of the opinions of the truth of which they have
professed, and with sincerity, to be the most firmly convinced. Thus, on
the very subject in discussion,—the subject of a paper currency,—they
were at first so eager to put a stop to the circulation of the small
notes, that they could not wait for the form of parliamentary sanction,
but prohibited, on their own responsibility, the stamping of such notes.
Then they grew alarmed at the stories which they heard concerning the
discredit into which the small notes had fallen through their
over-anxiety to get rid of them in a hurry; and they permitted the issue
of the small notes of the Bank of England—beyond all question the worst
sort of small notes—for a further period. But now with one accord the
Scotch bankers, and all who were connected with Scotch bankers, raised
an uproar; in which they were cordially joined by every Scotch jobber,
who, hating ministers for the good they had done, stretched a point to
oppose them even when they were doing mischief. The great novelist
himself took the field, and put forth an entertaining story-book on the
currency,[*] in which, between an anecdote and a joke, he wedged in an
insinuation, that Scotchmen had not yet forgotten the use of the
claymore. Completely bawled down, ministers at Edition: current; Page:
[117] length did for the Scotch and Irish currencies, what they ought
from the first to have done for the English; they granted a Committee of
Inquiry. The result was, that the proposed change was abandoned so far
as respected Scotland, and postponed as regarded Ireland: and if
ministers have one-half the discernment for which we give them credit,
they have long since deeply regretted that they ever hazarded a measure,
which has materially lowered them in the estimation of the public, and
done no good.

The debates in Parliament were rather marked by general weakness, and
ignorance of the subject, than by the peculiar absurdity of any one
among the opinions which were broached. There was something deserving of
attention, however, in the treatment which was sustained by the
unfortunate science of political economy. On most questions affecting
the public wealth, the party in the right is pretty much accustomed to
be taunted, by the party in the wrong, with being misled by political
economy. But in the present instance, each party was taunted, by the
other with having been led into its present errors by that delusive
study. Those who were for a gold currency, said, they had never
concurred in the theories of the political economists on the advantages
of a paper currency. Among these was Mr. Tierney,* who said that on this
point he was more obstinate than on any other, although (he added) he
knew that good, wise, and well-informed men differed from him, and
although, he, for his part, affected to know no more, and see no
farther, than his neighbours. Those who were for a paper currency said,
that “excepting only the members of the Political Economy Club, there
were no persons to be found who approved of the conduct of ministers.”†
Another speaker on the same side, Mr. Hudson Gurney,‡ “could not help
attributing the source of all the evil to the Bullion Committee. Mr.
Horner had come up to it from Scotland to confuse the question with
Scotch metaphysics.” From all which it may be inferred, that there were
at least some persons on both sides, who, although they differed in
their opinions, agreed in their contempt for persons who were wiser than
themselves.

Proportioned to the invectives of both parties against “political
economy” and “metaphysics,” was the eagerness of each to shew that it
had the practical men on its side; and vehement was the contest before
they could settle, on which side the practical men really were. Mr.
Baring, who agreed with ministers that the small notes were a nuisance,
but who pertinaciously opposed their suppression, on the ground (if we
comprehend him rightly) that a period of distress was the wrong time for
such a measure, made a Edition: current; Page: [118] series of speeches,
in one of which, amid bitter complaints of the sacrifices made to
theory, and the disregard shewn to practical men, he exhorted the House
to recollect, that, in spite of all eloquent speeches, it “stood in this
situation—the men of business in it, from one end to the other, told the
right hon. gentlemen to beware. He did not think there was one banker or
merchant in the House, on whatever side he might be accustomed to vote,
who ventured to say he thought this measure could be carried without
injury to the country. . . . . If any practical man would get up and say
that this measure could be carried into effect without great suffering,
he would give up the point.”* His call was answered by Mr. Grenfell, who
took a widely different view of the state of opinion among practical
men. “As a practical man, his opinion was, that not only might this
measure be carried with safety, but that there could be no permanent
safety for the country without it. There was not a single practical man
who would attempt to deny that the one pound note system was a nuisance
which ought to be abated; that the evils which now afflicted the country
originated in those notes, and that one of the remedies for those evils
was to do away with that circulation.”†

The word experience was of course bandied from one side of the house to
the other, and the average number of appeals were made to it from
theory, by that numerous class, who are accustomed to judge of the
wisdom of a measure exclusively by the event. Among these Mr. Brougham’s
appearance will excite surprise. He candidly owned that he had once been
of opinion that a paper payable in gold by law, on demand, could never
exist in excess, and that “experience alone had shaken his firm belief
in this theory.”‡ We think that it would have been more to the credit of
Mr. Brougham’s wisdom, had he remained silent on a subject which it is
evident that he had not studied. It is not by merely glancing at the
surface of the subject, and making himself acquainted with one or two of
the more obvious facts, that a man becomes entitled to say what is or is
not experience.

Among the speeches, the most deserving of attention, in many points of
view, were those of Mr. Baring; and to these alone we shall further
advert. We have not room for an examination of the numerous theories
which that honourable gentleman let fall while vituperating theory. But
there is one of his theories—his darling theory—the theory so dear to
him, that he could scarcely open his lips without pronouncing it, which
must be noticed; the theory of a double standard.

At present, gold alone is by law a legal tender to any amount exceeding
forty shillings, and is therefore the sole regulator of the value of our
currency. Edition: current; Page: [119] Mr. Baring’s theory was, that it
would be a great improvement to make silver a legal tender also. Now,
the reasons against this are cogent and obvious. If both metals were
made a legal tender, they must be made so in a fixed ratio; say twenty
shillings, to pay a debt of one sovereign. But the relative value of the
two metals in the market is liable to variation; and, in point of fact,
does vary not unfrequently. As soon as this happened, it would become
the interest of all debtors to pay their debts in the metal which had
relatively fallen. Not only, therefore, would the currency vary in its
value with the fluctuations of two metals, instead of those only of one;
but whenever one of the two metals became the standard, the whole of the
other metal in circulation would be immediately melted.

Though we commonly object to the introduction of figures into a question
of political economy, as in general raising more difficulties than it
solves, in this instance we think that figures will render our meaning
more intelligible. Let us suppose that a sovereign, and twenty
shillings, are both of them made legal tender for a debt of one pound;
and that this proportion accurately corresponds with the present value
of both metals in the bullion market: the quantity of gold in the
sovereign, and of silver in the twenty shillings, being severally worth
in that market one pound. Let us now suppose that from a falling off in
the supply of gold, or an increase in the supply of silver, from the
mines, the quantity of gold in a sovereign becomes worth 21s. in silver,
or the quantity of silver in twenty shillings becomes worth only 19s. in
gold. In the first case, a speculator procures a sovereign with 20s.,
melts it, and sells it for 21s. In the other, with his 19s. in gold he
buys silver bullion, has it coined into 20s. at the mint; and by this
addition to the currency, raises, among other prices, the price of gold
bullion to 21s. when he procures a sovereign for 20s. melts it, and
sells it for 21s.

Two evils are thus produced by a double standard: in the first place,
double fluctuations; and secondly,—whenever, by a change in the relative
values of the metals, one of them becomes the standard instead of the
other,—the loss to the nation of the expence of coinage on half the
coins in circulation.

Not only did Mr. Baring overlook these arguments, fully and repeatedly
as they have been stated in almost all the writings on the subject, but
he found, with one exception, nobody to remind him of them.* What is
more, he found several members, and among others Mr. Huskisson,† to
express Edition: current; Page: [120] something more than a half assent
to the proposition. Mr. Peel also gave a modified assent to it, but with
the following sensible reservation:—“It would be necessary to accompany
it with a measure to guard against fluctuations in the price of silver,
so that if there should be an increase in the quantity of silver, the
man who had contracted obligations in gold should not be allowed to
discharge them in silver.”*—No doubt the measure would be harmless with
this condition, for it would be nugatory. Where would be the advantage
to the debtor of being allowed to pay in silver, if he were obliged to
pay it at the same rate, at which he might purchase gold with it, and
pay in gold?

It is curious, that every one of Mr. Baring’s arguments for two
standards, were arguments only for making silver the standard in
preference to gold. Such were, the greater facility of obtaining it in
the requisite quantities; its being the standard of other countries,
which rendered it impossible, unless it were ours also, to have a
perfectly accurate par of exchange; the less liability of its value than
of the value of gold, to be raised or lowered by the operations of
speculators, &c.&c. All these circumstances may deserve ample
consideration, regarded as reasons for making silver the standard,
instead of gold; but they certainly are no reasons for having more
standards than one.

A discussion of some interest took place in parliament, upon a
proposition for authorizing the issue of several millions of exchequer
bills to relieve the immediate distress. Ministers refused their assent
to this proposition, but, in lieu of it prevailed upon the Bank to make
advances to the extent of three millions upon the security of goods.

The propriety of this course appears unquestionable: yet, strange to
say, scarcely any part of their conduct excited so much reproach. The
practical men not only gave them no thanks for what they did, but would
not cease urging them to do what they had refused to do: and ministers
were bitterly inveighed against, for unfeelingly suffering such a depth
of distress to continue unassuaged, merely because they would not
deviate from a general principle, which was not applicable to such
extreme cases. Of those from whom this lachrymation proceeded, there was
not one who seemed capable of seeing that an advance by the Bank
afforded all the relief which an issue of Exchequer bills could afford;
probably much more than it would.

Two evils were expected to be remedied by this measure: first, the
depression of prices, owing to the contraction of the currency by the
immense destruction of mercantile and country paper; and, secondly, the
difficulty, or rather the utter impossibility, of obtaining loans,
except at extravagant interest. Both these evils were materially
mitigated by the advances of the Bank. By these advances, three millions
were added to the Edition: current; Page: [121] currency, and three
millions were added to the loans. By the issue of exchequer bills, very
little would have been added to either. Exchequer bills do not, except
to a very limited extent, circulate as currency; and for this reason,
neither could they have been of any use as a loan, to the merchant who
received them, unless they were first cashed. If cashed by the Bank,
they would have operated in the same manner precisely, as the Bank
advances upon goods under Government guarantee. If cashed elsewhere,
they would not have added to the aggregate of loans, but would merely
have enabled the holder to borrow money, which otherwise would probably
have been lent to some one else. If the measure, therefore, had averted
bankruptcy from one individual, it would only be by bringing it upon
another. To a certain extent, indeed, it might have drawn out funds,
which would not have been lent upon any inferior security; and so far,
but no farther, it would have afforded relief. But the advances of the
Bank, by immediately superadding the whole of their own amount, to the
funds which were already seeking an investment in the money-market, did
at once, and to the full extent, what, to a certain extent, the other
measure might possibly have done.

Yet this measure the practical men pronounced to be nugatory, while
their hearts were exclusively set upon the other. One reason they had
for this preference; and a curious specimen it was, of the empiricism of
the mere practical men, in every thing which they say and do in public
matters, and which they call, following experience. The issue of
exchequer bills had been tried in 1793, and had succeeded! while the
Bank advances had never been tried before! There are few quacks, in
tolerable practice, who cannot produce hundreds of instances in which
their nostrum has been taken, and in which, afterwards, the patient has
recovered. The practical men could produce only one such instance: and
even to that, there were objections, to which newspaper cases in general
are not liable: for patients, we know, do not always recover, even when
the doctor is dismissed; but a commercial crisis must abate, some time
or other: and if it begins to do so just after the exchequer bills have
been administered, people are sure to suppose that had it not been for
the drug, it would have continued till doomsday.

Hear how a practical man can rail against theory while in the act of
theorizing, and theorizing, too, upon a single instance.

Mr. Bright: “What did Mr. Pitt do on that occasion? He issued exchequer
bills, and the distress of the country was cured, not only without loss,
but with benefit to the state. Why should we now adopt new expedients?
Why not profit by the experience and the wisdom of our ancestors? He was
no speculatist, no theorist, and disliked the fashionable philosophy of
the day, and he asked the country to adopt the wise course of Mr.
Pitt.”*

Edition: current; Page: [122]
Mr. Tierney made a speech, which, as usual, was full of wit, and
pleasantry, and point, but somewhat barren of ideas. The only thing
particularly remarkable in it, was the principle of morality by which he
professed to be guided in his public conduct: “He approved of the issue
of Exchequer bills in 1793. On that occasion he was not in Parliament;
but had he been, he would in all probability, like a good soldier, have
fought under the banners of his party, and he believed they opposed it:
but the measure was sound and good.”*

We commend Mr. Tierney for his frankness; and shall know, hereafter, for
what degree of sincerity to give him credit, when he declares to the
House, on party questions, that the salvation of the country depends
upon its following his advice. We are greatly edified by the notion
which he entertains of the duty of a public man. It consists, he says,
in being “a good soldier.” Permit us to ask, whose soldier? Not that of
the people; for their interest is indissolubly linked with every thing
that is open, and honest, and sincere. Of whom, then, is he the soldier?
We need not go very far for an answer.

The Usury Laws also produced something of a debate. Our sentiments on
this subject, having been fully declared in our preceding volume, need
not be repeated here. The baneful operation of these laws during the
panic having done much to strengthen and spread the opinion of their
badness, it was to be expected that the country gentlemen would, in
defending them this session, exhibit marks of peculiar irritation. Such
marks they accordingly did exhibit; and poured out the vials of their
wrath to the very dregs, upon the unfortunate proposer, and upon all who
were of his opinion.

Mr. Davenport “called upon Government to take a part in stopping the
eagerness for introducing such bills.”[*] Mr. Bright, who richly
deserves to have been born a country gentleman, “was glad that the bill
was thus early opposed. It was essential that the country gentlemen
should not be year after year agitated in their minds, and more
particularly at a time when they ought to be kept at ease. He condemned
in the strongest manner the re-introduction of such a bill as that now
submitted for their consideration; it could be productive of no good,
and would disturb existing arrangements.”[†] On second thought, it
occurs to us, that the above observations are ironical. The principal
sentence is evidently a sly hit at the extreme sensitiveness of the
country gentlemen in money matters, which he artfully represents as
having risen to a disease in their minds, and complains that they are
not treated with the tenderness due to valetudinarians. Mr. R. Gordon
could not contain his indignation against Mr. Sykes, for merely
expressing his surprise that the country gentlemen should think the
Usury Edition: current; Page: [123] Laws injurious to them. “The landed
interest did not stand in need of the suggestions of the honourable
member. He condemned the honourable gentleman’s avidity to assist the
landed gentlemen with new theories; it would be better to allow the
country gentlemen to take care of themselves; for surely they ought to
be the judge of what suited their own affairs.”[*] Had Mr. Bright been
in his merry mood when these observations were made, he would have
remarked, in continuation of his former view of the subject, that the
country gentlemen already began to demonstrate that instinctive aversion
to their keepers, which persons in their unfortunate situation so
generally display.*

The only argument which was even named, against the repeal of the Usury
Laws, was, that it would shake the security of mortgages; by which is
meant that, if higher interest than 5 per cent were permitted to be
taken, all mortgages would be called in, and 2 or 3 per cent additional
interest immediately laid on. There is something so incredibly silly, as
well as something so much worse than silly, in this language, that it
deserves most particular notice. In the first place, it is scarcely
credible that men should be found in the present day, to stand up and
affirm what is here implied, that the lender is the person who fixes the
rate of interest; and that too, with full experience before their eyes,
that the lender cannot even keep the rate of interest from falling below
the legal limit, to say nothing of rising above it. Nor do we believe
that even the landlords would have committed so gross and so obvious a
mistake, were it not for their inveterate habit of taking their opinions
on all money matters from their attornies; to whom the Usury Laws, and
the evasion of the Usury Laws, are the source of profit without end, and
who, therefore, unanimously agree that those laws, and their evasion,
are equally indispensable to the security of the social order. In the
next place, suppose it true that these laws do keep down the rate of
interest on mortgages below its natural rate: is there any set of men,
save those who, like the country gentlemen, have so long been accustomed
to make the interest of all other classes yield to theirs, that it
appears to them almost a miracle to meet with resistance from any other
class in the attempt,—is there any other set of men, who would have the
assurance to say—We are dealers in corn, and we will therefore compel
you to buy it of us at our own price; we are borrowers of money, and we
will therefore compel you to lend it to us at our own rate; and all
this, not on account of any service which we have done or intend to do
you in return, but because we and our pockets are of such vast
importance to the nation, and their being well filled so absolutely
essential to the maintenance of the constitution and to the prosperity
of the state, that no Englishman will grudge to contribute his share, in
this or in any other way, towards filling them!

Edition: current; Page: [124] Edition: current; Page: [125]


THE SILK TRADE
 1826

Edition: current; Page: [126]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Westminster Review, V (Jan., 1826), 136-49. Unsigned; not republished.
Original heading: “Art. VI. Rise and Progress of the Silk Trade in
England, from the earliest period to the present time. Founded on
Official Documents. By César Moreau. Treuttel and Würtz. 1826.” Running
head: “The Silk Trade.” Not mentioned in JSM’s bibliography or
Autobiography. Identified as his in the Mills’ copy, Somerville College,
which contains, as well as the identification, two pencilled corrections
in JSM’s hand (see 134a-a and b-b below). The cancelled original
conclusion of the article is found on f.8v of the holograph MS of JSM’s
“Speech on the Church” (British Library of Political and Economic
Science, Mill-Taylor Collection, Add. Mat. II, M463). The three variants
below (138c-c, d-d, 139e-e) give the full final readings of this MS
fragment, in which c-c is interposed between the other two passages. The
identification of this article as JSM’s removes the discrepancy between
his bibliography and Autobiography: in the former he lists twelve
articles contributed from the second to the eighteenth numbers of the
Westminster; in the latter he says he contributed thirteen.

The apparent anomaly of JSM’s referring in the “January” number of the
Westminster to a speech of Huskisson’s delivered on 23 February (see 139
below) is resolved by the announcement of the publication of this number
in the Morning Chronicle for 4 April.

Edition: current; Page: [127]


The Silk Trade

our readers are aware that, by an Act passed in the year 1824,[*] the
existing prohibition against the importation of wrought silks is to
expire in July next. This measure did not pass without considerable
opposition, and strenuous efforts are now making to obtain its reversal.

It might have been thought that a measure of reform, which had passed
the ordeal of the two Houses of Parliament, could stand in need of no
further evidence to shew that it was imperiously called for by the
spirit of the age. With whatsoever faults those two assemblies may be
charged, they can hardly be accused of a propensity to rash innovation;
and when the public beheld the novel spectacle of ministers and
Parliaments legislating upon a general principle, only fifty years after
all thinking men had recognised it as a self-evident truth, they held up
their hands in astonishment, and imagined that the millennium was at
hand.

The commercial embarrassments, however, which became so unhappily
general, as the period fixed for the expiration of the monopoly drew
near, have afforded great advantages to the discontented of all classes,
in practising upon the public mind. A period of distress is a period of
easy excitement. There is no one so irritable as he who is smarting
under pecuniary loss; and the disappointed speculator is eager to lay
the blame of his ruin upon government, or competitors—upon anything, in
short, except his own folly. The monopolists have also been indebted to
the late distresses for the support of a sort of persons, who, under the
denomination of practical men, regard with dread every deviation from
routine; and who, while they treat all attempts at generalization with
disdain, under the appellation of theory, do not think it at all
theoretical to generalize on the single fact, that about a year and a
half after the passing of the act, distress in the silk trade ensued.

The existence of distress, unhappily, is not to be questioned; and there
are many unthinking persons, who, having the evidence of their senses
for this fact, take all the rest of the argument for granted. These are
the persons to whom we now address ourselves, and whom we hope to
convince that distress may exist, and may yet be owing to other causes
than Edition: current; Page: [128] the new measure; and that, though it
were owing to the new measure, that measure might be a very good one
notwithstanding.

If the silk trade were the only trade to which the distress extended,
there might be some colour for attributing it to the anticipation of the
effect which the admission of foreign silks may have on the market. But
distress prevails to an equal extent in the cotton, woollen, and many
other branches of manufacture and trade, in none of which any
apprehension is entertained of foreign competition. Even of the silk
manufacture it is not pretended that all the branches will be affected
by the change of system; yet which of them is there that is not
distressed? In what branch is the depression greater than among the
bombazeen manufacturers at Norwich? Yet nobody dreams that we can be
rivalled in this article by nations not possessing the advantage of our
wool.*

It is acknowledged that during the last year, speculation and
overtrading were carried to an almost unexampled height. It is a fact
that all the branches of trade which participated in the mania are now
participating in its deplorable consequences: of these branches the silk
trade was one. When we have here one perfectly sufficient cause of the
distress, need we go to look for another? Are the silk manufacturers
alone, in the commercial world, to be permitted to charge the
consequences of their own madness upon the government? Mr. Canning
characterised their conduct in proper terms, in his speech of the 13th
of February:—“By the employment of a great multitude of labourers, and
by large purchases of raw material, they had accumulated both raw
material and manufactured stock to double their previous amount, and
then, when the re-action came, they raised a cry, and upon the obstacles
to the measure, which they themselves had created, they founded an
argument for further time.”[*]

The silk trade, in fact, was never brisker than it was during the first
year subsequent to the passing of the act of 1824. The quantities
produced exceeded all former example. Although new mills had been
erected for throwing silk, the manufacturers were obliged to wait for
months, before they could get silk from the throwsters; and in the year
1825, as compared with the preceding year, the importation of thrown
silk was nearly trebled.† Still the goods were sold as fast as they came
out of the loom; and wages not only did not fall, as was predicted after
the abolition of what was called the Spitalfields act,[†] but such was
the demand, that in Edition: current; Page: [129] some instances they
actually rose. This demand continued unabated (except by the change of
season) till the very day when a number of manufacturers held a meeting
at the London Tavern, and put forth a declaration, that the French could
undersell them 60 per cent, a notion which they have ever since been
sedulously endeavouring to progagate.* We do not think it very much to
be wondered at, that the public should have taken them at their word.

The distress, therefore, in whatever way we may explain it, has no
bearing whatever upon the question.

In the claim of the monopolists, two things are implied:—that they
cannot support themselves under a free trade; and that, if they cannot
support themselves, they ought to be supported by the nation. If they
would say any thing in point, they must prove both these assertions;
that they have hitherto been content with assuming them, it requires
very little consideration to perceive.

Two sorts of persons have on this occasion entered the lists in favour
of the monopoly: they take their stand on very different grounds, and
must be met by very different arguments. One set profess themselves
enemies to political economy, and favourable to the old system of
restrictions upon trade. Their doctrine, if they can be said to have
any, seems to be, that we ought to produce every thing for ourselves,
the production of which, with our soil and climate, is not physically
impossible; or at least, that every manufacture which has ever existed
in this country ought to be upheld, no matter at what cost to the
community. Others, on the contrary, are ambitious to be thought
proficients in political economy, at the same time that they are
striking directly against its first principles. These profess the utmost
reverence for the abstract principles of free trade, and acknowledge
that a manufacture, which cannot stand against competition, ought to
fall. This, however, they contend, is by no means their case, or, at
least, would not be, if ministers had begun at the right end, and
commenced their operations by abolishing the corn monopoly. This it is
which disables them from competing with foreigners, and while this
subsists, to deprive them of their monopoly, is, according to them, a
cruel injustice.

We shall reply to these two classes of opponents in their order, and we
begin with the first.

If we were looking out for a reason why foreign silks should be
admitted, we do not know what better reason it would be possible to
give, than the very reason which is given by these persons for not
admitting them, namely, Edition: current; Page: [130] that they are
cheaper than those we have. This, however, is a reason which is any
thing but satisfactory to “practical men.” To the understandings of
practical men, particularly of silk manufacturers, the dearness of their
goods presents itself as a conclusive reason for forcing the public to
buy them. And so much pains do they take to inform us that we can
purchase our goods cheaper elsewhere, that one would imagine they
thought that there was something particularly attractive to buyers, in
the idea of buying at a high price.

The sort of opponents against whom we are now contending, are perfectly
willing that we should be permitted to purchase of foreigners, whatever
we can buy cheaper at home. They have no sort of objection to foreign
commerce, provided they can by any means guard themselves against the
misfortune of not having to pay enough for their goods; but so soon as
commerce threatens to be productive of any such fatal consequence as
cheap commodities, they tremble at the thoughts of it, and yet, it is
only by affording cheap commodities, that foreign trade contributes to
the national wealth.

The utility of trade does not consist in the large fortunes which are
made by merchants. The gains of merchants (except in the narrow case of
an exclusive company) do not exceed the ordinary profits of stock: and
the same capitals would, for anything that appears, have afforded the
same profits, if foreign commerce had never been heard of. Still less do
the exports add any thing to the national wealth. Were we to export
without importing, or to import nothing but money, we should not be
enriched but impoverished. It is only by our being enabled to import
goods, at a less cost than we could afford to produce them at home, that
our national wealth derives any sort of advantage from the existence of
foreign trade; and every prohibition, therefore, on importation,
operates pro tanto to render commerce useless. There is nothing more
characteristic of a weak mind, than an incapacity of discerning
inconsistencies; and it belongs to the same mind to boast of “British
commerce,” as the grand source of our national prosperity, and to uphold
that system which, if consistently acted upon, would not long leave us
any commerce to boast of.

If what is lost to the consumer by the exclusion of foreign
manufactures, were gained by the producer, something more might be said
for its wisdom. But what is lost to the consumer, is not gained by the
producer; it is wholly swallowed up by the expenses of production.
Manufacturers do not derive the same advantage from restrictions upon
trade that landlords do. The landlord really derives an addition to his
income, though we think a very small one, from the operation of the corn
monopoly. Not so the manufacturer: he, under a restricted trade,
receives no more than the ordinary profits of stock: which he would
equally have received had Edition: current; Page: [131] he embarked his
capital in any other employment. The tax which the consumer pays, nobody
receives; it is a dead loss to the country.

But what! say the silk manufacturers: is all the capital which we have
invested in the manufacture, and all the hands that are invested in it,
to be sacrificed to a theory?

To a theory, no: if by a theory be meant the mere pleasure of trying an
experiment. But it is not necessary that they should be sacrificed at
all; not that, if proved to be conducive to the general good, this or
any other sacrifice ought to be grudged. But we are of opinion, first,
that the silk manufacturers will not be called upon for any sacrifice,
except that which must always attend a temporary disturbance of prices;
and secondly, that if the sacrifice were ever so great, instead of
clamouring for the renewal of a restriction which does them no good, and
the public great harm, they ought to make an estimate of the amount of
their loss, and prefer a claim to compensation.

We will first suppose, that they cannot stand the competition, and we
will then give our reasons for believing that they can.

As it is certain that, by abandoning their business, the silk
manufacturers would not lose the whole of their capital, they could not
justly claim to be indemnified for the whole. The capital of a
manufacturer consists of the materials of the manufacture; the stock in
hand, the buildings, and machinery. The buildings, whether warehouses or
manufactories, would be available for a hundred other purposes. As for
the machinery, if our absurd laws against the exportation of it were
removed, it would easily find a market in Italy or France. There remains
the material, and the stock in hand. The former could be re-exported:
the Bengal and China silk without any loss, the Italian with the loss of
the cost of carriage. The stock in hand could be disposed of, though at
a reduced price; and the amount of the indemnification necessary to
cover the loss, could be more easily estimated than indemnifications
usually can. We thus see how small a compensation would cover the losses
of the silk manufacturers, even if their apprehensions were realized;
and how little, at best, their argumentum ad misericordiam is worth: as
for the journeymen, they are a very numerous body, and their interests
deserve a proportional degree of attention. Their temporary distress is
greatly to be lamented; and whatever can be done for its relief,
consistently with what is due to the rest of the community, ought to be
done. A weaver, however, can easily change his employment. It is not,
perhaps, generally known, that the silk manufacture at Manchester is
carried on chiefly by persons who were originally cotton-weavers, and at
Norwich by woollen-weavers: so easy is the transition from one of these
kindred branches of manufacture to another, and in some parts of
Devonshire the lace manufacture has in the same manner superseded
Edition: current; Page: [132] the woollen. All these lines, it will be
said, are over stocked with hands. This may be true; but if we were to
import our silks, additional hands would be required to produce the
cotton, woollen, or other goods, by the export of which we should pay
for them.

We shall now state the grounds which there are for supposing that,
notwithstanding competition, the silk manufacture will continue to
prosper. We wish to keep this question perfectly distinct from the more
general one, whether foreign competition ought to be admitted; because
there is really no connection between the two questions, and because it
is the grand artifice of the monopolists to mix them together. If the
French silks are not either cheaper or better than the English, nobody
will buy them; and if they are, we have already observed, that it is not
a reason for keeping them out but for letting them in. If foreign silks
cannot profitably be imported, to take off a restriction which prevents
them from being imported may do no harm, but it will do as little good.
It would be of as much use to abolish a prohibition against carrying
coals to Newcastle, as against importing an article which we can make
cheapest at home. How can we expect other nations to believe us sincere
in our newly adopted liberality, if they see us taking as much pains to
keep out foreign goods when we are taking off restrictions, as we could
do if we were laying them on? Mr. Huskisson has been nearly as much
sneered at, for his doctrine of free trade, in France and America, as he
has in this country, though for an opposite reason: our monopolists cry
out that foreign competition will ruin them; foreigners say that our
pretence of admitting competition is hypocrisy, that we know our own
interests too well, that we take good care to keep the door shut against
all foreign productions, except those which we know will never come, and
that the sole purpose of our sham liberality is to delude other nations
into commercial concessions. We hope that they will be undeceived by the
operation of the act of 1824. We hope, therefore, that, in some articles
at least, their silk manufacturers may be able to undersell ours. In a
few fancy articles we believe they will; but in no others.

If they have any advantage in the material, it must be either in the
article of raw, or of thrown silk. Raw silk is obtained from Bengal,
China, and Italy.* Bengal and China silk foreigners purchase from us.
The Italian can Edition: current; Page: [133] be obtained by the English
and by the French manufacturers on the same terms, as is sufficiently
evident from a comparison of the cost of freight and profits of capital;
and it is besides confirmed by the evidence of Mr. Davison, a wholesale
silk dealer, before the lords committee on foreign trade in the year
1821. Being questioned concerning the price of raw silk in France, he
answered, “I believe the price of raw silk, exclusive of the duty, is
pretty much the same as it is here: the land carriage costs them pretty
much the same as our carriage by sea.”[*] And the duty in this country
is now a mere trifle.

The duty on thrown silk, though greatly reduced, is still much higher
than in France. With the exception of this difference of duty, which may
and ought to be got rid of, the foreigner has no advantage in this
article over our own manufacturer. However much the interests of our
throwsters might be affected by a still further reduction of the duty,
their monopoly ought not to stand in the way of so salutary a measure:
but the following extract from the evidence of Mr. Hale, of
Spitalfields, shows, that if they sustained any injury from the
reduction, it would be their own fault. “I inspected,” says he, “the
machinery at Turin, and was very much surprised to find they were so
backward, in proportion to what they were in the north of England; the
old silk mills at Derby that were working perhaps fifty years back, were
on much the same construction as the mills now are at Turin; the mills I
saw working organzine were on a construction which has been long
exploded by the best manufacturers of organzine in the kingdom. The same
remark might hold good in the silk manufactory at Lyons, but I saw no
organzining in any part of France, and I did not hear of there being a
single mill to throw organzine in that country.”[†] Well might the
committee before whom the above evidence was delivered express surprise
in their Report, “that, though the manufacture of organzine is one
almost entirely carried on by machinery, and requiring, in great part,
only the labour of women and children, yet that it cannot be made here
at less than double the price for which it is thrown in Italy;”[‡] but
the reason assigned by the committee, the recent introduction of this
branch of the manufacture, seems scarcely adequate to account for so
great an anomaly, were it not for the absence of that stimulus to
ingenuity and skill which would be the natural effect of free
competition. With that stimulus and the advantage of British machinery,
unless our throwsters be an inferior race to the rest of mankind, they
may hope to supply not only our market, but perhaps even that of France.
Surely if they cannot, there needs no better proof that throwing is a
business not suited to this country: that the foreign Edition: current;
Page: [134] manufacturer has as little advantage over ours in machinery,
or other contrivances for abridging labour, as he has in material, is
notorious, and admitted by the monopolists themselves.* In the various
articles used in dyeing and preparing the silk, if he enjoys any
advantage, he owes it to our absurd taxes on barilla, tallow, soap,
ashes, cochineal, madder, &c. which might either be abolished or greatly
reduced with a very inconsiderable (if any) loss of revenue. But this
branch of the subject we leave in the hands of the manufacturers
themselves. When they are tired of clamouring for the privilege of
alevyinga a tax upon the public, they may perhaps think of praying to be
relieved from taxes, the burthen of which is shared between the public
and them.

It is in the article of wages that the supposed advantage of the foreign
manufacturer exclusively consists, and this brings us into contact with
the less bigotted bpartsb of the opponents of the new measure; with
those who admit the propriety of taking off the prohibition, but who
urge that parliament ought first to have taken measures for lowering
wages, by abrogating the corn laws.

Now were we to affirm that the low rate of general wages in France does
not afford any advantage to the French manufacturer, we should affirm
that which could not be maintained, since it unquestionably gives him
higher profits.

This, however, may be maintained, and maintained correctly, that the low
rate of wages in France does not induce the French manufacturer to sell
his goods one sou cheaper, either in his own country or in ours, than if
the wages he had to pay were as high as in England, and consequently
does not induce him to undersell the British manufacturer.

Thus much is no doubt true, that if he were content to sell his silks at
the bare cost of production, and did not care what profit he made, or
whether he made any profit at all, the price at which he would be able
to Edition: current; Page: [135] sell his article without loss would be
low just in proportion as wages were low.

It is however certain that he will not choose to undersell the British
manufacturer, unless by so doing he can realize the ordinary profits
which are yielded by other capitals in his own country.

If, therefore, profits are higher in France than in England, and higher
exactly in proportion as wages are lower, the lowness of wages will not
enable the French manufacturer, consistently with his own interest, to
undersell the English manufacturer.

That the profits of stock really are higher in France than in England is
an undisputed fact, supported by incontestable evidence, and it is,
besides, a necessary consequence from the comparative lowness of wages.

If wages were lower in one employment only, prices would also be lower
in that employment. But wages are lower in all employments; and the
supposition of general low prices, except from some cause affecting the
circulating medium, is absurd.

The advantage of low wages is shared by all French capitalists, and it
cannot be supposed that the French silk-manufacturers will give an
advantage to the consumers which in any other employment they might keep
to themselves.

The conclusion, therefore, is manifest, that the high rate of wages
occasioned by our corn laws, though highly prejudicial to all classes of
capitalists, by lowering the general rate of profit, is not more
prejudicial to those who are exposed to foreign competition than to
those who are not; and that nothing, therefore, can be more utterly
unwarranted than the claim of the silk manufacturers to peculiar
protection on account of it.

Were it necessary, we might remark how greatly the silk manufacturers
have exaggerated the difference of wages in the two countries. The rate
of wages (our readers will be surprised to hear) in an article (gros de
Naples) on which more hands are employed than on any other, and which
may therefore be considered a near approximation to an average of the
whole, is almost exactly the same at Manchester and at Lyons. In
Spitalfields indeed it is 60 per cent higher. It is evident that so
great a difference of wages in the same employment cannot continue. The
attempts of the weavers to keep their wages above the average level can
only tend, if persevered in, to drive the manufacture altogether into
the country.

It was only a week or two ago that a complaint was made at the Worship
Street Police Office, by a master whose property had been injured in the
loom, and the windows of the weaver’s house broken, because his
daughter, rather than apply for a part of His Majesty’s bounty, agreed
to work under the old price, though she would still have obtained 25 per
cent more than is paid in the country.

Edition: current; Page: [136]
Another instance has come to our knowledge in which a man refused to
work for 22d. per yard, the regular rate being two shillings, although
the same article is made forty miles from London, at 16d.

We might, if it were worth while, urge a very powerful argumentum ad
hominem. Allowing for a moment that the effect of the corn laws upon
wages laid our manufacturers under a disadvantage, as compared with
their foreign competitors; we might show that the protecting duty which
they still enjoy is much more than a compensation for this disadvantage.
Judging from the data with which we presented our readers in an article
in our sixth Number, on the corn laws,[*] it is allowing very much to
the effect of these enactments, if we suppose them to raise the price of
corn 24 per cent. The weavers may be supposed, one with another, to
expend about half their wages in agricultural produce. An addition,
therefore, of 12 per cent to the wages which they would otherwise have
had, indemnifies them completely for the whole effect of the corn laws.
Assuming, then, that the silk manufacturer expends half his capital in
materials, machinery, &c. and the remaining half in the payment of
labour, it is evident that a protecting duty of 6 per cent would be an
ample equivalent for any addition to his expenses, which can be justly
ascribed to the corn laws. Instead, however, of 6 per cent he has 30, or
suppose that it were 20 per cent. It is obvious, therefore, even on
their own principles, how lame a case that portion of the monopolists
can make out, who rest their claims to monopoly upon the existence of
the corn laws.

In maintaining that the low rate of general wages in France does not
enable the French manufacturer to undersell ours, we, of course, do not
mean to deny the advantage which he may have from the comparative
cheapness of a particular sort of labour. Such an advantage in the
production of fancy articles it is well known that he has. From the
comparative rarity of the sort of skill and taste which are
indispensable in that branch of the manufacture, the price paid in this
country for these attainments, is, compared with the ordinary
remuneration for labour, remarkably high. At first, therefore, it is not
probable that our manufacturers could compete with foreigners, in the
production of this class of articles. Eventually, it is probable that
the stimulus which will be given to the exertions of our manufacturers
will, with the advantage of mechanics’ institutions as schools of
design, enable them, even in this branch, to maintain a successful
competition. If so, it would be an entire branch of trade gained to our
manufacturers, in consequence of that competition which they dread.

Much of the recent increase of the silk trade has been owing to patterns
copied from France. The silk trade, previously to the discussions in
Parliament, Edition: current; Page: [137] was really a disgrace to the
country. In taste, ingenuity, and enterprise, the French left our
manufacturers far behind, and the old imperfect looms continued to be
used in this country many years after Lyons had improved hers.

The manufacture of artificial flowers presents a striking illustration
of the stimulus afforded by a free trade. This article having somehow
been omitted in the catalogue of prohibited commodities, the
manufacture, it was supposed, could not survive the peace, as indeed it
could not, had not the producers, by the importation of French workmen,
and of some of the raw materials, which could not be, or were not, made
in this country, and by great exertions for the improvement of the
manufacture, succeeded in supplying so much cheaper and better an
article, than had ever before been produced in this country, that
instead of falling off, the business greatly increased, and now employs
a much greater number of hands than it did at any period during the war.

There is one of the statements put forth by the silk manufacturers,
which, as much stress has by some of them been laid upon it, requires
some notice. This is, that the East India company is in the habit of
selling India wrought silks at the same price per pound as the raw
material. The inference to be drawn is, that when the prohibition on the
sale of India wrought silks for home consumption expires, the company
will drive the manufacturer out of the market. This has afforded an
opportunity to some of the silk dealers, for animated invectives against
monopoly; though they might have remembered, that, so far as concerns
the Indian trade, the East India company has no monopoly; and that much
of the raw silk, and by far the greater portion of the wrought silks,
sold at the company’s sales in the last seven years, have been the bonâ
fide property of private traders.

The allegation, however, that raw and wrought silks may be purchased of
the company weight for weight at the same price, is contrary to fact. In
Bengal, there are two modes of winding the raw silk from the cocoon; one
is the old native mode, which produces the raw silk known by the name of
country-wound; the other, which is the European mode, has been
introduced by the company, and produces the superior kind of silk termed
filature. This is produced chiefly for exportation to Europe. The raw
material of which the Bengal wrought silks are made, still continues to
be wound after the old manner. Now we are enabled to state, that Indian
Bandannoes (to which article the importation of Bengal silk manufactures
is almost entirely confined) have, on the average of every year, for the
last seven years, obtained at the company’s sales a price greatly above
the price of an equal weight of country-wound silk, the material of
which they are made. In the last year (1825) in particular, it was
nearly double. Filature silk, a much better sort of material, did, in
the year 1819, obtain a higher Edition: current; Page: [138] price,
weight for weight, than the manufactured article; but in no subsequent
year has the same circumstance, or any thing approaching to it,
occurred. So much for the diatribes of monopolists against monopoly.

Being desirous to confine the reader’s attention to the main question,
we have not touched upon many collateral arguments of great weight. One
of these is the prevalence of smuggling, against which no prohibitions
can afford “protection,” and which our preventive service, with all its
expense, has hitherto proved inadequate even to obstruct.* We might ask
what becomes of the Bandannoes which are annually sold in
Leadenhall-street? or what market it is imagined they are intended
for—France, where they are scarcely worn at all, or England, where they
are worn by every body? And whether it is not well known that they are
exported to France for the purpose of being clandestinely re-imported
into England? The facilities of smuggling French silks are still greater
from the utter impossibility of distinguishing the French and the
English manufacture from one another; insomuch that a few months ago,
when the warehouse of an eminent silk-dealer was csearched by the
Custom-house officers, a quantity of silks were seized as French, which
were afterwards positively proved to have been made in England.c Freedom
of importation at a duty not exceeding the expense of smuggling, would
put an entire stop to all this evil; to the great benefit of the revenue
and of the public morals, and to the detriment of nobody.

dWe might also ask of the silk manufacturers (who consider themselves to
have been so ill treated by the government), whom they have to thank for
the bounty of £500,000, which was granted them under the name of a
reimbursement on the reduction of the duties on the raw material? The
real object of this bonus will be evident, when we say, that no part of
it was given to the retail dealers; who would yet have sustained, if the
price had fallen, the same proportional loss as the wholesale dealers
and manufacturers, and who were far less able to bear it, but whose
influence in the legislature was not, it seems, equally formidable.
Temporary circumstances, fortunately, prevented the fall from taking
place, till a considerable time afterwards: and the consequence was,
that the manufacturers and wholesale dealers received their
indemnification twice over; once under that name, and again in the price
of their goods.d

Edition: current; Page: [a]
[lf0223-04_figure_001.jpg]
MS fragment of “The Silk Trade” from the British Library of Political
and Economic Science. See p. 138, and Editor’s Note, p. 126.

Edition: current; Page: [b] Edition: current; Page: [139]
eBut without insisting upon these minor topics, we leave the question,
as between the public and the silk manufacturers, to the judgment of the
intelligent reader.e

Since the above article was written, we have read Mr. Huskisson’s speech
in the House of Commons, in defence of his commercial policy, a speech
which, while it has raised him higher than ever in our estimation, has
convinced us more than ever, that it is the duty of all lovers of their
country to raise their voices at this crisis in his support.[*] With the
exception of Turgot, the history of the world does not, perhaps, afford
another example of a minister steadfastly adhering to general principles
in defiance of the clamours of the timid and the interested of all
parties: and if the people are not true to him—if they do not show as
much zeal for their own interests as the monopolists of all sorts are
showing for theirs—they will deserve that defeat which they will most
assuredly sustain; and long will it be before they find another minister
who will encounter obloquy from his oldest supporters, and brave the
displeasure of almost all the powerful classes, in the vain hope of
benefitting them.

Edition: current; Page: [140] Edition: current; Page: [141]


THE NEW CORN LAW
 1827

Edition: current; Page: [142]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Westminster Review, VII (Jan., 1827), 169-86. Unsigned; not republished.
Original heading: “Art. IX.—A Catechism on the Corn Laws; with a List of
Fallacies, and the Answers. By a Member of the University of Cambridge.
Third Edition, with additions. London. Ridgway. 1827. pp. 60.” (JSM
seems, for the most part, to have been using the 2nd edition of T.
Perronet Thompson’s Catechism; see 816 below.) Running head: “New Corn
Law.” Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “An article on the New Corn
Bill, which appeared in the 13th number of the Westminster Review”
(MacMinn, 8). In his Autobiography there is only the general reference
cited above (46) to the corn laws as one of his special subjects.
Identified in the Somerville College copy, without corrections or
variants.

Edition: current; Page: [143]


The New Corn Law

ministers have at length produced their long-expected proposition for
the amendment of the Corn-laws.[*] It has already been once altered,
and, we need scarcely say, made worse, in the House of Commons. How much
worse it will be made before it passes, or whether it will pass at all,
we are unable, as yet, to conjecture; but, even in its original shape,
it was almost futile, and would not have effected any one of the ends
which it pretended to aim at. Let those be disappointed who looked for
any thing better: we confess that our hopes were never very sanguine. It
would argue little experience of human affairs to expect from
monopolists the abandonment of a monopoly; from landlords the voluntary
abatement of rent. And we should almost feel inclined to sit down
content with whatever may be obtained, and to thank our masters for
giving any thing, when they might have withheld all, were we not aware
that what they have yielded has been yielded to their fears alone, and
that greater fears may in time obtain for us those greater concessions
which they have taught us not to expect from their benevolence, or from
their patriotism.

A system of duties is to be substituted for a system of prohibition. If
the proposed bill should pass, corn may lawfully be imported at all
times. This, certainly, is something gained, at least in point of
principle. But coals, likewise, may lawfully be carried to Newcastle,
and steam-boats to the moon. Nominal permission is fruitless if coupled
with conditions which amount to a real prohibition. It makes little
difference to the consumer whether the law forbids corn to be imported,
or so orders matters that is never shall.

The vices of the existing Corn-law have so often been made the subject
of discussion, both in other publications and by ourselves, that we may
presume them to be distinctly in the recollection of our readers. It is
sufficient to say, that they all adhere to the proposed law, and in an
almost equal degree. Except in name, the trade in corn will not,
practically, be more free, the average price materially lower, nor the
fluctuations less extensive or less violent, than heretofore.

The correctness of this representation it will be for the reader to
estimate. We will lay the grounds of it before him.

Edition: current; Page: [144]
The principle of the new Corn-law is briefly as follows. When wheat (to
which we shall for the present confine ourselves) is at 60s. per
quarter, the duty on importation is to be 20s.; and for every shilling
by which the price exceeds 60s. the duty is to abate two shillings. This
is to continue until the price reaches 70s., at which, and all higher
prices, the duty is to remain stationary at one shilling per quarter.
The following scale exhibits the rates of duty in a clearer form.

Per Quarter
Per Quarter
Per Quarter
When the price is
{ 60_s._
and below
{ 61_s._
the duty is
{ 20_s._
{ 61_s._
{ 62_s._
{ 18_s._
{ 62_s._
{ 63_s._
{ 16_s._
{ 63_s._
{ 64_s._
{ 14_s._
{ 64_s._
{ 65_s._
{ 12_s._
{ 65_s._
{ 66_s._
{ 10_s._
{ 66_s._
{ 67_s._
{ 8_s._
{ 67_s._
{ 68_s._
{ 6_s._
{ 68_s._
{ 69_s._
{ 4_s._
{ 69_s._
{ 70_s._
{ 2_s._
{ 70_s._ and upwards
{ 1_s._

On the other hand, when the price is below 60s., for every shilling by
which it falls short of that mark, the duty is to increase two
shillings. Thus at 59s. the duty will be 22s.; at 58s. 24s., and so on.

Amid all this complication, the only material question is, at what price
this new system will enable us to commence importing. This point may,
fortunately, be ascertained. From the data which we have exhibited in
former articles,* and which every authentic statement since given to the
world has tended very strongly to confirm, it is established, that 52s.
per quarter or thereabouts is the lowest return which will indemnify the
merchant for importing corn into this country. When the price is 64s.
the duty will be 12s., which leaves exactly 52s. to the importer. Until,
therefore, the price rises to 64s., there can be no importation; except
in the casual contingency of an unusually abundant harvest abroad.
Against this contingency we must set that of an unusually scanty one,
which would prevent us from importing, even at that price.

These results suggest two material observations: First, that we shall
not, even now, be a regularly importing country. Mr. Canning stated,
when he brought forward his measure, that the average price for the last
four years, including no particular vicissitudes, and likewise for the
last twelve years, Edition: current; Page: [145] which include very
great vicissitudes, had been about 60s.[*] At this price the duty will
be 20s.; which will leave the importer no more than 40s.; altogether an
insufficient remuneration. The lowest price, therefore, which will admit
of importation, is considerably above the price of British corn in
average years.

The second observation is, that a law which virtually fixes the
importation price at 64s. is not much better than the existing law,
which fixes it at 70s. By the Corn-law passed in 1822, 70s. is the
importation price. If Mr. Canning had contented himself with proposing
that 64s. should hereafter be the importation price instead of 70s.
would he not have incurred the ridicule, not merely of all men of sense
for doing so little, but of all the world for pretending to have done so
much? Whatever advantage there would be in simply reducing the
importation price to 64s., that, and no more, is there in the measure
which Mr. Canning has proposed.* But because he has dressed it out with
a complicated apparatus of figures, which cannot be distinctly
comprehended without some little trouble; because he has overawed the
public by the ostentatious accuracy of a graduated scale, and soothed
them with flattering visions of a very low duty when corn is very high,
he has succeeded in his immediate purpose, and it seems not unlikely
that a majority of the public will, for the present, be satisfied with
perceiving that the Corn-laws have been altered, and will wait for
specific experience to learn, that the alteration has been very nearly
nugatory.

Further, although 64s. be a sufficient price to remunerate the foreign
grower, it by no means follows that, under the system now proposed,
there will be importation at that price. We have before observed, that
64s. is considerably above the average price; there will, therefore, be
no importation in ordinary years: but the foreigner will not raise corn
for our market unless he has the prospect of being enabled to sell it to
us in ordinary years. In the event, therefore, of a failure of our own
crops, we must bribe the foreigner to afford to us a part of the supply
which he has raised for the consumption of his own countrymen. It is
universally known that the price of food is enormously affected by a
trifling deficiency of supply, or a small extra demand. Suppose the
advance of price on the occurrence of a demand to be 12s. per quarter
(and all who are conversant with the corn-trade will allow that this is
far from being an immoderate supposition); the importing merchant, to be
remunerated, must then obtain 64s. free of duty. To afford this, the
price must be 68s. (the duty at that price being 4s.); a price which
Edition: current; Page: [146] wheat has not reached since the great year
of importation, 1819. Without insisting upon the strict accuracy of a
computation in which some of the quantities are conjectural, we think we
have said enough to show what sort of a “free trade” we are likely to
enjoy, and how much a father of a family will save, in his yearly
expenses, by the permission to purchase foreign corn.

When it is shown that the average price of corn will not be materially
diminished by the substitution of the new system for the old one, it
follows, as an obvious consequence, that it will still remain liable to
the same fluctuations as heretofore. These fluctuations, the range of
which, during the last twelve years, has been from 112s. to 38s., were
wholly occasioned by our high average price as compared with that of
other countries.

We can bestow little praise upon what is probably considered the great
merit of this Corn-bill as compared with former ones; the rapid
diminution of the duty as the price rises. This is the popular feature
of the plan. It is in appearance a boon, and a great one, conferred upon
our own countrymen. But, in truth, it is precisely the reverse: it is a
boon conferred upon the foreigner at their expense. A low duty is only
then a benefit to the buyer, when it occasions a low price. When a low
duty accompanies a high price, it is a benefit to the seller. A few
words will render our meaning clear. When the people of Great Britain
are made to pay 64s. per quarter, for corn which they might constantly
obtain at 52s., they are evidently taxed to the extent of 12s. per
quarter; a tax which, in so far as they consume homegrown corn, is
partly wasted in useless labour on ungrateful soils, partly gained by
the landlords, in the manner so often explained; but in so far as it
falls upon imported corn, it comes into our own treasury, because the
importation duty at 64s. is exactly 12s. Thus, when the price is 64s.:
but what if the price rises to 70s. before the first ships arrive in
port? In that case, the people of England are taxed no longer 12s. per
quarter, but 18s.; and the Custom-house, instead of taking the whole
18s., as it would have taken the 12s., contents itself with one shilling
per quarter. The remaining 17s. are not saved to the consumer; for he,
by the supposition, is paying 70s. per quarter. They are, therefore,
given away; gratuitously given away to the importer, and lost to the
community. If this bounty were retained by the importing merchants, who
may be our own countrymen, the evil would not be so great. But it is
self-evident that this large accession to their profits will only enable
them to give a higher price to the Polish farmer; that their mutual
competition will oblige them to do so, and that the benefit intended to
be conferred upon our own consumers by the gradually decreasing scale of
duties from 12s. downwards, will be reaped principally, if not wholly,
by foreigners.

The only reason which can be pleaded for giving this bonus to the
foreigner, and we are willing to allow that it may be justly pleaded,
is, that Edition: current; Page: [147] we could not otherwise obtain a
sufficient supply; that the producer can obtain a remunerating price
from his own countrymen, and, unless we outbid them, unless we hold out
extraordinary advantages to the foreigner, unless, in short, we tax
ourselves for his benefit, we shall not be able to obtain corn enough
when we absolutely require it. We fear that there is too much truth in
this statement. We prevent foreigners from raising corn for us, by
refusing to take it in ordinary years; and the consequence is, that when
their corn is necessary to our existence, we cannot obtain it without
giving them a bounty for starving their own countrymen to feed us. This
is a case of necessity, we admit; but who created the necessity? Our own
unjust and foolish laws. If we fixed the duty so low as would enable us
to be a regularly importing country, though it were to ever so small an
extent, the foreigner would acquire a habit of calculating upon our
demand. A few years’ experience would inform him how much corn our
market would carry off in an ordinary year: by this standard he would
regulate his cultivation; and the quantity which would remain on his
hands when we had a better harvest than usual, would supply our extra
demand when we had a worse. His own countrymen need not then be starved
for our benefit, and we ourselves might trust to the natural course of
events, and not to bounties, for our foreign supply.

Radicals and political economists had always said, that if we did not
choose to take the corn of foreigners in common years, we should not
easily obtain it in uncommon ones. This was always indignantly denied,
“agriculture” affirming that stores of corn had been accumulated in
foreign granaries, sufficient, if the ports were opened, to sink the
price almost to zero. It is true that this assertion of “agriculture”
was contradicted both by reasoning and by facts; but when did
“agriculture” regard facts or reasoning? Ministers, however, knew that
what the landlords so strenuously denied was true. They knew and felt
the difficulty of obtaining corn in one year from those from whom we
will not take it in another; and what do they propose? A rate of duty
which would enable us to import in all years was the obvious expedient;
but this “agriculture” forbade. Instead of this, therefore, they tax the
British consumers in the price of their bread, for the purpose of
bribing the foreigner to part with his corn in those years in which
“agriculture” thinks fit to let us buy it. But the people of Great
Britain must be passive and quiescent indeed, if, besides paying one tax
to “agriculture” in order to swell its rents, and another to be wasted
in growing ten quarters of corn with labour the produce of which would
purchase twelve, they will now consent to pay a third tax to foreigners
in order to obtain foreign corn in those cases of absolute necessity, in
which “agriculture” no longer ventures to shut it out.

From the foregoing remarks, it perhaps may be supposed, that we Edition:
current; Page: [148] anticipate no advantage whatever from the pending
bill. This, however, is not the case. The admission of corn from Canada,
at a fixed duty of five shillings,* is something gained; rather,
however, for the colony than for the mother country: since, the very
limited capital of Canada not permitting her at present to export so
much corn as will materially affect our prices, the Canadian producers
will enjoy the benefit of our high prices and their own low expenses.
Until the laws are repealed, which, under the mistaken idea of favouring
Canada, drive her capital into a trade not suited to her circumstances
(see an article in our present Number on the Timber-trade),[*] our
agriculturists have little reason to dread the competition of Canada.

It is something, also, to render the importation of corn always lawful,
even under such restrictions as will inevitably prevent it from taking
place. The very inefficacy of the change will not be without its use, if
it tends to tranquillize fears. The landlords who are in an agony of
apprehension lest the present bill should reduce them to penury, the
landlords who imagine that foreigners produce corn at no expense, and
give it gratis, or nearly so, will have experimental proof, when this
bill passes, of the unreasonableness of their alarm; and may perhaps be
induced to hear with less terror of a second alteration at some future
period.

We have read the late debates on this subject with some attention,
unwilling that any symptom of improved virtue or intelligence in the
arbiters of our destiny should escape our notice. Although we had not
the satisfaction of making any such discovery, a few remarks occurred to
us in the course of our labours, which, perhaps, may be worth the
trouble of communicating.

The first of these is, that it has become fashionable, on both sides of
the question, to treat with utter scorn the notion that there can be any
difference of interest on the subject of the Corn-laws between the
landlords and the other classes of society. Mr. Brougham, in particular,
represented the person who could harbour such a notion as a proper
object not only of contempt but detestation.[†] If this was said in
order to soothe the landlords, and persuade them that it is not their
interest to resist the march of improvement, the purpose at least was
laudable; and not the less so, although the proposition is manifestly
false. Doubtless, so far as the gratification of benevolent feelings is
included in the word interest, it is the interest of all, that what is
most beneficial to all should take place. But if pecuniary interest be
meant, it really appears to us very idle to deny that the landlords have
a different interest from the community, when the simple question is,
whether or not the community shall be taxed for their benefit. If the
whole Edition: current; Page: [149] of what the consumers lose is not
gained by the landlords, a part of it is: the consumer cannot lose a
shilling, but the landlord gains at least sixpence by the loss.

Mr. Canning, proceeding on the same scheme of, what we suppose he would
term, conciliation, commenced his speech by declaring, that the
conflicting opinions did not differ so widely as was commonly supposed,
and that the question was only a question of degree. In this we cannot
altogether concur with him; nor can we think that the difference between
being taxed, and not being taxed, is no more than a question of degree.
He proceeded to explain himself by saying, that no person advocated a
perfectly free trade in corn; that the necessity of some protection to
agriculture was universally acknowledged, and that the only question was
how much. We respect Mr. Canning’s honest intentions, and admire his
eloquence; but really, when we find him uttering with a grave face the
above assertion, we can neither give him credit for much knowledge of
the subject, nor even for much acquaintance with the commonest writings
upon it. We will take upon ourselves to affirm, that not only some, but
almost all the writers against the Corn-laws, have advocated, and do
advocate, a perfectly free trade in corn. From Adam Smith to the author
of the tract which we have prefixed to this article, they have
universally represented any tax on the necessaries of life as among the
most impolitic and injurious of all modes of taxation. They add, indeed,
that if we are so unwise as to tax the corn which is grown at home in
such a manner as to enhance its price to the consumer, we ought to tax
imported corn in the same degree; not, however, for the purpose of
protecting agriculture, which they regard as only a politer phrase for
robbery; but in order not to compel, by a system of unequal taxation,
the importation of corn which the powers of nature would enable us to
produce cheaper at home.

Protection to agriculture is a phrase somewhat like Protestant
ascendancy: interpreted literally, they mean nothing but what is
altogether harmless, and rather desirable than otherwise. When turned
into watchwords, and applied, the one to the Corn-laws, the other to the
Catholic question, they mean something highly mischievous, but which,
whether mischievous or not, is totally different from what the words
themselves import. The expressions, therefore, are fraudulent.

Before we offer up our substance to an allegorical idol, let us hear
what title it has to our worship. What is this “agriculture,” of which
you speak? When you say that no country was ever prosperous without
agriculture, do you mean, that no country was ever prosperous without
procuring food? If this be all, the truth of the proposition is not very
likely to be disputed. But if you mean that no country was ever
prosperous unless it procured food by digging and ploughing, instead of
procuring it by spinning and weaving, Edition: current; Page: [150] your
assertion is altogether destitute of truth: since the Dutch republic,
which procured the greater part of its food without digging or ploughing
was one of the most prosperous communities which the world ever saw.

Let us again ask: when you speak of the necessity of protecting
agriculture, do you mean the necessity of protecting the mere turning up
of the ground? or the necessity of protecting the procuring of food for
the people? If you mean the first, show us, if you can, any reason for
desiring to procure food by turning up the ground, when we can procure
more with the same quantity of labour in any other way. But if, by
protection to agriculture, you mean protection to procuring food, there
is no dispute about that. We are as desirous as you are, to afford
protection to the procuring of food; provided always, that the procuring
of food needs protection. But what is this contrivance of yours for
protecting it? Simply this: to force the people to obtain ten bushels of
corn by turning up the ground, when with the same degree of labour they
might obtain twelve by growing it in their looms and in their cotton
mills. If this be protection (which it is not, but privilege) it is
protection only to the owners of the ground. A prohibition of gas-lights
might be called, without any great impropriety, protection to the
oil-companies; but would the oil-companies be permitted to term it
protection for lighting? Yes; if lighting be protected by being rendered
more expensive and more difficult. No, if this be, as it evidently is,
the very reverse of protection. If agriculture means only turning up the
ground, it deserves no protection. Turning up the ground is not a bonum
per se. If it means procuring food, it is protected by excluding cheap
corn, precisely in the same manner as the lighting of the streets of
London would be protected by imposing a heavy duty upon gas.

Mr. Canning, in the course of a very humble apology for his intended
measure, laid great stress upon one of its supposed merits, which we
find it very difficult to understand. He said, that it gave the balance
of price to agriculture, and that of principle to trade. We invite our
readers to try, among all the meanings of the words balance, principle,
and price, whether there be one which will make English or sense of this
eulogium. If Mr. Canning means that he has given the name of an
advantage to the consumer, and all the reality to the agriculturist,
this, unhappily, is but too true. If he means any thing else, we should
be glad to be informed what principle is concerned in the matter, except
that of buying at the lowest price? If, in saying that he has given the
balance of price to agriculture, he means that he has secured to the
landlords as high a price as they had before, this is very true; but
where is then the principle which he has conceded to trade? Let us
further ask, why concede to trade, or concede to agriculture, at all?
Are trade and agriculture the end, or only the means? And how happens it
that our practical statesmen talk so much of the agricultural interest,
so Edition: current; Page: [151] much of the trading interest, and so
little of the general interest? It is of no consequence to the public
whether it obtains its food by trade, or by agriculture. The sole
concern of the public in regard to food, is how to obtain the most of
it, and at the cheapest rate.

Perhaps, however, in looking out for a meaning, we are trying this
passage by a test which it never was intended to bear. Words are often
employed, and with effect too, for other purposes than that of conveying
a meaning. Words frequently exercise a strong persuasive power by their
mere sound; and such was possibly the intention in this instance. It may
have been thought that this phrase might help to persuade both parties
that something had been conceded to each of them, and to render more
secure the game of compromise which ministers had resolved to play. No
one can be more ready than we are to make allowance for the dependent
condition of ministers under a constitution like the British. We are
aware that men in their situation are often under a necessity to
compromise, in order to be permitted to effect any good whatever. We, on
our part, being under no such necessity, shall endeavour to expose
compromise wherever we find it: in Whig, Tory, or Radical; Lord Eldon,
or Mr. Canning; a friend, or an enemy. If it be the purpose of ministers
to do all the good they can, we shall most effectually aid their
intentions, by pointing out the cases in which they have not done
enough. If, on the other hand, they desire to do good only so far as
they find it personally convenient, it may possibly happen that, by
unmasking their fallacies, we may render it convenient to them to do
more.

The word fallacies recalls our attention to the little tract[*] at the
head of the present article; which we have thus far omitted to notice,
not because it was not highly deserving of our attention, but because we
were desirous, in the first place, to express our sentiments on the
subject of immediate interest, the present state of the Corn Question.
The author (who signs himself T. Perronet Thompson)* has given, after
some prefatory matter, Edition: current; Page: [152] of which we do not
think so highly as of the work itself, an enumeration of a hundred and
sixty fallacies on the Corn-laws; or, to speak more accurately, ten or
twelve fallacies exhibited in a hundred and sixty different shapes; with
a sentence, or at most two or three sentences, in answer to each. Mr.
Thompson is master of his subject, and has disposed of the fallacies
with great philosophical accuracy, and considerable clearness,
conciseness, and felicity of expression. As this mode of combating those
Proteus-like fallacies, which are formidable less from their native
strength than from the multiplicity of shapes in which they appear,
seems to us to have peculiar advantages, we shall make room for the
exposure of some of the most potent among these instruments of
deception:—

That the manufacturers want great consumers; and therefore they should
let the landlords consume.—A. The manufacturers want only great payers;
and it is the same thing to them whether they find them in England or
Poland. They have not the smallest wish that the landlords should
consume for nothing, or for less than could be had from other people.

That the operatives are a lazy race, and seldom go to work before
Wednesday.—A. The landlords never go to work at all. (P. 29.)

That the agriculturist is the manufacturer’s best friend.—A. The
manufacturer’s best friend is he that will give him the most of what he
wants, in return for his goods.

That the manufacturers, by selling their goods to foreigners, destroy
their home market.—A. They destroy it, by selling for two bushels of
corn abroad instead of one at home. (P. 30.)

That the manufacturers want a market, but not particularly a foreign
market. They may sell to the inhabitants of Staffordshire, or Wales, as
well as to the Poles or the Swedes.—A. The manufacturers want the market
where they can get two Edition: current; Page: [153] bushels of corn for
their goods, and not the market where they can get one. (P. 31.)

That we are altogether in an artificial state, and therefore must go on
as we are.—A. This only means, that the community is losing by a great
many hurtful monopolies instead of one. Men are agreeing to vote for a
general famine, for the promise of a halfpenny roll a-piece to
themselves. Each sees the mischief of his neighbour’s bargain, but fears
to lose his own; and so all suffer like fools together. (P. 32.)

The following passage we recommend to the particular attention of
monopolists of all denominations:—

That if every thing was cheap, every body would be ruined.—A. The great
fallacy of the enemies of free trade. When the traders in any particular
branch obtain high prices, they get rich; what then so plain, as that if
the traders in all branches get high prices from one another and from
the public, they must all get rich; and the contrary?

This is the blunder of teaching a man to get rich by filling his purse
out of his waistcoat pocket. If he fills either his purse or his pocket
by itself, he may get rich; but not if he fills one out of the other. If
John Adams, in his residence on Pitcairn’s island, was to propose, for
example, to get rich by making and keeping a canoe himself, when he
could obtain yams cheaper by paying the natives of some neighbouring
island for bringing them in canoes of their own, and was to set down the
increased expense bestowed on his canoe as a gain to the shipping
interest of John Adams, it would be plain that it was only John Adams
making himself creditor by himself, and that whatever was the
flourishing appearance of his shipping account, the real fact was, that
he and his family lost and threw away all that might be saved by
employing the cheaper mode. The case is the same in greater communities;
except that it is one set of individuals that gain the shilling, and
another that lose the pound.

If one man should be allowed to take a halfpenny a-piece from every
individual in the united empire, he would get rich. But if all people
had liberty to do the same, they would not all get rich. Some men cannot
understand this, and therefore go on crying out, ‘The shipping interest
will be ruined, and the silk trade will be ruined, and you will all be
ruined together, by giving over filling your pockets at the expense of
one another, and trying to fill them by having more of every thing than
you want.’ And at the bottom of the whole will be found the land-owners,
who are the only persons who have any thing really at stake in keeping
up the delusion.

A time will come when the public will wake as from a dream, and ask who
it was that persuaded them, that the way to be rich was for every body
to give as much as possible for every thing. In the meanwhile there is
nothing to be done, but to wait till the progress of knowledge makes men
ashamed of being impoverished by such a fallacy. (Pp. 32-3.)

The following are highly deserving of attention:—

That we cannot have the blessings of civilization and wealth, and the
cheapness of provisions which is found in unimproved countries.—A. We
cannot have them both at once from our own soil; and there was never any
question of doing Edition: current; Page: [154] it. The question was,
whether cheap corn is not the best, wherever it may come from.

That the countries where cheap corn is found, are very miserable.—A. The
question is not whether those countries are happy, but whether having
their corn would make us happy. The objection is like saying, ‘On no
account let your ladies wear furs. You have no idea what wretches the
North-Western Indians are; and, above all, their women.’ The misery of
the people quoted, proceeds neither from having corn nor having furs;
but from totally different causes, which our buying their corn or furs
is one step towards removing. They have all the qualities required in
customers; which are, to want what we have, and have what we want. (Pp.
34-5.)

That an expense has been incurred on the inferior soils, and it would be
waste to throw it away.—A. If some unwise gentleman, by raising grapes
in hot-houses, had contrived to make wine equal to Port at the price of
Tokay, the best thing his friends could recommend to him, would be to
burn his hot-houses whatever had been the outlay, and take to drinking
Port at four and sixpence like his neighbours. There is no doubt that
the outlay will be lost; and the sooner, the better.

That the landlords who have made the outlay, and the people who are to
benefit by its being thrown away, are different individuals, and
therefore one has a claim to compensation from the other.—A. If the
gentleman supposed, had built his hot-houses in consequence of the
existence of a law prohibiting the introduction of foreign wine, the
case would certainly be altered. The first question then would be, ‘Had
the gentleman any hand in making the law himself?’ If he had originated
the plan, and voted in parliament after parliament for its support, he
would clearly have no claim. (P. 35.)

That there is no limit to the corn that can be produced at home, if
people will pay for it.—A. This is like saying, that there is no limit
to the milk which can be produced from a single cow, if people will only
pay for the keep. There may never be a time when it is impossible to
obtain another drop. But in the first place, it is clear that the
quantity is limited after all. And next, that there is no reason why
people should pay for feeding a cow on green peas, when by sending
across the brook they may have good milk produced by one fed on straw.

That the produce of Great Britain and Ireland is equal to the support of
their inhabitants.—A. This is only saying, that there are never more
inhabitants than are fed. It would have been equally true, if
nine-tenths of the present inhabitants had been starved. (Pp. 37-8.)

That if the manufacturers are already in such a state of distress as
calls for emigration, to throw a number of agriculturists out of work
must increase the evil.—A. Not if for every man thrown out of employment
in agriculture, ten men are brought into employment in other ways. (P.
39.)

That if we receive corn from other countries, we are not sure that they
will receive our manufactures in return.—A. They will receive what we
have to give, or else not give us corn.

That it is the interest of a country to support its own population with
the produce of its own soil.—A. Not if it can support them better with
the produce of another. It might as well be said that it was the
interest of the country, to supply its wine-drinkers with the produce of
its own soil by means of hot-houses. (P. 40.)

That the proprietors of land have a right to the protection of the
state.—A. Edition: current; Page: [155] They have a right to sell their
produce to all who choose to buy it, and to let others do the same. If
by protection they mean a protecting duty, a protecting duty means every
where, giving men other people’s money which they have no right to. It
means giving a tailor two and sixpence for his work instead of two
shillings, for the tailor’s convenience. (Pp. 44-5.)

That if the result of free trade is the impoverishment and distress of
the people, it will be ill compensated by an adherence to philosophical
maxims and sentimental conceptions.—A. The philosophical maxims are,
that every man has a right to sell the produce of his labour. The
sentimental conceptions, that one man ought not to be starved, to please
another.

That we ought not to follow the conceits of theory.—A. Conceits of
theory mean, believing that two from four leaves two. (P. 45.)

In the following passage, the fallacy of remunerating price is happily
exposed:—

That the question is, whether the country shall be cultivated or not?—A.
The question is, whether the country shall be cultivated to the extent
which is for the interest of the community, or whether it shall be
cultivated to a greater extent for the advantage of the landlords and
the injury of every body else? The counterpart of the fallacy would be,
if the manufacturers had got a duty on English corn, and said, ‘The
question is, whether the country shall have manufactures or not?’ (P.
47.)

That the man who made two blades of grass grow where there was one
before, was always held to be a public benefactor.[*]—A. The thing
really meant is, making two bushels of corn to exist where there might
have been four.

That the landlords will suffer by the permission of a free trade in
corn; and no man ought to suffer.—A. When the question is, whether one
man must suffer by a return to the rule of justice, or ten for want of
it, the last must carry it. (P. 48.)

That the farmers and servants in husbandry, who are unquestionably real
labourers, will suffer also.—A. It is true that some of them must change
their occupation. But it is impossible to condemn ten men to the
privation of the common right of all men to sell the produce of their
own labour, that one may not be obliged to change the mode of his. The
fallacy of bringing forward the sufferings of the agricultural labourers
from change, consists in keeping back the fact, that ten times as many
are unjustly suffering much more for want of it. And the suffering
altogether is only part of the consequences of the original injustice.
It is in the nature of injustice to produce suffering, both during its
continuance and at its removal; but this is not a reason why injustice
should not be removed.

That the petty shopkeepers and others, who have the custom of the
occupiers of land, must be ruined.—A. Not if they have an equal chance
of selling to somebody else instead. (Pp. 48-9.)

That the manufacturing interest ought to be conciliatory.—A. It is not
conciliation that is wanted, but justice. When Thomas is kept from
selling in the market to please John, there is no use in telling Thomas
he ought to be conciliatory. Give him justice, and the common right of
all men. He must be an Edition: current; Page: [156] idiot if he licks
John’s feet, to obtain permission to sell the fruit of his labour to
such as choose to buy it. (P. 51.)

That the French Revolution was introduced by calling for a free trade in
corn.—A. All popular revolutions begin with an opposition to some crying
injustice; which is a reason why crying injustices should be removed;
not why they should not. If there was not something of this kind, there
could be no revolution. The people never began an unnecessary revolution
in the world; though some have been carried beyond the point of
necessity after they were begun.

That all the mischief proceeds from defects in the system of
currency.—A. The system of currency may be good, or evil; but its
effects in either way cannot alter the fact, that the land-owners are
putting restrictions on the industry of the community. A man may have
suffered by bad shillings, but that was not what broke his leg. (P. 54.)

That the extreme opinion on one side is, that there should be a constant
prohibition, the extreme opinion on the other, that there should be
none; and that the point of justice and moderation lies somewhere
between.—A. The extreme opinions are mis-stated. The statement is, that
the extreme opinion on one side is, that John should keep Thomas out of
the market; the extreme opinion on the other, that he should not; and
therefore what justice and moderation require is, that he should keep
him out every other day. The extreme opinions truly stated, would be, on
one side, that the agriculturist ought to have a duty against the
manufacturer; on the other, that the manufacturer ought to have a duty
against the agriculturist; and therefore the just medium is, that each
should sell for what he can get, without having a duty against the other
at all. The way to examine the position is, to see how it would look if
the same statement, mutatis mutandis, were advanced on the part of the
manufacturers.

That we must reconcile conflicting interests—A. There can be no conflict
on a wrong. When the question is of a purse unjustly taken, it is a
fallacy to say we must reconcile conflicting interests, and give the
taker half.

That the differences between the parties are infinitely less wide than
they are stated to be in argument.—A. Whatever may be the absolute
magnitude of the difference, the principle is not the less important. If
the question were whether the takers of purses should be allowed to keep
the half or none, it would be no answer to say, the whole sums taken in
a twelvemonth were under six millions. (Pp. 55-6.)

That land and trade must wax and wane together.—A. True, as long as they
go on honestly in company. Not true, if one is endeavouring to wax by
the robbery of the other. [P. 56.]

That the manufacturing interest ought not to use harsh terms.—A. There
is nothing like calling things by their right names. The manufacturers
will eat their brown loaf if they are obliged to it; but the devil and
St. Dominic will not make them call it a leg of mutton.

That it is dangerous and wrong, to tell men they are injured.—A. The
danger and wrong, are in injuring them.

That agriculture ought to be held in honour.—A. The art of having corn
ought to be held in honour. The agriculturist who can make inferior land
produce corn, or good land produce an increased quantity, subject always
to honest competition on the part of those who can produce corn out of
their looms and their flatting-mills,—has the same claim to honour as
Arkwright and Edition: current; Page: [157] Watt. If Arkwright and Watt
had invented machines for making broad cloth at double the price that it
might be had in other ways their claims to honour would have been like
those of the modern agriculturists.

That wealth emanating from land has a right to certain privileges above
that which emanates from other sources.—A. This amounts only to saying,
that the wealth of the community should be diminished, that the wealth
of the agriculturists may be increased by a fraction of the difference.
(P. 56.)[*]

That money may as well be taken from the fund-holders as from the
landlords.—A. This is saying, that it is the same thing to defraud a
just creditor, and to prevent a shopkeeper from raising his prices by
monopoly. (P. 53.)

The truths which are so happily expressed in the following passage,
cannot be too often or too deeply impressed upon the public mind:—

That the fund-holders ought to be robbed.—A. To rob the fund-holders of
their interest, after having spent their capital, would, besides all the
evils of breach of contract, have the hardship of an ex post facto law,
with the unique addition of being made in the teeth of the invitation of
an existing law. The nation which should do it, would virtually declare
itself incapable of contracting any national engagement, or performing
any national act. A community must either acknowledge the possibility of
being bound to-morrow by its act of to-day, or it must disband; for if
it declares its own incompetency, it will be treated with as a community
by nobody. And for any thing that could be gained by such a proceeding,
it might as well be proposed to gain by robbing all the individuals who
had red hair. The individual robbers might gain by it, but the community
could not gain, because the red-haired men are themselves part of the
community. If the principal expended could be called back again, it
would be a different case. But nobody can seriously believe, that by
what has been called applying a sponge to the national debt, the
community would be one shilling the richer; or that by robbing one
individual of five pounds per annum in order to put it into the pocket
of another, the smallest progress would be made towards recovering the
hundred which was spent thirty years ago. A man might as well try to
repair the loss of a leg, by shifting the deficiency from one side to
the other. If every individual was a fund-holder in the same proportion
that he is a tax-payer, it would be clear that the attempt was only
shifting the leg. And it is just as true, when the case is as it is,
with the addition only that the fund-holders are the smaller party, and
therefore might possibly be robbed.

And this is not the fallacy of saying that a national debt is no evil.
It is a very great evil; and the worst thing about it is, that there is
no getting rid of it. When a million is borrowed and expended, the evil
is inflicted then; and not by the shifting of the interest from one
pocket to another afterwards.

The magnitude of the evil or punishment is the same as if there had been
inflicted a judicial necessity for throwing the amount of the interest
annually into the Thames. For if the money had never been borrowed, the
man who is now the fund-holder would have had the principal in his
pocket, and the tax-payer would have saved the interest, which is the
same to him as saving it from the Thames. But there is a special
provision of Providence, that when Edition: current; Page: [158] money
has been thus raised, no possible dishonesty shall get rid of the
burthen. If the principal had been borrowed from Prester John, the
community might possibly gain by cheating him of his interest. But since
the interest is owed to a component part of the community, it is in the
constitution of things, that the community, however inclined to the
practice of larceny, can gain nothing by robbing itself. (Pp. 51-3.)

And the following passages throw a just ridicule upon the panegyrics
which the landlords are so much in the habit of pronouncing upon
themselves in order to show that they ought to be protected in
injustice:—

That the race of English country gentlemen, English farmers, and English
yeomen, is worth preserving.—A. Not if they are to be kept at the public
expense. As long as they keep themselves, every body is glad to see
them.

That a bold peasantry is their country’s pride.—A. The bold peasantry
must keep their country, not the country them.

That the landlords are the Corinthian capital of society.—A. It is
carrying the metaphor too far to say they must be supported by the rest.

That they are a source of light and knowledge to the lower orders.—A.
They teach them what they are anxious they should learn; and others do
the same.

That they have sound political principles.—A. They take the side which
they think best for themselves; and other people do so too.

That they fought the battle against the Jacobins.—A. Which other people
are paying for.

That all they get they expend.—A. Most other people do the same.

That they are supporters of the fine arts.—A. Wealth would produce the
same effects in any other hands.

That they feed fat cattle.—A. And are paid for them.

That they keep up rural sports.—A. Men have no claim to be paid for
amusing themselves as they like best.

That they kill foxes and others.—A. The mole-catcher would do it better.

That they sit at quarter-sessions.—A. And strange things they sometimes
do there. For instance, in Buckinghamshire, they sentenced John Doe to
five months’ imprisonment for intending to assault the lord’s
hen-pheasant, and Richard Roe to three, for assaulting the serf’s
daughter.

That they are the unpaid magistracy.—A. If they demand to be kept, they
are not.

That they are good moral characters.—A. Other men are so too. But it is
impossible for all moral men to be kept.

That they are generous, brave, and humane.—A. All Englishmen from time
immemorial, by their own account, have been so too.

That nobody could do without them.—A. Nobody could do without every
body. But every body cannot be kept at the public expense. (Pp. 56-7.)

We have quoted enough to justify us in pronouncing this to be one of the
most useful works which have appeared on this subject during the present
controversy. We observe with pleasure that it has attracted the
attention of lord King, who has fought the battle of free trade in the
House of Lords nobly, and with weapons very similar to those of the
present author. We think that it would be a speculation worthy the
attention of a Edition: current; Page: [159] bookseller, to make a
collection of all which lord King has said on this subject in parliament
since it began to be discussed in 1825, and print it in a pamphlet, as a
companion to the tract before us. Every thing which is most noxious and
most offensive in the spirit of aristocracy has rarely received such
hard and well-directed blows. The exertions of Mr. Whitmore and of lord
Milton deserve no less praise; and their merit is enhanced by the
disgraceful reception, disgraceful even in the eyes of indifferent
spectators, which they have experienced from the House. But their
country will weigh them and their opponents by a different standard, and
will esteem and venerate them as deeply for having set at defiance the
fury of the band of enraged monopolists by whom they have been insulted,
as it would have despised them if they had stooped, with the vulgar herd
of public men, to court the applause of those monopolists by the
sacrifice of the best interests of their country.

Edition: current; Page: [160] Edition: current; Page: [161]


THE NATURE, ORIGIN, AND PROGRESS OF RENT
 1828

Edition: current; Page: [162]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Note III to Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the
Wealth of Nations. Ed. J. R. McCulloch. Edinburgh: Black, Tait, 1828,
IV, 100-25. Running head: “Rent.” Unsigned; not republished. Identified
in JSM’s bibliography as “A dissertation on Rent, in the notes subjoined
to McCulloch’s edition of Smith’s Wealth of Nations. (Some parts of this
note were however, altered by McCulloch)” (MacMinn, 9). Not mentioned in
JSM’s Autobiography. Ney MacMinn and his fellow editors identify Note
XXII, “Taxes on the Rent of Land” (ibid., 535-8) as JSM’s contribution,
but it seems unlikely that he would describe this slight three-page note
as a “dissertation on Rent”. (There is actually a third note on the
subject in McCulloch’s edition, Note XXIX, “Additional Note on Rent”
[ibid., 574-8], which from the context and the argument is almost
certainly McCulloch’s.) The identification here offered is based on the
copy of McCulloch’s edition in Somerville College, as well as on
likelihood. In that copy the pencilled notes reproduced at 173, 178, and
179 below occur; their wording, together with the description in the
bibliography, and McCulloch’s inscription in JSM’s copy (see 812-13
below), provide the best evidence now available. Internal evidence
suggests that, in addition to the marked passages, the concluding
paragraph (179-80) is by McCulloch.

Edition: current; Page: [163]


The Nature, Origin, and Progress of Rent

there are few chapters in Dr. Smith’s great work more unsatisfactory
than his chapter on rent. It contains, indeed, many curious and valuable
disquisitions on several topics connected with rent; but it leaves
untouched all the great questions with respect to its origin, nature,
and causes. Those theoretical principles which had been undiscovered by
his precursors, remained undiscovered by him: it was left to subsequent
inquirers to ascertain the causes of rent, the laws which determine its
amount, and the manner in which it is affected by the progress of
society.

The price of every commodity, according to Dr. Smith, must on the
average be at least sufficient to replace the capital necessarily
expended in producing it, together with the ordinary profits of stock;
because, if the price were permanently lower than this, the commodity
would not be produced. But although this is the lowest price at which a
commodity can be sold for any length of time, it is not the highest.
Some commodities indeed can never permanently sell for more than the
lowest price which will enable them to be brought to market; but others
can. Corn, cattle, and all the most important articles of raw produce,
compose the latter class; their price is usually such as to leave a
surplus, after replacing with the ordinary profits the whole expense of
producing them and bringing them to market: and this surplus falls to
the landlord, since the farmer cannot permanently receive a profit on
his capital exceeding what that capital could obtain in other trades.

Dr. Smith’s investigations appear to have stopped at this point. It is
obvious, however, that the nature of rent was yet only half-explained,
or rather was not explained at all. It is no explanation to say, that
rent is a surplus above the ordinary profits of stock; because the very
fact to be explained is the existence of such a surplus. If the price of
every other commodity depends upon what is necessary for replacing with
the ordinary profits the capital expended in its production, and if
competition will not suffer it for any length of time to exceed this
limit, why does not competition Edition: current; Page: [164] also keep
down the price of raw produce to what is sufficient for replacing the
capital, and affording the ordinary profits? Dr. Smith apparently did
not consider this to require explanation, or deemed it sufficiently
explained by the greatness of the demand. “There are some parts,” says
he, “of the produce of land, for which the demand must always be such as
to afford a greater price than what is sufficient to bring them to
market:”*—a reason which we must suppose him to have assigned rather
because no other occurred to him, than because he was entirely satisfied
with it, or had deduced it from any very careful analysis. A great
demand is by no means sufficient to account for a high price. There are
some commodities which, whatever might be the demand, would always be
cheap; because they could always be produced and brought to market at a
low price. Others, however trifling the demand, must always be dear;
because if they were not dear, they could not be brought to market at
all. Price, in short, does not depend upon the greatness of the demand.
To produce a high price, the demand must be attended with some principle
of limitation in the supply. Had Dr. Smith attended to this important
truth, of which he has elsewhere proved himself to be well aware, he
would have proceeded to inquire what is the principle of limitation in
the case of corn; and this inquiry would most probably have disclosed to
him the true theory of rent.

In the preceding note on value,[*] commodities were divided into two
classes; those which cannot be increased in quantity as the demand
increases, and those which can. It was shown, that to the price and
exchangeable value of the former class there is no limit, except the
inability or unwillingness of the purchasers to give more; but that, of
the other class, comprising the great mass of the physical objects of
human desire, the price and value are determined by the cost of
production; that is, by the quantity of labour required to produce them
and bring them to market. Raw produce belongs to the latter class; since
its quantity may be increased by additional labour, so as to meet any
conceivable increase of demand. The value of raw produce, therefore,
depends upon the cost of its production. But there is a peculiarity, in
the circumstances under which raw produce is produced, which causes an
apparent deviation from this law.

The value of every thing which is not limited in quantity, depends upon
its cost of production. But suppose that there is a commodity which has
two costs of production. The case is conceivable, and the following are
the circumstances under which it would arise. Suppose that a commodity
may be produced in two ways; one of them being much less expensive than
the other, but depending upon the possession of a particular instrument,
existing Edition: current; Page: [165] in limited quantity: and let
there be a demand for a larger supply of the commodity than can be
produced in the cheaper of the two ways; so that recourse must be had to
the dearer for a part of the supply. This commodity might be said to
have two costs of production. Which of these costs of production would
regulate its value? Evidently the dearer of the two; that which yields
the smallest produce to a given amount of labour and capital. For if the
value of the produce were not sufficient to replace with its profits the
expense of producing the commodity in the dearer mode, no portion of it
would be produced in that mode; and as the other mode is assumed not to
afford enough to satisfy the demand, its value would rise, from
scarcity, to the point which would enable a larger supply to be sent to
market. It could not rise above this limit, otherwise the producers of
the additional supply would obtain more than the ordinary rate of
profit; which the competition of other capitalists would necessarily
prevent.

It is clear, however, that the value or price which affords the ordinary
profits of stock to those who produce a commodity by a certain process,
must afford more than these ordinary profits to those who produce it by
a less expensive process. And if the instrument by which the cheaper
method of production is effected can be engrossed and appropriated by
one or more individuals to the exclusion of others, the whole excess of
profits which it yields—that is, the whole amount of produce, or its
value, produced in the cheaper mode, over and above that which is
produced in the dearer mode—will belong to the proprietors of the
instrument, and will form rent.

It appears, therefore, that any commodity, of which, from the necessary
circumstances of its production, equal quantities of labour or equal
capitals yield unequal returns, may yield a rent as soon as, from the
extension of the demand, the most productive of the capitals becomes
unable to supply the whole market. The value and price of the commodity,
too, must always be sufficient to replace with its ordinary profit the
least productive of the capitals; but, if such a quantity of the
commodity as the least productive capital can produce, affords to that
capital the ordinary profit, an equal quantity will yield the ordinary
profit to each of the other capitals: whatever, therefore, any of them
produces beyond this, constitutes a fund to the extent of which rent may
be paid.

Now, the produce of land is actually obtained under circumstances
precisely analogous to those supposed in the above investigation. The
quantity of corn or cattle in existence, may be increased by the
employment of an increased quantity of capital or labour, but it cannot
always be increased in the same proportion as the capital. A double
capital applied to the manufacture of hats, will in general produce a
double quantity of hats. A double capital applied to the growth of corn,
will seldom afford a double quantity of corn. In the earlier stages of
cultivation the quantity of produce may Edition: current; Page: [166]
perhaps be doubled, and even more than doubled, by doubling the outlay.
But land does not admit of being indefinitely forced with an equal
return. And notwithstanding the occasional occurrence of improvements,
it is invariably found that in the long run the effects of these
improvements are overbalanced by the decreasing productiveness of the
land; and that, speaking generally, additional supplies of food can only
be obtained by a greater proportional sacrifice of capital and labour.

When an increased supply of corn comes to be required, it may be got in
one of two ways. Land which remained uncultivated may be taken into
cultivation; or the old land may be made to afford a greater produce, by
a more complete system of drainage, the use of more powerful manures and
implements, the employment of additional cattle or additional hands,
&c.* It is characteristic of both these methods of increasing the
produce, that a diminished quantity is, on an average, obtained in
return for the same expenditure of labour and capital. In the case of
new land this is obvious, since it would have been cultivated before, if
its cultivation had not been less advantageous, all things considered,
than that of the land which was cultivated. It is equally true, that
when it is from the old cultivated land that the additional food is
obtained, the additional capital which is employed scarcely ever
produces so much in proportion to its amount, as the previous capitals.
And if any proof of this be required, it is sufficient to observe, that
otherwise none but the best lands, in fertility and situation taken
together, would ever have been cultivated; for if the growing demands of
the community could always have been supplied from those lands, without
any enhancement of expense, the price of corn would never have risen
sufficiently to enable the cultivation of any other lands to yield a
profit.

It being established, therefore, that after a certain stage of
cultivation a further supply of food must be obtained (if obtained at
all) not only at a greater absolute, but at a greater comparative
expense, it follows that when a further supply is wanted, the value and
price of food must rise in proportion to the necessary increase in the
cost of production;—and this, for one of the best of all possible
reasons, viz. that until it has so risen, the food will not be produced.
The exchangeable value of corn, therefore, has a constant tendency to
rise with the increased demand occasioned by an increase of population.

The produce of land, then, being a commodity which has not one only,
Edition: current; Page: [167] but several costs of production, and the
greatest of these being of necessity the sole regulator of its price, it
follows, in the manner which has been shown in the supposed case before
examined, that the inequality in these several costs of production is at
once the principal cause and the measure of rent.

If the nature of the land had been such that it had always yielded the
same or a greater proportional return to every fresh outlay of capital
and labour upon it, the entire supply of food required by the most
populous nation, might, it is obvious, have been raised from one acre as
easily as from millions. In such a state of things, prices could never
have risen, and rent would have been wholly unknown. Neither could
prices have risen, nor rent appeared, had there been an unbounded extent
of good land. But it is because the earth is of limited extent, and
because it yields, on an average, a constantly decreasing return,
according as cultivation is extended, to the same outlay of capital and
labour, that prices rise and rents are paid.

When, in the progress of cultivation, that indefinable stage is
attained, at which the proportional return to any further application of
capital begins to decrease, production will be carried no farther
without a rise of prices. The cultivators will, in preference, invest
their savings in some other employment, until the increase of population
produces an increase of demand, which, not being met by a corresponding
supply, must of course raise prices. In consequence of this rise, fresh
capital may now be applied by the agriculturists either to improve the
best lands, or to cultivate those of a somewhat inferior degree of
fertility. As much, therefore, of the return to the old capital as is
over and above the return to the new, will now be over and above the
ordinary profits of stock; it will therefore constitute rent.

Suppose, for instance, that the productiveness of capital, on a
particular piece of land, of the first degree of fertility, begins to
decline after it has been made to produce twenty bushels of corn. Let it
be supposed, that by superadding another capital equal to the first, not
twenty, but fifteen bushels would be added to the produce. These fifteen
bushels might with propriety be spoken of as the produce of the second
capital, and the twenty bushels as the produce of the first. As soon as
this additional quantity of produce is called for, by the increase of
the demand, corn must rise in value and in price until the fifteen
bushels exchange for as much money, and as much of all other things
whose value has remained constant, as the twenty bushels did before; for
the twenty bushels, at their former price, did not afford more than the
usual profits of stock; the fifteen bushels, therefore, will not afford
so much as the usual profits until they rise to that price. But when
fifteen bushels come to afford the ordinary profit to the second
capital, which is equal to the first, fifteen bushels will afford it
likewise to the first capital. Edition: current; Page: [168] The
remaining five bushels are thus over and above the ordinary profit of
stock; and this being the case, the competition of the farmers will
render them willing to pay them as rent to the landlord.

To carry the illustration a little farther, let population continue to
increase until it becomes necessary to raise a still greater supply of
corn. This is to be obtained by a still farther increase of expenditure
upon the soil, which will be attended with a still greater falling off
in the proportional return. Suppose, for instance, that a third capital,
equal to either of the foregoing, yields a return of no more than ten
bushels. Before these ten bushels will be produced, they must have risen
to the same price which the twenty bushels were sold for at first, and
the fifteen afterwards. Ten bushels will now yield to the producer the
ordinary rate of profit upon the last outlay of capital. But if ten
bushels afford him the ordinary profit upon one third part of his entire
stock, thirty bushels will afford him that rate of profit upon the
whole. A surplus of ten bushels will therefore remain out of the produce
of the first capital, and another of five out of that of the second,—in
all fifteen; the whole of which, being above the ordinary rate of
profit, will constitute rent.*

We may now perceive in what sense we ought to take the proposition of
Dr. Smith, that the price of food is always sufficient not only to
replace the capital expended with the profit which it would have
obtained in other employments, but to leave, besides, a surplus to the
landlord. So long as all the food which is raised is raised at the same
cost of production, the above proposition is not true in any sense. The
value of the produce is then exactly sufficient to replace the capital
with its profit, and no more. But when, from the increase of demand, and
the limited extent and fertility of the soil, some portion of the total
quantity of food produced has of necessity been raised at a greater cost
than the remainder, its value rises. It never is more than Edition:
current; Page: [169] sufficient, however, to replace, with the ordinary
profit, that portion of the whole capital employed which is attended
with the least return. But as all the corn sold in the same market must
be sold at the same price, and as that price is sufficient to replace
with its profit the least productive portion of the capital employed, it
must be more than sufficient to replace, with the same profit, all the
remainder of the capital. Here, therefore, commences the surplus which
Dr. Smith describes, and which he justly considers to be the measure of
rent.

Let us now briefly recapitulate the important principles which we have
endeavoured to establish:

1. That if the produce of land could always be increased in proportion
to the outlay, there could be no such thing as rent.

2. That the produce of land cannot be increased in proportion to the
outlay, but in a less proportion.

3. That the least productive, which, speaking generally, is the last
portion of the outlay, must yield the ordinary profits of stock; and

4. That all which the other portions yield more than this, being above
the ordinary profits, will constitute rent.

This result may be otherwise expressed in the following propositions:

1. That the causes of rent are, the limited extent of the land, and the
inequality in the return to different portions of the capital expended
on it.

2. That the rent which a piece of land may pay to its proprietor is
equal to the excess of its produce, above what its produce would be if
no part of the capital employed on it exceeded in productiveness the
least productive agricultural capital in the neighbourhood; and—

3. (A corollary from the preceding)—That the least productive capital,
among all those which supply the same market, pays no rent whatever:—a
proposition of which some farther developments will be offered in the
sequel.

Difference in proximity to the market is a source of rent precisely
analogous to difference in fertility. When the produce of different
lands is sold in the same market, and consequently at the same price,
the land which is nearest to the market, and pays least for carriage,
enjoys the same sort of advantage over the other as if it were more
fertile. The price must be sufficient to indemnify the cultivators of
both; it cannot, however, be sufficient to indemnify the one, without
being more than sufficient to indemnify the other. It cannot afford to
the cultivator of the more distant soil the profits of his stock,
without leaving to the owner of the more adjacent one a surplus for
rent; an equal price will always enable the nearer soil to be cultivated
more highly than the distant one. When the towns are gradually compelled
by the increase of their population not only to cultivate more Edition:
current; Page: [170] and more highly the lands in their vicinity, but to
draw a part of their supplies from a greater and greater distance, it
may happen that the advantage of vicinity may more than counterbalance
the disadvantage of barrenness, and lands of inferior fertility in the
immediate environs of a large town may yield a considerable rent, while
much richer land at a distance from the market will afford little,
perhaps none. As vicinity to a town is always a cause of rent, so
vicinity to a road or a navigable river or canal, by diminishing the
expense of transporting the produce to some great market, may have a
similar operation. It must be kept in mind that it is not the absolute
fertility or position of any given lands, but their superiority, in
these respects, as compared with other lands, supplying the same market,
that enables their cultivators to pay a superior rent. It is obvious,
too, that the larger the surface from which any particular market draws
its supplies, the higher, in proportion to their fertility, will be the
rent of the lands in its immediate neighbourhood.

The two sources of rent above described, fertility and proximity to the
market, are totally distinct from those peculiarities of soil or
situation which afford a rent on the common principle of monopoly. A
peculiar kind of produce, such as tokay, which can only be obtained from
a peculiar soil, and in limited quantity, may, from deficiency of
supply, obtain a price exceeding, in any possible proportion, the cost
of production. The whole of this excess, after deducting the ordinary
profit upon the capital, will naturally fall into the hands of the
landlord. Land laid out in dwelling-houses, gardens, or parks, and
possessing peculiar beauties of situation or disposition, is also of the
nature of a monopolized commodity, and its rent is governed entirely by
the demand. It cannot indeed yield a rent inferior to that which it
would afford if devoted to agriculture, but it may yield more, without
any assignable limit. When the advantage of any situation consists in
its affording greater facilities for business, as, for example, when a
shop, by being situated in a frequented part of the town, enables the
occupier to obtain greater annual profits than could be made by an equal
capital in a shop possessing no peculiar advantages of situation, the
difference between these extraordinary profits and the ordinary profits
will be added to the rent of the ground. It will be easy for the reader
to trace, in this and similar cases, how much of what is termed rent is
analogous to the price of a monopolized commodity, and how much is
analogous to rent properly so called.

If the theory of rent, thus explained, be sufficiently clear and
intelligible, the mode of explanation adopted above has this advantage,
that it frees the doctrine at once from a variety of objections which
have been very idly urged against it when expressed in other language,
and propounded in a different form.

Edition: current; Page: [171]
None of the eminent economists, who have given expositions of this
theory, ever imagined that it depended wholly on the unequal fertility
of different soils. They all knew that the inequality in the returns to
different portions of capital successively expended on the same soil,
was, equally with the different qualities of soils, a source of rent.
Not only indeed were they fully aware of this cause of rent, but they
have all of them directly and unequivocally laid it down; expounded it
with the greatest possible fulness, and left none of its important
effects on wages, rent, profits, and values, unexplained. When, however,
after having been once explained at length, the doctrine of rent had to
be incidentally alluded to, for purposes which did not render it
necessary to advert to the distinction between one of the two sources of
rent and the other, it was shorter and more convenient to speak of the
different qualities of the soil as being the cause of rent, than to
combine the two causes in one expression, and speak co-ordinately of
“the different qualities of the soil, and the difference in the
proportional returns to the capitals successively applied to the same
soil;” it being naturally supposed that every one would judge of the
doctrine from the full and formal exposition of it, and not from
incidental allusions. This laxity, however, has exposed them to
misinterpretations which they can hardly be blamed for not having
calculated upon. And it has been repeatedly urged, as a conclusive
refutation of the new theory of rent, that there is no land which does
not pay rent; that there would be rent if all the land was of uniform
quality; and that all the lands of a country must pay rent, after all of
them are taken into cultivation.

Any one who has read the foregoing exposition of the theory of rent,
will perceive that these assertions, in so far as they are true, are
corollaries from the very doctrine which they are supposed to disprove.
If rent be the result of the unequal returns to different agricultural
capitals, it follows necessarily, that whether the land be of equal or
unequal fertility, it will all yield rent as soon as it is all
cultivated, beyond the point after which any farther cultivation would
require a greater proportional expense. Nothing, therefore, can be more
idle than the objection, if this be all that is meant; and if any thing
more than this be intended, it is erroneous.

It is not essential to the theory of rent, that there should be no land
for which some rent is not paid. What the theory requires is, that of
the whole capital employed in agriculture, there should always be one
portion which yields no rent; one portion which barely replaces itself,
with the ordinary profits of stock. This principle is the real
foundation of the theory of rent, and it neither has been nor can be
called in question. For if the price of produce be so high as to afford
even to the least productive portion of the capital employed in the
land, a surplus above the ordinary profit, it is obvious that at least
the ordinary profit may be obtained by applying more Edition: current;
Page: [172] capital, and cultivating still more highly. But as there is
always, on the average, as much corn already grown as there is a demand
for at the existing prices, this increase of cultivation, on a part of
the land, must be counterbalanced by the entire abandonment of another
part, or a glut will unavoidably ensue. In the one case the owners of
the deserted land by their competition, in the other case the glut by a
consequent fall of price, would extinguish the rent assumed to have been
previously afforded by the least productive capital on the land.

It is evident, therefore, that there is always some portion of
agricultural capital which neither does, nor at the existing prices can,
yield rent. This being admitted, whether there is or is not any land
which pays no rent, will be matter of mere contingency. It will depend
upon the answer to this other question, whether there be in the country
any land which returns to the first and most productive capital expended
upon it, exactly the same proportional produce which the other
cultivated lands afford to the last and least productive? If there be
any such land it will be cultivated, and from what has been demonstrated
above, it is evident that it can yield no rent. It is sufficiently
obvious, that there will in general be land, in every extensive country,
of this precise degree of fertility; because, in general, there is in
such a country land of every degree of fertility, from the highest in
existence down to that land which produces absolutely nothing. But
whether there is or not, is, in so far as respects this theory, seldom
worth the trouble of ascertaining; though it is unfair to argue that
there can be no such land, because no proprietor will let his land
gratis. There may be land in every farm which would yield no rent, if
offered to be let separately from the rest; there may be entire farms
which can yield no rent, and which are therefore farmed by the
proprietor. No landlord will let his land gratis; but if his land is so
bad that unless it be let gratis it cannot be let at all, he must either
let it with other land, farm it himself, or suffer it to lie
uncultivated.

Another objection which has been recently urged against the theory of
rent, is, perhaps, worthy of a cursory notice, not so much on account of
its intrinsic importance, as because it has not yet attracted the notice
of any of the principal expounders of this theory. The substance of this
objection is, that it is a mistake to suppose, as Mr. Ricardo and others
have done, that the most fertile lands are first taken into cultivation.
The light and sandy soils, it is affirmed, are usually first cultivated,
while the clay and alluvial soils, though ultimately by far the most
productive, require a greater original outlay of capital to bring them
into cultivation, than can be spared in the early stages of agriculture.

Now, admitting the facts to be as here stated, it is singular how any
one could have supposed that they were in any respect subversive of the
doctrines previously laid down. If the richest land is sometimes the
last cultivated, Edition: current; Page: [173] it follows, indeed, that
the last capital expended is not always the least productive; but it
does not therefore follow that the least productive capital does not
regulate the price, whether that capital be the first applied or the
last. So long as the demand cannot be fully supplied by the cultivation
of this rich and fertile land, the cultivation of that which is inferior
must be continued: and even though the latter were thrown out of
tillage, it would still be true that the price of produce must be
determined by the cost of raising that portion which is obtained by the
agency of the least productive capital, which it is yet necessary to
apply to the ground.

aThe main purpose, however, for which this objection is propounded,
appears to be that of demonstrating the advantage of a high price of
corn. Dear corn causes, it is said, the cultivation not merely of barren
land, but sometimes also of lands more fertile than any which are yet
under tillage; and, therefore, it is beneficial! The fallacy of this
statement consists in the misinterpretation of the term fertile lands.
Fertility is here supposed to be a peculiar attribute of those lands on
which a great absolute quantity of produce may be raised, without
reference to expense; whereas it ought to be considered as belonging
more particularly to those lands which yield, not the greatest absolute
quantity of produce, but the greatest produce as compared with the
expenses attending their cultivation. Suppose, for example, that there
are two qualities of land in tillage, the one of which yields 100
quarters on a given surface, and the other 150 on the same surface; and
suppose farther that an outlay of capital and labour equal to 50 is
required in the cultivation of the former, and that the outlay required
for the latter is equal to 80. Under these circumstances, it is plain
that the land producing the 100 quarters would be deemed by an
agriculturist, and by every one else, to be the most fertile of the two;
inasmuch as fertility is never estimated by mere quantities of produce,
but by the proportion which these quantities bear to the necessary
outlay. It might perhaps be possible, by forcing at an immense expense,
to make an acre of Snowden or Ben-Lomond yield as large a quantity of
produce as could be obtained, under an ordinary system of management,
from an acre in the vale of Gloucester or the Carse of Gowrie; but would
any one maintain that they were therefore equally fertile? To suppose,
indeed, that the most fertile lands should require a higher price of
corn to keep them in cultivation than the less fertile, is an obvious
contradiction.a It is true that in a very early stage of society, when
but little capital has been accumulated, it is sometimes necessary to
consider, in the employment of it, not what will afford the greatest,
but what will afford the most immediate return. Lands may not Edition:
current; Page: [174] then be cultivated for want of capital, which it
would be highly advantageous to cultivate if there were the means; but
when the capital is found, and applied to these lands, then, if they are
not only more fertile than the old lands, but more fertile in proportion
to the outlay, they will admit of being cultivated at a lower price than
before, instead of requiring a higher. The land which needs a higher
price to make it equally profitable to the cultivator may be the more
productive land, in as far as gross produce is concerned, but with a
view to net profit it is unquestionably the more barren.

Besides the objections which have now been examined and refuted, another
has been urged from time to time against the theory of rent, as now
explained. The authors of this objection affect to suppose that Sir
Edward West, Mr. Malthus, and Mr. Ricardo, considered the cultivation of
inferior land as the cause of a high price of corn. But this, they
allege, is to invert the order of the phenomena; the cultivation of
inferior soils not being the cause but the effect of high price, and
this high price being itself the effect of demand. This very doctrine,
however, has been explicitly laid down by the distinguished authors
previously referred to, and particularly by Mr. Ricardo.* They have
nowhere contended that a high price of corn was caused by the
cultivation of inferior land; what they contend is, that it is caused by
the necessity under which every increasing population is placed, of
cultivating such inferior land, or of being starved. The wants and
desires of man are the cause why all commodities are produced, and are,
by consequence, the cause of their value; but it is the difficulty
experienced in gratifying these wants and desires, or, in other words,
the most incurred in the production of commodities, that measures and
regulates this value. This is the theory laid down by Mr. Ricardo and
the other expounders of the doctrine of rent, and it cannot be in any
degree affected by the petty cavils alluded to.

If the view which has been taken in the preceding pages of the
regulating principle of rent be the correct one, it will furnish a
solution of several problems, which were either unanswered, or answered
very inadequately, by Dr. Smith and his immediate successors. One of
these is the effect produced upon rent by the various changes incident
to the progress of society.

The state of society, so far as respects the accumulation of wealth, is
either retrograde, stationary, or progressive. Each of these states
affects rent in a different manner; but none of them affects it exactly
alike under all circumstances.

In a retrograde state of society, the rent of land has a tendency to
fall. The diminution of the national capital, which is the distinctive
characteristic Edition: current; Page: [175] of this state, does not
indeed of necessity diminish the power of the people to buy corn,
because they would probably renounce every other comfort before they
would sacrifice their customary supplies of food. But the soil also
produces the materials of many important manufactures, and as the
consumption of them would certainly be diminished, a smaller supply of
these materials would be required; and the decline of population, which
invariably results from any considerable diminution of the national
capital, would in time diminish also the demand for food. The land would
then cease to be cultivated so highly; the least productive portion of
capital would be withdrawn, or, to use a more correct expression, would
cease to be annually renewed; the price and value of raw produce would
now be regulated by a more productive portion of capital, and the rent
paid by that portion would be annihilated, and the corn rents paid by
the superior portions would be reduced by an equal amount, while their
value would be reduced by a still greater proportion. To revert to the
numerical example previously exhibited, of the three capitals yielding
20, 15, and 10 quarters respectively, and affording a rent of 15
quarters; let the third and last be supposed to be withdrawn in
consequence of the diminished demand. The second capital would then
yield no rent, and the first no more than five quarters; being a
reduction of two-thirds in the corn rent of the land: but as the price
and value of corn would also have fallen in the ratio of 15 to 10, or
one-third, the real reduction of rent will be, not as 3 to 1, but as 9
to 2. The interest, therefore, of the landlord, in so far as he is
affected by a retrograde state of society, coincides with that of the
community. What diminishes their wealth diminishes his, and generally in
a decidedly greater proportion.

When the wealth of the community is stationary, rent also in general
will be stationary. When the wealth of the community is progressive,
rent in the most ordinary and natural course of things will be
progressive. The growing demand for food requires a higher and higher
cultivation, with a return continually diminishing in proportion to the
outlay: the wealth of the landlord is therefore doubly augmented, first
by the increasing corn rent, next by the continually increasing value of
that corn.

The interest of the landlord, considered as affected by a progressive
state of society, is so far identical with that of the community; and
would be altogether so, were it not that in the progress of cultivation
two counteracting principles usually come into play. One of these is an
improved system of agriculture; the other is the importation of raw
produce from foreign countries. Both these circumstances operate to
increase the wealth of the community; both, however, are immediately,
the latter perhaps even permanently, injurious to the pecuniary
interests of the landlord.

A country which, in proportion to the fertility of its soil, is more
thickly Edition: current; Page: [176] peopled than its neighbours, and
in which, therefore, the land is more highly cultivated, and corn at a
higher price, soon finds that it can increase its supply of food at a
smaller sacrifice by purchasing a part of it from other less populous
nations, than by pushing the cultivation of its own land any further.
From this point, therefore, if importation be free, whatever increase
may take place in its wealth and population, the demand for the produce
of its land may not be increased, nor the price of that produce raised:
and the income of the landlord may remain stationary, while that of the
community is increasing; or if a forced increase of rent be produced by
excluding foreign corn, and compelling the community to go on supplying
its increasing demand by a higher cultivation of its own soil, the
prohibition could not afterwards be taken off without depriving the
landlord of the accession which he had gradually received to his income
by the progress of population co-operating with a restricted corn trade.
The wealth of the landlord would thus be, in the first instance at
least, diminished by what would both immediately and ultimately add to
the opulence of the community. The interest of the landlord is, in this
respect, no longer coincident with, but is in some respects opposed to
the interest of the nation.

Improvements in agriculture also, though beneficial to the community,
are generally, at least for a time, injurious to the landlord. They
enable the same produce to be obtained with a smaller capital. The least
productive portion of capital, therefore, would be withdrawn, or rather
would cease to be renewed: and it is unnecessary, after the explanations
already given, to repeat in what manner this would affect the price of
the produce and the income of the landlord. If indeed the demand for
corn were to increase in proportion to the cheapness, so that the same
capital as before would still be required, the landlord would be
uninjured. If, for instance, instead of 20, 15, and 10 quarters, 40, 30,
and 20 could now be produced with the three capitals before supposed,
and that the increased cheapness should encourage consumption so much
that the whole of this increased quantity could find a market, the rent
which before was 15 quarters, would now be 30, but as the value and
price of corn would be reduced one half, the landlord would be benefited
only in the greater cheapness of the corn which he consumed in his
family. If, on the other hand, as is perhaps most probable, the demand
did not increase in the same proportion as the cheapness, the landlord,
as such, would sustain a positive diminution of his income.

It is not unusual to hear surprise and sometimes even indignation
expressed at the paradox, (for such it is often considered,) that the
landlords are not benefited by the improvement of agriculture. There is,
however, nothing paradoxical in the opinion when properly explained.
Every landlord is benefited by the improvement of his own estate. But
why? Edition: current; Page: [177] because it increases the produce of
his estate, without so far increasing that of the whole country, as
perceptibly to lower the general price of corn. The proper way to try
the truth of the proposition, is to consider, not whether it is the
interest of a landlord to improve his own estate, but whether it is his
interest that his neighbours should universally improve theirs.

Improvements in agriculture, however, are, in the end, highly
beneficial, even to landlords, by removing the ultimate limit of
cultivation to a greater distance. The limit beyond which cultivation
cannot, under any given system of cultivation, possibly extend, is that
at which the last labourer employed barely reproduces his own
subsistence. But an increase in the general productive powers of the
soil, occasioned by an improvement, evidently enables more labourers and
more capital to be applied before this point is attained. As every
application of additional capital, with a diminished return, adds to the
rent, improvements in agriculture enable an amount of rent to be
ultimately paid, which could not have been paid under other
circumstances. And notwithstanding the undeniable tendency of
agricultural improvements to produce a temporary diminution of rent, it
may be doubted whether that tendency has ever, to any considerable
extent, been realized. The improvements which have been introduced into
agriculture are so extremely limited, when compared with those of which
some branches of manufacture have been found susceptible; and they are,
besides, so very slow in making their way against those old habits and
prejudices, which are perhaps more deeply rooted among the farmers than
among any other class of producers, that the progress of population
seems in most instances to have kept pace with the improvement of
agriculture, and, in the same proportion as corn could be obtained
cheaper, more corn has been required. It has not hitherto, indeed, been
at any time the effect of an improvement to drive capital from the land,
nor consequently to lower rent.

The adoption, by any considerable portion of the population, of a less
costly food, of potatoes for instance, instead of wheat, is, in its
effects upon cultivation, prices, and rents, exactly similar to an
improvement in agriculture.

The above observations are of the greatest importance for removing the
fallacies which frequently intrude themselves into discussions on the
corn laws, and all other subjects involving the consideration of rent.
Another corollary of equal importance from the principle of rent is the
proposition, that rent does not form a part of the cost of production;
or, as it is commonly, but somewhat vaguely expressed, that rent does
not enter into price.

Dr. Smith, though his language on this point is not always clear or
consistent with itself, seems to have perceived that rent does not form
a Edition: current; Page: [178] part of the cost of production of raw
produce. He lays it down, in substance, that corn is not high because
rent is paid, but rent is paid because corn is high.* Being of opinion,
however, that from some cause or other the value of raw produce always
exceeds its cost of production; and knowing that the cost of raw produce
forms one part of the cost of all manufactured articles, he concluded,
that the excess of the price of raw produce above its cost of
production, or, in other words, rent, entered into the cost of all
manufactures. The price of a manufactured article he thought must always
be sufficient to pay not only the wages of the labour, and the profits
of the stock, directly and indirectly employed in producing it, but
likewise the rent of the land on which the raw material was grown; and
thus, as he thought, rent, or at least the excess, which constitutes
rent, is not only an effect but a cause of high price; since if that
excess or that rent did not exist, all manufactures might be sold at a
smaller price.

bIt has now, however, been seen, that the price of raw produce does not
exceed the cost of production, including in that expression the ordinary
profits of the producer’s capital. The aggregate price exceeds the
aggregate cost of production; but this is because the cost of production
is unequal. The price exceeds the lowest, but not the highest cost of
production. And this highest cost, since it regulates the price of the
whole, may be considered, without impropriety, as the cost of the whole;
and the rent to be a peculiar privilege of favoured individuals; just as
if a bounty were given to a select party of cotton manufacturers, who
were not sufficiently numerous to supply the whole market, it could not
properly be said, that the cost of producing cottons had been
diminished, though it would be really diminished to the favoured
individuals.b

If therefore there were no such thing as rent, neither raw produce, nor
consequently manufactures, could be sold cheaper than they are; rent has
no influence either on value or price, and may be entirely left out of
consideration, whenever these subjects are discussed.

It only appears necessary further to observe, concerning the rent of
land, that it is not to be confounded with the consideration, annual or
otherwise, which is paid to the landlord for building houses or fences,
cutting drains, or effecting any other improvement on the land, which
requires to be regularly renewed. These are as much a part of the
capital employed in cultivation, as ploughs or thrashing machines, and
differ only by being in general the property of the landlord. If the
landlord supplied half the stock on the farm, part of his income would
evidently be profit, not rent; Edition: current; Page: [179] nor is the
case different when he supplies not only the land, but any of its
appurtenances, which, if they did not exist, must be provided from the
capital of the farmer.

The rent of mines is regulated by principles very similar to those which
determine the rent of land. The cost of production at the least fertile
of all the mines which must be worked to obtain the requisite supply,
regulates the price of the produce obtained from all the others. The
ideas of Dr. Smith, on this subject, were, as has been previously
remarked, extremely inaccurate.*

cThe chief difference between the principle of agricultural and that of
mining rent, is, that the great law of the application of capital to
land, the inequality of the return to different portions of the capital
employed, does not apply to mines. It is true that the difficulty of
working a mine increases as it becomes deeper. The return, therefore, to
any new capital, applied to a mine, is generally a diminished return;
but the return to the old capital diminishes along with it: there are
not, as in the case of land, two portions of capital invested in the
same mine, one of them producing more, and another less. dAmong the
consequences which flow from this circumstance, one is, that the least
productive mining capital may yield a rent.d The productiveness of
different mines does not differ by imperceptible degrees, like that of
different capitals on the same soil. If, for example, the richest mine
could singly supply the demand of the whole world, the undertaker might
keep the price of his produce above the cost of production at his own
mine, provided he kept it a little below the cost of production at any
other; and by this surplus, as by every other surplus of the same kind,
it would not be the capitalist but the proprietor who would benefit.c

The theory of rent, explained in the foregoing note, was, with the
exception of the principle of population, to which alone it is inferior
in importance, the first great discovery which followed the publication
of the Wealth of Nations. It was first announced to the world in two
pamphlets, published in 1815, by Mr. West, (now Sir Edward West,
chief-justice of Bombay,) and Mr. Malthus. A pamphlet explanatory of the
same doctrine was published by Mr. Ricardo,[*] two years after: but,
although he Edition: current; Page: [180] was posterior to the authors
above named, in promulgating the doctrine, and less happy in his mode of
explaining it than Sir Edward West, it is well known to many of his
friends that he was in possession of the principle, and was accustomed
to communicate it in conversation, several years prior to the
publication of the earliest of these works. This is no disparagement of
the merits of Sir Edward West, the originality of whose views cannot be
doubted; and whose exposition of the principle, as well as of several
collateral conclusions, evinces a thorough understanding of the subject,
together with a perspicuity of style and clearness of arrangement, which
entitle his essay to a very high rank among the works of political
economists. His mode of treating the subject, being that which is best
adapted to a reader who comes directly from the perusal of the Wealth of
Nations, has for the most part been adopted in this note. Mr. Malthus
also, though not quite so comprehensive and methodical, has clearly
explained the fundamental principle of rent, but has fallen into some
errors in its application, of which the length to which this note has
already extended forbids any particular examination. The most important
of them consists in supposing, that if an improvement took place in
agriculture, which had the effect of economizing labour, or if the wages
of labour were reduced, the saving thus made would be added to the rent
of the land. It has been shown above,[*] that in the first of these two
cases, the price would fall, and the benefit of the saving would be
given to the consumers. It will be shown hereafter,[†] in treating of
profits, that what would be saved to the producer by the other cause, a
fall of wages being a saving not peculiar to agriculture, but common to
all employments whatever, would be added to profits, and gained, not by
the landlord, but by capitalists in general.

Edition: current; Page: [181]


THE CURRENCY JUGGLE 1833

Edition: current; Page: [182]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Dissertations and Discussions, I (2nd ed., London: Longmans, 1867),
42-55. (Hereafter referred to as D&D, with edition, volume, and page
numbers.) Headed: “The Currency Juggle.” Reprinted from Tait’s Edinburgh
Magazine, II (Jan., 1833), 461-7 (unsigned), where the same title
carries a footnote: “Evidence of Thomas Attwood, Esq. before the
Committee of the House of Commons, on the Bank Charter” (Parliamentary
Papers, 1831-32, VI, 452-68). Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “An
article headed the Currency Juggle in the 10th numb. of Tait’s Magaz.
Jan. 1833. (N.B. The foot-note at the end is not mine)” (MacMinn, 24).
In his Autobiography (128), JSM refers to the reprinting of the article
in D&D. There are no corrections or variants indicated in the Somerville
College copies of the article in Tait’s and in D&D.

To the editor of Tait’s he wrote (7/11/32) in part: “I am highly
gratified by what you say of my paper on Currency, and no less so at the
notes you propose to add as from yourself, as I agree with you so
decidedly and so warmly on both points that if we could have known each
other’s minds before I wrote the article, I would gladly have touched
upon those collateral questions in the text” (Earlier Letters, Collected
Works, XII, 130).

The following text, taken from the 2nd ed. of D&D (the last in JSM’s
lifetime), is collated with that in D&D, 1st ed. (London: Parker, 1859),
and that in Tait’s. In the footnoted variants, D&D, 2nd ed., is
indicated by “67”; D&D, 1st ed., by “59”; Tait’s by “33”.

Edition: current; Page: [183]


The Currency Juggle

all friends of ‘the Movement’—all persons, be they Ministers, Members of
Parliament, or public writers, who look for the safety and well-being of
England, not through the extinction, but through the further progress of
apoliticala reform—commit, in our opinion, an egregious blunder, if they
devote themselves chiefly to setting forth what innovations ought not to
be made. Once open a door, and mischief may come in as well as go
out—who doubts it? But our fears are not on that sideb: improvementb,
and not conservation, is the prize to be striven for just now. cThe tide
of improvement having once begun to rise, we know that froth, and
straws, and levities of all kinds, will be floated in multitudes up the
streamd; but it is not the business of Reformersd to watch for their
appearance, and break each successive bubble the moment it shows itself
on the surface. eThese may be lefte to burst of themselves, or to be
swept away by the efforts of such as feel themselves called upon by
their duty to make that their occupation. Be it ours to find ffitf work
for the new instrument of government; it is enough that our silence
testifies against the unfit. No one can suffice for all things; and the
time is yet far distant when a Radical Reformer can, without deserting a
higher trust, allow himself to assume, in the main, the garb and
attitude of a Conservative.

There are, however, cases in which gthis wholesomeg rule of conduct
hmust be departed from, and the ievil incurred of a conflict between
reformers and reformers in the face of the common enemy. Purposes may be
proclaimed by part of the multitudinous body of professed Radicals,
which, for the credit of the common cause, it may be imperative upon
their fellow-Radicals to disavow; purposes such as cannot even continue
to be publicly Edition: current; Page: [184] broached (not being as
publicly protested against) without jserious mischiefj. In this light we
look upon all schemes for the confiscation of private property, in any
shape, or under any pretext; and upon none more than the gigantic plan
of confiscation which at present finds some advocates—a depreciation of
the currency.

In substance, this is merely a roundabout (and very inconvenient) method
of cutting down all debts to a fraction. Considering it in that light,
it is not wonderful that kfraudulent debtors should be its eager
partisans; but what recommends it to them should have been enough to
render it odious to all well-meaning, even if puzzle-headed, persons.
That men who are not knaves in their private dealings should understand
what the word depreciation means, and yet support it, speaks but ill for
the existing state of morality on such lsubjectsl. It is something new
in a civilized country. Several times, indeed, since paper credit
existed, governments or public bodies have got into their hands the
power of issuing a paper currency, without the restraint of
convertibility, or any limitation mofm the amount. The most memorable
cases are those of Law’s Mississippi scheme, the Assignats, and the Bank
Restriction in 1797. On these various occasions a depreciation did in
fact take place; but the intention was not nprofessedn of producing one,
nor were its authors in the slightest degree aware that such would be
the effect. The important truth, that currency is lowered o(cæteris
paribus)o in value, pby beingp augmented in quantity, was known solely
to speculative philosophers, to Locke and Hume. The qPracticalsq had
never heard of it; or if they had, disdained it as visionary theory. Not
an idea was entertained that a paper-money which rested on good
security—which rrepresentedr, as the phrase was, real wealth—could ever
become depreciated by the mere amount of the issues.

But now, this is understood and reckoned upon, and is the very
foundation of the scheme. sEverybody, with a few ridiculous exceptions,
now knowss, that increasing the issues of inconvertible tpaper,t lowers
its value, and thereby takes from all who have currency in their
possession, or who are entitled to receive any fixed sum, an indefinite
aliquot part of their property or income; making a present of the amount
to the issuers of the Edition: current; Page: [185] currency, and to the
persons by whom the fixed sums are payable. This is seen as clearly as
daylight; and udo men thereforeu recoil from the idea? No; they coolly
propose that the thing should be done; the novæ tabulæ issued; the
transfer to the debtor of the lawful property of the creditor, and to
the banker, of part of the property of every vonev who has money in his
purse, deliberately and knowingly accomplished. And this is seriously
entertained as a proposition sub judice; quite as fit to be discussed,
and as likely, à priori, to be found worthy of adoption, as any other.

At the head of the depreciation party are the two Messrs. Attwood,
Matthias and Thomas: the first wa Tory, andw nominee of the Duke of
Newcastle: his brother, the chairman of the Birmingham Union, one who,
as a man of action, willing and able to stand in the breach, the
organizer and leader of our late victorious struggle, has deserved well
of his country. But the ability required for leading xa congregated
multitude to victory, whether in the war of politics or in that of
battles, is one thing; the capacity to make laws for the commerce of a
great nation, or even to interpret the ycommonesty mercantile phenomena,
is another. If any one still doubts this truth, zhe may learn it fromz
Mr. Thomas Attwood’s evidence before the Bank Committee.

Mr. Attwood has there given vent to speculations on currency, which
prove that on a topic to which he has paid more attention than to any
other, he is yet far beneath aevena his recent antagonist, Mr.
Cobbett.[*] Mr. Cobbett, in truth, sees as clearly as any one, that to
enact that sixpence should hereafter be called a shilling, would be of
no use except to the bpersonb who owed a shilling before, and is now
allowed to pay it with sixpence. And, it being no part of Mr. Cobbett’s
object to produce any gratuitous evil, he has ccommonc sense enough to
see that it would be absurd, for the sake of operating upon dexistingd
contracts, to render all future ones impracticable except on the footing
of gambling transactions, by making it impossible for eany onee to
divine whether the shilling he undertakes to pay will be worth a penny
or a pound at the time of payment. Mr. Cobbett, therefore, is for
calling a spade a spade, and cancelling, avowedly, a part, or the whole,
as it may happen, of all existing debts; permitting the pound sterling
to be worth twenty shillings, as before. Edition: current; Page: [186]
Future creditors would thus have the benefit of knowing what they
bargained for, though they might, indeed, feel a slight doubt whether it
would be paid. In this scheme there is only knavery—no folly; fsave
thatf of expecting that a great act of national knavery should be a
national benefit. Mr. Attwood, on the other hand, is for the robbery
too; but then it has not so much the character of a robbery in his eyes;
for if it gbeg done in htheh way of a depreciated ipaper currencyi, such
a flood of wealth, he jimaginesj, will be disengaged in the process,
that the robber and the robbed, the lion and kthek lamb, lwilll lie down
lovingly together and wallow in riches. At the bottom of the
fundholder’s pocket, Mr. Attwood expects to find the philosopher’s
stone. As great a man as Mr. Attwood, the King of Brobdingnag, declared
it to be his creed, that the man who calls into existence two blades of
grass where monlym one grew before, deserves better of his country than
the whole tribe of statesmen and warriors. Mr. Attwood has the same
exalted opinion of the man who calls two pieces of paper into existence
where only one piece existed before.

But first, we must nsayn a few words respecting the robbery itself: we
will orevert afterwards too the accompanying juggle.

There phas been, and is,p one sophism, which has enabled many
well-intentioned qpersonsq to disguise from their own consciences the
real character of the contemplated fraud upon creditors. This sophism
rhas some superficial plausibility. More than half (it is argued) of the
National Debt, as well as a great multitude of private engagements, were
contracted in a depreciated currency; if, therefore, the interest or
principal be spaid without abatement, in money of the ancient standard,
we are paying to tpublic and private creditors more than they lent.

To this fallacy there are as many as three or four sufficient
refutations, every one standing on its own independent ground. But the
most conclusive and crushing of them all is not unfrequently overlooked,
such is the shortness of men’s memories, even about the events of their
own time. Many who abhor the “equitable adjustment,” join in condemning
the restoration of the currency in 1819; uconcedeu that Peel’s Bill[*]
plundered all debtors for the benefit of creditors; but vurgev, that the
present fundholders Edition: current; Page: [187] and other creditors
are, in great part, wnot the same personsw who reaped the undue benefit;
and that to claim damages from one set of xpersonsx, because another set
have been overpaid, is no reparation, but a repetition of injustice.
This is, indeed, true and irresistible, even though it stood alone:
there yneedsy no other argument: yet there zisz another, and a still
more powerful one.

The restoration of the ancient standard, and the payment, in the
restored currency, of the interest of a debt contracted in a depreciated
one, was no injustice, but the simple performance of a plighted compact.
All debts contracted during the Bank Restriction were contracted under
as full an assurance as the faith of a nation could give, that cash
payments were only atemporarilya suspended. At first, the suspension was
to last a few weeks, next, a few months; then, at bfarthestb, a few
years. Nobody ceven insinuated a suggestionc that it should be
perpetual, or that, when cash payments were resumed, less than a guinea
should be given at the Bank for a pound note and a shilling. And to
quiet the doubts and fears which would else have arisen, and which would
have rendered it impossible for any Minister to raise another loan
except at the most ruinous interest, it was made the law of the land,
solemnly sanctioned by Parliament, that, six months after the peace, if
not before, cash payments should be resumed. This, therefore, was
distinctly one of the conditions of all the loans made during that
period. It is a condition which dhas not beend fulfilled. Instead of six
months, more than eas manye years intervened between the peace and the
resumption of cash payments. fThe nation, therefore, hasf not kept faith
with the fundholder. Instead of having overpaid him, we have cheated
him. Instead of making him a present g(as is alleged)g of a percentage
equal to the enhancement of the currency, we continuedh, on the
contrary,h to pay his interest in depreciated paper iseverali years
after we were bound by contract to pay it in cash. And be it remarked,
that the depreciation was at its highest during a part of that jveryj
period. If, therefore, there is to be a great day of national atonement
for gone-by wrongs, the fundholders, instead of having anything to kpay
back, shouldk be directed to send in their bill for the principal and
interest of what they were defrauded of during lthe first years of the
peacel. Instead of this, it is proposed that, having already defrauded
them of mpartm of a benefit which was in Edition: current; Page: [188]
their bond, and for which they gave an equivalent, we should now force
them to make restitution of the nremainder.n

That they gave an equivalent is manifest. The depreciation odid not
attain its maximum untilo the last few years of the war; indeed, it
never amounted to anything considerable till then. It was during those
years, also, that pthe largest sums were borrowed by the Government. At
that time the effects of the Bank Restriction had begun to be well
understood. The writings of Mr. Henry Thornton, Lord King, Mr. Ricardo,
Mr. Huskisson, Mr. Blake,[*] &c. and the qReportq of the Bullion
Committee,[†] had diffused a very general conviction that the rcurrency
was in fact depreciatedr, and that the Bank Directors acted on
principles of which that evil was the natural consequence. Does anybody
imagine that the loans of those years could have been raised, except on
terms never before heard of under a civilized government, if there had
been no engagement to pay the interest or the principal in money of any
fixed standard; but it had been avowed, to whatever point the arbitrary
issues of the Bank might depress the value of the pound sterling, there
it would be suffered to remain?

What avails it, then, to cavil about spaying more than twast borrowed?
Everybody uwho borrows at interest, and keeps his engagement, pays more
than he borrowedu. The question is not, have we paid more than we
Edition: current; Page: [189] borrowed? but, have we paid more than we
vcontractedv to pay? And the answer is, we have paid wlessw. The
fundholder, as the weaker party, has pocketed the injury; he only asks
to be spared an additional and far greater one. We xcovenantedx to pay
in a metallic standard; we therefore are bound to do it. To deliberate
on such a question is as if a private person were to deliberate whether
he should pick a pocket.

So much for the substance of the fraud. There is, however, no political
crime so bad in itself but what may be made still worse by the manner of
doing it. To rob all creditors, public and private, is bad enough in all
conscience; but, for the sake of robbing existing creditors, to give to
a set of bankers the power of taxing the community to an unlimited
amount at their sole pleasure, by pouring forth paper which could only
get into circulation by lowering the value of all the paper already
issued; what would this be but to erect a company of public plunderers,
and place all our fortunes in their hands, merely because they offer to
lend us our own money, and call the twofold operation “affording
facilities to trade?” It were better worth our while to settle a
Blenheim or a Strathfieldsaye upon every banker in England. yPecuniary
transactionsy would shortly come to an end; in a few months we should be
in a state of barter. No zonez in his senses would take money in
exchange for anything, except he were sure of being able to lay it out
before the next day. aEvery onea would begin to estimate his
possessions, not by pounds sterling, but by sheep and oxen, as in the
bpatriarchal timesb.

Mr. Attwood opines, that the multiplication of the circulating medium,
and the consequent diminution of its value cdoc not merely diminish the
pressure of taxes and debts, and other fixed charges, but dgived
employment to labour, and that to an indefinite extent. If we could work
miracles, we would not be niggardly of them. Possessing the power of
calling all the labourers of Great Britain into high wages and full
employment, by no more complicated a piece of machinery than an
engraver’s plate, a man would be much to blame if he failed for want of
going far enough. Mr. Attwood, accordingly, is for increasing the
issues, until, with his paper loaves and fishes, he has fed the whole
multitude, so that not a creature goes away hungry. Such a depreciation
as would cause wheat to average ten shillings the bushel, he thinks,
would suffice; but if, on trial, any labourer should declare that he
still had an appetite, Mr. Attwood proffers to serve up another dish,
and then another, up to the desired point of satiety. If a population
thus satisfactorily fed should, under such ample encouragement, Edition:
current; Page: [190] double or treble in its numbers, all that would be
necessary, in this gentleman’s opinion, is to depreciate the currency so
much the more.

It is not that Mr. Attwood exactly thinks that a hungry people can be
literally fed upon his bits of paper. His doctrine is, that paper money
is not capital, but brings capital into fuller employment. A large
portion of the national capital, especially of that part which consists
of buildings and machinery, is now, he affirms, lying idle, in default
of a market for its productions; those various productions being, as he
admits, the natural market for one another, but being unable to exchange
for each other, for want eof a more plentiful medium of exchange, just
as wheels will not fturnf with a spare allowance of oil. It was
suggested to him, by some member of the Committee, that a small nominal
amount of currency will suffice to exchange as many commodities as a
larger one, saving that it will do it at lower prices; which, however,
when common to all commodities, are gexactlyg as good to the sellers as
high prices, except that these last may enable them to put off their
creditors with a smaller real value. Mr. Attwood could not help
admitting this; hbuth it failed to produce any impression upon him; he
could not perceive that high prices are in themselves no benefit, he
could not get iiti out of his head that high prices occasion “increased
consumption,” “increased demand,” and thereby give a stimulus to
production.[*] As if it were any increase of demand for bread, to have
two bits of paper to give for a loaf instead of one. As if being able to
sell a pair of shoes for two rags instead of one, when each rag is only
worth half as much, were any additional inducement to the production of
shoes.

Whenever we meet with any notion more than commonly absurd, we expect to
find that it is derived from what is miscalled “practical experience;”
namely, from something which has been seen, heard, and misunderstood.
Such is the case with Mr. Attwood’s delusion. What has imposed upon him
is, as usual, what he would term “a fact.” If prices could jbe kept as
high as in 1825, all would be well; for, in 1825, not one well-conducted
labourer in Great Britain was unemployed. kThek first liberty we shall
take, is that of disbelieving the “fact.” In its very nature, it is one
which neither Mr. Attwood, nor any one, can personally know to be true;
and his means of accurate knowledge are probably confined to the great
manufacturing and exporting town which he personally inhabits. Thus
much, however, we grant, that the buildings and machinery he speaks of
were not lying idle in Edition: current; Page: [191] 1825, but were in
full operation: many of them, indeed, were erected during that frantic
period; which is partly the cause of their lying idle now. But why was
all the capital of the country in such unwonted activity in 1825?
Because the whole mercantile public was in a state of insane delusion,
in its very nature temporary. From the impossibility of exactly
adjusting the operations of the producer to the wants of the consumer,
it always happens that some articles are more or less in deficiency, and
others in excess. lTo rectify these derangements, the healthy working of
the social economyl requires that in some channels capital should be in
full, while in others it should be in slack, employment. But in 1825, it
was imagined that all articles, compared with the demand for them, were
in a state of deficiency. mAn unusual extension of the spirit of
speculation, accompanied rather than caused by a great increase of paper
creditm, had produced a rise of prices, which not being supposed to be
connected with a depreciation of the currency, each nmerchant or
manufacturern considered to arise from an increase of the effectual
demand for his particular article, and ofancied there was a ready and
permanent market for palmostp any quantity of that article which he
could produce. Mr. Attwood’s error is that of supposing that a
depreciation of the currency really increases the demand for all
articles, and consequently their production, because, under some
circumstances, it may create a false opinion of an increase of demand,
which false opinion leads, as the reality would do, to an increase of
production, followed, however, by a fatal revulsion as soon as the
delusion ceases. The revulsion in 1825 was not caused, as Mr. Attwood
fancies,[*] by a contraction of the currency; the only cause of the real
ruin, was the imaginary prosperity. The contraction of the currency was
the consequence, not the cause, of the revulsion. So many merchants and
bankers having failed in their speculations, so many, therefore, being
unable to meet their engagements, their paper became worthless, and
discredited all other paper. An issue of inconvertible bank notes might
have enabled these debtors to cheat their creditors; but it would not
have opened a market for one more loaf of bread, or one more yard of
cloth; because what makes a demand for commodities is commodities, and
not bits of paper.

It is no slight qadditional motiveq to rejoice in our narrow escape from
marching to Parliamentary Reform through a violent revolution, when we
Edition: current; Page: [192] think of the influence which would in that
event have been exercised over Great Britain, for good or for ill, by
men of whose opinions rwhat precedesr is a faithful picture.s

We have no dread of them at present, because, together with the
disapprobation of all instructed tpersonst, they have to encounter a
strong popular prejudice against paper money of every kind. The real
misfortune would be, if they should wave their currency juggle, and
coalesce with the clearer-sighted and more numerous tribe of political
swindlers, who attack public and private debts directly and avowedly.

But even thus, we do not fear that they should succeed. There are enough
of honest upeopleu in England vto be too many for all the knaves; and it
is only for want of discussion that these schemes find any favourers
among sincere men. The mischief, and it is not inconsiderable, is, that
such things should be talked of, or wthoughtw of; that the time and
talents which ought to be employed in making good laws and redressing
real wrongs, should be taken up in counselling or in averting xa
national iniquityx: to the injury of all good hopes, but most to the
damage and discredit of the ypopular causey, which is almost
undistinguishably identified in the minds of many excellent, zbutz
ill-informed and timid people, with the supremacy of brute force over
right, and a perpetually impending spoliation of everything which one
apersona has and another bdesires.c

Edition: current; Page: [193]


CORPORATION AND CHURCH PROPERTY
 1833

Edition: current; Page: [194]


EDITOR’S NOTE

D&D, I (2nd ed.), 1-41, where it is headed: “The Right and Wrong of
State Interference with Corporation and Church Property.” Reprinted from
“Art. 1.—Corporation and Church Property,” The Jurist, or Quarterly
Journal of Jurisprudence and Legislation, IV (Feb., 1833), 1-26
(unsigned). Issued also as an anonymous pamphlet: Corporation and Church
Property Resumable by the State. London: Sweet, Stevens, and Maxwell,
1833. Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “An article on Corporation and
Church Property in the 10th number of the Jurist (in February 1833)
printed also as a separate tract and entitled ‘Corporation and Church
Property resumable by the State’ ” (MacMinn, 25). In his Autobiography
(128), discussing this article, JSM comments that in “the whole mass” of
his writings prior to this and “The Currency Juggle” he considers
nothing to be “of sufficient permanent value to justify reprinting.” He
then remarks: “The paper in the Jurist, which I still think a very
complete discussion of the rights of the State over Foundations, showed
both sides of my opinions, asserting as firmly as I should have done at
any time, the doctrine that all endowments are national property, which
the government may and ought to control; but not, as I should once have
done, condemning endowments in themselves, and proposing that they
should be taken to pay off the national debt. On the contrary, I urged
strenuously the importance of having a provision for education, not
dependent on the mere demand of the market, that is, on the knowledge
and discernment of average parents, but calculated to establish and keep
up a higher standard of instruction than is likely to be spontaneously
demanded by the buyers of the article. All these opinions have been
confirmed and strengthened by the whole course of my subsequent
reflections.”

The following text is collated with that in D&D (1st ed.), that in The
Jurist, and that in the pamphlet reprint. In the footnoted variants, D&D
(2nd ed.) is indicated by “67”; D&D (1st ed.) by “59”; The Jurist by
“33” (there are no substantive variants between the pamphlet and The
Jurist, except the correction indicated at 196s-s). In the Somerville
College copy of the pamphlet reprint, there is one inked variant (see
204c-c); there are no corrections or variants in the Somerville D&D. In
The Jurist and the pamphlet the article is divided into nine sections,
indicated by arabic numerals (which are here omitted) at the beginnings
of the paragraphs at 197.1, 198.4, 201.12, 203.21, 205.12, 209.4,
210.18, 218.9, and 221.29.

Edition: current; Page: [195]


Corporation and Church Property

ait is intendeda, in the present bpaperb, to enter somewhat minutely
into the subject of Foundations and Endowments, and the rights and
duties of the Legislature in respect to them: with the design, first, of
showing that there is no moral hindrance or bar to the interference of
the Legislature with endowments, though it should even extend to a total
change in their purposes; and next, of inquiring, in what spirit, and
with what reservations, it is incumbent on a virtuous Legislature to
exercise this power. As questions of political ethics, and the
philosophy of legislation in the abstract, these inquiries are not
unworthy of the consideration of thinking mindsc. But to this country,
and at this particular time, they are practical questions; not solely in
that more elevated and philosophical sense, in which all questions of
right and wrong are emphatically practical questions; but as being the
peculiar dtopicsd of the present houre. For no one fcan help seeing that
one of the gmost pressing of the duties which Parliamentary Reform has
devolved upon our public men, is that hof deciding what honestlyh may,
and, supposing this determined, what should, be done with the property
of the Church, and of the various Public Corporations.

It is a twofold problem; a question of expediency, and a question of
morality: the former complex, and depending upon temporary
circumstances; the latter simple, and unchangeable. We are to examine,
not merely in what way a certain portion of property may be most
usefully employed; that is a subsequent consideration: but, whether iit
can be touchedi at all without jspoliationj; whether the diversion of
the estates of foundations from Edition: current; Page: [196] the
present hands, and from the present purposes, would be disposing of what
is justly our own, or krobbingk somebody else of what is his; violating
property, endangering all rights, and infringing the first principles of
the social union. For the enemies of the interference of the Legislature
assert no less. And, if this were so, it would already be an act of
immorality even to ldiscussl the other question. It is mnot am fit
occupation for an honest man, to cast up the probable profits of an act
of plunder. If a resumption of endowments belongs to a class of acts
which, by universal agreement, ought to be abstained from, whatever may
be their consequences; there is no more to be said. nWhether it does so
or not, is the question now to be considered.n

If the inquiry owere embarrassed with no other difficulties than are
inherent in its own nature, it would notp, we think,p detain us long.
Unfortunately it is inextricably entangled with the hopes and fears, the
attachments and antipathies, qof temporary politicsq. All men are either
friendly or hostile to the Church of England; all men wish either well
or ill to our universities, and rtor our municipal corporations. But we
know not why the being biassed by such predilections or aversions,
should be more pardonable in a moralist or a legislator, than it would
be in a judge. If the dispute were, whether the Duke of Wellington
should be called upon to account for s100,000l.s, it would be tat
perversion of justice to moot the question of the Duke of Wellington’s
public services, and to decide the cause according as the judge
approves, or not, of the war with Bonaparte, or Catholic emancipation.
The true question would be, whether the money in the Duke’s possession
uwas his or notu. We have our opinion, like other people, on the merits
or demerits of the clergy, and other holders of endowments. We shall
endeavour to forget that we have any. General principles of justice are
not to be shaped to suit the form and dimensions of some particular case
in which the judge happens to take an interest.v

Edition: current; Page: [197]
By a foundation or endowment, is to be understood, money or money’s
worth (most commonly land) assigned, in perpetuity or for some long
period, for a public purpose: meaning by public, a purpose which,
whatever it may wbe, is notw the personal use and enjoyment of an
assignable individual or xindividuals.

The foundations which exist or have existed, in this or other countries,
are exceedingly multifarious. There are schools, and hospitals,
supported by assignments of land or money; there are also almshouses,
and other charitable institutions of a nature more or less analogous.
The estates of monasteries belong to the class of endowments: so do
those of our universities; and the lands and tithes of all established
churches. The estates of the Corporation of London, of the Fishmongers’
and Mercers’ Companies, &c., are also public foundations, and differ
from the foregoing only in being local, not national. All these masses
of property originally belonged to some individual or individuals, or to
the State; and were, either by the rightful owner, or by some wrongful
possessor, appropriated to the several purposes to which they now,
really or in name, continue to be applied.

It ymayy seem most natural to begin by zconsideringz whether the
existence of endowments is desirable at all; if this be settled in the
affirmative, to inquire on what conditions they should be aalloweda to
be constituted; and, lastly, how the Legislature ought to deal with them
after they are formed. But the problem, what is to be done with existing
endowments, is paramount in present importance to the question of
prospective legislation. bIt is preferableb, therefore, even at the
expense of an inversion of the Edition: current; Page: [198] logical
order of our propositions, to consider, first, whether it is allowable
for the State to change the appropriation of endowments, and,
afterwards, what is the limit at which its interference should stop.

If endowments are permitted, it is implied as a necessary condition,
that the State, for a time at least, shall not intermeddle with them.
The property assigned must temporarily be sacred to the purposes to
which it was destined by its owners. The founders of the cLondon
Universityc would dnot have subscribed their moneyd, nor would Mr.
Drummond have established the Oxford Professorship of Political Economy,
if they had thought that they were merely raising a sum of money to be
placed at the disposal of Parliament, or of the Ministry for the time
being. Subject to the restrictions which we shall hereafter suggest, the
control of the founder, over the disposition of the property, should, in
point of degree, be absolute. But to what extent should it reach in
point of time? For how long should this unlimited power of the founder
continue?

To this question the answer is ein principle so obvious, that it is not
easy to conceive howe it can ever have been missed by any
unsophisticated and earnest inquirer. The sacredness of the founder’s
assignment should continue during his own life, and for such longer
period as the foresight of a prudent man may be presumed to reach, and
no further. We do not pretend to fix the exact term of years; perhaps
there is no necessity for its being accurately fixed; but it evidently
should fbe only a moderatef one. For such a period, it conduces to the
ends for which foundations ought to exist, and for which alone they can
ever rationally have been intended, that they should remain undisturbed.

All beyond this is to make the dead, judges of the exigencies of the
living; to erect, not merely the ends, but the means, not merely the
speculative opinions, but the practical expedients, of a gone-by age,
into an irrevocable law for the present. The wisdom of our ancestors
gwas mostly a poor wisdom enoughg, but this is not even following the
wisdom of our ancestors; for our ancestors did not bind themselves never
to alter what they had once established. Under the guise of fulfilling a
bequest, this is making a dead man’s intentions for a single day, a rule
for subsequent centuries, when we know not whether he himself would have
made it a rule, even for the morrow.h

There is no fact in history which posterity will find it more difficult
to Edition: current; Page: [199] iunderstandi, than that the idea of
perpetuity, and that of any of the contrivances of man, should have been
coupled together in any sane mind: that it has been believed, nay, clung
to as jsacredj truth, and has formed part of the creed of whole nations,
that a signification of the will of a kman, ages ago, could impose upon
all mankind now and for ever an obligation of obeying him:—that, in the
beginning of the nineteenth century, it was not permitted to question
this doctrine without opprobrium: though for hundreds of years before, a
solemn condemnation of this very absurdity had been lincorporatedl in
the laws, and familiar to every judge by whom, during all that period,
they had been administered.

During the last four hundred years or thereabouts, in England and Wales,
the power of a landed proprietor to entail his land in favour of a
particular line of his descendants has been narrowed to a very moderate
term of years after his decease. During ma similarm length of time, it
has been laid down as a maxim of the common law, in the sweeping terms
in which technical jurisprudence delights, that “the law abhors
perpetuities.” It is now a considerable number of years since a London
merchant* having by testament directed that the bulk of his fortune
should accumulate for two generations, and then devolve without
restriction upon a person specified; this will, rare as such
dispositions might be expected to be, excited so much disapprobation,
that an Act of Parliament[*] was passed, expressly to nenactn that
nothing of the same sort should be done in future.

Is it of consequence to the public by whom and how private property is
inherited, which, whoever possess it, will in the main be spent in
ministering to one person’s individual wants and enjoyments—and is the
use made of a like sum, specifically set apart for the benefit of the
public, or of an indefinite portion of the public, a matter in which the
nation has no concern? Or shall we say it is supposed by King, Lords,
and Commons, and the Judges of the land, that a man cannot know what
partition of his property among his descendants, thirty years hence,
will be for the interest of otheo descendants themselves; but that he
may know (though he have scarcely learnt pthep alphabet) how children
may be best educated five hundred years hence; how the necessities of
the poor may then be best provided for; what branches of learning, or of
what is called learning, it will be most important to cultivate, and by
what body of men it will be desirable that the people should be taught
religion, to the qend of time?

Edition: current; Page: [200]
Men would not yield up their understandings to doctrines like these, if
they were not under some strong bias. Such thoughts never sprung from
reason and reflection. rThe cry about robbing the Church, spoliation of
endowments, &c., means only that the sspeakers likes better the purposes
to which the monies are now applied, than those to which he thinks they
would be applied if they were resumed:—a feeling which, twhen founded on
conviction, is entitled to respect;t but were it even just, we do not
see why a upersonu, who has got at his conclusions by good arguments,
should defend them by bad. It may be very unwise to alienate the
property of some particular foundation; but that does not make it
robbery. If it be inexpedient, vprove it so; but do not pretend that it
is a crime to disobey a man’s injunctions who has been dead five hundred
years. We fear, too, that this zeal for the inviolability of endowments
proceeds often from a feeling, which we find it more difficult to bear
with—that unreasoning instinct, which renders those whose souls are
buried in their acres, or pent up in their money bags, partizans of the
uti possidetis principle in all things; the dread that if anything is
taken from anybody, everything will be taken from everybody; a terror,
the more passionate because it is vague, at seeing violent hands laid
upon their Dagon money, though it be but to rescue him from the hands of
those who have filched him away.

That this is the real source of much of the horror which is felt at a
bare proposal that the Legislature should lay a finger upon the estates
of a public trust, although it be to restore them to their original
purposes, is manifest from this; that the same persons can witness the
most absolute perversion and alienation of the endowment from its
destined ends, by the slow, silent creeping-in of abuse in the hands of
the trustees themselves, and not feel the slightest discomposure.
Wherefore?—wBecausew their solicitude was not for the objects of the
endowment, but for the safety and sacredness of “vested rights.” They
dislike the example of searching in a person’s pocket, although it be
for stolen goods. For them, it is enough if the nine points of the law
maintain their wonted sanctity. Those they are sure they have on their
side, if any troublesome questioner shouldx, in their turn, incommode
them. The tenth point is much more intricate and obscure, and they have
not half so much faith in it.

To every argument tending to prove the utility of the Church
yEstablishmenty, or zany other endowed public institution, aunprejudiced
attention is Edition: current; Page: [201] duea. Like all reasons which
are brought to show the inexpediency of a proposed innovation, they
cannot be too carefully weighed. But when it is called spoliation of
property, for the State to alter a disposition made by the State itself,
or by an individual who died six hundred years ago, we answer, that no
bpersonb ought to be exercising rights of property six hundred years
after his death; that such rights of property, if they have been
unwisely sanctioned by the State, ought to be instantaneously put an end
to; that there is no fear of robbing a dead man; and no reasonable cman
who gave his money when living, for the benefit of the community, would
have desired that dhisd mode of benefiting the community should be
eadherede to when a better could be found.

Thus far of the imaginary rights of the founder. Next, as to those
rights of another kind, which, in the case of an existing endowment,
have usually sprung up in consequence of its existence; fthe life
interests of the actual holders. How far are these analogous to what are
deemed rights of property?—that is, rights which it is unjust to take
from gthe possessorg without his consent, or without giving him a full
equivalent.

There are some endowments in which the life interests amount to rights
of property in the strictest sense. These are, such as are created for
the application of their revenues to the mere use and enjoyment of
individuals of a particular description: to give pensions to indigent
persons, or htoh persons devoted to particular pursuits; to relieve the
necessities, or reward the services, of persons of a particular kind, by
supporting them in alms-houses or hospitals.

There are probably ibut a small proportioni of these endowments which
are fit jfor indefinite continuancej: mankind have begun to find out
that the mass of poverty is increased, not diminished, by these impotent
attempts to keep pace with it by mere kgivingk. All, however, who are
lactually benefiting by such institutions, have a right to the
continuance of the benefit, which should be as inviolable as mthe rightm
of the weaver to the produce of his loom. They have it by gift; nas much
son as if the founder owereo alive, and had settled it upon them by deed
under hand and seal. To take it from an existing incumbent would be an
ex-post-facto law of the worst kind. It would be the same sort of
injustice as if, in abolishing entails, the existing landed proprietors
pwere to bep ejected from their estates, on the plea that the estates
had qcomeq to them by entail from their predecessors.

Edition: current; Page: [202]
These rights, however, are never anything but life interests. Such
pensions or alms are not hereditary. They are not transmissible by will,
or by gift. There is no assignable person standing in remainder or
reversion; no individual specially designated, either by law or custom,
to succeed to a vacancy as it arises. No person would suffer any
privation, or be disappointed in any authorized expectation, by the
resumption of the endowment at the death of the existing incumbents.
There is no loss, where nobody will ever know who has lost. To say that
the funds cannot rightfully be resumed at the expiration of the life
interests, because somebody or other would succeed to them if they
continued to exist, is tantamount to affirming, that the army or navy
can never be reduced without an act of spoliation, because, if they were
kept up, somebody, to be sure, would be made a cadet or a midshipman,
who rotherwiser will not.*

But there is another and a far more important class of endowments, where
the object is not a provision for individuals of whatsoever description,
but the furtherance of some public purpose; sas the cultivation of
learning,s the diffusion of religious instruction, tor the education of
youth. Such, for instance, is the nature of the Church property, and the
property attached to the Universities and the foundation schools. The
individuals through whose hands the money passes, never entered into the
founder’s contemplation otherwise than as mere trustees for the public
purpose. The founder of a College at Oxford did not bestow his
upropertyu in order that some men then living, and an indefinite series
of successors appointing one another in a direct line, might be
comfortably fed and clothed. He, we may vpresumev, intended no benefit
to them, further than as a necessary means to the end he had in view—the
education of youth, and the advancement of learning. The like is true of
the Church property: it is held in trust, for the spiritual culture of
the people of England. The Clergy and the Universities are not
proprietors, nor even partly trustees and partly proprietors: they are
called so, we know, in law, wand for legal purposes may be so called
without Edition: current; Page: [203] impropriety; but moral right does
not necessarily wait upon the convenience of technical classificationw.
The trustees are indeed, at present, owing to the supineness of the
Legislature, the sole tribunal empowered to judge of the performance of
the trust: but it will scarcely be pretended that the money is made over
to them for any other reason than because they are charged with the
trust,—or that it is not an implied condition, that they shall apply
every shilling of it with an exclusive regard to the performance of the
duty entrusted to the collective body.

Yet of persons thus situated, persons whose interest in the foundation
is entirely subsidiary and subordinate, the whole of whose rights exist
solely as the necessary means to enable them to perform certain
duties—it is currently asserted, and xin the tone in which men affirm a
self-evident moral truthx, that the endowments of the Church and of the
Universities are ytheir propertyy; to deprive them of which would be as
much an act of confiscation as to rob a landowner of his zestate.z

Their property! In what system of legislative ethics, or even of
positive law,* is an estate in the hands of trustees the property of the
trustees? It is the property of the cestui que trust: of the person, or
body of persons, for whose benefit the trust is created. This, in the
case of a national endowment, is the entire people.†

The claims of the Clergy, and of the various members of the
Universities, to the retention of their present incomes, are of a widely
different nature from those rights which are intended when we speak of
the inviolability of Edition: current; Page: [204] property; and stand
upon a totally different foundation. The same person who is a trustee,
is also a labourer. He is to be paid for his services. What he is
entitled to, is his wages while athosea services are required, and such
retiring allowance as is stipulated in his engagement. All his just
pretensions depend on the terms of his contract. bHe would have no
ground of complaint, unless on the score of inhumanity, if, when his
services are no longer needed, he were dismissed without a provisionb;
unless the contract by which he was engaged had expressly corc tacitly
provided otherwise.

It is, however, dthed fact, that in the majority of cases, and
particularly in the case of the Church and of the Universities, the
incumbents hold their emoluments under an implied contract, which fully
entitles them to retain the whole amount during the term of their lives.

If the army were to be remodelled, or to be reduced, and the whole of
the officers changed, or a part of them discarded; and if these were
thrown eupon the world, without allowing them half-pay, or the pension
of their rank, there would not (fit will probablyf be allowed) be any
spoliation of property. But it might be said, with gjustice, that there
would be a breach of an implied contract; because the State would be
defeating an expectation raised by its own uniform practice. Half-pay,
or a pension, is certainly not promised to an officer when he enters the
army; he does not give his services on that express hconditionh. But the
regulations of the army have from time immemorial sanctioned the
practice, and led the officers to count upon it, and they give their
services on that iunderstandingi.

The case of the clergyman only differs from that of the military officer
in this, that the one, by custom, may be deprived of his place, but
retains a part of its emoluments; the other, by a different custom,
retains his place, emoluments and all, jfor the remainder of his lifej.
If this were the practice in the army, then instead of half-pay an
officer would never retire on less than full; and all persons would see
that, whether this was a good practice or knotk, it ought not to be
abolished retrospectively. The same argument holds good in the case of
the clergyman.

It cannot be doubted that where the emoluments of a public officer have,
by the uniform practice of ages, been considered as placed out of the
control of the Legislature, to exercise that control to the disadvantage
of the individual, without giving him notice before he accepts the
office, is an injustice to him. It gives him reasonable ground for
complaining of a breach of Edition: current; Page: [205] contract, and
should be scrupulously avoided; even if it were not something more than
merely impolitic, to immolate large classes of lpersonsl for the
pecuniary gain of the remainder; and most unwise to teach a multitude of
influential persons that their only means of maintaining themselves and
their families in their accustomed comfort is by ma successful
resistance to political reforms.

In return for the continuation of the life interests after releasing the
incumbents from the performance of nthen accompanying duties, the State,
of course, would acquire a right to the services of the individuals in
any other mode in which it could turn them to ouseo; provided it were
one suited to the station they had formerly filled.

We have endeavoured to make as clear as possible the real grounds of the
moral question respecting the interference of the Legislature with
foundations. We have paffirmedp that it is no violation of any right
which ought to exist in the founder, to set aside his dispositions many
years after his decease; but that where individuals have been allowed to
acquire beneficial interests in the endowment, these ought in general to
be respected; being, in most cases, either rights of property for life,
or rights for life by virtue of an implied contract. But, with the
reservation of these life interests, the Legislature is at liberty to
dispose, at its discretion, of the endowment, after that moderate number
of years has elapsed from the date of its formation, beyond which the
foresight of an individual cannot reasonably be supposed to extend.

We feel certain that the conclusion which we have just stated is fully
made out, and that nothing in the nature of an argument, capable of
bearing examination, can be brought to invalidate it. But it is harder,
in some cases, to convince men’s imagination than their reason; and
qscarcely anything which can be said isq enough to destroy the force of
an objection, which is yet a mere illusion of the imagination, by the
aid of a collective name.

Would you rob the Church? it is asked. And at the sound of these words
rise up images of rapine, violence, plunder: and every sentiment of
rrepugnancer which would be excited by a sproposals to take away from an
individual the earnings of his toil or the inheritance of his fatherst,
comes heightened in the particular case by the added idea of sacrileget.

But the Church! Who is the Church? Who is it that we desire to rob? Who
are the persons whose property, whose rights, we are proposing to take
away?

Not the clergy; from them we do not propose to take anything. To every
Edition: current; Page: [206] man who now benefits by the endowment, we
have said that we would leave his entire income; at least until the
State shall offer, as the purchase money of his services in some other
shape, advantages which he himself shall regard as equivalent.

But if not the clergy, surely we are not proposing to rob the laity: on
the contrary, they are robbed now, if the fact be, that the application
of the money to its present purpose is no longer advisable. We are
exhorting the laity to claim their property out of the hands of the
clergy; who are not the Church, but only the managing members of the
association.

Qui trompe-t-on ici? asks Figaro.[*] Qui vole-t-on ici? may well be
asked. uWhat man, woman, or child, is the victim of this robbery?u Who
suffers by the robbery when everybody robs nobody? vBut though no man,
wwoman, orw child is robbed, the Church it seems is robbed. What
follows? That the Church may be robbed, and no man, woman, or child be
the worse for it. If this be so, why, in Heaven’s name, should it not be
done? If xmoney or money’s worthx can be squeezed out of an abstraction,
we ywould appropriate it without scrupley. We had no idea that the
region

-   

    Where entity and quiddity,
-   

    The ghosts of defunct bodies, fly,[†]

was an Eldorado of riches. We wish all other abstract ideas had as ample
a patrimony. It is fortunate that their estates are of a less volatile
and airy nature than themselves, and that here at length is a “chimæra
bombinans in vacuo” which lives upon something more substantial than
“secundas intentiones.” We hold all such entia rationis to be fair game,
and their possessions a legitimate subject of invasion and conquest.

Any act may be a crime, if zgiving it a bad namez could make it so; but
the robbery that we object to must be something more than robbing a
word. The laws of property were made for the protection of ahuman
beingsa, and not of phrases. As long as the bread is not taken from any
of our fellow-creatures, we care not though the whole English dictionary
had to beg in the streets. Let those who think it a robbery for the
nation to resume what we say is its own, tell us whose it is; let them
inform us, Edition: current; Page: [207] what human creatures it belongs
to; not what letters and syllables. The alphabet has no property, and if
it bbringb an action for damages in any court where we are judge, it
shall be nonsuited.

But the Church, it will be said, is a corporationc, (or, in strictness
of legal language, an aggregate of many corporations)c; and a
corporation is a dpersond, and may hold property, and bring an action at
law. A corporation never dies, but is like a river, ever flowing, yet
always the same; while it empties at one extremity it fills at the
other, and preserves its identity by the continuity of its existence.
Whatever is acquired for the corporation belongs to the corporation,
even when all its members have died out, and been succeeded by others.
So London stands upon the Thames as it did at the Conquest, though not
one drop of water be the same.

It is quite unnecessary to remind us of all this. It is true that such
is the law. We admit that the law can call a man now living, and a man
not yet born, the same person; but that does not hinder them from being
edifferent men. fHaving declaredf them one person, it may ordain that
the income held by one in a certain capacity, shall pass, on his death,
to the other. There is nothing at all inconceivable in the idea; so far
from it, that such is actually the fact. It is as simple and as easy as
to say that a man’s income shall pass to the man’s own son. It is one of
the modes in which property may be legally transmitted. It is part of
the law of inheritance and succession.

There is not the slightest intention entertained of disputing all this.
The law is precisely as it is said to be: but because the law is so,
does it follow that it ought to be? or that it must remain protected
against amendment, more than any other of the laws which regulate the
succession to property?

All, or almost all, laws give rights to somebody. By the abrogation of
any, or almost any laws, some rights would gbe prevented from existingg.
But because a law has once been enacted, ought it to subsist hfor everh?
We know that there are some alterations in the law, which would be,
morally speaking, infringements of property. What makes them so? Not,
surely, the mere fact, inseparable from the repeal of any law whatever,
that the iclass of rights which it created ceasesi to exist. Where then
lies the distinction? There is no difficulty about it, nor ever was. The
difference is, that some laws cannot be altered without painfully
frustrating existing and authorized expectations; for which, therefore,
compensation is, in all or most cases, due. Now in the case of church
property no authorized expectations are defeated, junlessj those of
existing incumbents: this evil is Edition: current; Page: [208]
prevented if the life interests of the incumbents are preserved to
them.* To make the semblance of an injury where there is none, nothing
better can be thought of than to lump ktogetherk the living incumbents
and their unborn successors into one undivided mass, call the entire
heap one person, and pretend that not to give to the unborn man, is to
take from the living one.

lTo resume endowments would incontestably be to set aside, by an act of
the legislature, a disposition of property lawfully made. It would be a
change in the laws; but a change which is allowable, if to alter a
disposition of law be ever allowable. The fact of its being a
disposition of property can make no difference. Property surely may be
appropriated by law, to purposes from which it may be highly desirable
that it should be alienated. Much property is set apart by the laws of
all idolatrous nations, for the special use and service of their gods.
Large revenues are annually expended in offerings to those gods. To
resume those revenues would manifestly be robbing Baal; they are his by
law: law cannot give a clearer right of property than he has to them. A
lawyer, addressing a court of justice, would have nothing to object to
this argument: but a moralist or a legislator might say, that the
revenues were of no use to Baal, and that he would never miss them.

We, of this generation, are not addicted to falling down before a Baal
of brass or stone: the idols we worship are abstract terms: the
divinities to whom we render up our substance are personifications.
Besides our duties to our fellow-countrymen, we owe duties to the
constitution: privileges which mlandlords or nmerchants have no claim
to, must be granted to agriculture, or trade: and when every clergyman
has received the last halfpenny of his dues and expectations, there
oremaino rights of the Churchp, which it would be sacrilege to violate.

qToq all such rights we confess our rindifference. The only moral duties
which we are conscious of, are towards living beings, either present or
to come; who can be in some way better for what we do or forbear. When
Edition: current; Page: [209] we have done our duty to all these, we
feel easy in our minds, and sleep with an untroubled conscience the
sleep of the just; a sleep which the groans of no plundered abstraction
are loud enough to disturb.

If sthes case were not already far more than sufficiently made out, it
would be pertinent to observe that the Church of England, least of all
religious establishments, is entitled to dispute the power of the
legislature to alter the destination of endowments, since it owes to the
exercise of such a power all its own possessions.

The Roman Catholic Church derived its property from an earlier source
than any of the existing governments of Christendom: it is moreover a
society within itself, which existed anterior to the State, which is
organized independently of the State, and no changes in the State can
affect its identity, or its constitution. Its endowments, too, or a
great part of them, came into its hands not for public purposes but for
private; not in trust, but by fair bargain and sale; the donor taking
out the value in masses for his private salvation; tthereby, as he
hoped,t effecting an earlier liberation of his individual soul from
purgatory. If any ecclesiastical establishment, therefore, could be
entitled to deem itself ill-used in having its property taken away from
it, this might. Not so the Church of England; she, from her origin,
never was anything but a state church; all the property she ever had,
the State first took from the Roman Catholic Church;* exercising therein
a just and proper attribute of sovereignty; but perpetrating a flagrant
wrong in paying little or no regard to life interests, and consigning
the incumbents to penury. The corporation which was then turned out of
house and home, still exists, and is in every respect the same as
before: but if the Church of England were separated from the State, its
identity as a corporation would be gone: the present religious society
would be dissolved, and a new one formed, under different rules and a
different principle of government; from a monarchy it would be changed
to a republic, from a system of nomination to one of uelection. A
Catholic bishop can look out upon the fair and broad domains of his
Protestant substitute, and say, all this would have been mine. But let
the State endowments be once withdrawn from the Church of England, her
mitred Edition: current; Page: [210] but unpalaced prelates will indulge
in no such delusion: nobody, we suppose, will then stand up for the
vsimoniacal abuses of lay-patronage and congés d’élire; and the divine
who for his piety and learning shall have been elected rector of
Stanhope, or bishop of Winchester, if he ever cast a wistful thought
towards the pristine appendages of his dignity, will check it by the
reflexion, that they would not have belonged to whimw, but to some
political tool, some tutor or chaplain of a minister, or xthe stupidest
son of somex squirearchal house. A Catholic prelate, no doubt, believes
at heart that he has been robbed; as the descendants of the Pretender
would have believed to the latest generation, that they ought to be
Kings of England. But an English Protestant bishop who (after his church
in ceasing to receive state pay, had ceased also to be fashioned as a
state tool) should still fancy that he was the ypersony losing by the
zabolitionz of the salary, must be strangely ignorant of the history of
England’s political religion, as well as of something else which would
have taught him that a person honestly selected to serve God, was not a
likely individual to have been appointed high-priest of Mammon.

aConsidering it, then, as indisputablea, that endowments, after a
certain lapse of time, may, at the discretion of the legislature, be
diverted from their original bpurposes; itb remains to consider by what
principles or rules the legislature is bound to govern itself in the
exercise of this discretion.

We would prescribe but one rule: it is somewhat general, but sufficient
to indicate the spirit in which the control of the legislature ought to
be exerted. cWhen a resolution has been taken (which should never be,
except on strong grounds) to alter the appropriation of an endowment;
dthe first object shouldd be to employ it usefully; the second, to
depart as little from the original purpose of the foundation, as is
consistent with that primary object. The endeavour should be, even in
altering the edispositione of the founder, fto carry into effect as much
of his intention as it is possible to realize without gtoo great ag
sacrifice of substantial utility.

This limitation of the discretionary power of interference residing in
Edition: current; Page: [211] the legislature, would meet, we suspect,
with as much resistance (though from a very different sort of persons)
as the discretionary power itself. It hwouldh be objected to by some,
because they are desirous to confiscate the existing endowments towards
paying off the national debt, or defraying the current expenses of the
State: by others, because they deem foundations altogether to be rather
mischievous than useful, and the intentions of founders to be
undeserving of any regard. This last opinion is the more entitled to
notice, as among its supporters is to be numbered the great and good
Turgot. That eminently wise man thought so unfavourably of the purposes
for which endowments are usually made, and of the average intelligence
of the founders, that he was an enemy to foundations altogether.

Notwithstanding our deep reverence for this illustrious man, and the
great weight which is due to his isentimentsi on all subjects which he
had maturely considered, we must regard his opinion on this subject, as
one of what it is now allowable to call the prejudices of his age. The
wisest jpersonj is not safe from the liability to mistake for good the
reverse of some inveterate and grievous ill. The clearer his discernment
of existing evils, and the more absolutely his whole soul is engaged in
the contest against them, the more danger that the mischiefs which
chiefly occupy his own thoughts, should render him insensible to their
contraries, and that in guarding one side he should leave the other
uncovered. If Turgot did not wholly escape this error, which was common
to all the philosophers of his time, ample kallowancek may be justly
claimed both for him and for them. It is not the least of the mischiefs
of our mischievous prejudices, that in their decline they raise up
counter-prejudices, and that the human mind must oscillate for a time
between opposite extremes, before it can settle quietly in the middle.
The prejudices of the French philosophers were such as it was natural
should exist, lwhen all established institutions were in the very last
stage of decay and decrepitude, preparatory to the catastrophe by which,
soon after, they were swept away:—when whatever was meant to transmit
light, had become a curtain to keep it out, and whatever was designed
mfor them protection of society, had turned nto preying upon society;
when every trust which had been reposed in individuals for the benefit
of the species, had degenerated into a selfish job, and the canker had
eaten so deeply into the heart of civilization, that the greatest genius
of his time deliberately preferred the condition of a naked savage.

oAt the head of the foundationso which existed in the time of Turgot
Edition: current; Page: [212] was the Catholic hierarchyp, then almost
effete; whichp had become irreconcilably hostile to the progress of the
human mind, because that progress was no longer compatible with belief
in its tenets; and qwhichq, to stand its ground against the advance of
incredulity, rhad been driven to knit itself closely with sthes temporal
despotism, to which it had once been a substantial, and the only
existing, impediment and control. After this came monastic bodies,
constituted tostensiblyt for purposes which derived utheir value
chieflyu from vsuperstitionv, and now not even fulfilling what they
professed; bodies, wof most of which thew very existence had become one
vast and continued ximposturex. Next came universities and academical
institutions, which had once taught all that was then known; but having
ever since indulged their ease by remaining stationary, found it for
their interest that knowledge should do so too—institutions for
education, which ykept a century behind the community zthey affected to
educate; who, when Descartes appeared, publicly censured him for
differing from Aristotle; and when Newton appeared, anathematized him
for differing from Descartes. aTherea were hospitals which killed more
of their unhappy patients than they cured, and charities, of which the
superintendants, like the blicentiateb in Gil Blas,[*] got rich by
taking care of the affairs of the poor; or which at best made twenty
beggars, by giving, or pretending to give, a miserable and dependent
pittance to one.

The foundations, therefore, were among the grossest and cmost
conspicuous of the familiar abuses of the time; and beneath their shade
flourished and multiplied large classes of men, by interest and habit
the protectors of all abuses whatsoever. What wonder, that a life spent
in practical struggles against abuses should have strongly prepossessed
Turgot against foundations in general. Yet the evils existed, not
because there were foundations, but because those foundations were
perpetuities, and dbecaused provision was not made for their continual
modification, to meet the wants of each successive age.

The opinion of Turgot was sufficiently in accordance with the prevailing
philosophy of his time. It is rare that the same heads and the same
hands excel both in pulling down and in building up. The work of urgency
in Edition: current; Page: [213] those days was to make war against
evil: this the philosophers did, and the negation of evil was nearly all
the good which their philosophy provided for. They eseemede to have
conceived the perfection of political society to be reached, if man
could but be compelled to abstain from injuring man; not considering
that men need help as well as forbearance, and that Nature is to the
greater number a severer taskmaster even than man is to man. They left
each individual to fight his own battle against fate and necessity, with
little aid from his fellow-men, save what he, of his own spontaneous
seeking, might purchase in open market and pay for.

If this be a just estimate of the exigencies of human society; if man
requires nothing from man, fexcept to be guarded against molestation;
undoubtedly foundations, and many other things, are great absurdities.
But we may conceive a people, perfectly exempt from oppression by their
government, amply protected by gitg, both against foreign enemies and
against force or fraud as between its own citizens; we may conceive all
this secured, as far at least as institutions can secure it, and yet the
people in an abject state of degradation, both physical and mental.h

The primary and perennial sources of all social evil, are ignorance and
want of culture. These are not reached by the best contrived system of
political checks, necessary as such checks are for other purposes. There
is also an unfortunate peculiarity attending these evils. iOfi all
calamities, they are those of which the jpersonsj suffering from them
are apt to be kleast aware. Of their bodily wants and ailments mankind
are generally conscious; but the want of the mind, the want of being
wiser and better, is in the far greater number of cases unfelt: lsome of
its disastrous consequences are felt, but arel ascribed to any
imaginable cause except the true one. This want has malsom the property
of disguising from mankind not only itself, but the most eligible means
of providing even for the wants of which they are conscious.

On what, then, have mankind depended, on what must they continue to be
dependent, for the removal of their ignorance and nofn their defect of
culture? Mainly, on the unremitting exertions of the more instructed
Edition: current; Page: [214] and cultivated, whether in the position of
the government or in a private station, to awaken in their minds a
consciousness of this want, and to facilitate to them the means of
supplying it. The instruments of this work are not merely schools and
colleges, but every means by which the people can be reached, either
through their intellects or their sensibilities: from preaching and
popular writing, to national galleries, theatres, and public games.

Here, then, is a wide field of usefulness open for foundations; and in
point of fact, they have been destined for such purposes oftener than
for any ootherso. We are of opinion that such endowments are deserving
of encouragement, where a sufficiency do not already exist; and that
ptheir fundsp ought not to be appropriated in another manner, as long as
any opening remains for their useful application in this.

A doctrine is indeed abroad, and has been sanctioned by many high
authorities, qamong others byq Adam Smith, that endowed establishments,
for education or other public purposes, are a mere premium upon idleness
and inefficiency. Undoubtedly they are so, when it is nobody’s business
to see that the receivers of the endowment do their duty; when (what is
more) every attempt to regulate, or so much as to know (further than the
interested parties choose to make it known) the manner in which the
funds are employed, and the nature and extent of the service rendered in
consideration rofr them, is resented and exclaimed against as an
sinterference with the inviolability of private property. That this is
the condition of most of our own endowed establishments is too true.*
But instead of fixing our eyes exclusively upon what is nearest to us,
let us turn them towards the endowed Universities of France and Germany,
and mark if those are places of idleness and inefficiency. Let us see
whether, where the endowment proceeds from the governments themselves,
and where the governments do not, as here, leave it optional whether
that which is promised and paid for shall or shall not be done, it be
not found that, notwithstanding the acknowledged defects of tthoset
governments, the education given is the ubest which the age and country
can supply. Let us even look at home, and examine whether, with all the
grievous abuses of the endowed seminaries of Great Britain, they are,
after all, vworse than, or even so bad as, almost all our other places
of weducation?w We may ask, whether the desire Edition: current; Page:
[215] to gain as much money with as little labour as is consistent with
saving appearances, be peculiar to the endowed teachers? Whether the
plan of nineteen-twentieths of our unendowed schools, be not an
organized system of charlatanerie for imposing upon the ignorance of
xparents? Whether parents do, in point of fact, prove themselves as
solicitous, and as well qualified, to judge rightly of the merits of
places of education, as the theory of Adam Smith supposes? Whether the
truth be not, that, for the most part, they bestow very little thought
upon the matter; or if they do, show themselves in general the ready
dupes of the very shallowest artifices? Whether the necessity of keeping
parents in good humour does not too often, instead of rendering the
education better, render it worse; the real ends of instruction being
sacrified, not solely (as would yotherwise be the casey) to the ease of
the teacher, but to that, and zalsoz to the additional positive vices of
clap-trap and lip-proficiency? We may ask whether it is not matter of
experience, that a schoolmaster who endeavours really to educate,
instead of endeavouring only to seem to educate, and laying himself out
for the suffrages of those who never look below the surface, and only
for an instant at that, is almost sure, unless he have the genius and
the ardour of a Pestalozzi, to make a losing speculation? Let us do what
we may, it will be the study of the amerelya trading schoolmaster to
teach down to the level of the parents, be that level high or low; as it
is of the trading author, to write down to the level of his readers. And
in the one shape as in the other, it is binb all times and in all places
indispensable, that enlightened individuals and enlightened governments
should, from other motives than that of pecuniary gain, bestir
themselves to provide (though by no means forcibly to impose) that good
and wholesome food for the wants of the mind, for which the competition
of the mere trading market affords in general so indifferent a
substitute.

It may be said, however, that where there is a wise government, and one
which has the cconfidence of the people, whatever expense it may be
requisite either to defray or to advance for national education, or any
other of the purposes for which endowments exist, ought rather to be
furnished by the government, and paid out of the taxes; the government
being probably a better judge of good education than an average man—even
an average founder.

To this dit may be answeredd, that the full benefit of the superior
wisdom of the government would be obtained, in the case of old
foundations, by that discretionary power of modifying the dispositions
of the founder, Edition: current; Page: [216] which eought to be exerted
by the government as often as fthe purposes of the foundation requiref.
We certainly agree, that if the government is so wise, and if the people
rely so implicitly on its wisdom, as to find money out of the taxes for
all the purposes of utility to which they could have applied the
endowment, it is of no consequence whether the endowment be alienated or
gnotg; the alienation is merely nominal. But all know how far the fact
at present differs from hany suchh supposition. iIt is impossible to be
assured that the people will be willing to be taxed for every purpose of
moral and intellectual improvement for which funds may be required.i But
if there were a fund specially set apart, which jhad never comej from
the people’s pockets at all, which was given to them in trust for kthe
purposek of education, and which it was considered improper to divert to
any other employment while it could be usefully devoted to that; the
people would lprobably be always willingl to have it applied to that
purposem. There is such a fund, and it consists of the national
endowments.

If, again, it be said, that as the people grow more enlightened, they
will become more able to appreciate, and more willing to pay for, good
instruction; that the competition of the market will become more and
more adequate to provide good education, and endowed establishments will
be less and less necessary; we admit the fact. And nit might be said
with equal truth, that as the people improve, there will be less and
less necessity for penal laws. But penal laws are one among the
indispensable means of bringing about this very improvement; and in like
manner, if the people ever become sufficiently enlightened to be able to
do without educational endowments, it will be because those endowments
will have been preserved, and prized, and made efficient for their
proper purpose. It is only by a right use of endowments that a people
can be raised above the need of them.n

So much with regard to old endowments; the application of which, to the
purpose for which they were destined, ought to be as completely under
the control of the government as if the funds were taken directly out of
the Edition: current; Page: [217] taxes. But in addition to these old
endowments, the liberty of forming new ones, for education and mental
culture in all shapes, seems to us of considerable importance; and a
limited number of years should, we think, be allowed, during which the
disposition of the founder should undergo no alteration.

We deem this advisable, simply because governments are fallible; and, as
they have ample means both of providing and of recommending the
education they deem best, should not be allowed to prevent other people
from doing the same. No government is entitled (further than is implied
in the very act of governing) to make its own opinion the measure of
everything which is useful and true. A perfect government would, no
doubt, be always under the guidance of the wisest members of the
community. But no government can unite all the wisdom which is in all
the members of the community taken together; much less can a mere
majority in a legislative body. oA nation ought not to place its entire
stake upon the wisdom of one man, or one body of men, and to deprive all
other intellect and virtue of a fair field of usefulness, pwhenever they
cannotp be made to square exactly with the intellect and virtue of that
man or body. It is the wisdom of a community, as well as of an
individual, to beware of being one-sided: the more chances it gives
itself, the greater the probability that some will succeed. A
government, when properly constituted, should be allowed the greatest
possible facilities for what itself deems good; but the smallest for
preventing the good which may chance to come from elsewhere. This will
not be disputed if the government be a monarchy or an aristocracy: it is
quite equally true when the constitution is popular. The disapprobation
of the government, in that case, means the disapprobation of the
majority: and where the opinion of the majority gives the law, there,
above all, it is eminently the interest of the majority that minorities
should have fair play. Sinister interest indeed is often found in a
minority, but so, it must also be remembered, is truth: at qitsq
original appearance ritr must be so. All improvements, either in opinion
or practice, must be in a minority at first.

We deem it important that individuals should have it in their power to
enable good schooling, good writing, good preaching, or any other course
of good instruction, to be carried on for a certain number of years at a
pecuniary loss. By that time, if the people are intelligent, and the
government wisely constituted, the institution will probably be capable
of supporting itself, or the government will be willing to adopt all
that is good in it, Edition: current; Page: [218] for the improvement of
the institutions which are under the public care. For, that the people
can see what is for their good, when it has long been shown them, is
commonly true; that they can foresee it—seldom.

Endowments, again, are a snaturals and convenient mode of providing for
the support of establishments which are interesting only to a peculiar
class, and for which, therefore, it tmightt be improper to tax all the
members of the community. Such, for instance, are colleges for the
professional instruction of the clergy of a sect; as Maynooth,
uManchesteru, or Highbury.v

If, then, it be in truth desirable that foundations should exist, which
we think is clear from the foregoing and many other considerations; it
would seem to follow, as a natural consequence, that the appropriation
made by the founder should not be set aside, save in so far as paramount
reasons of utility require; that his design should be no further
departed from than he himself would probably have approved, if he had
lived to the present time, and participated to a reasonable degree in
its best ideas. If foundations deserve to be encouraged, it is desirable
to reward the liberality of the founder, by allowing to works of
usefulness (though wnot a perpetuityw) as prolonged a duration of
individual and distinguishable existence as circumstances will admit.

But this is not the only nor perhaps the strongest reason for keeping to
a certain extent in view, even in an alienation of endowments, the
intention of the founder. xAlmostx any fixed rule, consistent with
ensuring the employment of the funds for ysomey purpose of real utility,
is preferable to allowing financiers to count upon them as a resource
applicable to all the exigencies of the State zindiscriminately.
Otherwisez they may be seized on to supply, not the most permanent or
essential, but the most immediate and importunate demands: one year of
financial difficulty might suffice to dissipate funds that centuries
would not replace; and the time for an interference with foundations
would be determined, not by the necessity of a reform, but by the state
of the quarter’s revenue. aNor would it be right to disregard the great
importancea of the associations which lead mankind to respect the
declared will of every bperson,b in the disposal of what is justly his
own. That will is surely not least deserving of respect, when it is
ordaining an act Edition: current; Page: [219] of beneficence. And any
cdeviation from itd, not called for by high considerations of social
good, even when not a violation of propertyd, runs counter to a feeling
so nearly allied to those on which the respect for property is founded,
that there is scarcely a possibility of infringing the one without
shaking the security of the other.

It is no violation of these salutary associations to resume an
endowment, if it be done with the conscientious reservation which we
have suggested. Respect for the intentions of the founder is not shown
by a literal adherence to his mere words, but by an honest attempt to
give execution to his real wishes; not sticking superstitiously to the
means which he hit upon accidentally, or because he knew no better; but
regarding solely ethe end which he sought to compass by those means.

The first duty of the Legislature, findeedf, is to employ the endowment
gusefullyg: and that in a hdegreeh corresponding to the greatness of the
benefit contemplated by the donor. But it is also of importance, that
not only as great a benefit, but as far as possible the same kind of
benefit, should be reaped by society, as that which the founder
intended. iIt is incumbent on the State to consider, not to what purpose
iti, under the temptations of the moment, jwouldj like best to apply the
money; but rather what, among all kobjectsk of unquestionable utility,
which a reasonable lpersonl in these days would value sufficiently to
give this sum of money for, is the particular purpose most resembling
the original disposition of the founder.

Thus, money assigned for purposes of education, should be devoted, by
preference, to education: the kind, and the mode, being altered, as the
principles and practice of education mcomem to be better understood.
Money left for giving alms, should certainly cease to be expended in
giving alms; but it should be applied, in preference, to the general
benefit of the poorer classes, in whatever manner might appear most
eligible. The endowments of an established church should continue to
bear that character, as long as it is deemed advisable that the clergy
of a sect or sects should be supported by a public provision of that
amount: and under any circumstances, as much of these endowments as is
required should be sacredly preserved for the purposes of spiritual
culture; using that expression in its primitive meaning, Edition:
current; Page: [220] to denote the culture of the inward man—his moral
and intellectual well-being, as distinguished from the mere supply of
his bodily wants.

Such, indeed, as has been forcibly maintained by Mr. Coleridge, nwas the
only just conception of a national clergy, from their first
establishment. To the minds of our ancestors they presented themselves,
not solely as ministers for going through the ceremonial of religion,
nor even solely as religious teachers in the narrow sense, but as the
lettered class; the clerici or oclerks;o who were appointed generally to
prosecute all those studies, and diffuse all those impressions, which
constituted mental culture, as then understood; which fitted the mind of
man for his condition, destiny, and duty, as pa human beingp. In
proportion as this enlarged conception of the object of a national
church establishment has been departed from, so far, in the opinion of
the first living defender of our own establishment, it has been
perverted both in idea and in fact from its true nature and ends. A
national clerisy or clergy, as Mr. Coleridge conceives it, would be a
grand institution for the education of the whole people: not their
school education merely, though that would be included in the scheme;
but for training and rearing them, by systematic culture continued
throughout life, to the highest perfection of their mental qandq
spiritual nature.

The benefits of such an institution, and how it ought to be constituted
rto be free from the vices of an established church as at present
understood, are questions too extensive to be further adverted to in
this place. We will rather say, as being more pertinent to our present
design, that if endowments (like the Church property) originally set
apart for what was then deemed the highest spiritual culture, were
diverted to the purposes of the highest spiritual culture which the
sintellects of ta subsequentt age could devise, there would be no
departure from the intentions of the original owners, but, on the
contrary, a faithful fulfilment of them, when a literal and servile
adherence to the mere uaccidentsu of the appropriation would be the
surest means of defeating its essentials. vThev perfect lawfulness of
such an alienation as this, is explicitly laid down by the eminent
writer to whom we have referred. It is part of his doctrine, that the
State is at liberty to withdraw the endowment from its existing
possessors, whenever any body of persons can be found, whether ministers
of religion or not, by whom the ends of the establishment, as he
understands them, are likely to be more Edition: current; Page: [221]
perfectly fulfilled. It is the more important to place this admission
upon record, as the most able and accomplished of the rising defenders
of the Church of England have evidently issued from Mr. Coleridge’s
school, and have taken their weapons chiefly from his storehouse.

If, however, we seize upon the endowments of the Church, not for the
civilization and cultivation of the minds of our people, but to pay off
a small fraction of the National Debt, or to supply a temporary
financial exigency—we shall not only squander for the benefit of a
single generation, the inheritance of wposterity; we shall not only
purchase an imperceptible good, by sacrificing a most important one; but
by disregarding entirely the intentions of the original owners, we shall
do our best to create a habit of paltering with the sacredness of a
trust. It matters not that the property has now become res nullius, and
is therefore, properly speaking, our own. It is xnotx of our earning;
others gave it to us, and for purposes which it may be a ydutyy to set
aside, but which cannot honestly be sacrificed to a zconveniencez. We
have not the slightest reason to believe that if the owners were alive,
and still masters of their property, they would give it to us to be
blown away in gunpowder, or to save a few years’ house and window tax.

On a pressing exigency, as to avert a national bankruptcy, or repel a
foreign invasion, the whole or any part of the endowment might be
borrowed; as, in such a case, might any other property, public or
private: but subject to the promptest possible repayment.

If any surplus remains, after as much has been done for cultivating the
minds of the people, as it is thought advisable to do without making
them pay athe cost ofa it, the residue may be unobjectionably applied to
the ordinary purposes of government: though it should even then bbe
considered as a fund cliable to be drawn upon dto its full extentd, if
hereafter required, for purposes of spiritual culture.

eA few words must be addede on the kinds of foundation which ought fnotf
to be permitted: after which we shall conclude.

No endowment should be suffered to be made, or funds to be legally
appropriated, for any purpose which is actually gunlawfulg. If the law
has forbidden any act, has constituted it an offence or injury, heveryh
mode of committing the act, inot some particular modes only, ought to be
prohibitedi. But if the purpose for which the foundation is constituted
be not illegal, Edition: current; Page: [222] but only, in the opinion
of the Legislature, inexpedient, jthis is by no meansj a sufficient
reason for denying to the appropriation the protection of the law. The
grounds of this opinion may be sufficiently collected from the preceding
observations.

The only other restriction which we would impose upon the authors of
foundations, is, that the endowment shall not consist of land. The evils
of allowing land to pass into mortmain are universally acknowledged; and
the trustees, besides, ought to have no concern with the money entrusted
to them, except to apply it to its purposes. They may desire landed
property as a source of power, which is a reason the more for refusing
it to them: but as a source of income, it is not suited to their
position. They should konly havek to receive an annuity, and that in the
simplest and least troublesome manner: not to realize a rental from a
multitude of small tenants. Their time and attention ought not to be
divided between their proper business and the duties of a landlord, or
the superintendence and management of a landed estate.l

Edition: current; Page: [223]


MISS MARTINEAU’S SUMMARY OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
 1834

Edition: current; Page: [224]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Monthly Repository, VIII (May, 1834), 318-22. Signed A; not republished.
Original heading as above, with footnote: “Illustrations of Political
Economy, No. XXV. ‘The Moral of many Fables,’ by Harriet Martineau”
(London: Fox, 1834. Gathered, without repagination, in Vol. IX of
Illustrations of Political Economy, also Fox, 1834). Identified in JSM’s
bibliography as “A review of Miss Martineau’s Summary of Political
Economy in the Monthly Repository for May 1834” (MacMinn, 39). The one
correction indicated in the Somerville College copy will be found at
226a-a below.

Edition: current; Page: [225]


Miss Martineau’s Summary of Political Economy

besides subjoining to each of her Political Economy Tales a brief
summary of the doctrines which it was intended to illustrate, Miss
Martineau has concluded the Series by a similar compendium of the whole
science. We should rather say, not of the Science, but of its leading
doctrines and most important applications, as taught by the highest
contemporary authorities. For a science is a connected body of truth;
the entire philosophy of some distinctly definable portion of the field
of nature: and when it is taught as Science, that is, with a view to the
perfection of speculative knowledge rather than to the readiness of
practical application, the teacher aims at making such a selection of
its truths, and at presenting them in such an order, as will best
exhibit the connectedness of the whole, and the completeness with which
it solves all the questions which a contemplation of the subject-matter
suggests to the speculative inquirer. But this was not the task which
Miss Martineau set before herself, nor had it been left for her to
perform. Her object was, not to exhibit the science as a whole, but to
illustrate such parts of it as lead directly to important practical
results. Having accomplished this, she has now brought together in one
series, the principles which she had separately exemplified, and by
hanging them each in its place, upon a logical framework originally
constructed for the entire science, has given to the “Moral” of her
“many Fables,” some semblance of an elementary treatise. It would be
unjust to weigh this little work in a balance in which most of the
elaborate treatises on the subject would be found wanting. To all of
them, perhaps, it may be objected, that they attempt to construct a
permanent fabric out of transitory materials; that they take for granted
the immutability of arrangements of society, many of which are in their
nature fluctuating or progressive; and enunciate with as little
qualification as if they were universal and absolute truths,
propositions which are perhaps applicable to no state of society except
the particular one in which the writer happened to live. Thus, for
instance, English political economists presuppose, in every one of their
speculations, Edition: current; Page: [226] that the produce of industry
is shared among three classes, altogether distinct from one
another—namely, labourers, capitalists, and landlords; and that all
these are free agents, permitted in law and fact to set upon their
labour, their capital, and their land, whatever price they are able to
get for it. The conclusions of the science being all adapted to a
society thus constituted, require to be revised whenever they are
applied to any other. They are inapplicable where the only capitalists
are the landlords, and the labourers are their property; as in the West
Indies. They are inapplicable where the universal landlord is the State;
as in India. They are inapplicable where the agricultural labourer is
generally the owner both of the land itself and of the capital; as in
France; or of the capital only, as in Ireland. We might greatly prolong
this enumeration. It must not, however, be supposed that the science is
so incomplete and unsatisfactory as this might seem to prove. Though
many of its conclusions are only locally true, its method of
investigation is applicable universally; and as he who has solved a
certain number of algebraic equations, can without difficulty solve all
others, so he who knows the political economy of England, or even of
Yorkshire, knows that of all nations actual or possible: provided he
have sense enough not to expect the same conclusion to issue from
varying premises.

But it is, when not duly guarded against, an almost irresistible
tendency of the human mind to become the slave of its own hypotheses;
and when it has once habituated itself to reason, feel, and conceive,
under certain arbitrary conditions, at length to mistake these
conditions for laws of nature. Let us but be accustomed whenever we
think aofa certain things, to figure them to ourselves as existing in
one particular way, never in any other way, and we at last learn to
think, or to feel as if we thought, that way the natural and the only
possible way: and we feel the same sort of incapability of adapting our
associations to any change in the hypothesis, which a rustic feels in
conceiving that it is the earth which moves and the sun which stands
still. (And this, we may observe, en passant, is one of the reasons why
a literal understanding cannot be a good understanding, and why the
greatest powers of reasoning, when connected with a sluggish
imagination, are no safeguard against the poorest intellectual
slavery—that of subjection to mere accidental habits of thought.) It is
in this manner that in all countries the lawyer, from the habit of
making the existing system his standard of comparison, and asking
himself in each case as it occurs no question but this, how the case is
provided for by the law as it is, becomes usually a sworn foe to all
reform, merely because he cannot, for the life of him, realize the
conception of any other system, or fancy what it could be like. And we
think there is some danger of a similar result in the case of the
English political economists. They revolve in their Edition: current;
Page: [227] eternal circle of landlords, capitalists, and labourers,
until they seem to think of the distinction of society into those three
classes, as if it were one of God’s ordinances, not man’s, and as little
under human control as the division of day and night. Scarcely any one
of them seems to have proposed to himself as a subject of inquiry, what
changes the relations of those classes to one another are likely to
undergo in the progress of society; to what extent the distinction
itself admits of being beneficially modified, and if it does not even,
in a certain sense, tend gradually to disappear.

We are unable at present to enter into the extensive field of
speculation which these topics open to us. There is much acknowledged
evil to be got rid of, before these ulterior inquiries come into
immediate contact with practice: society has many incumbrances to throw
off, before it can start fair on that new journey. We have to abolish
all monopolies, and restrictions on trade or production for the benefit
of particular classes; to pay off our debt by an impost on all kinds of
property; to new-model our whole fiscal system, with a view to raise no
more revenue than is necessary, to raise it in the least costly manner,
and to avoid favouring any class of contributors at the expense of
another; and finally, we have to lessen the pressure on the
labour-market, by systematic colonization adapted specially to that end,
by ceasing to give, through the maladministration of the poor laws,
artificial inducements to the increase of population, and on the
contrary, giving all the force we can to the natural checks. The
political economists of the last and present age have taught us all
this, and through their exertions it has all been put into a train of
more or less speedy accomplishment. We only ask of those to whom we are
indebted for so much, that they will not require of us to believe that
this is all, nor, by fixing bounds to the possible reach of improvement
in human affairs, set limits also to that ardour in its pursuit, which
may be excited for an object at an indefinite distance, but only if it
be also of indefinite magnitude.

Miss Martineau’s little work is not more subject to the above criticism
than works of far greater pretension; but on the contrary, less. And as
an exposition of the leading principles of what now constitutes the
science, it possesses considerable merit.

There is but one point of importance on which we are obliged to differ
from her. We cannot concur in her unqualified condemnation of the
principle of the poor-laws. In this she is decidedly behind the present
state of the science; political economists having mostly abandoned this
among other exaggerated conclusions to which naturally enough they had
pushed the principle of population, when they first became acquainted
with it. The recent investigations of the poor-law commission,[*] with
which Miss Edition: current; Page: [228] Martineau is familiar, seem to
us as conclusive in support of the principle of a poor-rate, as they are
in condemnation of the existing practice.

We had marked for criticism, several instances of obscurity, or
insufficient explanation, and some of inaccuracy, either of thought or
of expression. But they are mostly of too little importance to require
notice. We shall merely note one or two; which, it will be at once seen,
arise from mere inadvertency. Thus, in page 120, she says, that when
from an increase in the cost of procuring food, wages rise, without
benefit to the labourers, “capitalists must either sell their
productions dearer than is necessary where food is cheaper, or submit to
a diminution of their profits. Under the first alternative, the
capitalist is incapacitated for competition with the capitalists of
countries where food is cheaper: under the second, the capital of the
country tends, through perpetual diminution, to extinction.” Now, a
moment’s reconsideration will easily show, that in the case supposed
there would be no tendency to a diminution of capital, but only to the
stoppage of any further increase. As well might it be said, that if you
fill a vessel till it overflows, the water will continue to flow out
until the vessel is empty.

Again, in page 3, are these words: “Productive labour being a beneficial
power, whatever stimulates and directs this power is beneficial also.
Many kinds of unproductive labour do this; many kinds of unproductive
labour are therefore beneficial. All labour for which there is a fair
demand is equally respectable.” We are sure Miss Martineau does not mean
the last assertion to be taken literally; there may be a fair demand for
labour which is positively infamous. What does she think of the labour
of a quack doctor? or a conjurer? or the professional assassins who once
drove so thriving a trade in Italy? But she probably means, that
unproductive labour may be as deserving of respect as productive labour.
It is quite out of keeping too, with Miss Martineau’s tone of thought
and feeling, to assert that unproductive labour, for the purpose of
immediate enjoyment, or of mental culture, is only beneficial because it
may collaterally “stimulate and direct” productive labour. This cannot
possibly be her meaning; but as such sentiments are often imputed to
political economists, we regret that she did not more carefully avoid
giving any colour to the imputation.

But even these small blemishes are rare, and do not materially impair
the value of the work: for which we may safely venture to bespeak
numerous readers and a favourable reception.

Edition: current; Page: [229]


ESSAYS ON SOME UNSETTLED QUESTIONS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
 1844

Edition: current; Page: [230]


EDITOR’S NOTE

London: Parker, 1844. Not republished in JSM’s lifetime; a 2nd edition,
presumably prepared by Helen Taylor, appeared in 1874 (London: Longmans,
Green, Reader, and Dyer), with a few alterations, which are discussed in
the headnotes to the separate essays. Identified in JSM’s bibliography
as “Essays on some unsettled Questions on Political Economy, in one vol.
8vo (four new, though written in 1830, the fifth a reprint, with some
alterations, from the article in the London and Westminster Review for
October 1836)” (MacMinn, 57). Copy in Somerville College.

In his Autobiography, commenting on the early morning discussions at
Grote’s house in the 1820s, JSM says (84-5):

The theory of International Values which I afterwards published,
emanated from these conversations, as did also the modified form of
Ricardo’s theory of Profits, laid down in my Essay on Profits and
Interest. . . . [These] were excogitated and worked out in about equal
proportions by myself and Graham: and if our original project had been
executed, my ‘Essays on some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy’
would have been brought out along with some papers of his, under our
joint names. But when my exposition came to be written, I found that I
had so much over-estimated my agreement with him, and he dissented so
much from the most original of the two Essays, that on International
Values, that I was obliged to consider the theory as now exclusively
mine, and it came out as such when published many years later. (Cf.
Earlier Letters, XII, 79.)

Later he comments (126-7) that the essays were written in 1830 and 1831
“almost as they now stand, except that in 1833 I partially rewrote the
fifth Essay. They were written with no immediate purpose of publication;
and when, some years later, I offered them to a publisher, he declined
them. They were only printed in 1844, after the success of the ‘System
of Logic.’ ” He offered them first to Tait’s Edinburgh Magazine in 1833;
in 1844 Tait encouraged him to publish them as a volume, but Parker, the
publisher of the Logic, accepted them, to JSM’s surprise (Earlier
Letters, XII, 178-9, XIII, 623-4; cf. ibid., XII, 231, XIII, 626, 630,
642.)

Edition: current; Page: [231]


Preface

of these essays, which were written in 1829 and 1830, the fifth alone
has been previously printed. The other four have hitherto remained in
manuscript, because, during the temporary suspension of public interest
in the species of discussion to which they belong, there was no
inducement to their publication.

They are now published (with a few merely verbal alterations) under the
impression, that the controversies excited by Colonel Torrens’ Budget[*]
have again called the attention of political economists to the
discussions of the abstract science: and from the additional
consideration, that the first paper relates expressly to the point upon
which the question at issue between Colonel Torrens and his antagonists
has principally turned.

From that paper it will be seen that opinions identical in principle
with those promulgated by Colonel Torrens (there would probably be
considerable difference as to the extent of their practical application)
have been held by the writer for more than fifteen years: although he
cannot claim to himself the original conception, but only the
elaboration, of the fundamental doctrine of the Essay.

A prejudice appears to exist in many quarters against the theory in
question, on the supposition of its being opposed to one of the most
valuable results of modern political philosophy, the doctrine of Freedom
of Trade between nation and nation. The opinions now laid before the
reader are presented as corollaries necessarily following from the
principles upon which Free Trade itself rests. The writer has also been
careful to point out, that from these opinions no justification can be
derived for any protecting duty, or other preference given to domestic
over foreign industry. But in regard to those duties on foreign
commodities which do not operate as protection, but are maintained
solely for revenue, and which do not touch either the necessaries of
life or the materials and instruments of production, it is his opinion
that any relaxation of such duties, beyond what may be required by the
interest of the revenue itself, should in general be made contingent
upon the adoption of some corresponding degree of freedom of trade with
this country, by the nation from which the commodities are imported.

Edition: current; Page: [232]


Of the Laws of Interchange Between Nations; and the Distribution of the Gains of Commerce among the Countries of the Commercial World

[Essay I in Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy,
1-46. Writing to Theodor Gomperz (27/1/68) about the German translation
of his works, JSM says: “I am unable to give any opinion as to including
the Essays on Unsettled Questions of Political Economy, but if a new
edition of them was called for here, I should alter the first Essay
considerably.” (Quoted in Adelaide Weinberg, Theodor Gomperz and John
Stuart Mill [Geneva: Librairie Droz, 1963], 49-50.) Such alterations, it
may be assumed, would be consonant with the revisions and alterations
made when major portions of this essay were quoted by JSM in his
Principles. Accordingly, in the text below the substantive variants
between the essay and the Principles are given, with guides to further
comparison. As the later text is that in the Principles, the earlier one
is here printed. In the variant notes, the last two figures of the date
of the edition of the Principles are given: “48” = 1848, etc. The 1st
edition of Some Unsettled Questions is indicated by “44”; the 2nd by
“74”. Two corrections are accepted from the 2nd edition (and they are
also found in the Principles), at 239p-p and 247n-n; the latter being
also the only correction in the Somerville College copy of the 1st
edition. One typographical error (“snch” for “such”, 261.13) is
corrected in the 2nd edition. Two readings from the 2nd edition are
given as variants (252j-j and k-k). Three typographical errors were
introduced into the 2nd edition: the paragraph at 251.14 is not
indented; “as it” replaces “as is” (254.34); and “suggests” replaces
“suggest” (257.23). On 256 the internal page reference is silently
altered to apply to this edition.]

of the truths with which political economy has been enriched by Mr.
Ricardo, none has contributed more to give to that branch of knowledge
the comparatively precise and scientific character which it at present
bears, than the more accurate analysis which he performed of the nature
of the advantage which nations derive from a mutual interchange of their
productions. Previously to his time, the benefits of foreign trade were
deemed, even by the most philosophical enquirers, to consist in
affording a vent for surplus produce, or in enabling a portion of the
national capital to replace itself with Edition: current; Page: [233] a
profit. The futility of the theory implied in these and similar phrases,
was an obvious consequence from the speculations of writers even
anterior to Mr. Ricardo. But it was he who first, in the chapter on
Foreign Trade, of his immortal Principles of Political Economy and
Taxation,[*] substituted for the former vague and unscientific, if not
positively false, conceptions with regard to the advantage of trade, a
philosophical exposition which explains, with strict precision, the
nature of that advantage, and affords an accurate measure of its amount.

He shewed, that the advantage of an interchange of commodities between
nations consists simply and solely in this, that it enables each to
obtain, with a given amount of labour and capital, a greater quantity of
all commodities taken together. This it accomplishes by enabling each,
with a quantity of one commodity which has cost it so much labour and
capital, to purchase a quantity of another commodity which, if produced
at home, would have required labour and capital to a greater amount. To
render the importation of an article more advantageous than its
production, it is not necessary that the foreign country should be able
to produce it with less labour and capital than ourselves. We may even
have a positive advantage in its production: but, if we are so far
favoured by circumstances as to have a still greater positive advantage
in the production of some other article which is in demand in the
foreign country, we may be able to obtain a greater return to our labour
and capital by employing none of it in producing the article in which
our advantage is least, but devoting it all to the production of that in
which our advantage is greatest, and giving this to the foreign country
in exchange for the other. aIt is not a difference in the absolute cost
of production, which determines the interchange, but a difference in the
comparative cost. It may be to our advantage to procure iron from Sweden
in exchange for cottons, even although the mines of England as well as
her manufactories should be more productive than those of Sweden; for if
we have an advantage of one-half in cottons, and only an advantage of a
quarter in iron, and could sell our cottons to Sweden at the price which
Sweden must pay for them if she produced them herself, we should obtain
our iron with an advantage of one-half, as well as our cottons. We may
often, by trading with foreigners, obtain their commodities at a smaller
expense of labour and capital than they cost to the foreigners
themselves. The bargain is still advantageous to the foreigner, because
the commodity which he receives in exchange, though it has cost us less,
would have cost him more.a As often as a country possesses two
commodities, one of which it can produce with less labour, comparatively
to what it would cost in a foreign country, than Edition: current; Page:
[234] the other; so often it is the interest of the country to export
the first mentioned commodity and to import the second; even though it
might be able to produce both the one and the other at a less expense of
labour than the foreign country can produce them, but not less in the
same degree; or might be unable to produce either except at a greater
expense, but not greater in the same degree.

On the contrary, if it produces both commodities with greater facility,
or both with greater difficulty, and greater in exactly the same degree,
there will be no motive to interchange.

If the cloth and the corn, each of which required 100 days’ labour in
Poland, required each 150 days’ labour in England; it would follow, that
the cloth of 150 days’ labour in England, if sent to Poland, would be
equal to the cloth of 100 days’ labour in Poland: if exchanged for corn,
therefore, it would exchange for the corn of only 100 days’ labour. But
the corn of 100 days’ labour in Poland, was supposed to be the same
quantity with that of 150 days’ labour in England. With 150 days’ labour
in cloth, therefore, England would only get as much corn in Poland as
she could raise with 150 days’ labour at home; and she would, in
importing it, have the cost of carriage besides. In these circumstances
no exchange would take place.

If, on the other hand, while the cloth produced with 100 days’ labour in
Poland was produced with 150 days’ labour in England, the corn which was
produced in Poland with 100 days’ labour could not be produced in
England with less than 200 days’ labour; an adequate motive to exchange
would immediately arise. With a quantity of cloth which England produced
with 150 days’ labour, she would be able to purchase as much corn in
Poland as was there produced with 100 days’ labour; but the quantity,
which was there produced with 100 days’ labour, would be as great as the
quantity produced in England with 200 days’ labour.

The power of Poland would be reciprocal. With a quantity of corn which
cost her 100 days’ labour, equal to the quantity produced in England by
200 days’ labour, she could in the supposed case purchase in England the
produce of 200 days’ labour in cloth. [But] the produce of 150 days’
labour in England in the article of cloth would be equal to the produce
of 100 days’ labour in Poland.*

The remainder of what Mr. Ricardo has done for the philosophical
exposition of the principles of foreign trade, is to shew, that the
truth of the propositions now recapitulated is not affected by the
introduction of money as a medium of exchange; the precious metals
always tending to distribute themselves in such a manner throughout the
commercial world, that every country shall import all that it would have
imported, and export all that it would have exported, if exchanges had
taken place, as in the example above supposed, by barter.[*]

Edition: current; Page: [235]
To this branch of the subject we shall, in the sequel of this essay,
return. At present it will be more convenient that we should continue to
suppose, that exchanges take place by the direct trucking of one
commodity against another.

It is established, that the advantage which two countries derive from
trading with each other, results from the more advantageous employment
which thence arises, of the labour and capital—for shortness let us say
the labour—of both jointly. The circumstances are such, that if each
country confines itself to the production of one commodity, there is a
greater total return to the labour of both together; and this increase
of produce forms the whole of what the two countries taken together gain
by the trade.

It is the purpose of the present essay to inquire, in what proportion
the increase of produce, arising from the saving of labour, is divided
between the two countries.

This question was not entered into by Mr. Ricardo, whose attention was
engrossed by far more important questions, and who, having a science to
create, had not time, or room, to occupy himself with much more than the
leading principles. When he had done enough to enable any one who came
after him, and who took the necessary pains, to do all the rest, he was
satisfied. He very rarely followed out the principles of the science
into the ramifications of their consequences. But we believe that to no
one, who has thoroughly entered into the spirit of his discoveries, will
even the minutiæ of the science offer any difficulty but that which is
constituted by the necessity of patience and circumspection in tracing
principles to their results.

Mr. Ricardo, while intending to go no further into the question of the
advantage of foreign trade than to show what it consisted of, and under
what circumstances it arose, unguardedly expressed himself as if each of
the two countries making the exchange separately gained the whole of the
difference between the comparative costs of the two commodities in one
country and in the other.[*] But, the whole gain of both countries
together, consisting in the saving of labour; and the saving of labour
being exactly equal to the difference between the costs, in the two
countries, of the one commodity as compared with the other; the two
countries taken together gain no more than this difference: and if
either country gains the whole of it, the other country derives no
advantage from the trade.

bSupposec, for example,c that 10 yards of broad cloth cost in England as
much labour as 15 yards of linen, and in Germany as much as 20.b If
England sends 10 yards of broad cloth to Germany, and is able to
exchange them for linen according to the German cost of production, she
will get 20 Edition: current; Page: [236] yards of linen, with a
quantity of labour with which she could not have produced more than 15;
and will gain, therefore, 5 yards on every 15, or 33⅓ per cent. But in
this case Germany would obtain only 10 yards of cloth for 20 of linen.
Now, 10 yards of cloth cost exactly the same quantity of labour in
Germany as 20 of linen; Germany, therefore, derives no advantage from
the trade, more than she would possess if it did not exist.

So, on the other hand, if Germany sends 15 yards of linen to England,
and finding the relative value of the two articles in that country
determined by the English costs of production, is enabled to purchase
with 15 yards of linen 10 yards of cloth; Germany now gains 5 yards,
just as England did before,—for with 15 yards of linen she purchases 10
yards of cloth, when to produce these 10 yards she must have employed as
much labour as would have enabled her to produce 20 yards of linen. But
in this case England would gain nothing: she would only obtain, for her
10 yards of cloth, 15 yards of linen, which is exactly the comparative
cost at which she could have produced them.

This, which was not an error, but a mere oversight of Mr. Ricardo,
arising from his having left the question of the division of the
advantage entirely unnoticed, was first corrected in the third edition
of Mr. Mill’s Elements of Political Economy [pp. 122-4]. It can hardly,
however, be said that Mr. Mill has prosecuted the inquiry any further;
which, indeed, would have been quite as inconsistent with the nature of
his plan as of Mr. Ricardo’s.

1. dWhen the trade is established between the two countries, the two
commodities will exchange for each other at the same rate of interchange
in both countries—bating the cost of carriage, of which, for the
present, it will be more convenient to omit the consideration.
Supposing, therefore, for the sake of argument, that the carriage of the
commodities from one country to another could be effected without labour
and without cost, no sooner would the trade be opened than, it is
self-evident, the value of the two commodities, estimated in each other,
would come to a level in both countries.d

If we knew what this level would be, we should know in what proportion
the two countries would share the advantage of the trade.

eWhen each country produced both commodities for itself, 10 yards of
fbroad clothf exchanged for 15 yards of linen in England, and for 20 in
Germany. They will now exchange for the same number of yards of linen in
both. For what number? If for 15 yards, England will be just as she was,
and Germany will gain all. If for 20 yards, Germany will be as before,
and England will derive the whole of the benefit. If for any number
intermediate Edition: current; Page: [237] between 15 and 20, the
advantage will be shared between the two countries. If, for example, 10
yards of cloth exchange for 18 of linen, England will gain an advantage
of 3 yards on every 15, Germany will save 2 out of every 20.

The problem is, what are the causes which determine the proportion in
which the cloth of England and the linen of Germany will exchange for
each gother?ge

hThis, therefore, is a question concerning exchangeable value. There
must be something which determines how much of one commodity another
commodity will purchase; and there is no reason to suppose that the law
of exchangeable value is more difficult of ascertainment in this case
than in other cases.

The law, however, cannot be precisely the same as in the common cases.
When two articles are produced in the immediate vicinity of one another,
so that, without expatriating himself, or moving to a distance, a
capitalist has the choice of producing one or the other, the quantities
of the two articles which will exchange for each other will be, on the
average, those which are produced by equal quantities of labour. But
this cannot be applied to the case where the two articles are produced
in two different countries; because men do not usually leave their
country, or even send their capital abroad, for the sake of those small
differences of profit which are sufficient to determine their choice of
a business, or of an investment, in their own country and neighbourhood.

The principle, that value is proportional to cost of production, being
consequently inapplicable, we must revert to a principle anterior to
that of cost of production, and from which this last flows as a
consequence,—namely, the principle of demand and supply.

In order to apply this principle, with any advantage, to the solution of
the question which now occupies us, the principle itself, and the idea
attached to the term demand, must be conceived with a precision, which
the loose manner in which the words are used generally prevents.

It is well known that the quantity of any commodity which can be
disposed of, varies with the price. The higher the price, the fewer will
be the purchasers, and the smaller the quantity sold. The lower the
price, the greater will in general be the number of purchasers, and the
greater the quantity disposed of. This is true of almost all commodities
whatever: though of some commodities, to diminish the consumption in any
given degree would require a much greater rise of price than of others.

Whatever be the commodity—the supply in any market being given, there is
some price at which the whole of the supply exactly will find
purchasers, Edition: current; Page: [238] and no more. That, whatever it
be, is the price at which, by the effect of competition, the commodity
will be sold. If the price be higher, the whole of the supply will not
be disposed of, and the sellers, by their competition, will bring down
the price. If the price be lower, there will be found purchasers for a
larger supply, and the competition of these purchasers will raise the
price.

This, then, is what we mean, when we say that price, or exchangeable
value, depends on demand and supply. We should express the principle
more accurately, if we were to say, the price so regulates itself that
the demand shall be exactly sufficient to carry off the supply.

Let us now apply the principle of demand and supply, thus understood, to
the interchange of broad-cloth and linen between England and Germany.h

iAs jexchangeablej value in this case, as in every other, is
proverbially fluctuating, it does not matter what we suppose it to be
when we begin; we shall soon see whether there be any fixed point about
which it oscillates—which it has a tendency always to approach to, and
to remain at.

Let us suppose, then, that by the effect of what Adam Smith calls the
higgling of the market,[*] 10 yards of cloth, in both countries,
exchange for 17 yards of linen.

The demand for a commodity, that is, the quantity of it which can find a
purchaser, varies, as we have before remarked, according to the price.
In Germany, the price of 10 yards of cloth is now 17 yards of linen; or
whatever quantity of money is equivalent in Germany to 17 yards of
linen. Now, that being the price, there is some particular number of
yards of cloth, which will be in demand, or will find purchasers, at
that price. There is some given quantity of cloth, more than which could
not be disposed of at that price,—less than which, at that price, would
not fully satisfy the demand. Let us suppose this quantity to be, 1000
times 10 yards.

Let us now turn our attention to England. There, the price of 17 yards
of linen is 10 yards of cloth, or whatever quantity of money is
equivalent in England to 10 yards of cloth. There is some particular
number of yards of linen, which, at that price, will exactly satisfy the
demand, and no more. Let us suppose that this number is 1000 times 17
yards.

As 17 yards of linen are to 10 yards of cloth, so are 1000 times 17
yards to 1000 times 10 yards. At the existing kexchangeablek value, the
linen which England requires, will exactly pay for the quantity of cloth
which, on the same terms of interchange, Germany requires. The demand on
each side is precisely sufficient to carry off the supply on the other.
The conditions Edition: current; Page: [239] required by the principle
of demand and supply are fulfilled, and the two commodities will
continue to be interchanged, as we supposed them to be, in the ratio of
17 yards of linen for 10 yards of cloth.

But our lsuppositionl might have been different. Suppose that, at the
assumed rate of interchange, England mhadm been disposed to consume no
greater quantity of linen that 800 times 17 yards; it is evident that,
at the rate supposed, this would not have sufficed to pay for the 1000
times 10 yards of cloth, which we have supposed Germany to require at
the assumed value. Germany would be able to procure no more than 800
times 10 yards, at that price. To procure the remaining 200, which she
would have no means of doing but by bidding higher for them, she would
offer more than 17 yards of linen in exchange for 10 yards of cloth; let
us suppose her to offer 18. At nthatn price, perhaps, England would be
inclined to purchase a greater quantity of linen. She ocouldo consume,
possibly, at that price, 900 times 18 yards. On the other hand, cloth
having risen in price, the demand of Germany for it would, probably,
have diminished. If, instead of 1000 times 10 yards, she is now
contented with 900 times ten yards, these will exactly pay for the 900
times 18 yards of linen which England is willing to take at the altered
price: the demand on each side will again exactly suffice to take off
the corresponding supply; and 10 yards for 18 will be the rate at which,
in both countries, cloth will exchange for linen.

The converse of all this would have happened if instead of 800 times 17
yards, we had supposed that England, at the rate of 10 for 17, would
have taken 1200 times 17 yards of linen. In this case, it is England
whose demand is not fully supplied; it is England who, by bidding for
more linen, will alter the rate of interchange to her own disadvantage;
and 10 yards of cloth will fall, in both countries, below the value of
17 yards of linen. By this fall of cloth, or what is the same thing,
this rise of linen, the demand of Germany for cloth will increase, and
the demand of England for linen will diminish, till the rate of
interchange has so adjusted itself that the cloth and the linen will
exactly pay for ponep another; and when once this point is attained,
values will remain qas they areq.

It may be considered, therefore, as established, that when two countries
trade together in two commodities, the rexchangeabler value of these
commodities relatively to each other will adjust itself to the
inclinations and circumstances of the consumers on both sides, in such
manner that the Edition: current; Page: [240] quantities required by
each country, of the sarticles which it imports from its neighbour,
shall be exactly sufficient to pay for one another. As the inclinations
and circumstances of consumers cannot be reduced to any rule, so neither
can the proportions in which the two commodities will be interchanged.
We know that the limits within which the variation is confined are the
ratio between their costs of production in the one country, and the
ratio between their costs of production in the other. Ten yards of cloth
cannot exchange for more than 20 yards of linen, nor for less than 15.
But they may exchange for any intermediate number. The ratios,
therefore, in which the advantage of the trade may be divided between
the two nations, are various. The circumstances on which the
proportionate share of each country more remotely depends, admit only of
a very general indication.

It is even possible to conceive an extreme case, in which the whole of
the advantage resulting from the interchange would be reaped by one
party, the other country gaining nothing at all. There is no absurdity
in the hypothesis, that of some given commodity a certain quantity is
all that is wanted at any price, and that when that quantity is
obtained, no fall in the texchangeablet value would induce other
consumers to come forward, or those who are already supplied to take
more. Let us suppose that this is the case in Germany with cloth. Before
her trade with England commenced, when 10 yards of cloth cost her as
much labour as 20 yards of linen, she nevertheless consumed as much
cloth as she wanted under any circumstances, and if she could obtain it
at the rate of 10 yards of cloth for 15 of linen, she would not consume
more. Let this fixed quantity be 1000 times 10 yards. At the rate,
however, of 10 for 20, England would want more linen than would be
equivalent to this quantity of cloth. She would consequently offer a
higher value for linen; or, what is the same thing, she would offer her
cloth at a cheaper rate. But as by no lowering of the value could she
prevail on Germany to take a greater quantity of cloth, there would be
no limit to the rise of linen, or fall of cloth, until the demand of
England for linen was reduced by the rise of its value, to the quantity
which one thousand times ten yards of cloth would purchase. It might be,
that to produce this diminution of the demand, a less fall would not
suffice, than uoneu which would make 10 yards of cloth exchange for 15
of linen. Germany would then gain the whole of the advantage, and
England would be exactly as she was before the trade commenced. It would
be for the interest, however, of Germany herself, to keep her linen a
little below the value at which it could be produced in England, in
order to keep herself from being supplanted by the home producer.
England, therefore, would always benefit in some degree by the existence
of the trade, though it might vbe in av very trifling one.i

Edition: current; Page: [241]
wBut in general there will not be this extreme inequality in the degree
in which the demand in the two countries varies with variations in the
price. The advantage will probably be divided equally, oftener than in
any one unequal ratio that can be named; though the division will be
much oftener, on the whole, unequal than equal.

2. We shall now examine whether the same law of interchange, which we
have shown to apply upon the supposition of barter, holds good after the
introduction of money. Mr. Ricardo found that his more general
proposition stood this test; and as the proposition which we have just
demonstrated is only a further developement of his principle, we shall
probably find that it suffers as little, by a mere change in the mode
(for it is no more) in which one commodity is exchanged against
another.w

xWe may at first make whatever supposition we will with respect to the
value of money. Let us suppose, therefore, that before the opening of
the trade, the price of cloth is the same in both countries, namely, six
shillings per yard.* As 10 yards of cloth were supposed to exchange in
England for 15 yards of linen, in Germany for 20, we must suppose that
linen is sold in England at four shillings per yard, in Germany at
three. Cost of carriage and importer’s profit are left as before, out of
consideration.

In this state of prices, cloth, it is evident, cannot yet be exported
from England into yGermany. Buty linen can be imported from Germany into
England. It will be so, and, in the first instance, the linen will be
paid for in money.

The efflux of money from England, and its influx into Germany, will
raise money prices in the latter country, and lower them in the former.
Linen will rise in Germany above three shillings per yard, and cloth
above six shillings. Linen in England being imported from Germany, will
(since cost of carriage is not reckoned) sink to the same prices as in
that country, while cloth will fall below six shillings. As soon as the
price of cloth is lower in England than in Germany, it will begin to be
exported, and the price of cloth in Germany will fall to what it is in
England. As long as the cloth exported does not suffice to pay for the
linen imported, money will continue to flow from England into Germany,
and prices generally will continue to fall in England, and rise in
Germany. By the fall, however, of cloth in England, cloth will fall in
Germany also, and the demand for it will increase. By the rise of linen
in Germany, linen must rise in England also, Edition: current; Page:
[242] and the demand for it will diminish. zAlthough the increased
exportation of cloth takes place at a lower price, and the diminished
importation of linen at a higher, yet the total money value of the
exportation would probably increase, that of the importation diminish.z
As cloth fell in price and linen rose, there would be some particular
price of both articles at which the cloth exported, and the linen
imported, would exactly pay for each other. At this point prices would
remain, because money would then cease to move out of England into
Germany. What this point might be, would entirely depend upon the
circumstances and inclinations of the purchasers on both sides. If the
fall of cloth did not much increase the demand for it in Germany, and
the rise of linen did not diminish very rapidly the demand for it in
England, much money must pass before the equilibrium is restored; cloth
would fall very much, and linen would rise, until England, perhaps, had
to pay nearly as much for it as when she produced it for herself. But
if, on the contrary, the fall of cloth caused a very rapid increase of
the demand for it in Germany, and the rise of linen in Germany reduced
very rapidly the demand in England from what it was under the influence
of the first cheapness produced by the opening of the trade; the cloth
would very soon suffice to pay for the linen, little money would pass
between the two countries, and England would derive a large portion of
the benefit of the trade. We have thus arrived at precisely the same
conclusion, in supposing the employment of money, which we found to hold
under the supposition of barter.

In what shape the benefit accrues to the two nations from the trade, is
clear enough. Germany, before the commencement of the trade, paid six
shillings per yard for abroad-cloth. Shea now obtains it at a lower
price. This, however, is not the whole of her advantage. As the money
prices of all her other commodities have risen, the money incomes of all
her producers have increased. This is no advantage to them in buying
from each other; because the price of what they buy has risen in the
same ratio with their means of paying for it: but it is an advantage to
them in buying any thing which has not risen; and still more, any thing
which has fallen. They therefore benefit as consumers of cloth, not
merely to the extent to which cloth has fallen, but also to the extent
to which other prices have risen. Suppose that this is one-tenth. The
same proportion of btheirb money incomes as before, will suffice to
supply their other wants, and the remainder, being increased one-tenth
in amount, will enable them to purchase one-tenth more cloth than
before, even though cloth had not cfallen. Butc it has Edition: current;
Page: [243] fallen: so that they are doubly gainers. dIf they do not
choose to increase their consumption of cloth, this does not prevent
them from being gainers.d They purchase the same quantity with less
money, and have more to expend upon their other wants.

In England, on the contrary, general money-prices have fallen. Linen,
however, has fallen more than the rest; having been lowered in price, by
importation from a country where it was cheaper, whereas the others have
fallen only from the consequent efflux of money. Notwithstanding,
therefore, the general fall of money-prices, the English producers will
be exactly as they were in all other respects, while they will gain as
purchasers of linen.

The greater the efflux of money required to restore the equilibrium, the
greater will be the gain of Germany; both by the fall of cloth, and by
the rise of her general prices. The less the efflux of money requisite,
the greater will be the gain of England; because the price of linen will
continue lower, and her general prices will not be reduced so much. It
must not, however, be imagined that high money-prices are a good, and
low money-prices an evil, in themselves. But the higher the general
money-prices in any country, the greater will be that country’s means of
purchasing those commodities which, being imported from abroad, are
independent of the causes which keep prices high at home.x

e3. We have hitherto supposed the carriage to be performed without
labour or expense. If we abandon this supposition, we must correct the
statement of the case in a slight degree. The prices of the two articles
will no longer, when the trade is opened, be the same in both countries,
nor will the articles exchange for one another at the same rate in both.
Ten yards of cloth will purchase in Germany a quantity of linen greater
than in England by a per-centage equal to the entire cost of conveyance
both of the cloth to Germany and of the linen to England. The
money-price of linen will be higher in England than in Germany, by the
cost of carriage of the linen. The money-price of cloth will be higher
in Germany than in England, by the cost of carriage of the cloth.

The expense of the carriage is evidently a deduction pro tanto from the
saving of labour produced by the establishment of the trade. The two
countries together, therefore, have their gains by the trade diminished,
by the amount of the cost of carriage of both commodities. But here the
question arises, which of the two countries bears this deduction, or in
what proportion it is divided between them.

At the first inspection it would appear that each country bears its own
cost of carriage, that is, that each country pays the carriage of the
commodity which it imports. Upon this supposition, each country would
gain whatever share of the joint saving of labour would otherwise fall
to its lot, Edition: current; Page: [244] minus the cost of bringing
from the other country the commodity which it imports. This solution is
rendered plausible by the circumstance just now mentioned, that the
price of the commodity will be higher in the country which imports it,
than in the country which exports it, by the amount of the cost of
carriage. If linen is sold in England at a higher price than in Germany,
by a per-centage equal to the cost of carriage of the linen, it appears
obvious that England pays for the carriage of the linen, and Germany, by
parity of reason, for that of the cloth.

But if we apply to these questions the principles already explained, we
shall see that this is not by any means a universal law: the fact may
correspond with it, or it may not.

For suppose that the prices have adjusted themselves, no matter how, and
that the imports and exports balance one another, each commodity, of
course, being dearer by the cost of carriage, in the country which
imports than in that which exports it: and suppose now that the cost of
carriage, both of the one and of the other, were suddenly and
miraculously annihilated, and that the commodities could pass from
country to country without expense. If each country bore its own cost of
carriage before, each country will save its own cost of carriage now.
Cloth, in Germany, will in that case fall exactly to what it is in
England; linen in England, to what it is in Germany.

Now this fall of price, supposing it to happen, will probably affect the
demand on both sides; and it will either affect it alike in both
countries, or it will affect it unequally. It will affect it alike, if
the fall of price does not affect the demand at all, or if it affects it
equally in both countries. If either of these results should take place,
the cloth and the linen would continue to balance each other as before:
no money would pass from one country to the other; prices in both would
continue at the point to which they had fallen, and each country would
exactly save the cost of carriage on the commodity which it imports from
the other.

But the result might be, that the fall of price might not have an effect
exactly equal, on the demand in the two countries. Suppose, for
instance, that the fall of cloth in Germany owing to the saving of the
cost of carriage, did not increase the demand for cloth in Germany; but
that the fall of linen in England from a like cause, did increase the
demand for linen in England. The linen imported would be more than could
be paid for by the cloth exported: the difference must be paid in money:
the change in the distribution of the precious metals between the two
countries would lower the price of cloth in England, (and consequently
in Germany), while it would raise the price of linen in Germany, (and
consequently in England). Germany, therefore, by the annihilation of
cost of carriage, would save in price more than the cost of carriage of
the cloth; England would save less in price than Edition: current; Page:
[245] the cost of carriage of the linen. But if by the miraculous
annihilation of cost of carriage, England would not save the whole of
the carriage of her imports, it follows that England did not previously
pay the whole of that cost of carriage.

Thus, the division of the cost of trade, and the division of the
advantage of trade, are governed by precisely the same principles; and
the only general proposition which can be affirmed respecting the cost
is, that it is pro tanto a deduction from the advantage. It cannot even
be maintained that the cost is shared in the same proportion as the
advantage is; because the increase of the demand for a commodity as its
price falls, is not governed by any fixed law. Suppose, for instance,
that the advantage happened to be divided equally: this must be because
the greater cheapness arising from the establishment of the trade,
either did not affect the demand at all, or affected it in an equal
proportion on both sides. Now, because such is the effect of the degree
of increased cheapness resulting from importation burthened with cost of
carriage, it would not follow that the still greater degree of
cheapness, produced by the additional saving of the cost of carriage
itself, would also affect the demand of both countries in precisely an
equal degree. But we cannot be said to bear an expense, which, if saved,
would be saved to somebody else, and not to us. Two countries may have
equal shares of the clear benefit of the trade, while, if the cost of
carriage were saved, they would divide that saving unequally. If so,
they divide the gross gain in one unequal ratio, the cost in another
unequal ratio, though their shares of the cost being deducted from their
shares of the gain leave equal remainders.

4. The question naturally suggests itself, whether any country, by its
own legislative policy, can engross to itself a larger share of the
benefits of foreign commerce, than would fall to it in the natural or
spontaneous course of trade.

The answer is, it can.e fBy taxing gexports, for instance, we may,
underg certain circumstances, produce a division of the advantage of the
trade more favourable to ourselves. In some cases, we may draw into our
coffers, at the expense of foreigners, not only the whole tax, but more
than the tax: in other cases, we should gain exactly the tax,—in others,
less than the tax. In this last case, a part of the tax is borne by
ourselves: possibly the whole, possibly even, as we shall show, more
than the whole.

hSupposeh that England taxes her export of cloth: the tax not being
supposed high enough to induce Germany to produce cloth for herself. The
price at which cloth can be sold in Germany is augmented by the tax.
This Edition: current; Page: [246] will probably diminish the quantity
consumed. It may diminish it so much, that even at the increased price,
there will not be required so great a money value as before. iIt may
diminish it in such a ratio, that the money value of the quantity
consumed will be exactly the same as before.i Or it may not diminish it
at all, or so little, that, in consequence of the higher price, a
greater money value will be purchased than before. In this last case,
England will gain, at the expense of Germany, not only the whole amount
of the duty, but jmore. Forj the money value of her exports to Germany
being increased, while her imports remain the same, money will flow into
England from Germany. The price of cloth will rise in England, and
consequently in Germany; but the price of linen will fall in Germany,
and consequently in England. We shall export less cloth, and import more
linen, till the equilibrium is restored. It thus appears, what is at
first sight somewhat remarkable, that, by taxing her exports, England
would, kunderk some conceivable circumstances, not only gain from her
foreign customers the whole amount of the tax, but would also get her
imports cheaper. She would get them cheaper in two ways,—for she would
obtain them for less money, and would have more money to purchase them
with. Germany, on the other hand, would suffer doubly: she would have to
pay for her cloth a price increased not only by the duty, but by the
influx of money into England, while the same change in the distribution
of the circulating medium would leave her less money to purchase it
with.

This, however, is only one of three possible cases. If, after the
imposition of the duty, Germany requires so diminished a quantity of
cloth, that its ltotal money valuel is exactly the same as before, the
balance of trade mwillm be undisturbed: England will gain the duty,
Germany will lose it, and nothing more. If, again, the imposition of the
duty occasions such a falling off in the demand, that Germany requires a
less pecuniary value than before, our exports will no longer pay for our
imports, money must pass from England into Germany, and Germany’s share
of the advantage of the trade will be increased. By the change in the
distribution of money, cloth will fall in England; and therefore it
will, of course, fall in Germany. Thus Germany will not pay the whole of
the tax. From the same cause, linen will rise in Germany, and
consequently in England. When this alteration of prices has so adjusted
the demand, that the cloth and the linen again pay for one another, the
result is, that Germany has paid only a part of the tax, and the
remainder of what has been received into our treasury has come
indirectly out of the pockets of our own consumers of linen, who pay a
higher price for that imported commodity, in consequence of the tax on
our exports, Edition: current; Page: [247] nwhilen at the same time
they, in consequence of the efflux of money and oconsequento fall of
prices, have smaller money incomes wherewith to pay for the linen at
that advanced price.

It is not an impossible supposition that, by taxing our exports, we
might not only gain nothing from the foreigner, the tax being paid out
of our own pockets, but might even compel our own people to pay a second
tax to the foreigner. Suppose, as before, that the demand of Germany for
cloth falls off so much on the imposition of the duty, that she requires
a smaller money value than before, but that the case is so different
with linen in England, that when the price rises the demand either does
not fall off at all, or so little that the money value required is
greater than before. The first effect of laying on the duty is, as
before, that the cloth exported will no longer pay for the linen
imported. Money will, therefore, flow out of England into Germany. One
effect is to raise the price of linen in Germany, and, consequently, in
England. But this, by the supposition, instead of stopping the efflux of
money, only makes it greater, because the higher the price, the greater
the money value of the linen consumed. The balance, therefore, can only
be restored by the other effect, which is going on at the same time,
namely, the fall of cloth in the English, and, consequently, in the
German market. Even when cloth has fallen so low that its price with the
duty is only equal to what its price without the duty was at first, it
is not a necessary consequence that the fall will stop; for the same
amount of exportation as before will not now suffice to pay the
increased money value of the imports; and although the German consumers
have now not only cloth at the old price, but likewise increased money
incomes, it is not certain that they will be inclined to employ the
increase of their incomes in increasing their purchases of cloth. The
price of cloth, therefore, must perhaps fall, to restore the
equilibrium, more than the whole amount of the duty; Germany may be
enabled to import cloth at a lower price when it is taxed, than when it
was untaxed: and this gain she will acquire at the expense of the
English consumers of linen, who, in addition, will be the real payers of
the whole of what is received at their own custom-house under the name
of duties on the export of cloth.p

Such are the extremely various effects which may result to ourselves,
and to our customers, from the imposition of taxes on our exports:* and
Edition: current; Page: [248] the determining circumstances are of a
nature so imperfectly ascertainable, that it must be almost impossible
to decide with any certainty, even after the tax has been imposed,
whether we have been gainers by it or losers. qIt is certain, however,
thatq whatever we gain, is lost by somebody else, and there is the
expense of the collection besides: if international morality, therefore,
were rightly understood and acted upon, such taxes, as being contrary to
the universal weal, would not exist. rMoreover, the imposition of such a
tax frequently will, and always may, expose a country to lose this
branch of its trade altogether, or to carry it on with diminished
advantage, in consequence of the competition of untaxed exporters from
other countries, or of the domestic producers in the country to which it
exports. Even on the most selfish principles, therefore, the benefit of
such a tax is always extremely precarious.

5.r We have had an example of a tax on exports, that is, on foreigners,
falling in part on ourselves. We shall, therefore, not be surprised if
we find a tax on imports, that is, on ourselves, partly falling upon
foreigners.

Instead of taxing the cloth which we export, suppose that we tax the
linen which we import. The duty which we are now supposing must not be
what is termed a protecting duty, that is, a duty sufficiently high to
induce us to produce the article at home. If it had this effect, it
would destroy entirely the trade both in cloth and in linen, and both
countries would lose the whole of the advantage which they previously
gained by exchanging those commodities with one another. We suppose a
duty which might diminish the Edition: current; Page: [249] consumption
of the article, but which would not prevent us from continuing to
import, as before, whatever linen we did consume.

The equilibrium of trade would be disturbed if the imposition of the tax
diminished in the slightest degree the quantity of linen consumed. For,
as the tax is levied at our own custom-house, the German exporter only
receives the same price as formerly, though the English consumer pays a
higher one. If, therefore, there be any diminution of the quantity
bought, although a larger sum of money may be actually laid out in the
article, a smaller one will be due from England to Germany: this sum
will no longer be an equivalent for the sum due from Germany to England
for cloth, the balance therefore must be paid in money. Prices will fall
in Germany, and rise in England; linen will fall in the German market;
cloth will rise in the English. The Germans will pay a higher price for
cloth, and will have smaller money incomes to buy it with; while the
English will obtain linen cheaper, that is, its price will exceed what
it previously was by less than the amount of the duty, while their means
of purchasing it will be increased by the increase of their money
incomes.

If the imposition of the tax does not diminish the demand, it will leave
the trade exactly as it was before. We shall import as much, and export
as much; the whole of the tax will be paid out of our own pockets.

But the imposition of a tax on a commodity, almost always diminishes the
demand more or less; and it can never, or scarcely ever increase the
demand. It may, therefore, be laid down as a principle, that a tax on
imported commodities, when it really operates as a tax, and not as a
prohibition, either total or partial, almost always falls in part upon
the foreigners who consume our goods: and that this is a mode in which a
nation may sbe almost sure of appropriatings to itself, at the expense
of foreigners, a larger share than would otherwise belong to it of the
increase in the general productiveness of the labour and capital of the
world, which results from the interchange of commodities among nations.f

tIt is scarcely necessary to observe, that no such advantage can result
from the duty, if it operate as a protecting duty; if it induce the
country which imposes it, to produce for herself that which she would
otherwise have imported. The saving of labour—the increase in the
general productiveness of the capital of the world—which is the effect
of commerce, and which a non-protecting duty would enable the country
imposing it to engross, could not be engrossed by a protecting duty,
because such a duty prevents any such increased production from
existing.t

uWith a view to practical legislation, therefore, duties on importation
Edition: current; Page: [250] may be divided vintou two classes: those
which have the effect of encouraging some particular branch of domestic
industry, and those which have not.

wThe former are purely mischievous, both to the country imposing them,
and to those with whom it trades. They prevent a saving of labour and
capital, which, if permitted to be made, would be divided in some
proportion or other between the importing country and the countries
which buy what that country does or might export.

The other class of duties are those which do not encourage one mode of
procuring an article at the expense of another, but allow interchange to
take place just as if the duty did not exist—and to produce the saving
of labour which constitutes the motive to international as to all other
commerce. Of this kind, are duties on the importation of any commodity
which could not by any possibility be produced at home; and duties not
sufficiently high to counterbalance the difference of expense between
the production of the article at home, and its importation. Of the money
which is brought into the treasury of any country by taxes of this last
description, a part only is paid by the people of that country; the
remainder by the foreign consumers of their goods.

Nevertheless, this latter kind of taxes are in principle as ineligible
as the former, although not precisely on the same ground. A protecting
duty can never be a cause of gain, but always and necessarily of loss,
to the country imposing it, just so far as it is efficacious to its end.
A non-protecting duty on the contrary would, in most cases, be a source
of gain to the country imposing it, in so far as throwing part of the
weight of its taxes upon other people is a gain; but it would be a
xmeans of gain whichx it could seldom be advisable to adopt, being so
easily counteracted by a precisely similar proceeding on the other side.

If England, in the case already supposed, sought to obtain for herself
more than her natural share of the advantage of the trade with Germany,
by imposing a duty upon yclothy, Germany would only have to impose a
duty upon zlinenz, sufficient to diminish the demand for that article
about as much as the demand for aclotha had been diminished in England
by the tax. Things would then be as before, and each country would pay
its own tax. Unless, indeed, the sum of the two duties exceeded the
entire advantage of the trade; for in that case the trade, and its
advantage, would cease entirely.

There would be no advantage, therefore, in imposing duties of this kind,
with a view to gain by them, in the manner which has been pointed out.
Edition: current; Page: [251] But bso long as any other kind of taxes on
commodities are retained, as a source of revenueb, these may often be as
cunobjectionablec as the rest. It is evident, dmoreoverd, that
considerations of reciprocity, which are quite unessential when the
matter in debate is a protecting duty, are of material importance when
the repeal of duties of this other description is discussed. A country
cannot be expected to renounce the power of taxing foreigners, unless
foreigners will in return practise towards itself the same forbearance.
The only mode in which a country can save itself from being a loser by
the eduties imposed by other countries on its commodities, is to impose
corresponding fduties on theirs. Only it must take care that gtheseg
duties be not so high as to exceed all that remains of the advantage of
the trade, and put an end to importation altogether; causing the article
to be either produced at home, or imported from another hand a dearerh
market.v

iIt is not necessary to apply the principles which we have stated to the
case of bounties on exportation or importation. The application is easy,
and the conclusions present nothing of particular interest or
importance.

6. Any cause which alters the exports or imports from one country into
another, alters the division of the advantage of interchange between
those two countries. Suppose the discovery of a new process, by which
some article of export, or some article not previously exported, can be
produced so cheap as to occasion a great demand for it in other
countries. This of course produces a great influx of money from other
countries, and lowers the prices of all articles imported from them,
until the increase of importation produced by this cause has restored
the equilibrium. Thus, the country which acquires a new article of
export gets its imports cheaper. This is not a case of mere alteration
in the division of the advantage; it is a new advantage created by the
discovery.

But suppose that the invention, to which the nation is indebted for this
increase of the return to its industry, comes into use in the other
country, and that the process is one which can be as perfectly and as
cheaply performed in the one country as in the other. The new
exportation will cease; trade will revert to its old channels, the money
which flowed in will again flow out, and the country which invented the
process will lose that increase of its gain by trade, which it had
derived from the discovery.

Edition: current; Page: [252]
Now the exportation of machinery comes within the case which we have
just described.

If the fact be, that by allowing to foreigners a participation in our
machinery, we enable them to produce any of our leading articles of
export, at a lower money price than we can sell those articles, it is
certain that unless we possess as great an advantage in the production
of the machinery itself as we have in the production of other articles
by means of machinery, the permitting of its exportation would alter to
our disadvantage the division of the benefit of trade. Our exports being
diminished, we should have to pay a balance in money. This would raise,
in foreign countries, the price of everything which we import from
thence: while our incomes, being reduced in money value, would render us
less able to buy those articles even if they had not risen. The
equilibrium of exports and imports would only be restored, when either
some of the latter became so dear that we could produce them cheaper at
home, or some articles not previously exported became exportable from
the fall of prices. In the one case, we lose the benefit of importation
altogether, and are obliged to produce at home, at a greater cost. In
the other case, we continue to import, but pay dearer for our imports.

Notwithstanding what has now been observed, restrictions on the
exportation of machinery are not, in our opinion, justifiable, either on
the score of international morality or of sound policy. It is evidently
the common interest of all nations that each of them should abstain from
every measure by which the aggregate wealth of the commercial world
would be diminished, although of this smaller sum total it might thereby
be enabled to jattract to itselfj a larger share. And the time will
certainly come when nations in general will feel the importance of this
rule, and will so direct their approbation and disapprobation as to
enfore observance of it. Moreover, a country possessing machines
kshouldk consider that if a similar advantage were extended to other
countries, they would employ it above all in the production of those
articles, in which they had already the greatest natural advantages; and
if the former country would be a loser by their improvements in the
production of articles which it sells, it would gain by their
improvements in those which it buys. The exportation of machinery may,
however, be a proper subject for adjustment with other nations, on the
principle of reciprocity. Until, by the common consent of nations, all
restrictions upon trade are done away, a nation cannot be required to
abolish those from which she derives a real advantage, without
stipulating for an equivalent.

Edition: current; Page: [253]
7. The case which we have just examined, is an example in how remarkable
a manner every cause which materially influences exports, operates upon
the prices of imports. According to the ancient theory of the balance of
trade, and to the associations of the generality of what are termed
practical men to this day, the sole benefit derived from commerce
consists in the exports, and imports are rather an evil than otherwise.
Political economists, seeing the folly of these views, and clearly
perceiving that the advantage of commerce consists and must consist
solely of the imports, have occasionally suffered themselves to employ
language evincing inattention to the fact, that exports, though
unimportant in themselves, are important by their influence on imports.
So real and extensive is this influence, that every new market which is
opened for any of our goods, and every increase in the demand for our
commodities in foreign countries, enables us to supply ourselves with
foreign commodities at a smaller cost.

Let us revert to our earliest and simplest example, but which displays
the real law of interchange more luminously than any formula into which
money enters; the case of simple barter. We showed, that if at the rate
of 10 yards of cloth for 17 of linen, the demand of Germany amounted to
1000 times 10 yards of cloth, the two nations will trade together at
that rate of interchange, provided that the linen required in England be
exactly 1000 times 17 yards, neither more nor less. For the cloth and
the linen will then exactly pay for one another, and nobody on either
side will be obliged to offer what he has to sell at a lower rate, in
order to procure what he wants to buy.

Now if the increase of wealth and population in Germany should greatly
increase the demand in that country for cloth, the demand for linen in
England not increasing in the same ratio,—if, for instance, Germany
became willing, at the above rate, to take 1500 times 10 yards; is it
not evident, that to induce England to take in exchange for this the
only article which Germany by supposition has to give, the latter must
offer it at a rate more advantageous to England—at 18, or perhaps 19
yards, for 10 of cloth? So that the division of the advantage becomes
more and more favourable to a country, in proportion as the demand for
its commodities increases in foreign countries.

It is not even necessary that the country which takes its goods, should
supply it with any commodity whatever. Suppose that a country should be
opened to our merchants, disposed to buy from us in abundance, but which
can sell to us scarcely anything, as every commodity which it affords
could be got cheaper by us from some other quarter. Nevertheless, our
trade with this country will enable us to obtain from all other
countries their commodities at a lower price. At the first opening of
this commerce of Edition: current; Page: [254] mere exportation, we must
have received in payment a large quantity of money; for which our
customer will have been indemnified by other countries, in exchange for
her commodities. Prices must consequently be lower in all other
countries, and higher with us, than before the opening of the new branch
of trade; and we therefore obtain the commodities of other countries at
a less cost, both as we pay less money for them, and as that money is
lower in value.

8. Another obvious application of the same principle will enable us to
explain, and to bring within the dominion of strict science, the
rivality of one exporting nation and another, or what is called, in the
language of the mercantile system, underselling: a subject which
political economists have taken little trouble to elucidate, from the
habit before alluded to of disregarding almost entirely, in their purely
scientific inquiries, those circumstances which affect the trade of a
country by operating immediately upon the exports.

Let us revert to our old example, and to our old figures. Suppose that
the trade between England and Germany in cloth and linen is established,
and that the rate of interchange is 10 yards of cloth for 17 of linen.
Now suppose that there arises in another country, in Flanders, for
example, a linen manufacture; and that the same causes, the working of
which in England and Germany has made 10 yards exchange for 17, would in
England and Flanders, putting Germany out of the question, have made the
rate of interchange 10 for 18. It is evident that Germany also must give
18 yards of linen for 10 of cloth, and so carry on the trade with a
diminished share of the advantage, or lose it altogether. If the play of
demand in England and Flanders had made the rate of interchange not 10
for 18 but 10 for 21, (10 to 20 being in Germany the comparative cost of
production,) it is evident that Germany could not have maintained the
competition, and would have lost, not part of her share of the
advantage, but all advantage, and the trade itself.

It would be no answer to say, that Germany could probably still have
found the means of importing cloth from England, by exporting something
else. If she had purchased cloth with anything else, she would have
purchased it dearer: as is proved by the fact, that having free choice,
she found it most advantageous to purchase it with linen. When she could
get 10 yards of cloth for 17 of linen, that was the mode in which she
could get it with least labour. Being pressed by competition, she gave
successively 17½, 18, 18½; but rather than give 19 yards of linen, she
perhaps would prefer to give, as costing her rather less labour, 10
yards of silk, (which we will suppose to be the quantity which in
England will purchase 10 yards of cloth). It is obvious that, although
Germany has found the means Edition: current; Page: [255] of supplying
herself with cloth, by exporting a different article from that in which
she was undersold, yet the advantage of the trade between her and
England is now shared in a proportion much less favourable to Germany.

There is no difficulty in showing that the same series of consequences
takes place in exactly the same manner through the agency of money. The
trade in cloth and linen between England and Germany being supposed to
exist as before, Flanders produces linen at a lower price than that at
which Germany has hitherto afforded it. The exportation from Germany is
suspended; and Germany, continuing to import cloth, pays for it in
money. By so doing she lowers her own prices, and raises those in
England: she has to pay more money for cloth, and to pay it in a
currency of higher value. She thus suffers more and more as a consumer
of cloth, until by the fall of her prices she can either afford to sell
linen as cheap as Flanders, or to export some other commodity which she
could not export before. In either case, her trade resumes its course,
but with diminished advantage on her side.*

It is in the mode just described, that those countries which formerly
supplied Europe with manufactures, but which owed their power of doing
so not to any natural and permanent advantages, but to their more
advanced state of civilization as compared with other countries, have
lost Edition: current; Page: [256] their pre-eminence as other countries
successively attained an equal degree of civilization. Lombardy and
Flanders, in the middle ages, produced some descriptions of clothing and
ornament for all Europe: Holland, at a much later period, supplied
ships, and almost all articles which came in ships, to most other parts
of the world. All these countries have probably at this moment a much
larger amount of capital than ever they had, but having been undersold
by other countries, they have lost by far the greater part of the share
which they had engrossed to themselves of the benefit which the world
derives from commerce; and their capital yields to them in consequence a
smaller proportional return. We are aware that other causes have
contributed to the same effect, but we cannot doubt that this is a
principal one.

As much as is really true of the great returns alleged to have been made
to capital during the last war, must have arisen from a similar cause.
Our exclusive command of the sea excluded from the market all by whom we
should have been undersold.

The adoption by France, Russia, the Netherlands, and the United States,
of a more severely restrictive commercial policy, subsequently to 1815,
has done great injury undoubtedly to those countries; for the duties
which they have established are intended to be, and really are, of the
class termed protecting; that is to say, such as force the production of
commodities by more costly processes at home, instead of suffering them
to be imported from abroad. But these duties, though chiefly injurious
to the countries imposing them, have also been highly injurious to
England. By diminishing her exportation, or preventing it from
increasing as it would otherwise have done, they have kept up the prices
of all imported commodities in England, above what those prices would
have fallen to if trade had been left free.

By another obvious application of the same reasoning, it will be seen,
that there is a real foundation for the notion, that a country may be
benefited by receiving from another country the concession of what used
to be termed commercial advantages, or by restraining its colonies from
purchasing goods of any country except itself. In the figured
illustration last used (p. 254), it is evident, that if England had been
bound by a treaty with Germany to buy linen exclusively from her,
Germany would have retained the trade which we supposed her to lose, and
would have continued to purchase cloth at a comparatively cheap rate
from England, instead of producing it by a more costly process at home.
Suppose that England had been a colony of Germany, and we see that by
compelling colonies to deal at her shop, she may obtain a real
advantage, though of a nature which we may hazard the assertion that the
founders of our colonial policy little dreamt of.

Edition: current; Page: [257]
Such an advantage, however, being gained at the expense of another
country, is, at the least, simply equivalent to a tax, or tribute. Now,
if a country has just grounds, or deems superiority of power a
sufficient ground, for exacting a tribute from another country, the most
direct mode is the best. First, because it is the most intelligible, and
has least of trick or disguise. Secondly, because it allows the people
of the country paying the tribute, to raise the money in whatever way
they consider least oppressive to themselves. Thirdly, because the
indirect mode of taxing a country, by restrictions on its commerce,
disturbs the distribution of industry most advantageous to the world at
large, and occasions a greater loss to the restricted country, and to
the other countries with which that country would have traded, than gain
to the country in whose favour the restrictions are imposed. And lastly,
because a country never could obtain such privileges from an independent
nation, and has seldom been so undisguised an oppressor as to demand
them even from its colonies, without subjecting itself to restrictions
in some degree equivalent, for the benefit of those whom it has thus
taxed. Each country, therefore, usually pays tribute to the other; and
to produce this fruitless reciprocity of exaction, the industry and
trade of both countries are diverted from the most advantageous
channels, and the return to the labour and capital of both is
diminished, in pure loss.

9. The same principles which have led to the above conclusions, also
suggest a remark of some importance with respect to the probable effect
of a change from a restricted to a comparatively free trade.

There is no doubt that our prohibiting the importation of a particular
article, which, but for the prohibition, would have been imported,
enables us to obtain our other imports at smaller cost. The article for
which we have the greatest demand, and for which our demand is most
increased by cheapness, is that which we should naturally import
preferably to any other; now of this article we should import the
quantity necessary to pay for our exports, on terms of interchange less
advantageous to us than in the case of any other commodity. If our
legislature prohibits this commodity, the other country will be obliged
to offer any other article on easier terms, in order to force a
sufficient demand for it to be an equivalent to what she purchases from
us.

The steps of the process, money being used, would be these:—We prohibit
the importation of linen. The exportation of cloth continues, but is
paid for in money. Our prices rise, those in Germany fall, until silk,
or some other article, can be imported from Germany cheaper than it can
be produced at home, and in sufficient abundance to balance the export
of cloth. Thus by sacrificing the cheapness of one commodity, we gain
the cheapness of another: but we sacrifice a greater cheapness to gain a
less, Edition: current; Page: [258] and we sacrifice cheapness in the
article which we most want, and would import by preference, while our
compensation is cheapness in an article which we either could produce
more advantageously at home, or which we have so little desire for, that
it requires a species of bounty on the article to create a demand.

Restrictions on importation do, however, tend to keep down the value and
price of our remaining imports, and to keep up the nominal or money
prices of all our other commodities, by retaining a greater quantity of
money in the country than would otherwise be there. From this it
obviously follows, that if the restrictions were removed, we should have
to pay rather more for some of the articles which we now import, while
those which we are now prevented from importing would cost us more than
might be inferred from their present price in the foreign market. And
general prices would fall; to the benefit of those who have fixed sums
to receive; to the disadvantage of those who have fixed sums to pay; and
giving rise, as a general fall of prices always does, to an appearance,
though a temporary and fallacious one, of general distress.*

It is right to observe that the measures of the British Legislature
which have been falsely characterised as measures of free trade, must,
from their extremely insignificant extent, have produced far too little
effect in increasing our importation, to have actually led, in any
degree worth mentioning, to the results specified above.

It is of greater importance to take notice, that these effects may be
entirely obviated, if foreign countries can be prevailed upon
simultaneously to relax their restrictive systems, so as to create an
immediate increase of demand for our exports at the present prices. It
is true that exports and imports must, in the end, balance one another,
and if we increase our imports, our exports will of necessity increase
too. But it is a forced increase, produced by an efflux of money and
fall of prices; and this fall of prices being permanent, although it
would be no evil at all in a country where credit is unknown, it may be
a very serious one where large classes of persons, and the nation
itself, are under engagements to pay fixed sums of money of large
amount.

10. The only remaining application of the principle set forth in this
essay, which we think it of importance to notice specially, is the
effect produced upon a country by the annual payment of a tribute or
subsidy to a foreign power, or by the annual remittance of rents to
absentee landlords, or of any other kind of income to its absent owners.
Remittances to Edition: current; Page: [259] absentees are often very
incorrectly likened in their general character to the payment of a
tribute; from which they differ in this very material circumstance, that
tribute, if not paid to a foreign country, is not paid at all, whereas
rents are paid to the landlord, and consumed by him, even if he resides
at home. The two kinds of payment, however, have a perfect resemblance
to each other in such parts of their effects as we are about to point
out.

The tribute, subsidy, or remittance, is always in goods; for, unless the
country possesses mines of the precious metals, and numbers those metals
among its regular articles of export, it cannot go on, year after year,
parting with them, and never receiving them back. When a nation has
regular payments to make in a foreign country, for which it is not to
receive any return, its exports must annually exceed its imports by the
amount of the payments which it is bound so to make. In order to force a
demand for its exports greater than its imports will suffice to pay for,
it must offer them at a rate of interchange more favourable to the
foreign country, and less so to itself, than if it had no payments to
make beyond the value of its imports. It therefore carries on the trade
with less advantage, in consequence of the obligations to which it is
subject towards persons resident in foreign countries.

The steps of the process are these. The exports and imports being in
equilibrium, suppose a treaty to be concluded, by which the country
binds itself to pay in tribute to another country, a certain sum
annually. It makes, perhaps, the first payment by a remittance of money.
This lowers prices in the paying country, and raises them in the
receiving one: the exports of the tributary country increase, its
imports diminish. When the efflux of money has altered prices in the
requisite degree, the exports exceed the imports annually, by the amount
of the tribute; and the latter, being added to the sum of the payments
due, restores the balance of payments between the two countries. The
result to the tributary country is a diminution of her share in the
advantage of foreign trade. She pays dearer for her imports, in two
ways, because she pays more money, and because that money is of higher
value, the money incomes of her inhabitants being of smaller amount.

Thus the imposition of a tribute is a double burthen to the country
paying it, and a double gain to that which receives it. The tributary
country pays to the other, first, the tax, whatever be its amount, and
next, something more, which the one country loses in the increased cost
of its imports, the other gains in the diminished cost of its own.

Absenteeism, moreover, though not burthensome in the former of these
ways, since the money is paid whether the receiver be an absentee or
not, is yet disadvantageous in the second of the two modes which have
been Edition: current; Page: [260] mentioned. Ireland pays dearer for
her imports in consequence of her absentees; a circumstance which the
assailants of Mr. McCulloch, whether political economists or not, have
not, we believe, hitherto thought of producing against him.

11. If the question be now asked, which of the countries of the world
gains most by foreign commerce, the following will be the answer.

If by gain be meant advantage, in the most enlarged sense, that country
will generally gain the most, which stands most in need of foreign
commodities.

But if by gain be meant saving of labour and capital in obtaining the
commodities which the country desires to have, whatever they may be; the
country will gain, not in proportion to its own need of foreign
articles, but to the need which foreigners have of the articles which
itself produces.

Let us take, as an illustration of our meaning, the case of France and
England. Those two nations, in consequence of the restrictions with
which they have loaded their commercial intercourse, carry on so little
trade with each other, as may almost, regard being had to the wealth and
population of the two countries, be called none at all. If these fetters
were at once taken off, which of the two countries would be the greatest
gainer? England without doubt. There would instantly arise in France an
immense demand for the cottons, woollens, and iron of England; while
wines, brandies, and silks, the staple articles of France, are less
likely to come into general demand here, nor would the consumption of
such productions, it is probable, be so rapidly increased by the fall of
price. The fall would probably be very great before France could obtain
a vent in England for so much of her exports as would suffice to pay for
the probable amount of her imports. There would be a considerable flow
of the precious metals out of France into England. The English consumer
of French wine would not merely save the amount of the duty which that
wine now pays, but would find the wine itself falling in prime cost,
while his means of purchasing it would be increased by the augmentation
of his own money income. The French consumer of English cottons, on the
contrary, would not long continue to be able to purchase them at the
price they now sell for in England. He would gain less, as the English
would gain more, than might appear from a mere comparison between the
present prices of commodities in the two countries.

Various consequences would flow from opening the trade between France
and England, which are not expected, either by the friends or by the
opponents of the present restrictive system. The wine-growers of France,
who imagine that free trade would relieve their distress by raising the
price of their wine, might not improbably find that price actually
lowered. On the other hand, our silk manufacturers would be surprised if
they were Edition: current; Page: [261] told that the free admission of
our cottons and hardware into the French market, would endanger their
branch of manufacture: yet such might very possibly be the effect.
France, it is likely, could most advantageously pay us in silks for a
portion of the large amount of cottons and hardware which we should sell
to her; and though our silk manufacturers may now be able to compete
advantageously, in some branches of the manufacture, with their French
rivals, it by no means follows that they could do so when the efflux of
money from France, and its influx into England, had lowered the price of
silk goods in the French market, and increased all the expenses of
production here.

On the whole, England probably, of all the countries of Europe, draws to
herself the largest share of the gains of international commerce:
because her exportable articles are in universal demand, and are of such
a kind that the demand increases rapidly as the price falls. Countries
which export food, have the former advantage, but not the latter. But
our own colonies, and the countries which supply us with the materials
of our manufactures, maintain a hard struggle with us for an equal share
of the advantages of their trade; for their exports are also of a kind
for which there exists a most extensive demand here, and a demand
capable of almost indefinite extension by a fall of price. Contrary,
therefore, to common opinion, it is probable that our trade with the
colonies, and with the countries which send us the raw materials of our
national industry, is not more but less advantageous to us, in
proportion to its extent, than our trade with the continent of Europe.
We mean in respect to the mere amount of the return to the labour and
capital of the country; considered abstractedly from the usefulness or
agreeableness of the particular articles on which the receivers may
choose to expend it.

Edition: current; Page: [262]


Of the Influence of Consumption on Production

[Essay II in Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy, 47-74. The
one substantive variant between the 1st and 2nd editions is indicated at
263a-a below. Two typographical errors were introduced in the 2nd
edition, “influence” for “affluence” (264.34) and “supply, it” for
“supply it” (272.39).]

before the appearance of those great writers whose discoveries have
given to political economy its present comparatively scientific
character, the ideas universally entertained both by theorists and by
practical men, on the causes of national wealth, were grounded upon
certain general views, which almost all who have given any considerable
attention to the subject now justly hold to be completely erroneous.

Among the mistakes which were most pernicious in their direct
consequences, and tended in the greatest degree to prevent a just
conception of the objects of science, or of the test to be applied to
the solution of the questions which it presents, was the immense
importance attached to consumption. The great end of legislation in
matters of national wealth, according to the prevalent opinion, was to
create consumers. A great and rapid consumption was what the producers,
of all classes and denominations, wanted, to enrich themselves and the
country. This object, under the varying names of an extensive demand, a
brisk circulation, a great expenditure of money, and sometimes totidem
verbis a large consumption, was conceived to be the great condition of
prosperity.

It is not necessary, in the present state of the science, to contest
this doctrine in the most flagrantly absurd of its forms or of its
applications. The utility of a large government expenditure, for the
purpose of encouraging industry, is no longer maintained. Taxes are not
now esteemed to be “like the dews of heaven, which return again in
prolific showers.” It is no longer supposed that you benefit the
producer by taking his money, provided you give it to him again in
exchange for his goods. There is nothing which impresses a person of
reflection with a stronger sense of the shallowness of the political
reasonings of the last two centuries, than the general reception so long
given to a doctrine which, if it proves anything, proves Edition:
current; Page: [263] that the more you take from the pockets of the
people to spend on your own pleasures, the richer they grow; that the
man who steals money out of a shop, provided he expends it all again at
the same shop, is a benefactor to the tradesman whom he robs, and that
the same operation, repeated sufficiently often, would make the
tradesman’s fortune.

In opposition to these palpable absurdities, it was triumphantly
established by political economists, that consumption never needs
encouragement. All which is produced is already consumed, either for the
purpose of reproduction or of enjoyment. The person who saves his income
is no less a consumer than he who spends it: he consumes it in a
different way; it supplies food and clothing to be consumed, tools and
materials to be used, by productive labourers. Consumption, therefore,
already takes place to the greatest extent which the amount of
production admits of; but, of the two kinds of consumption, reproductive
and unproductive, the former alone adds to the national wealth, the
latter impairs it. What is consumed for mere enjoyment, is gone; what is
consumed for reproduction, leaves commodities of equal value, commonly
with the addition of a profit. The usual effect of the attempts of
government to encourage consumption, is merely to prevent saving; that
is, to promote unproductive consumption at the expense of reproductive,
and diminish the national wealth by the very means which were intended
to increase it.

What a country wants to make it richer, is never consumption, but
production. Where there is the latter, we may be asure thata there is no
want of the former. To produce, implies that the producer desires to
consume; why else should he give himself useless labour? He may not wish
to consume what he himself produces, but his motive for producing and
selling is the desire to buy. Therefore, if the producers generally
produce and sell more and more, they certainly also buy more and more.
Each may not want more of what he himself produces, but each wants more
of what some other produces; and, by producing what the other wants,
hopes to obtain what the other produces. There will never, therefore, be
a greater quantity produced, of commodities in general, than there are
consumers for. But there may be, and always are, abundance of persons
who have the inclination to become consumers of some commodity, but are
unable to satisfy their wish, because they have not the means of
producing either that, or anything to give in exchange for it. The
legislator, therefore, needs not give himself any concern about
consumption. There will always be consumption for everything which can
be produced, until the wants of all who possess the means of producing
are completely satisfied, and then production will not increase any
farther. The legislator has to look solely to two points: that no
obstacle shall exist to prevent those who have the Edition: current;
Page: [264] means of producing, from employing those means as they find
most for their interest; and that those who have not at present the
means of producing, to the extent of their desire to consume, shall have
every facility afforded to their acquiring the means, that, becoming
producers, they may be enabled to consume.

These general principles are now well understood by almost all who
profess to have studied the subject, and are disputed by few except
those who ostentatiously proclaim their contempt for such studies. We
touch upon the question, not in the hope of rendering these fundamental
truths clearer than they already are, but to perform a task, so useful
and needful, that it is to be wished it were oftener deemed part of the
business of those who direct their assaults against ancient
prejudices,—that of seeing that no scattered particles of important
truth are buried and lost in the ruins of exploded error. Every
prejudice, which has long and extensively prevailed among the educated
and intelligent, must certainly be borne out by some strong appearance
of evidence; and when it is found that the evidence does not prove the
received conclusion, it is of the highest importance to see what it does
prove. If this be thought not worth inquiring into, an error conformable
to appearances is often merely exchanged for an error contrary to
appearances; while, even if the result be truth, it is paradoxical
truth, and will have difficulty in obtaining credence while the false
appearances remain.

Let us therefore inquire into the nature of the appearances, which gave
rise to the belief that a great demand, a brisk circulation, a rapid
consumption (three equivalent expressions), are a cause of national
prosperity.

If every man produced for himself, or with his capital employed others
to produce, everything which he required, customers and their wants
would be a matter of profound indifference to him. He would be rich, if
he had produced and stored up a large supply of the articles which he
was likely to require; and poor, if he had stored up none at all, or not
enough to last until he could produce more.

The case, however, is different after the separation of employments. In
civilized society, a single producer confines himself to the production
of one commodity, or a small number of commodities; and his affluence
depends, not solely upon the quantity of his commodity which he has
produced and laid in store, but upon his success in finding purchasers
for that commodity.

It is true, therefore, of every particular producer or dealer, that a
great demand, a brisk circulation, a rapid consumption, of the
commodities which he sells at his shop or produces in his manufactory,
is important Edition: current; Page: [265] to him. The dealer whose shop
is crowded with customers, who can dispose of a product almost the very
moment it is completed, makes large profits, while his next neighbour,
with an equal capital but fewer customers, gains comparatively little.

It was natural that, in this case, as in a hundred others, the analogy
of an individual should be unduly applied to a nation: as it has been
concluded that a nation generally gains in wealth by the conquest of a
province, because an individual frequently does so by the acquisition of
an estate; and as, because an individual estimates his riches by the
quantity of money which he can command, it was long deemed an excellent
contrivance for enriching a country, to heap up artificially the
greatest possible quantity of the precious metals within it.

Let us examine, then, more closely than has usually been done, the case
from which the misleading analogy is drawn. Let us ascertain to what
extent the two cases actually resemble; what is the explanation of the
false appearance, and the real nature of the phenomenon which, being
seen indistinctly, has led to a false conclusion.

We shall propose for examination a very simple case, but the explanation
of which will suffice to clear up all other cases which fall within the
same principle. Suppose that a number of foreigners with large incomes
arrive in a country, and there expend those incomes: will this operation
be beneficial, as respects the national wealth, to the country which
receives these immigrants? Yes, say many political economists, if they
save any part of their incomes, and employ them reproductively; because
then an addition is made to the national capital, and the produce is a
clear increase of the national wealth. But if the foreigner expends all
his income unproductively, it is no benefit to the country, say they,
and for the following reason.

If the foreigner had his income remitted to him in bread and beef, coats
and shoes, and all the other articles which he was desirous to consume,
it would not be pretended that his eating, drinking, and wearing them,
on our shores rather than on his own, could be of any advantage to us in
point of wealth. Now, the case is not different if his income is
remitted to him in some one commodity, as, for instance, in money. For
whatever takes place afterwards, with a view to the supply of his wants,
is a mere exchange of equivalents; and it is impossible that a person
should ever be enriched by merely receiving an equal value in exchange
for an equal value.

When it is said that the purchases of the foreign consumer give
employment to capital which would otherwise yield no profit to its
owner, the same political economists reject this proposition as
involving the fallacy of Edition: current; Page: [266] what has been
called a “general glut.” They say, that the capital, which any person
has chosen to produce and to accumulate, can always find employment,
since the fact that he has accumulated it proves that he had an
unsatisfied desire; and if he cannot find anything to produce for the
wants of other consumers, he can for his own.

It is impossible to contest these propositions as thus stated. But there
is one consideration which clearly shews, that there is something more
in the matter than is here taken into the account; and this is, that the
above reasoning tends distinctly to prove, that it does a tradesman no
good to go into his shop and buy his goods. How can he be enriched? it
might be asked. He merely receives a certain value in money, for an
equivalent value in goods. Neither does this give employment to his
capital; for there never exists more capital than can find employment,
and if one person does not buy his goods another will; or if nobody
does, there is overproduction in that business, he can remove his
capital, and find employment for it in another trade.

Every one sees the fallacy of this reasoning as applied to individual
producers. Every one knows that as applied to them it has not even the
semblance of plausibility; that the wealth of a producer does in a great
measure depend upon the number of his customers, and that in general
every additional purchaser does really add to his profits. If the
reasoning, which would be so absurd if applied to individuals, be
applicable to nations, the principle on which it rests must require much
explanation and elucidation.

Let us endeavour to analyse with precision the real nature of the
advantage which a producer derives from an addition to the number of his
customers.

For this purpose, it is necessary that we should premise a single
observation on the meaning of the word capital. It is usually defined,
the food, clothing, and other articles set aside for the consumption of
the labourer, together with the materials and instruments of production.
This definition appears to us peculiarly liable to misapprehension; and
much vagueness and some narrow views have, we conceive, occasionally
resulted from its being interpreted with too mechanical an adherence to
the literal meaning of the words.

The capital, whether of an individual or of a nation, consists, we
apprehend, of all matters possessing exchangeable value, which the
individual or the nation has in his or in its possession for the purpose
of reproduction, and not for the purpose of the owner’s unproductive
enjoyment. All unsold goods, therefore, constitute a part of the
national capital, and of the capital of the producer or dealer to whom
they belong. It is true that tools, materials, and the articles on which
the labourer is supported, are the Edition: current; Page: [267] only
articles which are directly subservient to production: and if I have a
capital consisting of money, or of goods in a warehouse, I can only
employ them as means of production in so far as they are capable of
being exchanged for the articles which conduce directly to that end. But
the food, machinery, &c., which will ultimately be purchased with the
goods in my warehouse, may at this moment not be in the country, may not
be even in existence. If, after having sold the goods, I hire labourers
with the money, and set them to work, I am surely employing capital,
though the corn, which in the form of bread those labourers may buy with
the money, may be now in warehouse at Dantzic, or perhaps not yet above
ground.

Whatever, therefore, is destined to be employed reproductively, either
in its existing shape, or indirectly by a previous (or even subsequent)
exchange, is capital. Suppose that I have laid out all the money I
possess in wages and tools, and that the article I produce is just
completed: in the interval which elapses before I can sell the article,
realize the proceeds, and lay them out again in wages and tools, will it
be said that I have no capital? Certainly not: I have the same capital
as before, perhaps a greater, but it is locked up, as the expression is,
and not disposable.

When we have thus seen accurately what really constitutes capital, it
becomes obvious, that of the capital of a country, there is at all times
a very large proportion lying idle. The annual produce of a country is
never any thing approaching in magnitude to what it might be if all the
resources devoted to reproduction, if all the capital, in short, of the
country, were in full employment.

If every commodity on an average remained unsold for a length of time
equal to that required for its production, it is obvious that, at any
one time, no more than half the productive capital of the country would
be really performing the functions of capital. The two halves would
relieve one another, like the semichori in a Greek tragedy; or rather
the half which was in employment would be a fluctuating portion,
composed of varying parts; but the result would be, that each producer
would be able to produce every year only half as large a supply of
commodities, as he could produce if he were sure of selling them the
moment the production was completed.

This, or something like it, is however the habitual state, at every
instant, of a very large proportion of all the capitalists in the world.

The number of producers, or dealers, who turn over their capital, as the
expression is, in the shortest possible time, is very small. There are
few who have so rapid a sale for their wares, that all the goods which
their own capital, or the capital which they can borrow, enables them to
supply, are carried off as fast as they can be supplied. The majority
have not an Edition: current; Page: [268] extent of business, at all
adequate to the amount of the capital they dispose of. It is true that,
in the communities in which industry and commerce are practised with
greatest success, the contrivances of banking enable the possessor of a
larger capital than he can employ in his own business, to employ it
productively and derive a revenue from it notwithstanding. Yet even
then, there is, of necessity, a great quantity of capital which remains
fixed in the shape of implements, machinery, buildings, &c., whether it
is only half employed, or in complete employment: and every dealer keeps
a stock in trade, to be ready for a possible sudden demand, though he
probably may not be able to dispose of it for an indefinite period.

This perpetual non-employment of a large proportion of capital, is the
price we pay for the division of labour. The purchase is worth what it
costs; but the price is considerable.

Of the importance of the fact which has just been noticed there are
three signal proofs. One is, the large sum often given for the goodwill
of a particular business. Another is, the large rent which is paid for
shops in certain situations, near a great thoroughfare for example,
which have no advantage except that the occupier may expect a larger
body of customers, and be enabled to turn over his capital more quickly.
Another is, that in many trades, there are some dealers who sell
articles of an equal quality at a lower price than other dealers. Of
course, this is not a voluntary sacrifice of profits: they expect by the
consequent overflow of customers to turn over their capital more
quickly, and to be gainers by keeping the whole of their capital in more
constant employment, though on any given operation their gains are less.

The reasoning cited in the earlier part of this paper, to show the
uselessness of a mere purchaser or customer, for enriching a nation or
an individual, applies only to the case of dealers who have already as
much business as their capital admits of, and as rapid a sale for their
commodities as is possible. To such dealers an additional purchaser is
really of no use; for, if they are sure of selling all their commodities
the moment those commodities are on sale, it is of no consequence
whether they sell them to one person or to another. But it is
questionable whether there be any dealers in whose case this hypothesis
is exactly verified; and to the great majority it is not applicable at
all. An additional customer, to most dealers, is equivalent to an
increase of their productive capital. He enables them to convert a
portion of their capital which was lying idle (and which could never
have become productive in their hands until a customer was found) into
wages and instruments of production; and if we suppose that the
commodity, unless bought by him, would not have found a purchaser for a
year after, then all which a capital of that value can enable men to
produce during a year, is clear gain—gain to the dealer, or producer,
and to Edition: current; Page: [269] the labourers whom he will employ,
and thus (if no one sustains any corresponding loss) gain to the nation.
The aggregate produce of the country for the succeeding year is,
therefore, increased; not by the mere exchange, but by calling into
activity a portion of the national capital, which, had it not been for
the exchange, would have remained for some time longer unemployed.

Thus there are actually at all times producers and dealers, of all, or
nearly all classes, whose capital is lying partially idle, because they
have not found the means of fulfilling the condition which the division
of labour renders indispensable to the full employment of capital,—viz.,
that of exchanging their products with each other. If these persons
could find one another out, they could mutually relieve each other from
this disadvantage. Any two shopkeepers, in insufficient employment, who
agreed to deal at each other’s shops so long as they could there
purchase articles of as good a quality as elsewhere, and at as low a
price, would render the nation a service. It may be said that they must
previously have dealt, to the same amount, with some other dealers; but
this is erroneous, since they could only have obtained the means of
purchasing by being previously enabled to sell. By their compact, each
would gain a customer, who would call his capital into fuller
employment; each therefore would obtain an increased produce; and they
would thus be enabled to become better customers to each other than they
could be to third parties.

It is obvious that every dealer who has not business sufficient fully to
employ his capital (which is the case with all dealers when they
commence business, and with many to the end of their lives), is in this
predicament simply for want of some one with whom to exchange his
commodities; and as there are such persons to about the same degree
probably in all trades, it is evident that if these persons sought one
another out, they have their remedy in their own hands, and by each
other’s assistance might bring their capital into more full employment.

We are now qualified to define the exact nature of the benefit which a
producer or dealer derives from the acquisition of a new customer. It is
as follows:—

1. If any part of his own capital was locked up in the form of unsold
goods, producing (for a longer period or a shorter) nothing at all; a
portion of this is called into greater activity, and becomes more
constantly productive. But to this we must add some further advantages.

2. If the additional demand exceeds what can be supplied by setting at
liberty the capital which exists in the state of unsold goods; and if
the dealer has additional resources, which were productively invested
(in the public funds, for instance), but not in his own trade; he is
enabled to obtain, on a portion of these, not mere interest, but profit,
and so to Edition: current; Page: [270] gain that difference between the
rate of profit and the rate of interest, which may be considered as
“wages of superintendance.”

3. If all the dealer’s capital is employed in his own trade, and no part
of it locked up as unsold goods, the new demand affords him additional
encouragement to save, by enabling his savings to yield him not merely
interest, but profit; and if he does not choose to save (or until he
shall have saved), it enables him to carry on an additional business
with borrowed capital, and so gain the difference between interest and
profit, or, in other words, to receive wages of superintendance on a
larger amount of capital.

This, it will be found, is a complete account of all the gains which a
dealer in any commodity can derive from an accession to the number of
those who deal with him: and it is evident to every one, that these
advantages are real and important, and that they are the cause which
induces a dealer of any kind to desire an increase of his business.

It follows from these premises, that the arrival of a new unproductive
consumer (living on his own means) in any place, be that place a
village, a town, or an entire country, is beneficial to that place, if
it causes to any of the dealers of the place any of the advantages above
enumerated, without withdrawing an equal advantage of the same kind from
any other dealer of the same place.

This accordingly is the test by which we must try all such questions,
and by which the propriety of the analogical argument, from dealing with
a tradesman to dealing with a nation, must be decided.

Let us take, for instance, as our example, Paris, which is much
frequented by strangers from various parts of the world, who, as
sojourners there, live unproductively upon their means. Let us consider
whether the presence of these persons is beneficial, in an industrial
point of view, to Paris.

We exclude from the consideration that portion of the strangers’ incomes
which they pay to natives as direct remuneration for service, or labour
of any description. This is obviously beneficial to the country. An
increase in the funds expended in employing labour, whether that labour
be productive or unproductive, tends equally to raise wages. The
condition of the whole labouring class is, so far, benefited. It is true
that the labourers thus employed by sojourners are probably, in part or
altogether, withdrawn from productive employment. But this is far from
being an evil; for either the situation of the labouring classes is
improved, which is far more than an equivalent for a diminution in mere
production, or the rise of wages acts as a stimulus to population, and
then the number of productive labourers becomes as great as before.

To this we may add, that what the sojourners pay as wages of labour or
Edition: current; Page: [271] service (whether constant or casual),
though expended unproductively by the first possessor, may, when it
passes into the hands of the receivers, be by them saved, and invested
in a productive employment. If so, a direct addition is made to the
national capital.

All this is obvious, and is sufficiently allowed by political
economists; who have invariably set apart the gains of all persons
coming under the class of domestic servants, as real advantages arising
to a place from the residence there of an increased number of
unproductive consumers.

We have only to examine whether the purchases of commodities by these
unproductive consumers, confer the same kind of benefit upon the
village, town, or nation, which is bestowed upon a particular tradesman
by dealing at his shop.

Now it is obvious that the sojourners, on their arrival, confer the
benefit in question upon some dealers, who did not enjoy it before. They
purchase their food, and many other articles, from the dealers in the
place. They, therefore, call the capital of some dealers, which was
locked up in unsold goods, into more active employment. They encourage
them to save, and enable them to receive wages of superintendance upon a
larger amount of capital. These effects being undeniable, the question
is, whether the presence of the sojourners deprives any others of the
Paris dealers of a similar advantage.

It will be seen that it does; and nothing will then remain but a
comparison of the amounts.

It is obvious to all who reflect (and was shown in the paper which
precedes this)[*] that the remittances to persons who expand their
incomes in foreign countries are, after a slight passage of the precious
metals, defrayed in commodities: and that the result commonly is, an
increase of exports and a diminution of imports, until the latter fall
short of the former by the amount of the remittances.

The arrival, therefore, of the strangers (say from England), while it
creates at Paris a market for commodities equivalent in value to their
funds, displaces in the market other commodities to an equal value. To
the extent of the increase of exports from England into France in the
way of remittance, it introduces additional commodities which, by their
cheapness, displace others formerly produced in that country. To the
extent of the diminution of imports into England from France,
commodities which existed or which were habitually produced in that
country are deprived of a market, or can only find one at a price not
sufficient to defray the cost.

It must, therefore, be a matter of mere accident, if by arriving in a
place, the new unproductive consumer causes any net advantage to its
industry, of the kind which we are now examining. Not to mention that
Edition: current; Page: [272] this, like any other change in the
channels of trade, may render useless a portion of fixed capital, and so
far injure the national wealth.

A distinction, however, must here be made.

The place to which the new unproductive consumers have come, may be a
town or village, as well as a country. If a town or village, it may
either be or not be a place having an export trade.

If the place had no previous trade except with the immediate
neighbourhood, there are no exports and imports, by the new arrangement
of which, the remittance can be made. There is no capital, formerly
employed in manufacturing for the foreign market, which is now brought
into less full employment.

Yet the remittance evidently is still made in commodities, but in this
case without displacing any which were produced before. To shew this, it
is necessary to make the following remarks.

The reason why towns exist, is that ceteris paribus it is convenient, in
order to save cost of carriage, that the production of commodities
should take place as far as practicable in the immediate vicinity of the
consumer. Capital finds its way so easily from town to country and from
country to town, that the amount of capital in the town will be
regulated wholly by the amount which can be employed there more
conveniently than elsewhere. Consequently the capital of a place will be
such as is sufficient

1st. To produce all commodities which from local circumstances can be
produced there at less cost than elsewhere: and if this be the case to
any great extent, it will be an exporting town. When we say produced, we
may add, or stored.

2nd. To produce and retail the commodities which are consumed by the
inhabitants of the town, and the place of whose production is in other
respects a matter of indifference. To the inhabitants of the town must
be added such dwellers in the adjoining country, as are nearer to that
place than to any other equally well furnished market.

Now, if new unproductive consumers resort to the place, it is clear that
for the latter of these two purposes, more capital will be required than
before. Consequently, if less is not required for the former purpose,
more capital will establish itself at the place.

Until this additional capital has arrived, the producers and dealers
already on the spot will enjoy great advantages. Every particle of their
own capital will be called into the most active employment. What their
capital does not enable them to supply, will be got from others at a
distance, who cannot supply it on such favourable terms; consequently
they will be in the predicament of possessing a partial
monopoly—receiving for every thing a price regulated by a higher cost of
production than they are compelled to pay. They also, being in
possession of the market, will be Edition: current; Page: [273] enabled
to make a large portion of the new capital pass through their hands, and
thus to earn wages of superintendance upon it.

If, indeed, the place from whence the strangers came, previously traded
with that where they have taken up their abode, the effect of their
arrival is, that the exports of the town will diminish, and that it will
be supplied from abroad with something which it previously produced at
home. In this way an amount of capital will be set free equal to that
required, and there will be no increase on the whole. The removal of the
court from London to Birmingham would not necessarily, though it would
probably,* increase the amount of capital in the latter place. The
afflux of money to Birmingham, and its efflux from London, would render
it cheaper to make some articles in London for Birmingham consumption;
and to make others in London for home consumption, which were formerly
brought from Birmingham.

But instead of Birmingham, an exporting town, suppose a village, or a
town which only produced and retailed for itself and its immediate
vicinity. The remittances must come thither in the shape of money; and
though the money would not remain, but would be sent away in exchange
for commodities, it would, however, first pass through the hands of the
producers and dealers in the place, and would by them be exported in
exchange for the articles which they require—viz. the materials, tools,
and subsistence necessary for the increased production now required of
them, and articles of foreign luxury for their own increased
unproductive consumption. These articles would not displace any formerly
made in the place, but on the contrary, would forward the production of
more.

Hence we may consider the following propositions as established:

1. The expenditure of absentees (the case of domestic servants
excepted,) is not necessarily any loss to the country which they leave,
or gain to the country which they resort to (save in the manner shown in
Essay I):[*] for almost every country habitually exports and imports to
a much greater value than the incomes of its absentees, or of the
foreign sojourners within it.

2. But sojourners often do much good to the town or village which they
resort to, and absentees harm to that which they leave. The capital of
the petty tradesman in a small town near an absentee’s estate, is
deprived of the market for which it is conveniently situated, and must
resort Edition: current; Page: [274] to another to which other capitals
lie nearer, and where it is consequently outbid, and gains less;
obtaining only the same price, with greater expenses. But this evil
would be equally occasioned, if, instead of going abroad, the absentee
had removed to his own capital city.

If the tradesman could, in the latter case, remove to the metropolis, or
in the former, employ himself in producing increased exports, or in
producing for home consumption articles now no longer imported, each in
the place most convenient for that operation; he would not be a loser,
though the place which he was obliged to leave might be said to lose.

Paris undoubtedly gains much by the sojourn of foreigners, while the
counteracting loss by diminution of exports from France is suffered by
the great trading and manufacturing towns, Rouen, Bordeaux, Lyons, &c.,
which also suffer the principal part of the loss by importation of
articles previously produced at home. The capital thus set free, finds
its most convenient seat to be Paris, since the business to which it
must turn is the production of articles to be unproductively consumed by
the sojourners.

The great trading towns of France would undoubtedly be more flourishing,
if France were not frequented by foreigners.

Rome and Naples are perhaps purely benefited by the foreigners
sojourning there: for they have so little external trade, that their
case may resemble that of the village in our hypothesis.

Absenteeism, therefore, (except as shown in the first Essay,)[*] is a
local, not a national evil; and the resort of foreigners, in so far as
they purchase for unproductive consumption, is not, in any commercial
country, a national, though it may be a local good.

From the considerations which we have now adduced, it is obvious what is
meant by such phrases as a brisk demand, and a rapid circulation. There
is a brisk demand and a rapid circulation, when goods, generally
speaking, are sold as fast as they can be produced. There is slackness,
on the contrary, and stagnation, when goods, which have been produced,
remain for a long time unsold. In the former case, the capital which has
been locked up in production is disengaged as soon as the production is
completed; and can be immediately employed in further production. In the
latter case, a large portion of the productive capital of the country is
lying in temporary inactivity.

From what has been already said, it is obvious that periods of “brisk
demand” are also the periods of greatest production: the national
capital is never called into full employment but at those periods. This,
however, is no reason for desiring such times; it is not desirable that
the whole capital of the country should be in full employment. For, the
calculations of producers and traders being of necessity imperfect,
there are always some commodities Edition: current; Page: [275] which
are more or less in excess, as there are always some which are in
deficiency. If, therefore, the whole truth were known, there would
always be some classes of producers contracting, not extending, their
operations. If all are endeavouring to extend them, it is a certain
proof that some general delusion is afloat. The commonest cause of such
delusion is some general, or very extensive, rise of prices (whether
caused by speculation or by the currency) which persuades all dealers
that they are growing rich. And hence, an increase of production really
takes place during the progress of depreciation, as long as the
existence of depreciation is not suspected; and it is this which gives
to the fallacies of the currency school, principally represented by Mr.
Attwood, all the little plausibility they possess. But when the delusion
vanishes and the truth is disclosed, those whose commodities are
relatively in excess must diminish their production or be ruined: and if
during the high prices they have built mills and erected machinery, they
will be likely to repent at leisure.

In the present state of the commercial world, mercantile transactions
being carried on upon an immense scale, but the remote causes of
fluctuations in prices being very little understood, so that
unreasonable hopes and unreasonable fears alternately rule with
tyrannical sway over the minds of a majority of the mercantile public;
general eagerness to buy and general reluctance to buy, succeed one
another in a manner more or less marked, at brief intervals. Except
during short periods of transition, there is almost always either great
briskness of business or great stagnation; either the principal
producers of almost all the leading articles of industry have as many
orders as they can possibly execute, or the dealers in almost all
commodities have their warehouses full of unsold goods.

In this last case, it is commonly said that there is a general
superabundance; and as those economists who have contested the
possibility of general superabundance, would none of them deny the
possibility or even the frequent occurrence of the phenomenon which we
have just noticed, it would seem incumbent on them to show, that the
expression to which they object is not applicable to a state of things
in which all or most commodities remain unsold, in the same sense in
which there is said to be a superabundance of any one commodity when it
remains in the warehouses of dealers for want of a market.

This is merely a question of naming, but an important one, as it seems
to us that much apparent difference of opinion has been produced by a
mere difference in the mode of describing the same facts, and that
persons who at bottom were perfectly agreed, have considered each other
as guilty of gross error, and sometimes even misrepresentation, on this
subject.

In order to afford the explanations, with which it is necessary to take
Edition: current; Page: [276] the doctrine of the impossibility of an
excess of all commodities, we must advert for a moment to the argument
by which this impossibility is commonly maintained.

There can never, it is said, be a want of buyers for all commodities;
because whoever offers a commodity for sale, desires to obtain a
commodity in exchange for it, and is therefore a buyer by the mere fact
of his being a seller. The sellers and the buyers, for all commodities
taken together, must, by the metaphysical necessity of the case, be an
exact equipoise to each other; and if there be more sellers than buyers
of one thing, there must be more buyers than sellers for another.

This argument is evidently founded on the supposition of a state of
barter; and, on that supposition, it is perfectly incontestable. When
two persons perform an act of barter, each of them is at once a seller
and a buyer. He cannot sell without buying. Unless he chooses to buy
some other person’s commodity, he does not sell his own.

If, however, we suppose that money is used, these propositions cease to
be exactly true. It must be admitted that no person desires money for
its own sake, (unless some very rare cases of misers be an exception,)
and that he who sells his commodity, receiving money in exchange, does
so with the intention of buying with that same money some other
commodity. Interchange by means of money is therefore, as has been often
observed, ultimately nothing but barter. But there is this
difference—that in the case of barter, the selling and the buying are
simultaneously confounded in one operation; you sell what you have, and
buy what you want, by one indivisible act, and you cannot do the one
without doing the other. Now the effect of the employment of money, and
even the utility of it, is, that it enables this one act of interchange
to be divided into two separate acts or operations; one of which may be
performed now, and the other a year hence, or whenever it shall be most
convenient. Although he who sells, really sells only to buy, he needs
not buy at the same moment when he sells; and he does not therefore
necessarily add to the immediate demand for one commodity when he adds
to the supply of another. The buying and selling being now separated, it
may very well occur, that there may be, at some given time, a very
general inclination to sell with as little delay as possible,
accompanied with an equally general inclination to defer all purchases
as long as possible. This is always actually the case, in those periods
which are described as periods of general excess. And no one, after
sufficient explanation, will contest the possibility of general excess,
in this sense of the word. The state of things which we have just
described, and which is of no uncommon occurrence, amounts to it.

For when there is a general anxiety to sell, and a general
disinclination to buy, commodities of all kinds remain for a long time
unsold, and those Edition: current; Page: [277] which find an immediate
market, do so at a very low price. If it be said that when all
commodities fall in price, the fall is of no consequence, since mere
money price is not material while the relative value of all commodities
remains the same, we answer that this would be true if the low prices
were to last for ever. But as it is certain that prices will rise again
sooner or later, the person who is obliged by necessity to sell his
commodity at a low money price is really a sufferer, the money he
receives sinking shortly to its ordinary value. Every person, therefore,
delays selling if he can, keeping his capital unproductive in the mean
time, and sustaining the consequent loss of interest. There is
stagnation to those who are not obliged to sell, and distress to those
who are.

It is true that this state can be only temporary, and must even be
succeeded by a reaction of corresponding violence, since those who have
sold without buying will certainly buy at last, and there will then be
more buyers than sellers. But although the general over-supply is of
necessity only temporary, this is no more than may be said of every
partial over-supply. An overstocked state of the market is always
temporary, and is generally followed by a more than common briskness of
demand.

In order to render the argument for the impossibility of an excess of
all commodities applicable to the case in which a circulating medium is
employed, money must itself be considered as a commodity. It must,
undoubtedly, be admitted that there cannot be an excess of all other
commodities, and an excess of money at the same time.

But those who have, at periods such as we have described, affirmed that
there was an excess of all commodities, never pretended that money was
one of these commodities; they held that there was not an excess, but a
deficiency of the circulating medium. What they called a general
superabundance, was not a superabundance of commodities relatively to
commodities, but a superabundance of all commodities relatively to
money. What it amounted to was, that persons in general, at that
particular time, from a general expectation of being called upon to meet
sudden demands, liked better to possess money than any other commodity.
Money, consequently, was in request, and all other commodities were in
comparative disrepute. In extreme cases, money is collected in masses,
and hoarded; in the milder cases, people merely defer parting with their
money, or coming under any new engagements to part with it. But the
result is, that all commodities fall in price, or become unsaleable.
When this happens to one single commodity, there is said to be a
superabundance of that commodity; and if that be a proper expression,
there would seem to be in the nature of the case no particular
impropriety in saying that there is a superabundance of all or most
commodities, when all or most of them are in this same predicament.

Edition: current; Page: [278]
It is, however, of the utmost importance to observe that excess of all
commodities, in the only sense in which it is possible, means only a
temporary fall in their value relatively to money. To suppose that the
markets for all commodities could, in any other sense than this, be
overstocked, involves the absurdity that commodities may fall in value
relatively to themselves; or that, of two commodities, each can fall
relatively to the other, A becoming equivalent to B — x, and B to A — x,
at the same time. And it is, perhaps, a sufficient reason for not using
phrases of this description, that they suggest the idea of excessive
production. A want of market for one article may arise from excessive
production of that article; but when commodities in general become
unsaleable, it is from a very different cause; there cannot be excessive
production of commodities in general.

The argument against the possibility of general over-production is quite
conclusive, so far as it applies to the doctrine that a country may
accumulate capital too fast; that produce in general may, by increasing
faster than the demand for it, reduce all producers to distress. This
proposition, strange to say, was almost a received doctrine as lately as
thirty years ago; and the merit of those who have exploded it is much
greater than might be inferred from the extreme obviousness of its
absurdity when it is stated in its native simplicity. It is true that if
all the wants of all the inhabitants of a country were fully satisfied,
no further capital could find useful employment; but, in that case, none
would be accumulated. So long as there remain any persons not possessed,
we do not say of subsistence, but of the most refined luxuries, and who
would work to possess them, there is employment for capital; and if the
commodities which these persons want are not produced and placed at
their disposal, it can only be because capital does not exist,
disposable for the purpose of employing, if not any other labourers,
those very labourers themselves, in producing the articles for their own
consumption. Nothing can be more chimerical than the fear that the
accumulation of capital should produce poverty and not wealth, or that
it will ever take place too fast for its own end. Nothing is more true
than that it is produce which constitutes the market for produce, and
that every increase of production, if distributed without miscalculation
among all kinds of produce in the proportion which private interest
would dictate, creates, or rather constitutes, its own demand.

This is the truth which the deniers of general over-production have
seized and enforced; nor is it pretended that anything has been added to
it, or subtracted from it, in the present disquisition. But it is
thought that those who receive the doctrine accompanied with the
explanations which we have given, will understand, more clearly than
before, what is, and what is not, implied in it; and will see that, when
properly understood, it in no Edition: current; Page: [279] way
contradicts those obvious facts which are universally known and admitted
to be not only of possible, but of actual and even frequent occurrence.
The doctrine in question only appears a paradox, because it has usually
been so expressed as apparently to contradict these well-known facts;
which, however, were equally well known to the authors of the doctrine,
who, therefore, can only have adopted from inadvertence any form of
expression which could to a candid person appear inconsistent with it.
The essentials of the doctrine are preserved when it is allowed that
there cannot be permanent excess of production, or of accumulation;
though it be at the same time admitted, that as there may be a temporary
excess of any one article considered separately, so may there of
commodities generally, not in consequence of over-production, but of a
want of commercial confidence.

Edition: current; Page: [280]


On the Words Productive and Unproductive

[Essay III in Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy,
75-89. One typographical error was introduced into the 2nd edition,
“expand” for “expend” (288.29).]

it would probably be difficult to point out any two words, respecting
the proper use of which political economists have been more divided,
than they have been concerning the two words productive and
unproductive; whether considered as applied to labour, to consumption,
or to expenditure.

Although this is a question solely of nomenclature, it is one of
sufficient importance to be worth another attempt to settle it
satisfactorily. For, although writers on political economy have not
agreed in the ideas which they were accustomed to annex to these terms,
the terms have generally been employed to denote ideas of very great
importance, and it is impossible that some vagueness should not have
been thrown upon the ideas themselves by looseness in the use of the
words by which they are habitually designated. Further, so long as the
pedantic objection to the introduction of new technical terms continues,
accurate thinkers on moral and political subjects are limited to a very
scanty vocabulary for the expression of their ideas. It therefore is of
great importance that the words with which mankind are familiar, should
be turned to the greatest possible advantage as instruments of thought;
that one word should not be used as the sign of an idea which is already
sufficiently expressed by another word; and that words which are
required to denote ideas of great importance, should not be usurped for
the expression of such as are comparatively insignificant.

The phrases productive labour, and productive consumption, have been
employed by some writers on political economy with very great latitude.
They have considered, and classed, as productive labour and productive
consumption, all labour which serves any useful purpose—all consumption
which is not waste. Mr. McCulloch has asserted, totidem verbis, that the
Edition: current; Page: [281] labour of Madame Pasta was as well
entitled to be called productive labour as that of a cotton spinner.[*]

Employed in this sense, the words productive and unproductive are
superfluous, since the words useful and agreeable on the one hand,
useless and worthless on the other, are quite sufficient to express all
the ideas to which the words productive and unproductive are here
applied.

This use of the terms, therefore, is subversive of the ends of language.

Those writers who have employed the words in a more limited sense, have
usually understood by productive or unproductive labour, labour which is
productive of wealth, or unproductive of wealth. But what is wealth? And
here the words productive and unproductive have been affected with
additional ambiguities, corresponding to the different extension which
different writers have given to the term wealth.

Some have given the name of wealth to all things which tend to the use
or enjoyment of mankind, and which possess exchangeable value. This last
clause is added to exclude air, the light of the sun, and any other
things which can be obtained in unlimited quantity without labour or
sacrifice; together with all such things as, though produced by labour,
are not held in sufficient general estimation to command any price in
the market.

But when this definition came to be explained, many persons were
disposed to interpret “all things which tend to the use or enjoyment of
man,” as implying only all material things. Immaterial products they
refused to consider as wealth; and labour or expenditure which yielded
nothing but immaterial products, they characterised as unproductive
labour and unproductive expenditure.

To this it was, or might have been, answered, that according to this
classification, a carpenter’s labour at his trade is productive labour,
but the same individual’s labour in learning his trade was unproductive
labour. Yet it is obvious that, on both occasions, his labour tended
exclusively to what is allowed to be production: the one was equally
indispensable with the other, to the ultimate result. Further, if we
adopted the above definition, we should be obliged to say that a nation
whose artisans were twice as skilful as those of another nation, was
not, ceteris paribus, more wealthy; although it is evident that every
one of the results of wealth, and everything for the sake of which
wealth is desired, would be possessed by the former country in a higher
degree than by the latter.

Every classification according to which a basket of cherries, gathered
and eaten the next minute, are called wealth, while that title is denied
Edition: current; Page: [282] to the acquired skill of those who are
acknowledged to be productive labourers, is a purely arbitrary division,
and does not conduce to the ends for which classification and
nomenclature are designed.

In order to get over all difficulties, some political economists seem
disposed to make the terms express a distinction sufficiently definite
indeed, but more completely arbitrary, and having less foundation in
nature, than any of the former. They will not allow to any labour or to
any expenditure the name of productive, unless the produce which it
yields returns into the hands of the very person who made the outlay.
Hedging and ditching they term productive labour, though those
operations conduce to production only indirectly, by protecting the
produce from destruction; but the necessary expenses incurred by a
government for the protection of property are, they insist upon it,
consumed unproductively: though, as has been well pointed out by Mr.
McCulloch, these expenses, in their relation to the national wealth, are
exactly analogous to the wages of a hedger or a ditcher.[*] The only
difference is, that the farmer, who pays for the hedging and ditching,
is the person to whom the consequent increase of production accrues,
while the government, which is at the expense of police officers and
courts of justice, does not, as a necessary consequence, get back into
its own coffers the increase of the national wealth resulting from the
security of property.

It would be endless to point out the oddities and incongruities which
result from this classification. Whether we take the words wealth and
production in the largest, or in the most restricted sense in which they
have ever yet been employed, nobody will dispute that roads, bridges,
and canals, contribute in an eminent degree, and in a very direct
manner, to the increase of production and wealth. The labour and
pecuniary resources employed in their construction would, according to
the above theory, be considered productive, if every occupier of land
were compelled by law to construct so much of the road, or canal, as
passes through his own farm. If, instead of this, the government makes
the road, and throws it open to the public toll-free, the labour and
expenditure would be, on the above system, clearly unproductive. But if
the government, or an association of individuals, made the road, and
imposed a toll to defray the expense, we do not see how these writers
could refuse to the outlay the title of productive expenditure. It would
follow, that the very same labour and expense, if given gratuitously,
must be called unproductive, which, if a charge had been made for it,
would have been called productive.

When these consequences of the purely arbitrary classification to which
we allude have been pointed out and complained of, the only answer which
we have ever seen made to the objection is, that the line of demarcation
Edition: current; Page: [283] must be drawn somewhere, and that in every
classification there are intermediate cases, which might have been
included, with almost equal propriety, either in the one class or in the
other.

This answer appears to us to indicate the want of a sufficiently
accurate and discriminating perception, what is the kind of inaccuracy
which generally cannot be avoided in a classification, and what is that
other kind of inaccuracy, from which it always may be, and should be,
exempt.

The classes themselves may be, mentally speaking, perfectly definite,
though it may not always be easy to say to which of them a particular
object belongs. When it is uncertain in which of two classes an object
should be placed, if the classification be properly made, and properly
expressed, the uncertainty can turn only upon a matter of fact. It is
uncertain to which class the object belongs, because it is doubtful
whether it possesses in a greater degree the characteristics of the one
class or those of the other. But the characteristics themselves may be
defined and distinguished with the nicest exactness, and always ought to
be so. Especially ought they in a case like the present, because here it
is only the distinction between the ideas which is of any importance.
That we should be able with ease to portion out all employments between
the two classes, does not happen to be of any particular consequence.

It is frequently said that classification is a mere affair of
convenience. This assertion is true in one sense, but not if its meaning
be, that the most proper classification is that in which it is easiest
to say whether an object belongs to one class or to the other. The use
of classification is, to fix attention upon the distinctions which exist
among things; and that is the best classification, which is founded upon
the most important distinctions, whatever be the facilities which it may
afford of ticketing and arranging the different objects which exist in
nature. In fixing, therefore, the meaning of the words productive and
unproductive, we ought to endeavour to render them significative of the
most important distinctions which, without too glaring a violation of
received usage, they can be made to express.

We ought further, when we are restricted to the employment of old words,
to endeavour as far as possible that it shall not be necessary to
struggle against the old associations with those words. We should, if
possible, give the words such a meaning, that the propositions in which
people are accustomed to use them, shall as far as possible still be
true; and that the feelings habitually excited by them, shall be such as
the things to which we mean to appropriate them ought to excite.

We shall endeavour to unite these conditions in the result of the
following enquiry.

In whatever manner political economists may have settled the definition
of productive and unproductive labour or consumption, the consequences
Edition: current; Page: [284] which they have drawn from the definition
are nearly the same. In proportion to the amount of the productive
labour and consumption of a country, the country, they all allow, is
enriched: in proportion to the amount of the unproductive labour and
consumption, the country is impoverished. Productive expenditure they
are accustomed to view as a gain; unproductive expenditure, however
useful, as a sacrifice. Unproductive expenditure of what was destined to
be expended productively, they always characterise as a squandering of
resources, and call it profusion and prodigality. The productive
expenditure of that which might, without encroaching upon capital, be
expended unproductively, is called saving, economy, frugality. Want,
misery, and starvation, are described as the lot of a nation which
annually employs less and less of its labour and resources in
production; growing comfort and opulence as the result of an annual
increase in the quantity of wealth so employed.

Let us then examine what qualities in expenditure, and in the employment
of labour, are those from which all the consequences above mentioned
really flow.

The end to which all labour and all expenditure are directed, is
twofold. Sometimes it is enjoyment immediately; the fulfilment of those
desires, the gratification of which is wished for on its own account.
Whenever labour or expense is not incurred immediately for the sake of
enjoyment, and is yet not absolutely wasted, it must be incurred for the
purpose of enjoyment indirectly or mediately; by either repairing and
perpetuating, or adding, to the permanent sources of enjoyment.

Sources of enjoyment may be accumulated and stored up; enjoyment itself
cannot. The wealth of a country consists of the sum total of the
permanent sources of enjoyment, whether material or immaterial,
contained in it: and labour or expenditure which tends to augment or to
keep up these permanent sources, should, we conceive, be termed
productive.

Labour which is employed for the purpose of directly affording
enjoyment, such as the labour of a performer on a musical instrument, we
term unproductive labour. Whatever is consumed by such a performer, we
consider as unproductively consumed: the accumulated total of the
sources of enjoyment which the nation possesses, is diminished by the
amount of what he has consumed: whereas, if it had been given to him in
exchange for his services in producing food or clothing, the total of
the permanent sources of enjoyment in the country might have been not
diminished but increased.

The performer on the musical instrument then is, so far as respects that
act, not a productive, but an unproductive labourer. But what shall we
say of the workman who made the musical instrument? He, most persons
Edition: current; Page: [285] would say, is a productive labourer; and
with reason; because the musical instrument is a permanent source of
enjoyment, which does not begin and end with the enjoying, and therefore
admits of being accumulated.

But the skill of the musician is a permanent source of enjoyment, as
well as the instrument which he plays upon: and although skill is not a
material object, but a quality of an object, viz., of the hands and mind
of the performer; nevertheless skill possesses exchangeable value, is
acquired by labour and capital, and is capable of being stored and
accumulated. Skill, therefore, must be considered as wealth; and the
labour and funds employed in acquiring skill in anything tending to the
advantage or pleasure of mankind, must be considered to be productively
employed and expended.

The skill of a productive labourer is analogous to the machinery he
works with: neither of them is enjoyment, nor conduces directly to it,
but both conduce indirectly to it, and both in the same way. If a
spinning-jenny be wealth, the spinner’s skill is also wealth. If the
mechanic who made the spinning-jenny laboured productively, the spinner
also laboured productively when he was learning his trade: and what they
both consumed was consumed productively, that is to say, its consumption
did not tend to diminish, but to increase the sum of the permanent
sources of enjoyment in the country, by effecting a new creation of
those sources, more than equal to the amount of the consumption.

The skill of a tailor, and the implements he employs, contribute in the
same way to the convenience of him who wears the coat, namely, a remote
way: it is the coat itself which contributes immediately. The skill of
Madame Pasta, and the building and decorations which aid the effect of
her performance, contribute in the same way to the enjoyment of the
audience, namely, an immediate way, without any intermediate
instrumentality. The building and decorations are consumed
unproductively, and Madame Pasta labours and consumes unproductively;
for the building is used and worn out, and Madame Pasta performs,
immediately for the spectators’ enjoyment, and without leaving, as a
consequence of the performance, any permanent result possessing
exchangeable value: consequently the epithet unproductive must be
equally applied to the gradual wearing out of the bricks and mortar, the
nightly consumption of the more perishable “properties” of the theatre,
the labour of Madame Pasta in acting, and of the orchestra in playing.
But notwithstanding this, the architect who built the theatre was a
productive labourer; so were the producers of the perishable articles;
so were those who constructed the musical instruments; and so, we must
be permitted to add, were those who instructed the musicians, and all
persons who, by the instructions which they may have given to Madame
Pasta, contributed to the formation of Edition: current; Page: [286] her
talent. All these persons contributed to the enjoyment of the audience
in the same way, and that a remote way, viz., by the production of a
permanent source of enjoyment.

The difference between this case, and the case of the cotton spinner
already adverted to, is this. The spinning-jenny, and the skill of the
cotton spinner, are not only the result of productive labour, but are
themselves productively consumed. The musical instrument and the skill
of the musician are equally the result of productive labour, but are
themselves unproductively consumed.

Let us now consider what kinds of labour, and of consumption or
expenditure, will be classed as productive, and what as unproductive,
according to this rule.

The following are always productive:

Labour and expenditure, of which the direct object or effect is the
creation of some material product useful or agreeable to mankind.

Labour and expenditure, of which the direct effect and object are, to
endow human or other animated beings with faculties or qualities useful
or agreeable to mankind, and possessing exchangeable value.

Labour and expenditure, which without having for their direct object the
creation of any useful material product or bodily or mental faculty or
quality, yet tend indirectly to promote one or other of those ends, and
are exerted or incurred solely for that purpose.

The following are partly productive and partly unproductive, and cannot
with propriety be ranged decidedly with either class:

Labour or expenditure which does indeed create, or promote the creation
of, some useful material product or bodily or mental faculty or quality,
but which is not incurred or exerted for that sole end; having also for
another, and perhaps its principal end, enjoyment, or the promotion of
enjoyment.

Such are the labour of the judge, the legislator, the police-officer,
the soldier; and the expenditure incurred for their support. These
functionaries protect and secure mankind in the exclusive possession of
such material products or acquired faculties as belong to them; and by
the security which they so confer, they indirectly increase production
in a degree far more than equivalent to the expense which is necessary
for their maintenance. But this is not the only purpose for which they
exist; they protect mankind, not merely in the possession of their
permanent resources, but also in their actual enjoyments; and so far,
although highly useful, they cannot, conformably to the distinction
which we have attempted to lay down, be considered productive labourers.

Such, also, are the labour and the wages of domestic servants. Such
persons are entertained mainly as subservient to mere enjoyment; but
Edition: current; Page: [287] most of them occasionally, and some
habitually, render services which must be considered as of a productive
nature; such as that of cookery, the last stage in the manufacture of
food; or gardening, a branch of agriculture.

The following are wholly unproductive:

Labour exerted, and expenditure incurred, directly and exclusively for
the purpose of enjoyment, and not calling into existence anything,
whether substance or quality, but such as begins and perishes in the
enjoyment.

Labour exerted and expenditure incurred uselessly, or in pure waste, and
yielding neither direct enjoyment nor permanent sources of enjoyment.

It may be objected, that expenditure incurred even for pure enjoyment
promotes production indirectly, by inciting to exertion. Thus the view
of the splendour of a rich establishment is supposed by some writers to
produce upon the mind of an indigent spectator an earnest desire of
enjoying the same luxuries, and a consequent purpose of working with
vigour and diligence, and saving from his earnings, thus increasing the
productive capital of the country.

It is true that mankind are, for the most part, excited to productive
industry solely by the desire of subsequently consuming the result of
their labour and accumulation. The consumption called unproductive,
viz., that of which the direct result is enjoyment, is in reality the
end, to which production is only the means; and a desire for the end, is
what alone impels any one to have recourse to the means.

But, notwithstanding this, it is of the greatest importance to mark the
distinction between the labour and the consumption which have enjoyment
for their immediate end, and the labour and the consumption of which the
immediate end is reproduction. Though the sight of the former may still
further stimulate that desire for the enjoyments afforded by wealth,
which the mere knowledge, without the immediate view, would suffice to
excite (and without dwelling on the consideration that if the example of
a large expenditure excites one individual to accumulation, it
encourages two to prodigal expense); still, if we look only to the
effects which are intended, or to those which immediately follow from
the consumption, and whose connexion with it can be distinctly traced,
it evidently renders a country poorer in the permanent sources of
enjoyment; while reproductive consumption leaves the country richer in
these same sources. Besides, if what is spent for mere pleasure promotes
indirectly the increase of wealth, it can only be by inducing others not
to expend on mere pleasure.

Before quitting the subject, one more observation should be added. It
must not be supposed that what is expended upon unproductive labourers
is necessarily, the whole of it, unproductively consumed. The
unproductive labourers may save part of their wages, and invest them in
a productive employment.

Edition: current; Page: [288]
It is not unusual to speak of what is paid in wages to a labourer as
being thereby consumed, as if all profit and loss to the nation were to
be seen in the capitalist’s account-book. What is paid for productive
labour is said to be productively consumed; what is paid for
unproductive labour is said to be consumed unproductively. It would be
proper to say, not that it is productively or unproductively consumed,
but productively or unproductively expended; otherwise, we shall be
obliged to say that it is consumed twice over; the first time
unproductively, perhaps, and the second, it may be, productively.

To pronounce in which way the wages of the labourer are consumed, we
must follow them into the labourer’s own hands. As much as is necessary
to keep the productive labourer in perfect health and fitness for his
employment, may be said to be consumed productively. To this should be
added what he expends in rearing children to the age at which they
become capable of productive industry. If the state of the market for
labour be such as to afford him more, this he may either save, or, as
the common expression is, he may spend it. If he saves any portion, this
(unless it be merely hoarded) he intends to employ productively, and it
will be productively consumed. If he spends it, the consumption is for
enjoyment immediately, and is therefore unproductive.

This suggests another correction in the established language. Political
economists generally define the “net produce” to be that portion of the
gross annual produce of a country which remains after replacing the
capital annually consumed. This, as they proceed to explain, consists of
profits and rent; wages being included in the other portion of the gross
produce, that which goes to replace capital. After this definition, they
usually proceed to tell us that the net produce, and that alone,
constitutes the fund from which a nation can accumulate, and add to its
capital, as also that which it can, without retrograding in wealth,
expend unproductively, or for enjoyment. Now, it is impossible that both
the above propositions can be true. If the net produce is that which
remains after replacing capital, then net produce is not the only fund
out of which accumulation may be made: for accumulation may be made from
wages; this is in all countries one of the great sources, and in
countries like America perhaps the greatest source of accumulation. If,
on the other hand, it is desirable to reserve the name of net produce to
denote the fund available for accumulation or for unproductive
consumption, we must define net produce differently. The definition
which appears the best adapted to render the ordinary doctrines relating
to net produce true, would be this:

The net produce of a country is whatever is annually produced beyond
what is necessary for maintaining the stock of materials and implements
Edition: current; Page: [289] unimpaired, for keeping all productive
labourers alive and in condition for work, and for just keeping up their
numbers without increase. What is required for these purposes, or, in
other words, for keeping up the productive resources of the country,
cannot be diverted from its destination without rendering the nation as
a whole poorer. But all which is produced beyond this, whether it be in
the hands of the labourer, of the capitalist, or of any of the numerous
varieties of rent-owners, may be taken for immediate enjoyment, without
prejudice to the productive resources of the community; and whatever
part of it is not so taken, constitutes a clear addition to the national
capital, or to the permanent sources of enjoyment.

Edition: current; Page: [290]


On Profits, and Interest

[Essay IV in Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy,
90-119. Writing to J. P. Nichol (15/4/34), JSM comments: “By-the-bye, I
believe almost all that I have written in the fourth essay concerning
Interest is erroneous but it may lead you to think on the subject, if
you have not already” (Earlier Letters, XII, 222). (See also headnote,
230 above.)

One correction introduced in the 2nd edition is here accepted, with the
reading of the 1st edition given as a variant (294a-a). Two
typographical errors were introduced into the 2nd edition, “ef” for “of”
(302.4) and “supposed” for “disposed” (304.20).]

the profits of stock are the surplus which remains to the capitalist
after replacing his capital: and the ratio which that surplus bears to
the capital itself, is the rate of profit.

This being the definition of profits, it might seem natural to adopt, as
a sufficient theory in regard to the rate of profit, that it depends
upon the productive power of capital. Some countries are favoured beyond
others, either by nature or art, in the means of production. If the
powers of the soil, or of machinery, enable capital to produce what is
necessary for replacing itself, and twenty per cent more, profits will
be twenty per cent; and so on.

This, accordingly, is a popular mode of speaking on the subject of
profits; but it has only the semblance, not the reality, of an
explanation. The “productive power of capital,” though a common, and,
for some purposes, a convenient expression, is a delusive one. Capital,
strictly speaking, has no productive power. The only productive power is
that of labour; assisted, no doubt, by tools, and acting upon materials.
That portion of capital which consists of tools and materials, may be
said, perhaps, without any great impropriety, to have a productive
power, because they contribute, along with labour, to the accomplishment
of production. But that portion of capital which consists of wages, has
no productive power of its own. Wages have no productive power; they are
the price of a productive power. Wages do not contribute, along with
labour, to the production of commodities, no more than the price of
tools contributes along Edition: current; Page: [291] with the tools
themselves. If labour could be had without purchase, wages might be
dispensed with. That portion of capital which is expended in the wages
of labour, is only the means by which the capitalist procures to
himself, in the way of purchase, the use of that labour in which the
power of production really resides.

The proper view of capital is, that anything whatever, which a person
possesses, constitutes his capital, provided he is able, and intends, to
employ it, not in consumption for the purpose of enjoyment, but in
possessing himself of the means of production, with the intention of
employing those means productively. Now the means of production are
labour, implements, and materials. The only productive power which
anywhere exists, is the productive power of labour, implements, and
materials.

We need not, on this account, altogether proscribe the expression,
“productive power of capital;” but we should carefully note, that it can
only mean the quantity of real productive power which the capitalist, by
means of his capital, can command. This may change, though the
productive power of labour remains the same. Wages, for example, may
rise; and then, although all the circumstances of production remain
exactly as they were before, the same capital will yield a less return,
because it will set in motion a less quantity of productive labour.

We may, therefore, consider the capital of a producer as measured by the
means which he has of possessing himself of the different essentials of
production: namely, labour, and the various articles which labour
requires as materials, or of which it avails itself as aids. The ratio
between the price which he has to pay for these means of production, and
the produce which they enable him to raise, is the rate of his profit.
If he must give for labour and tools four-fifths of what they will
produce, the remaining fifth will constitute his profit, and will give
him a rate of one in four, or twenty-five per cent, on his outlay.

It is necessary here to remark, what cannot indeed by any possibility be
misunderstood, but might possibly be overlooked in cases where attention
to it is indispensable, viz., that we are speaking now of the rate of
profit, not the gross profit. If the capital of the country is very
great, a profit of only five per cent upon it may be much more ample,
may support a much larger number of capitalists and their families in
much greater affluence, than a profit of twenty-five per cent on the
comparatively small capital of a poor country. The gross profit of a
country is the actual amount of necessaries, conveniences, and luxuries,
which are divided among its capitalists: but whether this be large or
small, the rate of profit may be just the same. The rate of profit is
the proportion which the profit bears to the capital; which the surplus
produce after replacing the outlay, bears to the outlay. In short, if we
compare the price paid for labour and tools Edition: current; Page:
[292] with what that labour and those tools will produce, from this
ratio we may calculate the rate of profit.

As the gross profit may be very different though the rate of profit be
the same; so also may be absolute price paid for labour and tools be
very different, and yet the proportion between the price paid and the
produce obtained may be just the same. For greater clearness, let us
omit, for the present, the consideration of tools, materials, &c., and
conceive production as the result solely of labour. In a certain
country, let us suppose, the wages of each labourer are one quarter of
wheat per year, and 100 men can produce, in one year, 120 quarters. Here
the price paid for labour is to the produce of that labour as 100 to
120, and profits are 20 per cent. Suppose now that, in another country,
wages are just double what they are in the country before supposed;
namely, two quarters of wheat per year, for each labourer. But suppose,
likewise, that the productive power of labour is double what it is in
the first country; that by the greater fertility of the soil, 100 men
can produce 240 quarters, instead of 120 as before. Here it is obvious,
that the real price paid for labour is twice as great in the one country
as in the other; but the produce being also twice as great, the ratio
between the price of labour and the produce of labour is still exactly
the same: an outlay of 200 quarters gives a return of 240 quarters, and
profits, as before, are 20 per cent.

Profits, then (meaning not gross profits, but the rate of profit),
depend (not upon the price of labour, tools, and materials—but) upon the
ratio between the price of labour, tools, and materials, and the produce
of them: upon the proportionate share of the produce of industry which
it is necessary to offer, in order to purchase that industry and the
means of setting it in motion.

We have hitherto spoken of tools, buildings, and materials, as
essentials of production, co-ordinate with labour, and equally
indispensable with it. This is true; but it is also true that tools,
buildings, and materials, are themselves the produce of labour; and that
the only cause (cases of monopoly excepted) of their having any value,
is the labour which is required for their production.

If tools, buildings, and materials were the spontaneous gifts of nature,
requiring no labour either in order to produce or to appropriate them;
and if they were thus bestowed upon mankind in indefinite quantity, and
without the possibility of being monopolized; they would still be as
useful, as indispensable as they now are; but since they could, like air
and the light of the sun, be obtained without cost or sacrifice, they
would form no part of the expenses of production, and no portion of the
produce would be required to be set aside in order to replace the outlay
made for these Edition: current; Page: [293] purposes. The whole
produce, therefore, after replacing the wages of labour, would be clear
profit to the capitalist.

Labour alone is the primary means of production; “the original
purchase-money which has been paid for everything.”[*] Tools and
materials, like other things, have originally cost nothing but labour;
and have a value in the market only because wages have been paid for
them. The labour employed in making the tools and materials being added
to the labour afterwards employed in working up the materials by aid of
the tools, the sum total gives the whole of the labour employed in the
production of the completed commodity. In the ultimate analysis,
therefore, labour appears to be the only essential of production. To
replace capital, is to replace nothing but the wages of the labour
employed. Consequently, the whole of the surplus, after replacing wages,
is profits. From this it seems to follow, that the ratio between the
wages of labour and the produce of that labour gives the rate of profit.
And thus we arrive at Mr. Ricardo’s principle, that profits depend upon
wages; rising as wages fall, and falling as wages rise.[†]

To protect this proposition (the most perfect form in which the law of
profits seems to have been yet exhibited) against misapprehension, one
or two explanatory remarks are required.

If by wages, be meant what constitutes the real affluence of the
labourer, the quantity of produce which he receives in exchange for his
labour; the proposition that profits vary inversely as wages, will be
obviously false. The rate of profit (as has been already observed and
exemplified) does not depend upon the price of labour, but upon the
proportion between the price of labour and the produce of it. If the
produce of labour is large, the price of labour may also be large
without any diminution of the rate of profit: and, in fact, the rate of
profit is highest in those countries (as, for instance, North America)
where the labourer is most largely remunerated. For the wages of labour,
though so large, bear a less proportion to the abundant produce of
labour, there than elsewhere.

But this does not affect the truth of Mr. Ricardo’s principle as he
himself understood it; because an increase of the labourer’s real
comforts was not considered by him as a rise of wages. In his language
wages were only said to rise, when they rose not in mere quantity but in
value. To the labourer himself (he would have said) the quantity of his
remuneration is the important circumstance: but its value is the only
thing of importance to the person who purchases his labour.

The rate of profits depends not upon absolute or real wages, but upon
the value of wages.

If, however, by value, Mr. Ricardo had meant exchangeable value, his
Edition: current; Page: [294] proposition would still have been remote
from the truth. Profits depend no more upon the exchangeable value of
the labourer’s remuneration, than upon its quantity. The truth is, that
by the exchangeable value is meant the quantity of commodities which the
labourer can purchase with his wages; so that when we say the
exchangeable value of wages, we say their quantity, under another name.

Mr. Ricardo, however, did not use the word value in the sense of
exchangeable value.

Occasionally, in his writings, he could not avoid using the word as
other people use it, to denote value in exchange. But he more frequently
employed it in a sense peculiar to himself, to denote cost of
production; in other words, the quantity of labour required to produce
the article; that being his criterion of cost of production.[*] Thus, if
a hat could be made with ten days’ labour in France and with five days’
labour in England, he said that the value of a hat was double in France
of what it was in England. If a quarter of corn could be produced a
century ago with half as much labour as is necessary at present, Mr.
Ricardo said that the value of a quarter of corn had doubled.

Mr. Ricardo, therefore, would not have said that wages had risen,
because a labourer could obtain two pecks of flour instead of one, for a
day’s labour; but if last year he received, for a day’s labour,
something which required eight hours’ labour to produce it, and this
year something which requires nine hours, then Mr. Ricardo would say
that wages had risen. A rise of wages, with Mr. Ricardo, meant an
increase in the cost of production of wages; an increase in the number
of hours’ labour which agoesa to produce the wages of a day’s labour; an
increase in the proportion of the fruits of labour which the labourer
receives for his own share; an increase in the ratio between the wages
of his labour and the produce of it. This is the theory: the reasoning,
of which it is the result, has been given in the preceding paragraphs.

Some of Mr. Ricardo’s followers, or more properly, of those who have
adopted in most particulars the views of political economy which his
genius was the first to open up, have given explanations of Mr.
Ricardo’s doctrine to nearly the same effect as the above, but in rather
different terms. They have said that profits depend not on absolute, but
on proportional wages: which they expounded to mean the proportion which
the labourers en masse receive of the total produce of the country.

It seems, however, to be rather an unusual and inconvenient use of
language to speak of anything as depending upon the wages of labour, and
Edition: current; Page: [295] then to explain that by wages of labour
you do not mean the wages of an individual labourer, but of all the
labourers in the country collectively. Mankind will never agree to call
anything a rise of wages, except a rise of the wages of individual
labourers, and it is therefore preferable to employ language tending to
fix attention upon the wages of the individual. The wages, however, on
which profits are said to depend, are undoubtedly proportional wages,
namely, the proportional wages of one labourer: that is, the ratio
between the wages of one labourer, and (not the whole produce of the
country, but) the amount of what one labourer can produce; the amount of
that portion of the collective produce of the industry of the country,
which may be considered as corresponding to the labour of one single
labourer. Proportional wages, thus understood, may be concisely termed
the cost of production of wages; or, more concisely still, the cost of
wages, meaning their cost in the “original purchase money,” labour.

We have now arrived at a distinct conception of Mr. Ricardo’s theory of
profits in its most perfect state. And this theory we conceive to be the
basis of the true theory of profits. All that remains to do is to clear
it from certain difficulties which still surround it, and which, though
in a greater degree apparent than real, are not to be put aside as
wholly imaginary.

Though it is true that tools, materials, and buildings (it is to be
wished that there were some compact designation for all these essentials
of production taken together,) are themselves the produce of labour, and
are only on that account to be ranked among the expenses of production;
yet the whole of their value is not resolvable into the wages of the
labourers by whom they were produced. The wages of those labourers were
paid by a capitalist, and that capitalist must have the same profit upon
his advances as any other capitalist; when, therefore, he sells the
tools or materials, he must receive from the purchaser not only the
reimbursement of the wages he has paid, but also as much more as will
afford him the ordinary rate of profit. And when the producer, after
buying the tools and employing them in his own occupation, comes to
estimate his gains, he must set aside a portion of the produce to
replace not only the wages paid both by himself and by the tool-maker,
but also the profits of the tool-maker, advanced by himself out of his
own capital.

It is not correct, therefore, to state that all which the capitalist
retains after replacing wages forms his profit. It is true the whole
return to capital is either wages or profits; but profits do not compose
merely the surplus after replacing the outlay; they also enter into the
outlay itself. Capital is expended partly in paying or reimbursing
wages, and partly in paying the profits of other capitalists, whose
concurrence was necessary in order to bring together the means of
production.

Edition: current; Page: [296]
If any contrivance, therefore, were devised by which that part of the
outlay which consists of previous profits could be either wholly or
partially dispensed with, it is evident that more would remain as the
profit of the immediate producer; while, as the quantity of labour
necessary to produce a given quantity of the commodity would be
unaltered, as well as the quantity of produce paid for that labour, it
seems that the ratio between the price of labour and its produce would
be the same as before; that the cost of production of wages would be the
same, proportional wages the same, and yet profits different.

To illustrate this by a simple instance, let it be supposed that
one-third of the produce is sufficient to replace the wages of the
labourers who have been immediately instrumental in the production; that
another third is necessary to replace the materials used and the fixed
capital worn out in the process; while the remaining third is clear
gain, being a profit of 50 per cent. Suppose, for example, that 60
agricultural labourers, receiving 60 quarters of corn for their wages,
consume fixed capital and seed amounting to the value of 60 quarters
more, and that the result of their operations is a produce of 180
quarters. When we analyse the price of the seed and tools into its
elements, we find that they must have been the produce of the labour of
40 men: for the wages of those 40, together with profit at the rate
previously supposed (50 per cent) make up 60 quarters. The produce,
therefore, consisting of 180 quarters, is the result of the labour
altogether of 100 men: namely, the 60 first mentioned, and the 40 by
whose labour the fixed capital and the seed were produced.

Let us now suppose, by way of an extreme case, that some contrivance is
discovered, whereby the purposes to which the second third of the
produce had been devoted, may be dispensed with altogether: that some
means are invented by which the same amount of produce may be procured
without the assistance of any fixed capital, or the consumption of any
seed or material sufficiently valuable to be worth calculating. Let us,
however, suppose that this cannot be done without taking on a number of
additional labourers, equal to those required for producing the seed and
fixed capital; so that the saving shall be only in the profits of the
previous capitalists. Let us, in conformity with this supposition,
assume that in dispensing with the fixed capital and seed, value 60
quarters, it is necessary to take on 40 additional labourers, receiving
a quarter of corn each, as before.

The rate of profit has evidently risen. It has increased from 50 per
cent to 80 per cent. A return of 180 quarters could not before be
obtained but by an outlay of 120 quarters; it can now be obtained by an
outlay of no more than 100.

Here, therefore, is an undeniable rise of profits. Have wages, in the
sense above attached to them, fallen or not? It would seem not.

Edition: current; Page: [297]
The produce (180 quarters) is still the result of the same quantity of
labour as before, namely, the labour of 100 men. A quarter of corn,
therefore, is still, as before, the produce of 10/18 of a man’s labour
for a year. Each labourer receives, as before, one quarter of corn;
each, therefore, receives the produce of 10/18 of a year’s labour of one
man, that is, the same cost of production; each receives 10/18 of the
produce of his own labour, that is, the same proportional wages; and the
labourers collectively still receive the same proportion, namely 10/18,
of the whole produce.

The conclusion, then, cannot be resisted, that Mr. Ricardo’s theory is
defective: that the rate of profits does not exclusively depend upon the
value of wages, in his sense, namely, the quantity of labour of which
the wages of a labourer are the produce; that it does not exclusively
depend upon proportional wages, that is, upon the proportion which the
labourers collectively receive of the whole produce, or the ratio which
the wages of an individual labourer bear to the produce of his
individual labour.

Those political economists, therefore, who have always dissented from
Mr. Ricardo’s doctrine, or who, having at first admitted, ended by
discarding it, were so far in the right; but they committed a serious
error in this, that, with the usual one-sidedness of disputants, they
knew no medium between admitting absolutely and dismissing entirely; and
saw no other course than utterly to reject what it would have been
sufficient to modify.

It is remarkable how very slight a modification will suffice to render
Mr. Ricardo’s doctrine completely true. It is even doubtful whether he
himself, if called upon to adapt his expressions to this peculiar case,
would not have so explained his doctrine as to render it entirely
unobjectionable.

It is perfectly true, that, in the example already made use of, a rise
of profits takes place, while wages, considered in respect to the
quantity of labour of which they are the produce, have not varied at
all. But though wages are still the produce of the same quantity of
labour as before, the cost of production of wages has nevertheless
fallen; for into cost of production there enters another element besides
labour.

We have already remarked (and the very example out of which the
difficulty arose presupposes it) that the cost of production of an
article consists generally of two parts,—the wages of the labour
employed, and the profits of those who, in any antecedent stage of the
production, have advanced any portion of those wages. An article,
therefore, may be the produce of the same quantity of labour as before,
and yet, if any portion of the profits which the last producer has to
make good to previous producers can be economized, the cost of
production of the article is diminished.

Now, in our example, a diminution of this sort is supposed to have taken
place in the cost of production of corn. The production of that article
has become less costly, in the ratio of six to five. A quantity of corn,
Edition: current; Page: [298] the means of producing which could not
previously have been secured but at an expense of 120 quarters, can now
be produced by means which 100 quarters are sufficient to purchase.

But the labourer is supposed to receive the same quantity of corn as
before. He receives one quarter. The cost of production of wages has,
therefore, fallen one-sixth. A quarter of corn, which is the
remuneration of a single labourer, is indeed the produce of the same
quantity of labour as before; but its cost of production is nevertheless
diminished. It is now the produce of 10/18 of a man’s labour, and
nothing else; whereas formerly it required for its production the
conjunction of that quantity of labour with an expenditure, in the form
of reimbursement of profit, amounting to one-fifth more.

If the cost of production of wages had remained the same as before,
profits could not have risen. Each labourer received one quarter of
corn; but one quarter of corn at that time was the result of the same
cost of production, as 1⅕ quarter now. In order, therefore, that each
labourer should receive the same cost of production, each must now
receive one quarter of corn, plus one-fifth. The labour of 100 men could
not be purchased at this price for less than 120 quarters; and the
produce, 180 quarters, would yield only 50 per cent, as first supposed.*

It is, therefore, strictly true, that the rate of profits varies
inversely as the cost of production of wages. Profits cannot rise,
unless the cost of production of wages falls exactly as much; nor fall,
unless it rises.

The proof of this position has been stated in figures, and in a
particular case: we shall now state it in general terms, and for all
cases.

We have supposed, for simplicity, that wages are paid in the finished
commodity. The agricultural labourers, in our example, were paid in
corn, and if we had called them weavers, we should have supposed them to
be paid in cloth. This supposition is allowable, for it is obviously of
no consequence, in a question of value, or cost of production, what
precise article we assume as the medium of exchange. The supposition
has, besides, the recommendation of being conformable to the most
ordinary state of the facts; for it is by the sale of his own finished
article that each capitalist obtains the means of hiring labourers to
renew the production; which is virtually the same thing as if, instead
of selling the article for money and Edition: current; Page: [299]
giving the money to his labourers, he gave the article itself to the
labourers, and they sold it for their daily bread.

Assuming, therefore, that the labourer is paid in the very article he
produces, it is evident that, when any saving of expense takes place in
the production of that article, if the labourer still receives the same
cost of production as before, he must receive an increased quantity, in
the very same ratio in which the productive power of capital has been
increased. But, if so, the outlay of the capitalist will bear exactly
the same proportion to the return as it did before; and profits will not
rise.

The variations, therefore, in the rate of profits, and those in the cost
of production of wages, go hand in hand, and are inseparable. Mr.
Ricardo’s principle, that profits cannot rise unless wages fall, is
strictly true, if by low wages be meant not merely wages which are the
produce of a smaller quantity of labour, but wages which are produced at
less cost, reckoning labour and previous profits together. But the
interpretation which some economists have put upon Mr. Ricardo’s
doctrine, when they explain it to mean that profits depend upon the
proportion which the labourers collectively receive of the aggregate
produce, will not hold at all; for that, in our first example, remained
the same, and yet profits rose.

The only expression of the law of profits, which seems to be correct,
is, that they depend upon the cost of production of wages. This must be
received as the ultimate principle.

From this may be deduced all the corollaries which Mr. Ricardo and
others have drawn from his theory of profits as expounded by himself.
The cost of production of the wages of one labourer for a year, is the
result of two concurrent elements or factors,—viz., 1st, the quantity of
commodities which the state of the labour market affords to him; 2ndly,
the cost of production of each of those commodities. It follows, that
the rate of profits can never rise but in conjunction with one or other
of two changes,—1st, a diminished remuneration of the labourer; or,
2ndly, an improvement in production, or an extension of commerce, by
which any of the articles habitually consumed by the labourer may be
obtained at smaller cost. (If the improvement be in any article which is
not consumed by the labourer, it merely lowers the price of that
article, and thereby benefits capitalists and all other people so far as
they are consumers of that particular article, and may be said to
increase gross profit, but not the rate of profit.)

So, on the other hand, the rate of profit cannot fall, unless
concurrently with one of two events: 1st, an improvement in the
labourer’s condition; or, 2ndly, an increased difficulty of producing or
importing some article which the labourer habitually consumes. The
progress of population and cultivation has a tendency to lower profits
through the latter of these two Edition: current; Page: [300] channels,
owing to the well known law of the application of capital to land, that
a double capital does not cæteris paribus yield a double produce. There
is, therefore, a tendency in the rate of profits to fall with the
progress of society. But there is also an antagonist tendency of profits
to rise, by the successive introduction of improvements in agriculture,
and in the production of those manufactured articles which the labourers
consume. Supposing, therefore, that the actual comforts of the labourer
remain the same, profits will fall or rise, according as population, or
improvements in the production of food and other necessaries, advance
fastest.

The rate of profits, therefore, tends to fall from the following
causes:—1. An increase of capital beyond population, producing increased
competition for labour; 2. An increase of population, occasioning a
demand for an increased quantity of food, which must be produced at a
greater cost. The rate of profits tends to rise from the following
causes:—1. An increase of population beyond capital, producing increased
competition for employment; 2. Improvements producing increased
cheapness of necessaries, and other articles habitually consumed by the
labourer.

The circumstances which regulate the rate of interest have usually been
treated, even by professed writers on political economy, in a vague,
loose, and unscientific manner. It has, however, been felt that there is
some connexion between the rate of interest and the rate of profit; that
(to use the words of Adam Smith) much will be given for money, when much
can be made of it.[*] It has been felt, also, that the fluctuations in
the market-rate of interest from day to day, are determined, like other
matters of bargain and sale, by demand and supply. It has, therefore,
been considered as an established principle, that the rate of interest
varies from day to day according to the quantity of capital offered or
called for on loan; but conforms on the average of years to a standard
determined by the rate of profits, and bearing some proportion to that
rate—but a proportion which few attempts have been made to define.

In consequence of these views, it has been customary to judge of the
general rate of profits at any time or place, by the rate of interest at
that time and place: it being supposed that the rate of interest, though
liable to temporary fluctuations, can never vary for any long period of
time unless profits vary; a notion which appears to us to be erroneous.

It was observed by Adam Smith, that profits may be considered as divided
into two parts, of which one may properly be considered as the
remuneration for the use of the capital itself, the other as the reward
of the labour of superintending its employment; and that the former of
these will correspond with the rate of interest. The producer who
borrows capital Edition: current; Page: [301] to employ it in his
business, will consent to pay, for the use of it, all that remains of
the profits he can make by it, after reserving what he considers
reasonable remuneration for the trouble and risk which he incurs by
borrowing and employing it.[*]

This remark is just; but it seems necessary to give greater precision to
the ideas which it involves.

The difference between the profit which can be made by the use of
capital, and the interest which will be paid for it, is rightly
characterized as wages of superintendance. But to infer from this that
it is regulated by entirely the same principles as other wages, would be
to push the analogy too far. It is wages, but wages paid by a commission
upon the capital employed. If the general rate of profit is 10 per cent,
and the rate of interest 5 per cent, the wages of superintendance will
be 5 per cent; and though one borrower employ a capital of 100,000l.,
another no more than 100l., the labour of both will be rewarded with the
same per centage, though, in the one case, this symbol will represent an
income of 5l., in the other case, of 5000l. Yet it cannot be pretended
that the labour of the two borrowers differs in this proportion. The
rule, therefore, that equal quantities of labour of equal hardness and
skill are equally remunerated, does not hold of this kind of labour. The
wages of any other labour are here an inapplicable criterion.

The wages of superintendance are distinguished from ordinary wages by
another peculiarity, that they are not paid in advance out of capital,
like the wages of all other labourers, but merge in the profit, and are
not realized until the production is completed. This takes them entirely
out of the ordinary law of wages. The wages of labourers who are paid in
advance, are regulated by the number of competitors compared with the
amount of capital; the labourers can consume no more than what has been
previously accumulated. But there is no such limit to the remuneration
of a kind of labour which is not paid for out of wealth previously
accumulated, but out of that produce which it is itself employed in
calling into existence.

When these circumstances are duly weighed, it will be perceived, that
although profit may be correctly analyzed into interest and wages of
superintendance, we ought not to lay it down as the law of interest,
that it is profits minus the wages of superintendance. Of the two
expressions, it would be decidedly the more correct, that the wages of
superintendance are regulated by the rate of interest, or are equal to
profits minus interest. In strict propriety, neither expression would be
allowable. Interest, and the wages of superintendance, can scarcely be
said to depend upon one another. They are to one another in the same
relation as wages and profits Edition: current; Page: [302] are. They
are like two buckets in a well: when one rises, the other descends, but
neither of the two motions is the cause of the other; both are
simultaneous effects of the same cause, the turning of the windlass.

There are among the capitalists of every country a considerable number
who are habitually, and almost necessarily, lenders; to whom scarcely
any difference between what they could receive for their money and what
could be made by it, would be an equivalent for incurring the risk and
labour of carrying on business. In this predicament is the property of
widows and orphans; of many public bodies; of charitable institutions;
most property which is vested in trustees; and the property of a great
number of persons unused to business, and who have a distaste for it, or
whose other occupations prevent their engaging in it. How large a
proportion of the property lent to the nation comes under this
description, has been pointed out in Mr. Tooke’s Considerations on the
State of the Currency.[*]

There is another large class, consisting of bankers, bill-brokers, and
others, who are money-lenders by profession; who enter into that
profession with the intention of making such gains as it will yield
them, and who would not be induced to change their business by any but a
very strong pecuniary inducement.

There is, therefore, a large class of persons who are habitually
lenders. On the other hand, all persons in business may be considered as
habitually borrowers. Except in times of stagnation, they are all
desirous of extending their business beyond their own capital, and are
never desirous of lending any portion of their capital except for very
short periods, during which they cannot advantageously invest it in
their own trade.

There is, in short, a productive class, and there is, besides, a class
technically styled the monied class, who live upon the interest of their
capital, without engaging personally in the work of production.

The class of borrowers may be considered as unlimited. There is no
quantity of capital that could be offered to be lent, which the
productive classes would not be willing to borrow, at any rate of
interest which would afford them the slightest excess of profit above a
bare equivalent for the additional risk, incurred by that transaction,
of the evils attendant on insolvency. The only assignable limit to the
inclination to borrow, is the power of giving security: the producers
would find it difficult to borrow more than an amount equal to their own
capital. If more than half the capital of the country were in the hands
of persons who preferred lending it to engaging personally in business,
and if the surplus were greater than could be invested in loans to
Government, or in mortgages upon the property of unproductive consumers;
the competition of lenders would Edition: current; Page: [303] force
down the rate of interest very low. A certain portion of the monied
class would be obliged either to sacrifice their predilections by
engaging in business, or to lend on inferior security; and they would
accordingly accept, where they could obtain good security, an abatement
of interest equivalent to the difference of risk.

This is an extreme case. Let us put an extreme case of a contrary kind.
Suppose that the wealthy people of any country, not relishing an idle
life, and having a strong taste for gainful labour, were generally
indisposed to accept of a smaller income in order to be relieved from
the labour and anxiety of business. Every producer in flourishing
circumstances would be eager to borrow, and few willing to lend. Under
these circumstances the rate of interest would differ very little from
the rate of profit. The trouble of managing a business is not
proportionally increased by an increase of the magnitude of the
business; and a very small surplus profit above the rate of interest,
would therefore be a sufficient inducement to capitalists to borrow.

We may even conceive a people whose habits were such, that in order to
induce them to lend, it might be necessary to offer them a rate of
interest fully equal to the ordinary rate of profit. In that case, of
course, the productive classes would scarcely ever borrow. But
government, and the unproductive classes, who do not borrow in order to
make a profit by the loan, but from the pressure of a real or supposed
necessity, might still be ready to borrow at this high rate.

Although the inclination to borrow has no fixed or necessary limit
except the power of giving security, yet it always, in point of fact,
stops short of this; from the uncertainty of the prospects of any
individual producer, which generally indisposes him to involve himself
to the full extent of his means of payment. There is never any permanent
want of market for things in general; but there may be so for the
commodity which any one individual is producing; and even if there is a
demand for the commodity, people may not buy it of him but of some
other. There are, consequently, never more than a portion of the
producers, the state of whose business encourages them to add to their
capital by borrowing; and even these are disposed to borrow only as much
as they see an immediate prospect of profitably employing. There is,
therefore, a practical limit to the demands of borrowers at any given
instant; and when these demands are all satisfied, any additional
capital offered on loan can find an investment only by a reduction of
the rate of interest.

The amount of borrowers being given, (and by the amount of borrowers is
here meant the aggregate sum which people are willing to borrow at some
given rate,) the rate of interest will depend upon the quantity of
capital owned by people who are unwilling or unable to engage in trade.
Edition: current; Page: [304] The circumstances which determine this,
are, on the one hand, the degree in which a taste for business, or an
aversion to it, happens to be prevalent among the classes possessed of
property; and on the other hand, the amount of the annual accumulation
from the earnings of labour. Those who accumulate from their wages,
fees, or salaries, have, of course, (speaking generally) no means of
investing their savings except by lending them to others: their
occupations prevent them from personally superintending any employment.

Upon these circumstances, then, the rate of interest depends, the amount
of borrowers being given. And the counter-proposition equally holds,
that, the above circumstances being given, the rate of interest depends
upon the amount of borrowers.

Suppose, for example, that when the rate of interest has adjusted itself
to the existing state of the circumstances which affect the disposition
to borrow and to lend, a war breaks out, which induces government, for a
series of years, to borrow annually a large sum of money. During the
whole of this period, the rate of interest will remain considerably
above what it was before, and what it will be afterwards.

Before the commencement of the supposed war, all persons who were
disposed to lend at the then rate of interest, had found borrowers, and
their capital was invested. This may be assumed; for if any capital had
been seeking for a borrower at the existing rate of interest, and unable
to find one, its owner would have offered it at a rate slightly below
the existing rate. He would, for instance, have bought into the funds,
at a slight advance of price; and thus set at liberty the capital of
some fundholder, who, the funds yielding a lower interest, would have
been obliged to accept a lower interest from individuals.

Since, then, all who were willing to lend their capital at the market
rate, have already lent it, Government will not be able to borrow unless
by offering higher interest. Though, with the existing habits of the
possessors of disposable capital, an increased number cannot be found
who are willing to lend at the existing rate, there are doubtless some
who will be induced to lend by the temptation of a higher rate. The same
temptation will also induce some persons to invest, in the purchase of
the new stock, what they would otherwise have expended unproductively in
increasing their establishments, or productively, in improving their
estates. The rate of interest will rise just sufficiently to call forth
an increase of lenders to the amount required.

This we apprehend to be the cause why the rate of interest in this
country was so high as it is well known to have been during the last
war. It is, therefore, by no means to be inferred, as some have done,
that the general rate of profits was unusually high during the same
period, because Edition: current; Page: [305] interest was so. Supposing
the rate of profits to have been precisely the same during the war, as
before or after it, the rate of interest would nevertheless have risen,
from the causes and in the manner above described.

The practical use of the preceding investigation is, to moderate the
confidence with which inferences are frequently drawn with respect to
the rate of profit from evidence regarding the rate of interest; and to
shew that although the rate of profit is one of the elements which
combine to determine the rate of interest, the latter is also acted upon
by causes peculiar to itself, and may either rise or fall, both
temporarily and permanently, while the general rate of profits remains
unchanged.

The introduction of banks, which perform the function of lenders and
loan-brokers, with or without that of issuers of paper-money, produces
some further anomalies in the rate of interest, which have not, so far
as we are aware, been hitherto brought within the pale of exact science.

If bankers were merely a class of middlemen between the lender and the
borrower; if they merely received deposits of capital from those who had
it lying unemployed in their hands, and lent this, together with their
own capital, to the productive classes, receiving interest for it, and
paying interest in their turn to those who had placed capital in their
hands; the effect of the operations of banking on the rate of interest
would be to lower it in some slight degree. The banker receives and
collects together sums of money much too small, when taken individually,
to render it worth while for the owners to look out for an investment,
but which in the aggregate form a considerable amount. This amount may
be considered a clear addition to the productive capital of the country;
at least, to the capital in activity at any moment. And as this addition
to the capital accrues wholly to that part of it which is not employed
by the owners, but lent to other producers, the natural effect is a
diminution of the rate of interest.

The banker, to the extent of his own private capital, (the expenses of
his business being first paid,) is a lender at interest. But, being
subject to risk and trouble fully equal to that which belongs to most
other employments, he cannot be satisfied with the mere interest even of
his whole capital: he must have the ordinary profits of stock, or he
will not engage in the business: the state of banking must be such as to
hold out to him the prospect of adding, to the interest of what remains
of his own capital after paying the expenses of his business, interest
upon capital deposited with him, in sufficient amount to make up, after
paying the expenses, the ordinary profit which could be derived from his
own capital in any productive employment. This will be accomplished in
one of two ways.

1. If the circumstances of society are such as to furnish a ready
investment of disposable capital; (as for instance in London, where the
public Edition: current; Page: [306] funds and other securities, of
undoubted stability, and affording great advantages for receiving the
interest without trouble and realizing the principal without difficulty
when required, tempt all persons who have sums of importance lying idle,
to invest them on their own account without the intervention of any
middleman;) the deposits with bankers consist chiefly of small sums
likely to be wanted in a very short period for current expenses, and the
interest on which would seldom be worth the trouble of calculating it.
Bankers, therefore, do not allow any interest on their deposits. After
paying the expenses of their business, all the rest of the interest they
receive is clear gain. But as the circumstances of banking, as of all
other modes of employing capital, will on the average be such as to
afford to a person entering into the business a prospect of realizing
the ordinary, and no more than the ordinary, profits upon his own
capital; the gains of each banker by the investment of his deposits,
will not on the average exceed what is necessary to make up his gains on
his own capital to the ordinary rate. It is, of course, competition,
which brings about this limitation. Whether competition operates by
lowering the rate of interest, or by dividing the business among a
larger number, it is difficult to decide. Probably it operates in both
ways; but it is by no means impossible that it may operate in the latter
way alone: just as an increase in the number of physicians does not
lower the fees, though it diminishes an average competitor’s chance of
obtaining them.

It is not impossible that the disposition of the lenders might be such,
that they would cease to lend rather than acquiesce in any reduction of
the rate of interest. If so, the arrival of a new lender, in the person
of a banker of deposit, would not lower the rate of interest in any
considerable degree. A slight fall would take place, and with that
exception things would be as before, except that the capital in the
hands of the banker would have put itself into the place of an equal
portion of capital belonging to other lenders, who would themselves have
engaged in business (e.g., by subscribing to some joint-stock company,
or entering into commandite). Bankers’ profits would then be limited to
the ordinary rate chiefly by the division of the business among many
banks, so that each on the average would receive no more interest on his
deposits than would suffice to make up the interest on his own capital
to the ordinary rate of profit after paying all expenses.

2. But if the circumstances of society render it difficult and
inconvenient for persons who wish to live upon the interest of their
money, to seek an investment for themselves, the bankers become agents
for this specific purpose: large as well as small sums are deposited
with them, and they allow interest to their customers. Such is the
practice of the Scotch banks, and of most of the country banks in
England. Their customers, not Edition: current; Page: [307] living at
any of the great seats of money transactions, prefer entrusting their
capital to somebody on the spot, whom they know, and in whom they
confide. He invests their money on the best terms he can, and pays to
them such interest as he can afford to give; retaining a compensation
for his own risk and trouble. This compensation is fixed by the
competition of the market. The rate of interest is no further lowered by
this operation, than inasmuch as it brings together the lender and the
borrower in a safe and expeditious manner. The lender incurs less risk,
and a larger proportion, therefore, of the holders of capital are
willing to be lenders.

When a banker, in addition to his other functions, is also an issuer of
paper money, he gains an advantage similar to that which the London
bankers derive from their deposits. To the extent to which he can put
forth his notes, he has so much the more to lend, without himself having
to pay any interest for it.

If the paper is convertible, it cannot get into circulation permanently
without displacing specie, which goes abroad and brings back an
equivalent value. To the extent of this value, there is an increase of
the capital of the country; and the increase accrues solely to that part
of the capital which is employed in loans.

If the paper is inconvertible, and instead of displacing specie
depreciates the currency, the banker by issuing it levies a tax on every
person who has money in his hands or due to him. He thus appropriates to
himself a portion of the capital of other people, and a portion of their
revenue. The capital might have been intended to be lent, or it might
have been intended to be employed by the owner: such part of it as was
intended to be employed by the owner now changes its destination, and is
lent. The revenue was either intended to be accumulated, in which case
it had already become capital, or it was intended to be spent: in this
last case, revenue is converted into capital: and thus, strange as it
may appear, the depreciation of the currency, when effected in this way,
operates to a certain extent as a forced accumulation. This, indeed, is
no palliation of its iniquity. Though A might have spent his property
unproductively, B ought not to be permitted to rob him of it because B
will expend it on productive labour.

In any supposable case, however, the issue of paper money by bankers
increases the proportion of the whole capital of the country which is
destined to be lent. The rate of interest must therefore fall, until
some of the lenders give over lending, or until the increase of
borrowers absorbs the whole.

But a fall of the rate of interest, sufficient to enable the money
market to absorb the whole of the paper-loans, may not be sufficient to
reduce the profits of a lender who lends what costs him nothing, to the
ordinary rate of profit upon his capital. Here, therefore, competition
will operate Edition: current; Page: [308] chiefly by dividing the
business. The notes of each bank will be confined within so narrow a
district, or will divide the supply of a district with so many other
banks, that on the average each will receive no larger amount of
interest on his notes than will make up the interest on his own capital
to the ordinary rate of profit.

Even in this way, however, the competition has the effect, to a certain
limited extent, of lowering the rate of interest; for the power of
bankers to receive interest on more than their capital attracts a
greater amount of capital into the banking business than would otherwise
flow into it; and this greater capital being all lent, interest will
fall in consequence.

Edition: current; Page: [309]


On the Definition of Political Economy; and on the Method of aInvestigation Proper to Ita

[Essay V in Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy,
120-64. Reprinted from “On the Definition of Political Economy; and on
the Method of Philosophical Investigation in that Science,” London and
Westminster Review, IV and XXVI (Oct., 1836), 1-29. Original article
identified in JSM’s bibliography as “An article headed ‘On the
Definition of Political Economy, and on the method of philosophical
investigation in that science’—running title ‘Political Economy,
what—Nature and Methods of Political Philosophy.’ In the London and
Westminster Review for October 1836 (No. 7 and 50) but written five
years before, in the autumn of 1831. Rewritten in the summer of 1833”
(MacMinn, 47).

In January, 1834, expressing gratitude at J.P. Nichol’s approbation of
this essay, JSM asks him “to suggest all manner of further developments,
clearer explanations and apter illustrations,” and goes on: “. . . I am
ambitious that the essay, even if for that end it should remain
unpublished for twenty years, should become classical and of authority .
. .” (Earlier Letters, XII, 211). Nichol evidently suggested its
publication in the London and Westminster (see ibid., 231). (See also
the headnote, 230 above.)

The following text is that of 1844; in the variant notes (which derive
from the version of 1836), “44” refers to the version in Some Unsettled
Questions; “36” to that in the London and Westminster. Five of the
variants derive also from JSM’s corrections in his copy of the article
in the London and Westminster (see 313r-r, 314x-x, 328a-a, 330f-f, and
332p-p). In the 2nd edition of Some Unsettled Questions several
typographical errors were introduced: “successfully” for “successively”
(310.15), “definition” for “definitions” (311.10), “been previously
been” for “previously been” (311.30), “and” for “and” (312.16), “Τέχυη”
for “Τέχνη” (312.34), “of production” for “of the production” (314.25),
and “experiments” for “experiments” (327.34).]

it might be imagined, on a superficial view of the nature and objects of
definition, that the definition of a science would occupy the same place
in the chronological which it commonly does in the didactic order. As a
treatise bonb any science usually commences with an attempt to express,
Edition: current; Page: [310] in a brief formula, what the science is,
and wherein it differs from other sciences, so, it might be supposed,
did the framing of such a formula naturally precede the successful
cultivation of the sciencec.

This, however, is far from having been the case. The definition of a
science has almost invariably not preceded, but followed, the creation
of the science itself. Like the wall of a city, it has usually been
erected, not to be a receptacle for such edifices as might afterwards
spring up, but to circumscribe an aggregation already in existence.
Mankind did not measure out the ground for intellectual cultivation
before they began to plant it; they did not divide the field of human
investigation into regular compartments dfirst, and thend begin to
collect truths for the purpose of being etherein deposited; theye
proceeded in a less systematic manner. As discoveries were gathered in,
either one by one, or in groups resulting from the continued prosecution
of some uniform course of inquiry, the truths which were successively
brought into store cohered and became agglomerated according to their
individual affinities. Without any intentional classification, the facts
classed fthemselvesf. They became associated gin the mind, according to
their general and obvious resemblances; and the aggregates thus formed,
having to be frequently spoken of as aggregates, came to be denoted by a
common name. Any body of truths which had thus acquired a collective
denomination, was called a science. It was long before this fortuitous
classification was felt not to be sufficiently precise. It was in a more
advanced stage of the progress of knowledge that mankind became sensible
of the advantage of ascertaining whether the facts which they had thus
grouped together were distinguished from all other facts by any common
properties, and what these were. The first attempts to answer this
question were commonly very hunskilful, and the consequent definitions
extremely imperfecth.

And, in truth, there is scarcely any investigation in the whole body of
iai science requiring so high a degree of analysis and abstraction, as
the inquiry, what the science itself is; in other words, what are the
properties common to all the truths composing it, and distinguishing
them from all other truths. Many persons, accordingly, who are
profoundly conversant with the details of a science, would be very much
at a loss to supply such a definition of the science itself as should
not be liable to well-grounded logical objections. From this remark, we
cannot except the authors of elementary scientific treatises. The
definitions which those works furnish of the sciences, for the most part
either do not fit them—some being Edition: current; Page: [311] too
wide, some too narrow—or do not go deep enough into them, but define a
science by its accidents, not its essentials; by some one of its
properties which may, indeed, serve the purpose of a distinguishing
mark, but which is of too little importance to have ever of itself led
mankind to give the science a name and rank as a separate object of
study.

The definition of a science must, indeed, be placed among that class of
truths which Dugald Stewart had in view, when he observed that the first
principles of all sciences belong to the philosophy of the human
mind.[*] The observation is just; and the first principles of all
sciences, including the definitions of them, have consequently
participated hitherto in the vagueness and uncertainty which has
pervaded that most difficult and unsettled of all branches of knowledge.
If we open any book, even mathematics or natural philosophy, it is
impossible not to be struck with the mistiness of what we find
represented as preliminary and fundamental notions, and the very
insufficient manner in which the propositions which are palmed upon us
as first principles seem to be made out, contrasted with the lucidity of
the explanations and the conclusiveness of the proofs as soon as the
writer enters upon the details of his subject. Whence comes this
anomaly? Why is the admitted certainty of the results of those sciences
in no way prejudiced by the want of solidity in their premises? How
happens it that a firm superstructure has been erected upon an unstable
foundation? The solution of the paradox is, that what are called first
principles, are, in truth, last principles. Instead of being the fixed
point from whence the chain of proof which supports all the rest of the
science hangs suspended, they are themselves the remotest link of the
chain. Though presented as if all other truths were to be deduced from
them, they are the truths which are last arrived at; the result of the
last stage of generalization, or of the last and subtlest process of
analysis, to which the particular truths of the science can be
subjected; those particular truths having previously been ascertained by
the evidence proper to their own nature.

Like other sciences, Political Economy has remained destitute of a
definition framed on strictly logical principles, or even of, what is
more easily to be had, a definition exactly co-extensive with the thing
defined. This has not, perhaps, caused the real bounds of the science to
be, in jthis country at leastj, practically mistaken or overpassed; but
it has occasioned—perhaps we should rather say it is connected
with—indefinite, and often erroneous, conceptions of the mode in which
the science should be studied.

Edition: current; Page: [312]
We proceed to verify these assertions by an examination of the most
generally received definitions of the science.

1. First, as to the vulgar notion of the nature and object of Political
Economy, we shall not be wide of the mark if we state it to be something
to this effect:—That Political Economy is a science which teaches, or
professes to teach, in what manner a nation may be made rich. This
notion of what constitutes the science, is in some degree countenanced
by the title and arrangement which Adam Smith gave to his invaluable
work. A systematic treatise on Political Economy, he chose to call an
Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations; and the
topics are introduced in an order suitable to that view of the purpose
of his kbookk.

With respect to the definition in question, if definition it can be
called which is not found in any set form of words, but left to be
arrived at by a process of abstraction from a hundred current modes of
speaking on the subject; it seems liable to the conclusive objection,
that it confounds the essentially distinct, though closely connected,
ideas of science and art. These two ideas differ from one another as the
understanding differs from the will, or as the indicative mood in
grammar differs from the imperative. The one deals in facts, the other
in precepts. Science is a collection of truths; art, a body of rules, or
directions for conduct. The language of science is, This is, or, This is
not; This does, or does not, happen. The language of art is, Do this;
Avoid that. Science takes cognizance of a phenomenon, and endeavours to
discover its law; art proposes to itself an end, and looks out for means
to effect it.

If, therefore, Political Economy be a science, it cannot be a collection
of practical rules; though, unless it be altogether a useless science,
practical rules must be capable of being founded upon it. The science of
mechanics, a branch of natural philosophy, lays down the laws of motion,
and the properties of what are called the mechanical powers. The art of
practical mechanics teaches how we may avail ourselves of those laws and
properties, to increase our command over external nature. An art would
not be an art, unless it were founded upon a scientific knowledge of the
properties of the subject-matter: without this, it lwould not bel
philosophy, but empiricism; ἐμπειρία, not τέχνηm, in Plato’s sensem.
nRules, therefore, for making a nation increase in wealth, are not a
science, but they are the results of science. Political Economy does not
oof itselfo instruct how to make a nation rich; but whoever would be
qualified to judge of the means of making a nation rich, must first be a
political economist.

Edition: current; Page: [313]
2. The definition most generally received among instructed ppersonsp,
and qlaid down in the commencement of most of the professed treatises on
the subject, is to the following effect:—That Political Economy informs
us of the laws which regulate the production, distribution, and
consumption of wealth. To this definition is frequently appended a
familiar illustration. Political Economy, it is said, is to the state,
what domestic economy is to the family.

This definition is rfreer from the fault which we pointed out in the
former one. It distinctly takes notice that Political Economy is a
science and not an art; that it is conversant with laws of nature, not
with maxims of conduct, and teaches us how things take place of
themselves, not in what manner it is advisable for us to shape them, in
order to attain some particular end.

sBut though the definition is, with regard to this particular point,
unobjectionable, so much can scarcely be said for the accompanying
illustration; which rather sends back the mind to the current loose
notion of Political Economy already disposed of. Political Economy is
really, and is tstated in the definitiont to be, a science: but domestic
economy, so far as it is capable of being reduced to principles, is an
art. It consists of rules, or maxims of prudence, for keeping the family
regularly supplied with what its wants require, and securing, with uanyu
given amount of means, the greatest possible quantity of physical
comfort and enjoyment. Undoubtedly the beneficial result, the great
practical application of Political Economy, would be to accomplish for a
nation something like what the most perfect domestic economy
accomplishes for a single household: but supposing this purpose
realised, there would be the same difference between the rules by which
it might be effected, and Political Economy, which there is between the
art of gunnery and the theory of projectiles, or between the rules of
mathematical land-surveying and the science of trigonometry.

The definition, though not liable to the same objection as the
illustration which is annexed to it, is itself far from unexceptionable.
To neither of them, considered as standing at the head of a treatise,
have we much to object. At a very early stage in the study of the
science, anything more accurate would be useless, and therefore
pedantic. In a merely initiatory definition, scientific precision is not
required: the object is, to insinuate into the learner’s mind, it is
scarcely material by what means, some general preconception vofv what
are the uses of the pursuit, and what the series of Edition: current;
Page: [314] topics through which he is about to travel. As a mere
anticipation or wébauchew of a definition, intended to indicate to a
learner as much as he is able to understand before he begins, of the
nature of what is about to be taught to him, we do not quarrel with the
received formula. But if it claims to be admitted as that complete
xdefinitiox or boundary-line, which results from a thorough exploring of
the whole extent of the subject, and is intended to mark the exact place
of Political Economy among the sciences, its pretension cannot be
allowed.

“The science of the laws which regulate the production, distribution,
and consumption of wealth.” The term ywealthy is surrounded by a haze of
floating and vapoury associations, which will let nothing that is seen
through them be zshewnz distinctly. Let us supply its place by a
periphrasis. Wealth is defined, all objects useful or agreeable to
amankinda, except such as can be obtained in indefinite quantity without
labour. Instead of ballb objects, some authorities say, all cmaterialc
objects: the distinction is of no moment for dthed present purpose.

To confine ourselves to eproductione: If the laws of the production of
all objects, or even of all fmaterialf objects, which are useful or
agreeable to gmankindg, were comprised in Political Economy, it would be
difficult to say where the science would end: at the least, all or
nearly all physical knowledge would be included in it. Corn and cattle
are material objects, in ha highh degree useful to imankindi. The laws
of the production of the one include the principles of agriculture; the
production of the other is the subject jofj the art of cattle-breeding,
which, kin so far ask really an art, must be built upon the science of
lphysiologyl. The laws of the production of manufactured articles
involve the whole of chemistry and the whole of mechanics. The laws of
the production of the wealth which is extracted from the bowels of the
earth, cannot be set forth without taking in a large part of geology.

When a definition so manifestly surpasses in extent what it professes to
define, we must suppose that it is not meant to be interpreted
literally, though the limitations with which it is to be understood are
not stated.

Perhaps it will be said, that Political Economy is conversant with such
only of the laws of the production of wealth as are applicable to all
kinds Edition: current; Page: [315] of wealth: those which relate to the
details of particular trades or employments forming the subject of other
and totally distinct sciences.

If, however, there were no more in the distinction between Political
Economy and physical science than mthism, the distinction, we may
venture to affirm, would never have been made. No similar division
exists in any other department of knowledge. We do not break up zoology
or mineralogy into two parts; one treating of the properties common to
all animals, or to all minerals; another conversant with the properties
peculiar to each particular species of animals or minerals. The reason
is obvious; there is no distinction in kind between the general laws of
animal or of mineral nature and the peculiar properties of particular
species. There is as close an analogy between the general laws and the
particular ones, as there is between one of the general laws and
another: most commonly, indeed, the particular laws are but the complex
result of a plurality of general laws modifying each other. A
separation, therefore, between the general laws and the particular ones,
merely because the former are general and the latter particular, would
run counter both to the strongest motives of convenience and to the
natural tendencies of the mind. If the case is different with the laws
of the production of wealth, it must be becausen, in this case,n the
general laws differ oin kindo from the particular ones. But if so, the
difference pin kindp is the radical distinction, and we should find out
what qthatq is, and found our definition upon it.

But, further, the recognised boundaries which separate the field of
Political Economy from that of physical science, by no means correspond
with the distinction between the truths which concern all kinds of
wealth and those which relate only to some kinds. The three laws of
motion, and the law of gravitation, are common, as far as human
observation has yet extended, to all matter; and these, therefore, as
being among the laws of the production of all wealth, should form part
of Political Economy. There are hardly any of the processes of industry
which do not partly depend upon the properties of the lever; but it
would be a strange classification which included those properties among
the truths of Political Economy. Again, the latter science has many
inquiries altogether as special, and relating as exclusively to
particular sorts of material objects, as any of the branches of physical
science. The investigation of some of the circumstances which regulate
the price of corn, has as little to do with the laws common to the
production of all wealth, as any part of the knowledge of the
agriculturist. The inquiry into the rent of mines or fisheries, or into
Edition: current; Page: [316] the value of the precious metals, elicits
truths which have immediate reference to the production solely of a
peculiar kind of wealth; yet these are admitted to be correctly placed
in the science of Political Economy.

The real distinction between Political Economy and physical science must
be sought in something deeper than the nature of the subject-matter;
which, indeed, is for the most part common to both. Political Economy,
and the scientific grounds of all the useful arts, have in truth one and
the same subject-matter; namely, the objects which conduce to man’s
convenience and enjoyment: but they are, nevertheless, perfectly
distinct branches of knowledge.

3. If we contemplate the whole field of human knowledge, attained or
attainable, we find that it separates itself obviously, and as it were
spontaneously, into two rdivisions, which stand so strikingly in
opposition and contradistinction to one another, that in all
classifications of our knowledge they have been kept apart. These are,
physical science, and moral or psychological science. The difference
between these two departments of our knowledge does not reside in the
subject-matter with which they are conversant: for although, of the
simplest and most elementary parts of each, it may be said, with an
approach to truth, that they are concerned with different
subject-matters—namely, the one with the shuman minds, the other with
all things whatever except the mind; this distinction does not hold
between the higher regions of the two. Take the science of politics, for
instance, or that of law: who will say that these are physical sciences?
and yet is it not obvious that they are conversant fully as much with
matter as with mind? Take, again, the theory of music, of painting, of
any other of tthe fine arts, and who will venture to pronounce that the
facts they are conversant with belong either wholly to the class of
matter, or wholly to that of mind?

The following seems to be the rationale of the distinction between
physical and moral science.

In all the intercourse of man with nature, whether we consider him as
acting uuponu it, or as receiving impressions vfromv it, the effect or
phenomenon depends upon causes of two kinds: the properties of the
object acting, and those of the object acted upon. Everything which can
possibly happen in which man and external things, are jointly concerned,
results from the joint operation of a law or laws of matter, and a law
or laws of the human mind. Thus the production of corn by human labour
is the result of a law of mind, and many laws of matter. The laws of
matter are those properties of the soil and of vegetable life which
cause the seed to Edition: current; Page: [317] germinate in the ground,
and those properties of the human body which render food necessary to
its support. The law of mind is, that man wdesiresw to possess
subsistence, and consequently xwillsx the necessary means of procuring
it.

Laws of mind and laws of matter are so dissimilar in their nature, that
it would be contrary to all principles of rational arrangement to mix
them up as part of the same study. In all scientific methods, therefore,
they are placed apart. Any compound effect or phenomenon which depends
both on the properties of matter and on those of mind, may thus become
the subject of two completely distinct sciences, or branches of science;
one, treating of the phenomenon in so far as it depends upon the laws of
matter only; the other treating of it in so far as it depends upon the
laws of mind.

The physical sciences are those which treat of the laws of matter, and
of all complex phenomena in so far as dependent upon the laws of matter.
The mental or moral sciences are those which treat of the laws of mind,
and of all complex phenomena in so far as dependent upon the laws of
mind.

Most of the moral sciences presuppose physical science; but few of the
physical sciences presuppose moral science. yThe reason is obvious.y
There are many phenomena (an earthquake, for example, zorz the motions
of the planets) which depend upon the laws of matter exclusively; and
have nothing whatever to do with the laws of mind. Many, therefore, of
the physical sciences may be treated of without any reference to mind,
and as if the mind existed as a recipient of knowledge only, not as a
cause producing effects. But there are no phenomena which depend
exclusively upon the laws of minda; even the phenomena of the mind
itself being partially dependent upon the physiological laws of the
bodya. All the mental sciences, therefore, bnot excepting the pure
science of mindb, must take account of a great variety of physical
truths; and (as physical science is commonly cand very properlyc studied
first) may be said to presuppose them, taking up the complex phenomena
where physical science leaves dthemd.

Now this, it will be found, is a precise statement of the relation in
which Political Economy stands to the various sciences which are
tributary to the arts of production.

The laws of the production of the objects which constitute wealth, are
the subject-matter both of Political Economy and of almost all the
physical Edition: current; Page: [318] sciences. Such, however, of those
laws as are purely laws of emattere, belong to physical science, and to
that exclusively. Such of them as are laws of the human fmindf, and no
others, belong to Political Economy, which finally sums up the result of
both combined.

Political Economy, therefore, presupposes all the physical sciences; it
takes for granted all such of the truths of those sciences as are
concerned in the production of the objects demanded by the wants of
mankind; or at least it takes for granted that the physical part of the
process takes place somehow. It then inquires what are the phenomena of
mind which are concerned in the production and distribution* of those
same objects; it borrows from the pure science of mind the laws of those
phenomena, and inquires what effects follow from these mental laws,
acting in concurrence with those physical ones.†

From the above considerations the following seems to come out as the
correct and complete definition of Political Economy:—“The science which
treats of the production and distribution of wealth, so far as they
depend upon the laws of human nature.” Or thus—“The science relating to
the moral or psychological laws of the production and distribution of
wealth.”

For popular use this definition is amply sufficient, but it still falls
short Edition: current; Page: [319] of the complete accuracy required
for the purposes of the philosopher. Political Economy does not treat of
the production and distribution of wealth in all states of mankind, but
only in what is termed the social state; nor so far as they depend upon
the laws of human nature, but only so far as they depend upon a certain
portion of those laws. This, at least, is the view which must be taken
of Political Economy, if we mean it to find any place in an
encyclopedical division of the field of science. On any other view, it
either is not gscience at all, or it is several sciences. This will
appear clearly, if, on the one hand, we take a general survey of the
moral sciences, with a view to assign the exact place of Political
Economy among them; while, on the other, we consider attentively the
nature of the methods or processes by which the truths which are the
object of those sciences are arrived at.

Man, who, considered as a being having a moral or mental nature, is the
subject-matter of all the moral sciences, may, with reference to that
part of his nature, form the subject of philosophical inquiry under
several distinct hypotheses. We may inquire what belongs to man
hconsidered individually, and ash if no human being existed besides
himself; we may next consider him as coming into contact with other
iindividualsi; and finally, as living in a state of society, that is,
forming part of a body or aggregation of human beings, systematically
co-operating for common purposes. Of this last state, political
government, or subjection to a common superior, is an ordinary
ingredient, but forms no necessary part of the conception, and, with
respect to our present purpose, needs not be further adverted to.

Those laws or properties of human nature which appertain to man as a
mere individual, and do not presuppose, as a necessary condition, the
existence of other individuals j(except, perhaps, as mere instruments or
means)j, form a part of the subject of pure mental philosophy. They
comprise all the laws of the mere intellect, and those of the purely
self-regarding desires.

Those laws of human nature which relate to the feelings called forth in
a human being by other kindividualk human or intelligent beings, las
such;l namely, the affections, the conscience, or feeling of duty, and
the love of approbation; and to the conduct of man, so far as it depends
upon, or has relation to, these parts of his nature—form the subject of
another portion of pure mental philosophy, namely, that portion of it on
which morals, or ethics, are founded. For morality itself is not a
science, but an art; not Edition: current; Page: [320] truths, but
rules. The truths on which the rules are founded are drawn (as is the
case in all arts) from a variety of sciences; but the principal of them,
and those which are most nearly peculiar to mthism particular art,
belong to a branch of the science of mind.

Finally, there are certain principles of human nature which are
peculiarly connected with the ideas and feelings generated in man by
living in a state of society, that is, by forming part of a union or
aggregation of human beings for a common purpose or purposes. Few,
indeed, of the elementary laws of the human mind are peculiar to this
state, almost all being called into action in the two other states. But
those simple laws of human nature, operating in that wider field, give
rise to results of a sufficiently universal character, and even (when
compared with the still more complex phenomena of which they are the
determining causes) sufficiently simple, to admit of being called,
though in a somewhat looser sense, laws of society, or laws of human
nature in the social state. These laws, or general truths, form the
subject of a branch of science which may be aptly designated from the
title of social economy; somewhat less happily by that of speculative
politics, or the science of politics, as contradistinguished from the
art. This science stands in the same relation to the social, as anatomy
and physiology to the physical body. It shows by what principles of his
nature man is induced to enter into a state of society; how this
nfeaturen in his position acts upon his interests and feelings, and
through them upon his conduct; how the association tends progressively
to become closer, and the co-operation extends itself to more and more
purposes; what those purposes are, and what the varieties of means most
generally adopted for furthering them; what are the various relations
which establish themselves among ohuman beingso as the ordinary
consequence of the social union; what those which are different in
different states of society; pin what historical order those states tend
to succeed one another;p and what are the effects of each upon the
conduct and character of man.

This branch of science, whether we prefer to call it social economy,
speculative politics, or the natural history of society, presupposes the
whole science of the nature of the individual mind; since all the laws
of which the latter science takes cognizance are brought into play in a
state of society, and the truths of the social science are but
statements of the manner in which those simple laws take effect in
complicated circumstances. Pure mental philosophy, therefore, is an
essential part, or preliminary, of political philosophy. The science of
social economy embraces every part of man’s nature, in so far as
influencing the conduct or condition of man in society; and therefore
may it be termed speculative politics, as being the scientific Edition:
current; Page: [321] foundation of qpracticalq politics, or the art of
government, of which the art of legislation is a part.*

It is to this important division of the field of science that one of the
writers who have most correctly conceived and copiously illustrated its
nature and limits,—we mean M. Say,[*]—has chosen to give the name
Political Economy. And, indeed, this large extension of the
rsignificationr of that term is countenanced by its setymology.s But the
words “political economy” have long ceased to have tso large at meaning.
Every writer is entitled to use the words which are his tools in the
manner which he judges most conducive to the general purposes of the
exposition of truth; but he exercises this discretion under liability to
criticism: and M. Say seems to have done in this instance, what should
never be done without strong reasons; uto haveu altered the meaning of a
name which was appropriated to a particular purpose (and for which,
therefore, a substitute must be provided), in order to transfer it to an
object for which it was easy to find a more characteristic denomination.

What is now commonly understood by the term “Political Economy” is not
the science of speculative politics, but a branch of that science. It
does not treat of the whole of man’s nature as modified by the social
state, nor of the whole conduct of man in society. It is concerned with
him solely as a being who desires to possess wealth, and who is capable
of judging of the comparative efficacy of means for obtaining that end.
It predicts only such of the phenomena of the social state as take place
in consequence of the pursuit of wealth. It makes entire abstraction of
every other human passion or motive; except those which may be regarded
as perpetually antagonizing principles to the desire of wealth, namely,
aversion to labour, and desire of the present enjoyment of costly
indulgences. These it takes, to a certain extent, into its calculations,
because these do not merely, like vother desires, occasionally conflict
with the Edition: current; Page: [322] pursuit of wealth, but accompany
it always as a drag, or impediment, and are therefore inseparably mixed
up in the consideration of it. Political Economy considers mankind as
occupied solely in acquiring and consuming wealth; and aims at showing
what is the course of action into which mankind, living in a state of
society, would be impelled, if that motive, except in the degree in
which it is checked by the two perpetual counter-motives above adverted
to, were absolute ruler of all their actions. Under the influence of
this desire, it shows mankind accumulating wealth, and employing that
wealth in the production of other wealth; sanctioning by mutual
agreement the institution of property; establishing laws to prevent
individuals from encroaching upon the property of others by force or
fraud; adopting various contrivances for increasing the productiveness
of their labour; settling the division of the produce by agreement,
under the influence of competition (competition itself being governed by
certain laws, which laws are therefore the ultimate regulators of the
division of the produce); and employing certain expedients (as money,
credit, &c.) to facilitate the distribution. All these operations,
though many of them are really the result of a plurality of motives, are
considered by Political Economy as flowing solely from the desire of
wealth. The science then proceeds to investigate the laws which govern
these several operations, under the supposition that man is a being who
is determined, by the necessity of his nature, to prefer a greater
portion of wealth to a smaller in all cases, without any other exception
than that constituted by the two counter-motives already specified. Not
that any political economist was ever so absurd as to suppose that
mankind are really thus constituted, but because this is the mode in
which science must necessarily proceed. When an effect depends upon a
concurrence of causes, those causes must be studied one at a time, and
their laws separately investigated, if we wish, through the causes, to
obtain the power of either predicting or controlling the effect; since
the law of the effect is compounded of the laws of all the causes which
determine it. The law of the centripetal and that of the wtangentialw
force must have been known before the motions of the earth and planets
could be explained, or many of them predicted. The same is the case with
the conduct of man in society. In order to judge how he will act under
the variety of desires and aversions which are concurrently operating
upon him, we must know how he would act under the exclusive influence of
each one in particular. There is, perhaps, no action of a man’s life in
which he is neither under the immediate nor under the remote influence
of any impulse but the mere desire of wealth. xWith respect to thosex
parts of human conduct of which wealth is not even the principal
Edition: current; Page: [323] object, yto these Political Economy does
not pretend that its conclusions are applicable. But there are also
certain departments of human affairs, in which the acquisition of wealth
is the main and acknowledged end. It is only of these that Political
Economy takes notice. The manner in which it necessarily proceeds is
that of treating the main and acknowledged end as if it were the sole
end; which, of all hypotheses equally simple, is the nearest to the
truth. The political economist inquires, what are the actions which
would be produced by this desire, if, within the departments in
question, it were unimpeded by any other. In this way a nearer
approximation is obtained than would otherwise be practicable, to the
real order of human affairs in those departments. This approximation
zisz then to be corrected by making proper allowance for the effects of
any impulses of a different description, which can be shown to interfere
with the result in any particular case. Only in a few of the most
striking cases (such as athea important one of the principle of
population) are these corrections interpolated into the expositions of
Political Economy itself; the strictness of purely scientific
arrangement being thereby somewhat departed from, for the sake of
practical utility. So far as it is known, or may be presumed, that the
conduct of bmankindb in the pursuit of wealth is under the collateral
influence of any other of the properties of our nature than the desire
of obtaining the greatest quantity of wealth with the least labour and
self-denial, the conclusions of Political Economy will so far fail of
being applicable to the explanation or prediction of real events, until
they are modified by a correct allowance for the degree of influence
exercised by the other cause.

Political Economy, then, may be defined as follows; and the definition
seems to be complete:—

“The science which traces the laws of such of the phenomena of society
as arise from the combined operations of mankind for the production of
wealth, in so far as those phenomena are not modified by the pursuit of
any other object.”

But while this is a correct definition of Political Economy as a portion
of the field of science, the didactic writer on the subject will
naturally combine in his exposition, with the truths of the pure
science, as many of the practical modifications as will, in his
estimation, cbe most conducive toc the usefulness of his work.

The above attempt to frame a stricter definition of the science than
what are commonly received as such, may be thought to be of little use;
Edition: current; Page: [324] or, at best, to be chiefly useful in a
general survey and classification of the sciences, rather than as
conducing to the more successful pursuit of the particular science in
question. We think otherwise, and for this reason; that, with the
consideration of the definition of a science, is inseparably connected
that of the philosophic method of the science; the nature of the process
by which its investigations are to be carried on, its truths to be
arrived at.

Now, in whatever science there are systematic differences of
opinion—which is as much as to say, in all the moral or mental sciences,
and in Political Economy among the rest; in whatever science there
exist, among those who have attended to the subject, what are commonly
called ddifferences of principled, as distinguished from differences of
matter-of-fact or detail,—the cause will be found to be, a difference in
their conceptions of the ephilosophic methode of the science. The
parties who differ are guided, either knowingly or unconsciously, by
different views concerning the nature of the evidence appropriate to the
subject. They differ not solely in what they believe themselves to see,
but in the quarter fwhencef they obtained the light by which they think
they see it.

The most universal of the forms in which this difference of method is
accustomed to present itself, is the ancient feud between what is called
gtheory,g and what is called hpractice or experienceh. There arei, on
social and political questions, two kinds of reasoners: there is one
portion whoi term themselves practical men, and call the others
theorists; a title which the latter do not reject, though they by no
means recognise it as peculiar to them. The distinction between the two
is a very broad one, though it is one of which the language employed is
a most incorrect exponent. It has been again and again demonstrated,
that those who are accused of despising facts and disregarding
experience build and profess to build wholly upon facts and experience;
while those who disavow theory cannot make one step without theorizing.
But, although both classes of inquirers do nothing but theorize, and
both of them consult no other guide than experience, there is this
difference between them, and a most important difference it is: that
those who are called practical men require specific experience, and
argue wholly upwards from particular facts to a general conclusion;
while those who are called theorists aim at embracing a wider field of
experience, and, having argued upwards from particular facts to Edition:
current; Page: [325] a general principle including a much wider range
than that of the question under discussion, then argue downwards from
that general principle to a variety of specific conclusions.

Suppose, for example, that the question were, whether absolute kings
were likely to employ the powers of government for the welfare or for
the oppression of their subjects. The practicals would endeavour to
determine this question by a direct induction from the conduct of
particular despotic monarchs, as testified jby history. The theorists
would refer the question to be decided by the test not solely of our
experience of kings, but of our experience of kmenk. They would contend
that an observation of the tendencies which human nature has manifested
in the variety of situations in which human beings have been placed, and
especially observation of what passes in our own lmindsl, warrants us in
inferring that a human being in the situation of a despotic king will
make a bad use of power; and that this conclusion would lose nothing of
its certainty even if absolute kings had never existed, or if history
furnished us with no information of the manner in which they had
conducted themselves.

The first of these methods is a method of induction, merely; the last a
mixed method of induction and ratiocination. The first may be called the
method à posteriori; the latter, the method à priori. We are aware that
this last expression is sometimes used to characterize a supposed mode
of philosophizing, which does not profess to be founded upon experience
at all. But we are not acquainted with manym mode of philosophizingn, on
political subjects at least, to which such a description is fairly
applicablen. By the method à posteriori we mean that which requires, as
the basis of its conclusions, not oexperienceo merely, but pspecificp
experience. By the method à priori we mean (what has commonly been
meant) reasoning from an assumed hypothesis; which is not a practice
confined to mathematics, but is of the essence of all science which
admits of general reasoning at all. To verify the hypothesis itself à
posteriori, that is, to examine whether the facts of any actual case are
in accordance with it, is no part of the business of science at all, but
of the application of science.

In the definition which we have attempted to frame of the science of
Political Economy, we have characterized it as essentially an abstract
science, and its method as the method à priori. Such is undoubtedly its
character as it has been understood and taught by all its most
distinguished teachers. It reasons, and, as we contend, must necessarily
reason, from assumptions, not from facts. It is built upon hypotheses,
strictly analogous Edition: current; Page: [326] to qthoseq which, under
the name of definitions, are the foundation of the other abstract
sciences. Geometry presupposes an arbitrary definition of a line, “that
which has length but not breadth.” Just in the same manner does
Political Economy presuppose an arbitrary definition of man, as a being
who invariably does that by which he may obtain the greatest amount of
necessaries, conveniences, and luxuries, with the smallest quantity of
labour and physical self-denial with which they can be obtained in the
existing state of knowledge. It is true that this definition of man is
not formally prefixed to any work on Political Economy, as the
definition of a line is prefixed to Euclid’s Elements; and in proportion
as by being so prefixed it would be less in danger of being forgotten,
we may see ground for regret that this is not done. It is proper that
what is assumed in every particular case, should once for all be brought
before the mind in its full extent, by being somewhere formally stated
as a general maxim. Now, no one who is conversant with systematic
treatises on Political Economy will question, that whenever a political
economist has shown that, by acting in a particular manner, a labourer
may obviously obtain higher wages, a capitalist larger profits, or a
landlord higher rent, he concludes, as a matter of course, that they
will certainly act in that manner. Political Economy, therefore, reasons
from assumed premises—from premises which rmightr be totally without
foundation in fact, and which are not pretended to be universally in
accordance with it. The conclusions of Political Economy,
sconsequentlys, like those of geometry, are only true, as the common
phrase is, in the abstract; that is, they are only true under certain
suppositions, in which none but general causes—causes common to the
whole class of cases under consideration—are taken into the account.

This ought not to be denied by the political economist. If he deny it,
then, and then only, he places himself in the wrong. The à priori method
which is laid to his charge, as if his employment of it proved his whole
science to be worthless, is, as we shall presently show, the only method
by which truth can possibly be attained in tany department of the social
sciencet. All that is requisite is, that he be on his guard not to
ascribe to conclusions which are grounded upon an hypothesis a different
kind of certainty from that which really belongs to them. They would be
true without qualification, only in a case which is purely imaginary. In
proportion as the actual facts recede from the hypothesis, he must allow
a corresponding deviation from the strict letter of his conclusion;
otherwise it will be true only of things such as he has arbitrarily
supposed, not of such things as really exist. That which is true in the
abstract, is always true in the concrete with proper allowances. When a
certain cause really Edition: current; Page: [327] exists, and if left
to itself would infallibly produce a certain effect, that same effect,
modified by all the other concurrent causes, will correctly correspond
to the result really produced.

The conclusions of geometry are not strictly true of such lines, angles,
and figures, as human hands can construct. But no one, therefore,
contends that the conclusions of geometry are of no utility, or that it
would be better to ushut up Euclid’s Elementsu, and content ourselves
with “practice” and “experience.”

No mathematician ever thought that his definition of a line corresponded
to an actual line. As little did any political economist ever imagine
that real men had no object of desire but wealth, or none which would
not give way to the slightest motive of a pecuniary kind. But they were
justified in assuming this, for the purposes of their argument; because
they had to do only with those parts of human conduct which have
pecuniary advantage for their direct and principal object; and because,
as no two individual cases are exactly alike, no general maxims could
ever be laid down unless some of the circumstances of the particular
case were left out of consideration.

But we go vfartherv than to affirm that the method à priori is a
legitimate wmodew of philosophical investigation in the moral sciences:
we contend that it is the xonlyx mode. We affirm that the method à
posteriori, or that of specific experience, is altogether inefficacious
in those sciences, as a means of arriving at any considerable body of
valuable truth; though it admits of being usefully applied in aid of the
method à priori, and even forms an indispensable supplement to it.

There is a property common to almost all the moral sciences, and by
which they are distinguished from ymanyy of the physical; this is, that
it is seldom in our power to make experiments in them. In chemistry and
natural philosophy, we can not only observe what happens under all the
combinations of circumstances which nature brings together, but we may
also try an indefinite number of new combinations. This we can seldom do
in ethical, and scarcely ever in political zsciencez. We cannot try
forms of government and systems of national policy on a diminutive scale
in our laboratories, shaping our experiments as we think they may most
conduce to the advancement of knowledge. We therefore study nature under
circumstances of great disadvantage in these sciences; being confined to
the limited number of experiments which take place (if we may so speak)
of their own accord, without any preparation or management of ours; in
circumstances, moreover, of great complexity, and never perfectly known
Edition: current; Page: [328] to us; and with the far greater part of
the processes concealed from our observation.

The consequence of this unavoidable defect in the materials of the
induction is, that we can rarely obtain what Bacon has quaintly, but,
not unaptly, termed an experimentum crucis.

In any science which admits of an unlimited range of arbitrary
experiments, an experimentum crucis may always be obtained. Being able
to vary all the circumstances, we can always take effectual means of
ascertaining which of them are, and which are not, material. Call the
effect B, and let the question be whether the cause A in any way
contributes to it. We try an experiment in which all the surrounding
circumstances are altered, except A alone: if the effect B is
nevertheless produced, A is the cause of it. Or, instead of leaving A,
and changing the other circumstances, we leave all the other
circumstances and change A: if the effect B in that case does not take
place, then again A is a necessary condition of its existence. Either of
these experiments, if accurately performed, is an experimentum crucis;
it converts the presumption we had before of the existence of a
connection between A and B into proof, by negativing every other
hypothesis which would account for the appearances.

But this can seldom be done in the moral sciences, owing to the immense
multitude of the influencing circumstances, and our very scanty means of
varying the experiment. Even in operating upon an individual mind, which
is the case affording greatest room for experimenting, we cannot often
obtain a crucial experiment. The effect, for example, of a particular
circumstance in education, upon the formation of character, may be tried
in a variety of cases, but we can hardly ever be certain that any two of
those cases differ in all their circumstances except the solitary one of
which we wish to estimate the influence. In how much greater a degree
must this difficulty exist in the affairs of states, where even the
number of arecordeda experiments is so scanty in comparison with the
variety and multitude of the circumstances concerned in each. How, for
example, can we obtain a crucial experiment on the effect of a
restrictive commercial policy upon national wealth? We must find two
nations alike in every other respect, or at least possessed, in a degree
exactly equal, of everything which conduces to national opulence, and
adopting exactly the same policy in all their other affairs, but
differing in this only, that one of them adopts a system of commercial
restrictions, and the other badoptsb free trade. This would be a
decisive experiment, similar to those which we can almost always obtain
in experimental physics. Doubtless this would Edition: current; Page:
[329] be the most conclusive evidence of all if we could get it. But let
any one consider how infinitely numerous and various are the
circumstances which either directly or indirectly do or may influence
the amount of the national wealth, and then ask himself what are the
probabilities that in the longest revolution of ages two nations will be
found, which agree, and can be shown to agree, in all those
circumstances except one?

Since, therefore, it is vain to hope that truth can be arrived at,
either in Political Economy or in any other department of the social
science, while we look at the facts in the concrete, clothed in all the
complexity with which nature has surrounded them, and endeavour to
elicit a general law by a process of induction from a comparison of
details; there remains no other method than the à priori one, or that of
“abstract speculation.”

Although sufficiently ample grounds are not afforded in the field of
politics, for a satisfactory induction by a comparison of the effects,
the causes may, in all cases, be made the subject of specific
experiment. These causes are, laws of human nature, and external
circumstances capable of exciting the human will to action. The desires
of man, and the nature of the conduct to which they prompt him, are
within the reach of our observation. We can also observe what are the
objects which excite those desires. The materials of this knowledge
every one can principally collect within himself; with reasonable
consideration of the differences, of which experience discloses to him
the existence, between himself and other people. Knowing therefore
accurately the properties of the substances concerned, we may reason
with as cmuchc certainty as in the most demonstrative parts of physics
from any assumed set of circumstances. This will be mere trifling if the
assumed circumstances bear no sort of resemblance to any real ones; but
if the assumption is correct as far as it goes, and differs from the
truth no otherwise than as a part differs from the whole, then the
conclusions which are correctly deduced from the assumption constitute
abstract truth; and when completed by adding or subtracting the effect
of the non-calculated circumstances, they are true in the concrete, and
may be applied to practice.

Of this character is the science of Political Economy in the writings of
its best teachers. To render it perfect as an abstract science, the
combinations of circumstances which it assumes, in order to trace their
effects, should embody all the circumstances that are common to all
cases whatever, and likewise all the circumstances that are common to
any important dclassd of cases. The conclusions correctly deduced from
these assumptions, would be as true in the abstract as those of
mathematics; and would be as near an approximation as abstract truth can
ever be, to truth in the concrete.

Edition: current; Page: [330]
When the principles of Political Economy are to be applied to a
particular case, then it is necessary to take into account all the
individual circumstances of that case; not only examining to which of
the sets of circumstances contemplated by the abstract science the
circumstances of the case in question correspond, but likewise what
other circumstances may exist in that case, which not being common to it
with any large and strongly-marked class of cases, have not fallen under
the cognizance of the science. These circumstances have been called
disturbing causese. And here onlye it is that an element of uncertainty
enters into the process—an uncertainty inherent in the nature of these
complex phenomena, and arising from the impossibility of being quite
sure that all the circumstances of the particular case are known to us
sufficiently in detail, and that our attention is not unduly diverted
from any of them.

This constitutes the only uncertainty of Political Economy; and not of
it alone, but of the moral sciences in general. When the disturbing
causes are known, the allowance necessary to be made for them detracts
in no way from scientific precision, nor constitutes any deviation from
the à priori method. The disturbing causes are not handed over to be
dealt with by mere conjecture. Like friction in mechanics, to which they
have been often compared, they may at first have been considered merely
as a nonassignable deduction to be made by guess from the result given
by the general principles of science; but in time many of them are
brought within the pale of the abstract science itself, and their effect
is found to admit of as accurate an estimation as those more striking
effects which they modify. The disturbing causes have their laws, as the
causes which are thereby disturbed have theirs; and from the laws of the
disturbing causes, the nature and amount of the disturbance may be
predicted à priori, like the operation of the fmore generalf laws which
they are said to modify or disturb, but with which they might more
properly be said to be concurrent. The effect of the gspecialg causes is
then to be added to, or subtracted from, the effect of the general ones.

These disturbing causes are sometimes circumstances which operate upon
human conduct through the same principle of human nature with which
Political Economy is conversant, namely, the desire of wealth, but which
are not general enough to be taken into account in the abstract science.
Of disturbances of this description every political economist can
produce many examples. In other instances the disturbing cause is some
other law of human nature. In the latter case it never can fall within
the Edition: current; Page: [331] province of Political Economy; it
belongs to some other science; and here the mere political economist, he
who has studied no science but Political Economy, if he attempt to apply
his science to practice, will fail.*

As for the other kind of disturbing causes, namely those which operate
through the same law of human nature out of which the general principles
of the science arise, these might always be brought within the pale of
the abstract science if it were worth while; and when we make the
necessary allowances for them in practice, if we are doing anything but
guess, we are following out the method of the abstract science into
minuter details; inserting among its hypotheses a fresh and still more
complex combination of circumstances, and so adding pro hâc vice ha
supplementary chapter or appendix, or at least a supplementary
itheoremi, to the abstract science.

Having now shown that the method à priori in Political Economy, and in
all the other branches of moral science, is the only certain or
scientific mode of investigation, and that the à posteriori method, or
that of specific experience, as a means of arriving at truth, is
inapplicable to these subjects, we shall jbe able to show that the
latter method is notwithstanding of great value in the moral sciences;
namely, not as a means of discovering truth, but of verifying it, and
reducing to the lowest point that uncertainty before alluded to as
arising from the complexity of every particular case, and from the
difficulty (not to say impossibility) of our being assured à priori that
we have taken into account all the material circumstances.

If we could be quite certain that we kknewk all the facts of the
particular case, we could derive llittlel additional advantage from
specific experience. Edition: current; Page: [332] The causes being
given, we mmaym know what will be their effect, without an actual trial
of every possible combination; since the causes are human feelings, and
outward circumstances fitted to excite them: and, as these for the most
part are, or at least might be, familiar to us, we can more surely judge
of their combined effect from that familiarity, than from any evidence
which can be elicited from the complicated and entangled circumstances
of an actual experiment. If the knowledge what are the particular causes
operating in any given instance were revealed to us by infallible
authority, then, if our abstract science were perfect, we should become
prophets. But the causes are not so revealed: they are to be collected
by observation; and observation in circumstances of complexity is apt to
be imperfect. Some of the causes may lie nbeyondn observation; many are
apt to escape it, unless we are on the look-out for them; and it is only
the habit of long and accurate observation which can give us so correct
a preconception what causes we are likely to find, as shall induce us to
look for them in the right quarter. But such is the nature of the human
understanding, that the very fact of attending with intensity to one
part of a thing, has a tendency to withdraw the attention from the other
parts. We are consequently in great danger of adverting to a portion
only of the causes which are actually at work. And if we are in this
predicament, the more accurate our deductions and the more certain our
conclusions oin the abstract,o (that is, making abstraction of all
circumstances except those which form part of pthep hypothesis,) the
less we are likely to suspect that we are in error: for no one can have
looked closely into the sources of fallacious thinking without being
deeply conscious that the coherence, and neat concatenation of our
philosophical systems, is more apt than we are commonly aware to pass
with us as evidence of their truth.

We cannot, therefore, too carefully endeavour to verify our theory, by
comparing, in the particular cases to which we have access, the results
which it would have led us to predict, with the most trustworthy
accounts we can obtain of those which have been actually realized. The
discrepancy between our anticipations and the actual fact is often the
only circumstance which would have drawn our attention to some important
qdisturbing causeq which we had overlooked. Nay, it often discloses to
us errors in thought, still more serious than the omission of what can
with any propriety be termed a disturbing cause. It often reveals to us
that the basis itself of our whole argument is insufficient; that the
data, from which we had reasoned, comprise only a part, and not ralwaysr
the most important part, of the circumstances by which the result is
really determined. Such oversights are committed by very good reasoners,
and even by a still rarer Edition: current; Page: [333] class, that of
good observers. It is a kind of error to which those are peculiarly
liable whose views are the largest and most philosophical: for exactly
in that ratio are their minds more accustomed to dwell upon those laws,
qualities, and tendencies, which are common to large classes of cases,
and which belong to all place and all time; while it often happens that
circumstances almost peculiar to the particular case or era have a far
greater share in governing that one case.

Although, therefore, a philosopher be convinced that no general truths
can be attained in the affairs of nations by the à posteriori road, it
does not the less behove him, according to the measure of his
opportunities, to sift and scrutinize the details of every specific
experiment. Without this, he may be an excellent professor of abstract
science; for a person may be of great use who points out correctly what
effects will follow from certain combinations of possible circumstances,
in whatever tract of the extensive region of hypothetical cases those
combinations may be found. He stands in the same relation to the
legislator, as the smeres geographer to the practical navigator; telling
him the latitude and longitude of all sorts of places, but not how to
find whereabouts he himself is sailing. If, however, he does no more
than this, he must rest contented to take no share in practical
politics; to have no opinion, or to hold it with extreme modesty, on the
applications which should be made of his doctrines to existing
circumstances.

No one who tattempts to lay down propositions for the guidancet of
mankind, however perfect his scientific acquirements, can dispense with
a practical knowledge of the actual modes in which the affairs of the
world are carried on, and an extensive personal experience of the actual
ideas, feelings, and intellectual and moral tendencies of his own
country and of his own age. The true practical statesman is he who
combines this experience with a profound knowledge of abstract political
philosophy. Either acquirement, without the other, leaves him lame and
impotent if he is sensible of the deficiency; renders him obstinate and
presumptuous if, as is more probable, he is entirely unconscious of it.u

Such, then, are the respective offices and uses of the à priori and the
Edition: current; Page: [334] à posteriori methods—the method of
abstract science, and that of specific experiment—as well in Political
Economy, as in all the other branches of social philosophy. Truth
compels us to express our conviction that whether among those who have
written on these subjects, or among those for whose use they wrote, vfew
can be pointed out who havev allowed to each of these methods its just
value, and systematically kept each to its proper objects and functions.
One of the wpeculiaritiesw of modern times, the separation of theory
from practice—of the studies of the closet from the outward business of
the world— xhas given a wrong bias to the ideas and feelings both of the
ystudenty and of the man of business. Each undervalues that part of the
materials of thought with which he is not familiar. The one despises all
comprehensive views, the other neglects details. The one draws his
notion of the universe from the few objects zwith which his course of
life has happened to render him familiarz; the other having got
demonstration on his side, and forgetting that it is only a
demonstration nisi—a proof at all times liable to be set aside by the
addition of a single new fact to the hypothesis—adenies,a instead of
examining and sifting, the allegations which are opposed to him. For
this he has considerable excuse in the bworthlessness of the testimony
on which the facts brought forward to invalidate the conclusions of
theory usually rest. In these complex matters, men see with their
preconceived opinions, not with their eyes: an interested or a
passionate man’s statistics are cofc little worth; and a year seldom
passes without examples of the astounding falsehoods which large bodies
of respectable men will back each other in publishing to the world as
facts within their personal knowledge. It is not because a thing is
asserted to be true, but because in its nature it may be true, that a
sincere and patient inquirer will feel himself called upon to
investigate it. He will use the assertions of opponents not as evidence,
but indications leading to evidence; suggestions of the most proper
course for his own inquiries.

But while the philosopher and the practical man bandy half-truths with
one another, we dmay seek far without finding oned who, placed on a
higher eminence of thought, comprehends as a whole what they see only in
separate parts; who can make the anticipations of the philosopher guide
Edition: current; Page: [335] the observation of the practical man, and
the specific experience of the practical man warn the philosopher where
something is to be added to his theory.

The most memorable example in modern times of a man who united the
spirit of philosophy with the pursuits of active life, and kept wholly
clear from the partialities and prejudices both of the student and of
the practical statesman, was Turgote; thee wonder not only of his age,
but of fhistory, for his astonishing combination of the most opposite,
and, judging from common experience, almost incompatible excellences.

Though it is impossible to furnish any test by which a speculative
thinker, either in Political Economy or ging any other branch of social
philosophy, may know that he is competent to judge of the application of
his principles to the existing condition of his own or any other
country, indications may be suggested by the absence of which he may
well and surely know that he is hnoth competent. His knowledge must at
least enable him to explain and account for what is, or he is an
insufficient judge of what ought to be. If a political economist, for
instance, finds himself puzzled by any recent or present commercial
phenomena; if there is any mystery to him in the late or present state
of the productive industry of the country, which his knowledge of
principle does not enable him to unriddle; he may be sure that something
is wanting to render his system of opinions a safe guide in existing
circumstances. Either some of the facts which influence the situation of
the country and the course of events are not known to him; or, knowing
them, he knows not what ought to be their effects. In the latter case
his system is imperfect even as an abstract system; it does not enable
him to trace correctly all the consequences even of assumed premises.
Though he succeed in throwing doubts upon the reality of some of the
phenomena which he is required to explain, his task is not yet
completed; even then he is called upon to show how the belief, which he
deems unfounded, arose; and what is the real nature of the appearances
which gave a colour of probability to allegations which examination
proves to be untrue.

When the speculative politician has gone through this labour—has gone
through it conscientiously, not with the desire of ifindingi his system
complete, but of making it so—he may deem himself qualified to apply his
principles to the guidance of practice: but he must still continue to
exercise the same discipline upon every new combination of facts as it
arises; he must make a large allowance for the disturbing influence of
unforeseen causes, and must carefully watch the result of every
experiment, in order Edition: current; Page: [336] that any residuum of
facts which his principles did not lead him to expect, and do not enable
him to explain, may become the subject of a fresh analysis, and furnish
the occasion for a consequent enlargement or correction of his general
views.

The method of the practical philosopher consists, therefore, of two
processes; the one analytical, the other synthetical. He must analyze
the existing state of society into its elements, not dropping and losing
any of them by the way. After referring to the experience of individual
man to learn the law of each of these elements, that is, to learn what
are its natural effects, and how much of the effect follows from so much
of the cause when not counteracted by any other cause, there remains an
operation of synthesis; to put all these effects together, and, from
what they are separately, to collect what would be the effect of all the
causes acting at once. If these various operations could be correctly
performed, the result would be jprophecyj; but, as they can be performed
only with a certain kapproximationk to correctness, mankind can never
predict with absolute certainty, but only with a less or greater degree
of probability; according as they are better or worse apprised what the
causes are,—have learnt with more or less accuracy from experience the
law to which each of those causes, when acting separately, conforms,—and
have summed up the aggregate effect more or less carefully.

With all the precautions which lhave beenl indicated there will still be
some danger of falling into partial views; but we shall at least have
taken the best securities against it. All that we can do more, is to
endeavour to be impartial critics of our own theories, and to free
ourselves, as far as we are able, from that reluctance from which few
inquirers are altogether exempt, to admit the reality or relevancy of
any facts which they have not previously either taken into, or left a
place open for in, their systems.

If indeed every phenomenon was generally the effect of no more than one
cause, a knowledge of the law of that cause would, unless there was a
logical error in our reasoning, enable us confidently to predict all the
circumstances of the phenomenon. We might then, if we had carefully
examined our premises and our reasoning, and found no flaw, venture to
disbelieve the testimony which might be brought to show that matters had
turned out differently from what we should have predicted. mIf the
causes of erroneous conclusions were always npatentn on the face of the
reasonings which lead to them, the human understanding would be a far
more trustworthy instrument than it is. But the narrowest examination of
the process itself will help us little towards discovering that we have
omitted Edition: current; Page: [337] part of the premises which we
ought to have taken into our reasoning. Effects are commonly determined
by a concurrence of causes. If we have overlooked any one cause, we may
reason justly from all the others, and only be the further wrong. Our
premises will be true, and our reasoning correct, and yet the result of
no value in the particular case. There is, therefore, almost always room
for a modest doubt as to our practical conclusions. Against false
premises and unsound reasoning, a good mental discipline may effectually
secure us; but against the danger of overlooking something, neither
strength of understanding nor intellectual cultivation can be more than
a very imperfect protection. A person may be warranted in feeling
confident, that whatever he has carefully contemplated with his mind’s
eye he has seen correctly; but no one can be sure that there is not
something in existence which he has not seen at all. He can do no more
than satisfy himself that he has seen all that is visible to any other
persons who have concerned themselves with the subject. For this purpose
he must endeavour to place himself at otheiro point of view, and strive
earnestly to see the object as they see it; nor give up the attempt
until he has either added the appearance which is floating before them
to his own stock of realities, or made out clearly that it is an optical
deception.

The pprinciplesp which we have now stated are by no means alien to
common apprehension: they are not absolutely hidden, perhaps, from any
one, but are commonly seen through a mist. We might have presented the
latter part of them in a phraseology in which they would have seemed the
most familiar of truisms: we might have cautioned inquirers against too
extensive generalization, and reminded them that there are exceptions to
all rules. Such is the current language of those who distrust
comprehensive thinking, without having any clear notion why or where it
ought to be distrusted. We have avoided the use of these expressions
purposely, because we deem them superficial and inaccurate. The error,
when there is error, does not arise from generalizing too extensively;
that is, from including too wide a range of particular cases in a single
proposition. Doubtless, a man often asserts of an entire class what is
only true of a part of it; but his error generally consists not in
making qtoo wideq an assertion, but in making the wrong kind of
assertion: he predicated an actual result, when he should only have
predicated a tendency to that result—a power acting with a certain
intensity in that direction. With regard to exceptions; in rany
tolerably advancedr science there is properly no such thing as an
exception. What is thought to be an exception to a principle is always
some other and distinct principle cutting into the former: Edition:
current; Page: [338] some other force which impinges against the first
force, and deflects it from its direction. There are not a law and an
exception to that law—the law acting in ninety-nine cases, and the
exception in one. There are stwos laws, each possibly acting in the
whole hundred cases, and bringing about a common effect by their
tconjunctt operation. If the force which, being the less conspicuous of
the two, is called the udisturbingu force, prevails sufficiently over
the other force in some one case, to constitute that case what is
commonly called an vexceptionv, the same disturbing force probably acts
as a modifying cause in many other cases which no one will call
exceptions.

Thus if it were stated to be a law of nature, that all heavy bodies fall
to the ground, it would probably be said that the resistance of the
atmosphere, which prevents a balloon from falling, constitutes the
balloon an wexceptionw to that pretended law of nature. But the real law
is, that all heavy bodies tend to fall; and xto this there is no
exception, not even the sun and moon; for even they, as every astronomer
knows, tend towards the earth, with a force exactly equal to that with
which the earth tends towards them. The resistance of the atmosphere
might, in the particular case of the balloon, from a misapprehension of
what the law of gravitation is, be said to prevail over the law; but its
disturbing effect is quite as real in every other case, since though it
does not yprevent, it retardsy the fall of all bodies whatever. The
rule, and the so-called exception, do not divide the cases between them;
each of them is a comprehensive rule extending to all cases. To call one
of these concurrent principles an exception to the other, is
superficial, and contrary to the correct principles of nomenclature and
arrangement. An effect of precisely the same kind, and arising from the
same cause, ought not to be placed in two different categories, merely
as there does or does not exist another cause preponderating over it.

It is only in zartz, as distinguished from science, that we can with
propriety speak of exceptions. Art, the immediate end of which is
practice, has nothing to do with causes, except as the means of bringing
about effects. However heterogeneous the causes, it carries the effects
of them all into one single reckoning, and according as the sum-total is
plus or minus, according as it falls above or below a certain line, Art
says, Do this, or Abstain from doing it. The exception does not arun by
insensible degrees into the rule, like what are called exceptions in
science. In a question of practice it frequently happens that a certain
thing is either fit to be done, or fit to be altogether abstained from,
there being no medium. If, in the Edition: current; Page: [339] majority
of cases, it is fit to be done, bthatb is made the rule. When a case
subsequently occurs in which the thing ought not to be done, an entirely
new leaf is turned over; the rule is now done with, and dismissed: a new
train of ideas is introduced, between which and those involved in the
rule there is a broad line of demarcation; as broad and tranchant as the
difference between Ay and No. Very cpossibly,c between the last case
which comes within the rule and the first of the exception, there is
only the difference of a shade: but that shade probably makes the whole
interval between acting in one way and in a totally different one. We
may, therefore, in talking of art, unobjectionably speak of the rule and
the exception; meaning by the rule, the cases in which there exists a
preponderance, however slight, of inducements for acting in a particular
way; and by the exception, the cases in which the preponderance is on
the contrary side.

Edition: current; Page: [340] Edition: current; Page: [341]


THE CURRENCY QUESTION
 1844

Edition: current; Page: [342]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Westminster Review, XLI (June, 1844), 579-98. Signed “A”; not
republished. Original heading: “Art. XI.—1. An Inquiry into the Currency
Principle; the Connexion of the Currency with Prices, and the Expediency
of a Separation of Issue from Banking. By Thomas Tooke, Esq., F.R.S.
[London:] Longman, [Brown, Green, and Longmans,] 1844. 2. An Inquiry
into the Practical Working of the Proposed Arrangements for the Renewal
of the Charter of the Bank of England, and the Regulation of the
Currency. With a Refutation of the Fallacies advanced by Mr. Tooke. By
R. Torrens, Esq., F.R.S. [London:] Smith, Elder, and Co., 1844.” Running
head: “The Currency Question.” Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “An
article headed ‘The Currency Question’ being a review of pamphlets by
Tooke and Torrens on currency, in the Westminster Review for June 1844.
(No. 2)” (MacMinn, 57). No corrections or variants in Somerville College
copy.

Edition: current; Page: [343]


The Currency Question

mr. tooke is known to all who are conversant with the discussions of the
last twenty-five years on commercial topics, as an authority, on all
such subjects, of the highest order. Beyond, perhaps, any other man, he
brings to the consideration of mercantile phenomena an intimate
practical knowledge of the elements upon which they depend, combined
with habits of reflecting, or, to give the operation its proper name, of
theorizing, which qualify him to discriminate and analyse the influences
of those various elements. Owing to this union of qualifications, those
who are interested in such inquiries have found in his various
publications (and particularly in the “History of Prices,”[*] which is a
summary of them all) a scientific explanation of those complex and
apparently anomalous phenomena of prices, which the commercial history
of the last half century presents in so great abundance, and which,
until shown by him to be exemplifications of those very principles and
laws with which they seemed to conflict, were perplexing even to those
who best understood the subject, and often dangerously misleading to
those who did not. The opinions, therefore, of Mr. Tooke upon the
questions raised by the new ministerial scheme for the reform of the
currency are entitled to an attentive, and, from all who are capable of
appreciating what he has previously written, a respectful hearing.*

In the first of the pamphlets[†] named at the commencement of this
Edition: current; Page: [344] article, Mr. Tooke has taken the field
against the system of doctrines on which the ministerial measure is
founded, and which derives its commonest designation from the names of
two of its most distinguished supporters—Mr. Jones Loyd and Mr.
Norman.[*] To represent the other side of the dispute, we have prefixed
the latest pamphlet of the indefatigable Colonel Torrens, who was, we
believe, the first promulgator of the theory in question, and who has
come forward as its champion against “the fallacies advanced by Mr.
Tooke.”[†]

For any influence which further discussion can have upon the decision of
parliament, it is evidently useless. Parliament has made up its mind.
The measure of Sir R. Peel[‡] has been received with approbation by
nearly all, in parliament and the press, by whom any opinion has been
expressed on it; and with acquiescence, if not satisfaction, by the
public. There is not the smallest chance of its undergoing material
alteration in its way through either house. That the attention,
therefore, of thinkers should be directed to the views contained in Mr.
Tooke’s pamphlet, is of importance rather as a matter of abstract
discussion, essential to the right understanding of commercial
phenomena, than with a view to any direct practical result. The question
has ceased to be a practical one, and cannot again become so for ten
years to come. But it involves highly important questions of theory; the
practical bearing of which, as of all theories, far transcends the
limits of any single application.

What was affirmed by Cicero of all things with which philosophy is
conversant, may be asserted without scruple of the subject of
currency—that there is no opinion so absurd as not to have been
maintained by some person of reputation. There even appears to be on
this subject a peculiar tenacity of error—a perpetual principle of
resuscitation in slain absurdity. There are at this day numerous persons
who can read and write, and some who think themselves oracles of wisdom,
who see no harm in emancipating a paper currency from the restraint of
convertibility, and from every definite principle of limitation,
provided only that it is grounded on the security of actual property;
forgetful that even the assignats were issued on no less a security than
the principal portion of the soil of France, and that a paper so
guaranteed is no more protected from depreciation, if issued in excess,
than the land itself would be if offered for sale in unusual quantity.
There Edition: current; Page: [345] are writers of pretension, not only
out of Bedlam, but even, we can assure Sir Robert Peel, out of
Birmingham, who think it the duty of the legislature periodically to
degrade the standard (or to authorize an increase of inconvertible paper
exactly equivalent) in proportion as the progress of industry creates an
increase of productions and a multiplication of pecuniary transactions.
But it is not against these extravagant aberrations that it is now
necessary to contend. In the discussions which we are here concerned
with, both sides admit, that the proper standard of currency is the
precious metals, at an unalterable mint valuation; that a pound
(precisely as stated by Sir Robert Peel) should mean a fixed quantity of
gold of a given fineness; and that no one who has contracted to pay that
given quantity, should be allowed on any pretext to discharge his debt
by paying a smaller quantity, or making over paper equivalent to a
smaller quantity. Gold is not an ideally perfect standard—a commodity
absolutely unchangeable in cost of production; but it approaches nearer
to that abstract perfection of a measure of value, than any other
production of nature or industry; and if it were far more subject to
fluctuation than it is, it would be less so than the policy of a
government,—especially one which takes for its principle of guidance
“the wants of trade,” which in this case simply means the convenience of
debtors.

Assuming then—as conceded by all persons whom it is at present necessary
to reason with—that the value of a paper currency must be maintained at
par with the coin which it professes to represent, and that to effect
this the issuers must be compelled to give coin for their notes whenever
demanded; there is an ulterior question, on which those who are entitled
to be considered authorities on the principles of the circulating
medium, part company. According to one opinion, steadiness of value in a
paper currency is sufficiently secured by ready and immediate
convertibility. This was, until lately, the prevailing, if not the
exclusive doctrine, among those by whom the theory of money had been
successfully cultivated. Within the last few years another doctrine has
sprung up, of which Colonel Torrens was, as we have said, the
originator, Mr. Loyd, Mr. Norman, and Mr. McCulloch among the chief
propounders, and to which Sir Robert Peel and his cabinet have become
proselytes.

According to this doctrine, the check of convertibility acts too slowly,
and admits of great mischief from excess of issues before it begins to
operate. Convertibility, it is contended, is a security only against
permanent depreciation. When an increased issue of paper has sunk the
value of the currency below its regular proportion to the currencies of
other countries, the exchanges turn, gold becomes an article of export,
and, to obtain it, notes are returned upon the Bank. But the increase of
issues has, in the Edition: current; Page: [346] meantime, raised
prices; which, when the excess of paper is removed, relapse to their
former level. This is already a mischief; it deranges mercantile
calculations, creates unexpected gains to some at the expense of others,
and adds to the gambling character in a certain degree inherent in all
the great operations of commerce. But the evil seldom ends here. All
advance of prices tends to encourage speculation; especially when the
same cause which creates the advance (being increased issues made by
bankers, in the form of increased advances to their customers)
occasions, as its very first effect, a reduction of the rate of
interest. The conjunction of rising markets and a low rate of interest
leads to speculative purchases, by which the rise itself is heightened
and prolonged. The rise, however, not being grounded on any permanent
cause of increased price (such as a deficiency of supply); in proportion
to its continuance, the fall, when the tide turns, is from a greater
height, and also to a lower depth. Those who during the rise of prices
obtained credit upon the apparently increasing value of the goods which
they held, are only enabled to fulfil their engagements by parting with
the goods at almost any sacrifice, and prices sink for a time as much
below their accustomed rate as they had previously been raised above it.

To avert these evils, in the opinion of Colonel Torrens and Mr. Loyd,
and we may now add of Sir Robert Peel, something more than
convertibility is necessary. Their remedy is to place the issuers under
a legal impossibility of ever increasing their issues (beyond a certain
moderate minimum), except in exchange for bullion, which, if refused to
them, would probably be sent to the mint and coined. By this contrivance
the paper currency is prevented from being arbitrarily increased. It can
only, under such a system, be extended, when, if the augmentation were
not made, an equivalent increase would probably take place in the
portion of the currency which consists of coin.

But it is not enough, according to these authorities, to prevent
increase of issues, otherwise than in exchange for bullion; it is also
necessary to prevent the currency from being diminished, otherwise than
by not re-issuing the notes which are presented for payment. Under the
present system, the Bank, when it finds its treasure leaving it, does
not remain passive, and allow the exchange of notes for specie to go on
until, the needful contraction having been effected, the drain stops of
itself. It becomes alarmed, and endeavours by calling in its issues to
stop the efflux of bullion in an earlier stage. It diminishes its loans
to merchants, depriving them in a period of falling prices of the
accustomed accommodation, which is then more than usually necessary. Or
it throws some of its securities upon the market, and by absorbing a
portion of the capital which is seeking investment, deprives the
merchants of an equivalent amount of pecuniary advances. By either
process, it raises the rate of interest and increases the Edition:
current; Page: [347] difficulty of obtaining loans, at a period which is
already one of pressure; thus heightening all the evils of a commercial
revulsion.

By the plan proposed, that of compelling the issuers to keep their
securities at a fixed amount, and to let the currency contract or expand
only by the exchange of gold for notes and of notes for gold, the paper
will, according to this theory, be preserved exactly the same in
quantity as the metallic money which would otherwise circulate in its
place; this identity of quantity being, it is supposed, indispensable to
secure identity of value.

It is generally assumed, as essential to this mode of regulating the
currency, that the privilege of issue should be confined to a single
establishment. But the rule of holding an unvarying amount of
securities, and of issuing notes beyond that amount only in exchange for
bullion, might be applied to a multiplicity of issuers; and a scheme for
that purpose was, in fact, devised by Colonel Torrens. Sir Robert Peel
cuts the knot by prohibiting to the country banks any issues whatever
beyond the average of the last two years. He does not apply to them, as
he does to the Bank of England, the other half of the proposed system,
by preventing arbitrary diminution as well as increase; either because
he thinks that in preventing over-issue he has guarded sufficiently
against revulsion, or because he deems more minute precautions
superfluous in an arrangement which is avowedly preparatory to the
suppression of all banks of issue other than the Bank of England.

Under the system thus established, we are confidently told that the
calamity of almost periodical recurrence, commonly known by the name of
a “commercial crisis,” will be greatly diminished both in frequency and
in severity. Some permit themselves to use language which at least seems
to import that these convulsions will be rendered impossible. Colonel
Torrens looks upon the measure as one which “will effectually prevent
the recurrence of those commercial revulsions, those cycles of
excitement and depression, which as Mr. Loyd has so felicitously
explained, result from the alternate expansion and contraction of an
ill-regulated circulation.”[*] He admits, indeed, that undue
speculation, and the consequent reaction, might prevail to a great
extent even under a metallic currency. But he attributes to the measure
now proposed, an efficacy in counteracting those evils, sufficient to
constitute that measure “the most important and the most salutary, as
regards the reform of our monetary system, which has been brought under
the consideration of parliament since the act of 1819 for the resumption
of cash payments.” [Ibid.]

We shall examine presently how far the measure deserves to be
considered—again in the words of Colonel Torrens—as “the reform of a
banking system hitherto, perhaps, the most defective in Europe.” [Ibid.]
But Edition: current; Page: [348] whatever may be its recommendations,
that of preventing, or even greatly alleviating commercial revulsions,
can scarcely be one of them; since commercial revulsions are as frequent
and as disastrous where this so bitterly-condemned banking system does
not exist. Not to mention Amsterdam or Hamburg, the currency of France
differs as little from a purely metallic currency as that of any
civilized country can well do in this industrial era. France has no
country banks of issue, no notes below twenty pounds (a large sum
measured by the standard of French incomes), and nobody has ever imputed
to the single issuing body which exists in France, any depreciating
action on the currency. Even the custom of making payments by cheques is
not yet generally adopted. Metallic money is the common medium of
payment. Yet commercial revulsions are as severe, in proportion to the
amount of mercantile business, in France as in England, and fill quite
as large a space in public discussion and in the meditations of
statesmen and of economists. An evil common to all commercial countries,
in the ratio of the extent of their transactions, cannot depend upon a
cause peculiar to England and the United States. What a currency
actually metallic does not prevent, it is impossible that making the
paper conform exactly to the variations of a metallic currency can cure.

As the notions of persons unacquainted with trade on what constitutes a
commercial crisis are generally rather vague and obscure, we will,
before going further, state as distinctly as possible what are its
principal characteristics.

A commercial crisis is the recoil of prices, after they have been raised
by speculation higher than is warranted by the state of the demand and
of the supply. Speculation is almost always set in motion by something
which affords apparent grounds for expecting either an extra demand or a
deficient supply. But the anticipation may, in the first place, be
erroneous; in the second, however rational it may be, the speculation
(especially where the prospect of gain is considerable) is very likely
to be overdone, each speculator conducting his operations as if he alone
knew the circumstances on which the hope of profit is grounded. The rise
consequent upon the speculative purchases attracts new speculators,
insomuch that, paradoxical as it may appear, the largest purchases are
often made at the highest price. But at last it is discovered that the
rise has gone beyond the permanent cause for it, and purchases cease, or
the holders think it is time to realise their gains. Then the recoil
comes; and the price falls to a lower point than that from which it had
risen, because the high price has both checked the demand, and, by
stimulating production or importation, called forth a larger supply.
Besides, many of those who during the high price have contracted
engagements, which they trusted to a further rise for giving them the
means of fulfilling, are unable to hold on until the crisis is past, but
must sell at any sacrifice.

Edition: current; Page: [349]
When this series of effects is confined to some one article of commerce,
individuals may be ruined, but the mercantile world generally is not
disturbed. When, however, as in 1825 and at several other periods in the
present century, the opening of new markets, or some expected deficiency
of supply extending to various important articles, has set speculation
at work in several great departments at once, the spirit is apt to
become general, and other commodities rise in price without any
reasonable cause whatever. In such cases, the ultimate revulsion is most
extensive and calamitous.

As long as the seasons vary, as markets fluctuate, and men miscalculate,
or the passion of gain (as in gamblers) over-rides their calculations,
so long will these alterations of ebb and flow, these “cycles,” as
Colonel Torrens calls them, “of excitement and depression,”[*] continue.
They are worse in America than in England, because American commerce is
conducted in a more gambling spirit; they are worse at Liverpool than in
London, for the same reason. But whatever aggravates the natural
fluctuations of the markets, or creates fluctuations when they would not
otherwise exist, increases both the frequency and the destructiveness of
such convulsions. This the corn laws do; and it is one of their
principal evils. This it is also affirmed that the currency, as at
present regulated, does; and the merit claimed for the system now to be
introduced is, that this artificial cause of fluctuation will be cut
off.

It is here that Mr. Tooke and the authors of the new scheme are
irreconcilably at variance. He denies in toto the evils imputed to the
existing system.

The imputations are—First: That the banks, by arbitrary extension of
their issues, raise prices; and thus create fluctuation, and
speculation, and ultimate revulsions, where such would not otherwise
exist.

Secondly: That when speculations have commenced from causes unconnected
with the banks, they, by extending their issues, concurrently with the
rise of prices, prevent the rise from being checked in an early stage.
And when the rise of prices, by its operation on the exports and
imports, has caused an efflux of gold, they hasten to stop it by a
contraction of the currency equal to or beyond the previous expansion;
which contraction being effected by a forced operation upon the loan
market, aggravates the difficulties of persons already distressed.

Mr. Tooke disputes both these assertions.

He denies that an extension of issues can be arbitrarily made by the
banks; or that, if made, it has any necessary tendency to raise prices.

He denies that, when prices are rising, the extension of issues, which
frequently takes place simultaneously, retards the action of the causes
which tend to check the rise; or that by preventing such increase of
issues, Edition: current; Page: [350] improvident speculation would be
earlier arrested, and the consequent calamities confined within a
narrower range.[*]

It is at once seen that this controversy involves a very important
question in the theory of currency; one, indeed, which has not, to our
knowledge, been subjected to thorough examination or put precisely in
issue before. This question is—With what limitations, if any, the
proposition is true that an increase in the quantity of the currency
raises prices?

That it is true in some sense and in some circumstances, no one thinks
of disputing; but that it is a universal principle, and true without any
limitation, may perhaps have been too easily taken for granted.

If—to adopt an illustration sometimes used—every person in England were
to awake one morning with a sovereign in his pocket, no one could doubt
that the rise of prices would be immediate. All or most would hasten to
expend their sovereign, either for pleasure or profit; and as there
would be no more commodities to be distributed than before, each would
bear a higher price.

On the other hand, suppose that a foreigner lands in England, bringing
with him five thousand pounds in gold. This additional purchasing power,
being brought into the market, would raise prices, but at first only the
prices of those commodities which it was employed in purchasing. It
might happen not to be employed in purchasing anything, and then it
would not raise prices at all. We scarcely think that any one would
contest the possibility, at least, of the case described by Mr. Tooke in
the following passage. We quote from his “History of Prices,” because
the statement of the same principle in his pamphlet is somewhat more
imperfect, and gives an advantage to Colonel Torrens to which we do not
think that the merits of the case entitle him:—

That an additional issue by the Bank of a million or of five millions on
securities, would, cæteris paribus, reduce the market rate of interest,
may be granted; but it is not self-evident, or consistent with
experience, that prices of commodities would therefore necessarily rise.
The persons who obtained such an increased price for their securities as
induced them to sell, would doubtless, upon receiving the money, seek
some other investment for it. There might not be, nor would it be likely
that there should be, anything in the state of supply and demand in the
markets for commodities to induce persons not habitually in them nor so
disposed, to speculate in goods; while the probability is, and such has
been the course of experience, that, as by the supposition the market
rate of interest in this country would, by such an operation of the
Bank, be depressed below its ordinary rate relatively to other
countries, there would be every inducement to the individuals who thus
had their capitals disengaged to seek investment in securities abroad,
whether public or private. As there would not, by the operation of the
Bank, be necessarily any additional inducement Edition: current; Page:
[351] to export commodities, the capital to be transmitted abroad for
such investments would be remitted in bullion. The effect, therefore, of
the issue of the million or five millions of bank notes by the Bank,
might merely be their return upon the Bank for bullion to be exported.
This was, in point of fact, the process in 1834, when the Bank increased
its securities by between three and four millions, and reduced its
treasure by the same amount; while the markets for commodities, although
the rate of interest was low, and the facility of credit complete, were
in the most quiescent state possible, and the corn markets falling.
(History of Prices, vol. iii, pp. 273-4.)

Or suppose another case, of frequent occurrence. A country bank issues
an extra amount of notes in advances to farmers, to enable them to hold
their corn, in hopes of getting a higher price. With the notes received
from the bank the farmer pays his rent, and withholds the corn by the
sale of which he would otherwise have paid it. But, for every farmer who
has not sold his corn, there is a miller or corn dealer somewhere who
has not bought it. The notes which this miller or corn dealer was
prepared to pay, he now puts into deposit, or repays to the banker from
whom they had been borrowed. By as much as the one is enabled to
postpone his sale, by so much does the other his purchase. There may
have been not a pound more expended in consequence of the transaction,
nor any action on prices, except to render more gradual the rise which
was taking place from other causes in the price of corn.

If the declaration of innumerable witnesses merits any confidence, the
modus operandi of country issues must very often be of this sort. The
country bankers unanimously disclaim any arbitrary power over their
issues, and declare that in certain states of the markets they cannot
extend their circulation; if they attempt it, the increase comes back to
them, either in deposits or by being presented for payment. They are, it
may be said, interested witnesses. But they must mean something by this
assertion. It cannot be a mere falsehood. It is confirmed, too, by many
persons of the greatest experience, who have no interest in banks of
issue,—Mr. Samuel Gurney, for example, and the late Mr. Rothschild.[*]
There must be some fact at the bottom of what is asserted. It may be a
fact partially stated or misunderstood, and they may be entirely wrong
in their explanation of it. But a fact of some sort there must be. We
have not seen, on the other side of the question, any attempt to clear
up the difficulty, or show the origin of the supposed mistake. We have
met with nothing except a flat denial.

For our own part, we see no incredibility in the assertion of the
bankers. We believe it to be in the main correct. It appears to us
perfectly consistent with the theory of the subject.

Edition: current; Page: [352]
The notion that every increase in the amount of the circulating medium
must raise prices, proceeds, as it seems to us, upon the erroneous
supposition, that an increase of money must be an increase of purchasing
power.

The purchasing power which determines prices is of two kinds,—ultimate
purchasing power, which determines permanent prices; and the portion of
that power which is in actual exercise at a given time; this determines
the fluctuations of prices.

The ultimate purchasing power of the community is, in the words of Mr.
Tooke, “the quantity of money constituting the revenues of the different
orders of the state, under the head of rents, profits, salaries, and
wages.”[*] We think he should rather have said their “gross incomes,” to
include that portion of their receipts which is employed in replacing
material, and in renewing machinery and buildings as they wear out. The
whole of these incomes is destined to be, and is, expended in purchases,
either for personal consumption or for reproduction. The aggregate of
money incomes, compared with the whole annual produce of the country,
determines general prices, as between the dealer and the consumer. If
you add to the currency in a way which increases the aggregate of
incomes, you raise prices; but this condition can be satisfied by
nothing short of a permanent increase* of the quantity of money in the
country; either from an influx of the metals, caused by a diminution in
the cost at which they can be produced and imported, or from increased
issue of an inconvertible paper currency. We say inconvertible, because
it is admitted that of that alone could any increase have the character
of permanence.†

But though an extension of issues may not increase the aggregate money
incomes of the community, nor raise general prices between dealer and
consumer, upon which prices all dealers depend for their ultimate
returns, and on the anticipation of which they necessarily ground all
their transactions with one another; some may suppose that it must
increase the money Edition: current; Page: [353] demand for commodities
at the particular moment; because the person who obtains the bank notes
does so for the purpose of using them, and may be supposed to bring them
immediately into the market and make purchases to their full extent.

This opinion seems to us to rest upon a great misconception of what
constitutes the money demand for a commodity.

It seems to be thought by many people that the purchase of commodities
implies the direct transfer of so much money from hand to hand in return
for so much produce; and that the limit to the possible demand for a
commodity at any moment, is the quantity of money then and there waiting
to be exchanged for it.* With this mode of thinking it is no wonder that
any one should suppose that whenever you add to the money at that place
physically present, you add as much to the demand, and consequently to
the price. But this is a very inadequate notion indeed of what
constitutes purchasing power.

The purchasing power of an individual at any moment is not measured by
the money actually in his pocket, whether we mean by money the metals,
or include bank notes. It consists, first, of the money in his
possession; secondly, of the money at his banker’s, and all other money
due to him and payable on demand; thirdly, of whatever credit he happens
to possess. To the full measure of this three-fold amount he has the
power of purchase. How much he will employ of this power, depends upon
his necessities, or, in the present case, upon his expectations of
profit. Whatever portion of it he does employ, constitutes his demand
for commodities, and determines the extent to which he will act upon
price.

Now, of these three elements of money demand, the first alone is
grounded upon a corresponding amount of money actually in esse. The
second, or the deposit at his banker’s, is in part grounded upon actual
money, namely, to the extent of about one-third, that being the
proportion Edition: current; Page: [354] which prudent bankers profess
to keep in their coffers to meet the drafts of their depositors. The
third element of money demand, namely credit, has no basis of actually
existing money at all. It is an additional money demand, created over
and above that which is constituted by all the money in actual
circulation. But it is exactly as operative upon prices as the money
itself, provided the possessor chooses to make use of the purchasing
power which it confers. This explains why periods of general confidence,
when large prospects of gain seem to be opening themselves, and when
there is a disposition among dealers to employ not only all their money
but all or much of their credit in enlarging their operations, are
attended with so great a rise of general prices. The effect is sometimes
ascribed to the bills of exchange and other transferable paper which
these transactions generate, and which are said to perform the functions
of currency. Those who use this language mistake the effect for the
cause. Bills of exchange are mere evidences of credit. The credit itself
is the operating cause. It is manifest that when buyers are willing to
employ their credit as well as their money in making purchases, their
demand for commodities becomes so much greater, and prices must rise.
They would rise if no such thing as a transferable acknowledgment of
debt had ever been known in the country.

We may observe, parenthetically, that these considerations remove the
puzzle which has been made of whether deposits, and cheques, and bills
of exchange, are to be considered as money. With those who think that
money alone confers power of purchase, these questions are very
pertinent. When they ask whether deposits, or whether anything else, is
money, they mean, does it operate on money prices? If it does, they
think it a necessary consequence that it should be called money. But
when once it is clearly seen that credit, so far as employed in the
purchase of commodities, operates upon prices in exactly the same degree
as money, the question what forms of credit should be called money,
becomes extremely unimportant. It would probably be best that no form
whatever should be so called.

If the views now stated be sound, it seems not easy to understand how an
increased creation of the written evidences of credit called bank notes,
can, of itself, create an additional demand, or occasion a rise of
price. Admitting bank notes to be money (which is, in truth, a mere
question of language), what does the person do who issues them, but take
so much from the third element of purchasing power, namely credit, and
add it to the first element, money in hand—making no addition whatever
to the total amount? More properly, he merely converts so much credit
from an unwritten into a written, and from a cumbrous into a convenient,
form. Bank notes are to credit precisely what coin is to bullion; the
same thing, Edition: current; Page: [355] merely rendered portable and
minutely divisible. We cannot perceive that they add anything, either to
the aggregate of purchasing power, or to the portion of that power in
actual exercise. The person to whom the notes are advanced is proved by
that very fact to have credit, and his requiring the advance proves that
to that extent he intends to use his credit in making purchases. Is it
supposed that having credit, and intending to buy goods by means of it,
he will be disabled from doing so because a banker is prohibited from
one particular mode of giving him credit?*

It must be conceded, and Mr. Tooke does fully concede,[*] that if
bankers, urged by competition or caught by the contagious confidence of
speculative times, make advances to persons who otherwise have not
credit and cannot give good security, in that case the foregoing
arguments do not apply. To that extent they do create a new purchasing
power, a new demand, and, as its consequence, a rise of price. The
American banks did raise prices by reckless advances; by lending money
to persons who could not repay them. No one is more aware of this than
Mr. Tooke. It is not, however, by their notes, as such, that banks thus
misconduct themselves. Imprudent advances of their deposits, or of their
private capital, or imprudent indorsement and guarantee of the
engagements of their customers, have precisely the same effect. All
extension of credit, legitimate or illegitimate, tends, in proportion as
it is made use of, to a rise of price. And all contraction of credit
produces an equivalent collapse.

That bank notes, as such, have any peculiar power on prices, we see no
reason whatever to believe: and we hold with Mr. Tooke, that when they
are increased, their increase is a consequence of a rise of prices, not
a cause.[†] It is a known fact that the country issues almost invariably
increase when the prices of agricultural produce are rising. The reason
is, that the buyers, having larger payments to make, apply for more
notes to make them with, it being the custom in the provision and cattle
markets not to buy on credit, but to pay immediately in bank notes. A
rise of other prices does not necessarily lead to increased issues;
because, in almost all other transactions between dealers, bank notes
are already superseded by cheques, or book credits; and these would soon
be introduced into the markets for agricultural produce, if the
obtaining bank notes were rendered difficult. Even the small quantity of
bank notes which are employed at the clearing house or elsewhere, to
effect the ultimate liquidation of these cheques and credits by the
payment of balances, might, as Mr. Tooke remarks,[‡] have their place
supplied by exchequer bills (as in Scotland), or by drafts on the Bank
of England.

Whether the credit which necessarily exists in a commercial country
Edition: current; Page: [356] assumes the form of bank notes or no, is,
in short, a mere matter of convenience. In whatever form or vesture the
credit is given, its influence on price is the same. He who has credit,
and desires to employ it in purchases, will find the means of doing so
without bank notes, and will act upon prices accordingly; while if he
does not think the time favourable for making purchases, even having the
notes in his possession will not induce him to do it; he will either
keep them by him until they are wanted, or they will go into deposit.

It appears, then, that any increase of issues which is likely to take
place under the present system of convertibility, is in itself quite
inoperative to raise prices,* and cannot, therefore, be an exciting
cause of commercial revulsions; but that a spirit of speculation, or an
undue extension of credit, does raise prices, and raises them equally
whether bank notes are generated by it or not; and that by preventing
the increase of bank notes during such periods, nothing would be done to
check the rise, since it is not bank notes which, as it is sometimes
expressed, sustain prices, but the state of credit generally. No mode of
regulating bank notes would either arrest the rise, or moderate the
subsequent revulsion, which is always proportional.

There is, however, one way in which the present administration of the
currency does heighten the evils of a commercial revulsion. The rise of
prices in periods of exaggerated confidence checks exportation and
greatly increases importation. A balance has to be paid in gold, and
this is demanded from the Bank. To stop the drain, it hastily contracts
its issues, that is, it sells securities and diminishes its loans, thus
aggravating, in a period of difficulty, the already existing pressure
upon the loan market; and this, it is urged, will be prevented by the
ministerial measure, since the bank will not be permitted to contract
its issues, except by not re-issuing the notes which have been returned
to it for payment. But, as Mr. Tooke remarks,[*] to attain this object
it is only necessary that the bank should habitually hold so large a
reserve of bullion as will admit of allowing any probable drain to
proceed until it has reached its limits. Whatever amount of reserve is
needed for this purpose will be equally necessary on the plan of Sir
Robert Peel, since the bullion, against which all notes beyond the fixed
amount of securities are to be issued, must be sufficient to meet the
Edition: current; Page: [357] greatest drain which can ever be supposed
to occur. We shall see presently that, in reality, the amount of reserve
which would suffice on Mr. Tooke’s plan will not be sufficient on Sir
Robert Peel’s.

We think, then—although with unfeigned diffidence, considering the high
authorities by which we are opposed—that the reasons urged in
recommendation of the contemplated changes, and in proof of the theory
on which they rest, are all untenable, and that the system about to be
adopted is in no way preferable to the present system, if improved as
Mr. Tooke proposes, by making it imperative on the Bank to keep a larger
reserve of bullion. But though not preferable, whether it is in any way
inferior is another consideration. That question must be determined, not
by its effects on price, for these we believe to be null, but by its
operation upon the rate of interest, for that is real. Fluctuations of
price do not, we believe, depend upon bank issues; but the operations of
banks, as of other money-lenders, of course act upon the loan market, or
as it is improperly called, the money market; in other words, upon the
rate of interest, and what is almost synonymous, the prices of
securities.

Mr. Tooke does not share the common opinion, that increased issues, by
lowering the rate of interest, operate as a stimulus to speculation. He
thinks it a vulgar error

That a facility of borrowing at a low rate of interest, not only confers
the power of purchasing, but affords the inducement, applies the
stimulus to speculation in commodities. If by facility of borrowing be
meant a laxity of regard to security for repayment on the part of the
lender, there is every probability that money so borrowed will be
hazardously, if not recklessly employed; and whether in the purchase of
shares, or of foreign securities, or of merchandize, or in any other
mode of adventure or enterprise, or in mere personal expenditure, is a
matter of chance, depending on the disposition and views of the
borrower. Such borrowers are not stimulated to purchase commodities
speculatively, merely because they can borrow on low terms; they are but
too happy if they can borrow at all. But to suppose that persons
entitled to credit are likely to be induced—stimulated is the favourite
term—by the mere circumstance of a low rate of interest, to enter into
speculations in commodities (using the term speculation in its obnoxious
sense), argues a want of knowledge of the motives which lead to such
speculations. These are seldom, if ever, entered into with borrowed
capital, except with a view to so great an advance of price, and to be
realized within so moderate a space of time, as to render the rate of
interest or discount a matter of comparatively trifling consideration.
(Pp. 81-2.)

The truth is, that the power of purchase by persons having capital and
credit is much beyond anything that those who are unacquainted
practically with speculative markets have any idea of. (P. 79.)

A person having the reputation of capital enough for his regular
business, and enjoying good credit in his trade, if he takes a sanguine
view of the prospect of a rise of price of the article in which he
deals, and is favoured by Edition: current; Page: [358] circumstances in
the outset and progress of his speculation, may effect purchases to an
extent perfectly enormous, compared with his capital.* (P. 136.)

But why should this purchasing power be directed to the purchase of
commodities, if there was nothing in the state of supply relatively to
the rate of consumption, to afford the prospect of gain on the necessary
eventual resale? The error is in supposing the disposition or will to be
co-extensive with the power. The limit to the motive for the exercise of
the power is in the prospect of resale with a profit. (P. 79.)

But although the issues of banks may not have the effect imputed to
them, of stimulating speculation by lowering the rate of interest, there
is no doubt that the mode of issuing and the mode of recalling them may
and does produce fluctuations in the loan market.

Fluctuation is an evil in the interest of loans, as well as in the
prices of commodities; and that is the best banking system (solvency and
convertibility being first provided for) under which there is least
liability to such fluctuations.

Edition: current; Page: [359]
In this respect it is Mr. Tooke’s opinion that the system about to be
introduced is decidedly inferior to the old:—

That a total separation of the business of issue from that of banking is
calculated to produce greater and more abrupt transitions in the rate of
interest, and in the state of credit, than the present system of union
of the departments. (P. 124.)

The ground of this opinion deserves attention.

It is a fact, attested by experience, that a drain of gold upon the Bank
for exportation takes place in most cases mainly by drawing out
deposits. As, in the proposed system, there is nothing to cause any
change in this respect, we must suppose that this would still be the
case, and that the demand for gold would be first felt by the deposit
department.

Now, under the present arrangements, in case of a run upon the deposits,
the Bank has to rely, not only on the portion of reserve which it
retains, like other bankers, against the deposits themselves, but also
on the gold in reserve on account of its notes. Until all the gold in
the possession of the Bank is exhausted, it is in no danger of stopping
payment. But under the proposed system the department of deposit must
rest upon its own resources. The reserve in the deposit department could
derive no aid from the issue department, while it would have to bear the
first brunt of the whole action intended to be exercised through it upon
the latter. As it would be prohibited from meeting this demand by
creating more notes, or even by having the notes which it paid out, and
which then went to the Edition: current; Page: [360] issue department
for gold, returned to it; either the reserve of the deposit department
alone will require to be as great as is now requisite for the deposits
and issues together, or it will be obliged to suspend its discounts and
sell its securities much earlier and more abruptly than is necessary
under the present mixed system. If the demand for gold were to the
extent of three or four millions, no “merchant, banker, or money
dealer,” says Mr. Tooke,

Could for a moment have a doubt as to the extremity of pressure which it
would cause. I am most intimately persuaded that it would be within the
mark to suppose that a rate of discount (assuming that the doors of the
Bank and the ears of the directors were irrevocably closed against all
applications) of twenty per cent. and upwards, would in many cases be
submitted to, and sacrifices of goods, if any large proportion were held
on credit, would be made at a still greater loss. And after all, it
might be a question whether even this effort of the Bank on its
securities would be effectual in restoring its reserve in sufficient
time to meet the exigency.

While the circulating department was still abundantly provided with
gold, the deposit department might have no alternative but to stop
payment.

And all this inconvenience may have been purely gratuitous, as a
sacrifice to the currency principle; because the utmost demand for gold
might have been satisfied by an export of 3,000,000l. or 4,000,000l.,
which, under a system of issuing and banking, would have been attended,
as in the instances of 1828-29, and 1831-32, with no inconvenience
whatever. (Pp. 109-10, 111.)

Indeed, if the purpose for which the new arrangements are intended is to
be carried out, the deposit department must in any case begin selling
its securities the moment a drain upon it commences; because if it does
not, the notes which will be returned to the issue department in
exchange for gold will not have been taken from those in circulation
among the public, but from the reserve in the deposit department; and
the cherished object of making the currency vary in quantity exactly as
would be the case with a metallic currency will not be effected.

We have now stated partly, in the words of Mr. Tooke, partly and more
often in our own, the grounds on which, in common with him, we have
adopted the following conclusions:—

That the proposed changes in the mode of regulating the currency will be
attended with none of the advantages predicted; that, so far as intended
to guard against the danger of over-issue, they are precautions against
a chimerical evil; that the real evil of commercial vicissitudes, of
“cycles of excitement and depression,”[*] is not touched by them, nor by
any regulations which can be adopted for bank notes or other mere
instruments of credit; and that in what Mr. Tooke justly calls (next to
solvency and Edition: current; Page: [361] convertibility) “the main
difference between one banking system and another,” namely, “the greater
or less liability to abrupt changes in the rate of interest and in the
state of commercial credit,”[*] the present arrangements, under the
condition of a larger bank reserve, have a decided advantage over the
new system.

We have left ourselves little room for any observations on Colonel
Torrens’s reply to Mr. Tooke.

Colonel Torrens is one of the first living economists, and, as he says
of Mr. Tooke, “can afford to lose some reputation by his present
publication,”[†] though we do not think that such a result is to be
apprehended. In clearness and precision of statement, and in that
closeness of discussion which is a great part both of argumentative
power and of dialectical dexterity, Colonel Torrens has never more
distinguished himself. Not a single exposed point in his adversary
escapes him; and on some minor questions we think he has successfully
answered Mr. Tooke. That we cannot entertain a similar opinion of his
main argument, we have sufficiently shown: and the grounds of our
difference have been so fully explained as to dispense, we hope, with
any detailed controversy.

Edition: current; Page: [362] Edition: current; Page: [363]


THE CLAIMS OF LABOUR
 1845

Edition: current; Page: [364]


EDITOR’S NOTE

D&D, II (1867), 181-217. Headed: “The Claims of Labour”; with a footnote
identifying the first publication, and adding: “Part of a review of the
work by Mr. Helps, entitled ‘The Claims of Labour: an Essay on the
Duties of the Employers to the Employed’ [London: Pickering, 1844].” (In
1859 the reading was “. . . review of a work, entitled ‘The . . .
Employed.’ ”) Reprinted from Edinburgh Review, LXXXI (Apr., 1845),
498-525 (unsigned), where it appeared as Art. VII (with the title of
Help’s work). Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “A review of a book
entitled ‘The Claims of Labour’ (by Arthur Helps Esq.) in the Edinburgh
review for April 1845” (MacMinn, 58).

This article, its subject still fresh in JSM’s mind when he wrote his
Principles (see Book IV, Chaps. vi and vii), was conceived a year before
the commencement of the Principles; on 9 Nov., 1844, he wrote to Macvey
Napier, editor of the Edinburgh:

I have been feeling lately a very great inclination to write something
on the doctrines & projects which are so rife just at present on the
fashionable subject of the “Claims of Labour”—& the little book so
called, would furnish an appropriate text, if you are inclined to the
subject, & would not prefer seeing it in other hands. It appears to me
that along with much of good intention, & something even of sound
doctrine, the speculations now afloat are sadly deficient, on the whole,
in sobriety & wisdom—forgetful, in general, of the lessons of universal
experience, & of some of those fundamental principles which one did
think had been put for ever out of the reach of controversy by Adam
Smith, Malthus, & others. The general tendency is to rivet firmly in the
minds of the labouring people the persuasion that it is the business of
others to take care of their condition, without any self control on
their own part—& that whatever is possessed by other people, more than
they possess, is a wrong to them, or at least a kind of stewardship, of
which an account is to be rendered to them. I am sure you will agree
with me in thinking it very necessary to make a stand against this sort
of spirit while it is at the same time highly necessary as well as
right, to shew sympathy in all that is good of the new tendencies, & to
avoid the hard, abstract mode of treating such questions which has
brought discredit upon political economists & has enabled those who are
in the wrong to claim, & generally to receive, exclusive credit for high
& benevolent feeling.

I do not know of anything so important at the present time as to attempt
to place these subjects in their right position before the public—& it
can nowhere be done so well as in the Edinburgh review—where I hope it
will be done even if it should not suit you that I should do it—although
I know no reason for thinking that the manner in which I should treat
the subject would be unsuitable to you. (Earlier Letters, Collected
Works, XIII, 643-4.)

The following text is collated with that in D&D, II (1st ed.), and that
in the Edinburgh. In the footnoted variants, the 2nd ed. is indicated by
“67”; the 1st by “59”; the Edinburgh by “45”. Two corrections in JSM’s
hand in the Somerville College copy (an off-print paged 1-28, but
otherwise unaltered) are indicated at 387l-l and m-m.

Edition: current; Page: [365]


The Claims of Labour

“persons of a thoughtful mind,” says the introduction to this little
volume, “seeing closely the falsehood, the folly, and the arrogance of
the age in which they live, are apt, occasionally, to have a great
contempt for it; and I doubt not, that many a man looks upon the present
time as one of feebleness and degeneracy. There are, however, signs of
an increased solicitude for the aClaims of Laboura, which of itself is a
thing of the highest promise, and more to be rejoiced over than all the
mechanical triumphs which both those who would magnify, and those who
would depreciate, the present age, would be apt to point to as
containing its especial significance and merit.”[*]

It is true that many are now inquiring, more earnestly than heretofore,
“how the great mass of the people are fed, clothed, and taught—and
whether the improvement in their condition corresponds at all with the
improvement of the condition of the middle and upper classes.” [P. 3.]
And many are of opinion, with the writer from whom we quote, that the
answer which can be given to these questions is an unsatisfactory one.
Nor is the newly-awakened interest in the condition of the labouring
people confined to persons, like this author, of feeling and reflection.
To its claims upon the conscience and philanthropy of the more favoured
classes, to its ever-strengthening demands upon their sense of
self-interest, this cause now adds the more ephemeral attractions of the
last new fashion. The bClaims of Labourb have become the question of the
day: the current of public meetings, subscriptions, and associations,
has for some time set strongly in that direction; and many minor topics
which previously occupied the public mind, have either merged into that
question, or been superseded by it. Even the Legislature, which seldom
concerns itself much with new tendencies of opinion until they have
grown too powerful to be safely overlooked, is invited, in each Session
with increasing urgency, to provide that the labouring classes shall
earn more, work less, or have their lot in Edition: current; Page: [366]
some other manner alleviated; and in each Session yields more or less
cheerfully, but still yields, though slowly yet increasingly, to the
requisition.

That this impulse is salutary and promising, few will deny; but it would
be idle to suppose that it has not its peculiar dangers, or that the
business of doing good can be the only one for which czealc suffices,
without dknowledged or circumspection. A change from wrong to right,
even in little things, is not so easy to make, as to wish for, and to
talk about. Society cannot with safety, in one of its gravest concerns,
pass at once from selfish supineness to restless activity. It has a long
and difficult apprenticeship yet to serve; during which we shall be
often reminded of the dictum of Fontenelle, that mankind only settle
into the right course after passing through and exhausting all the
varieties of error.[*] But however this may be, the movement is not
therefore to be damped or discouraged. If, in the attempt to benefit the
labouring classes, we are destined to see great mistakes committed in
practice, as so many errors are already advocated in theory, let us not
lay the blame upon excess of zeal. The danger is, that epeoplee in
general will care enough for the object, to be willing to sacrifice
other people’s interest to it, but not their own; and that the few who
lead will make the sacrifice of their money, their time, even their
bodily ease, in the cause; but will not do for its sake what to most men
is so much more difficult—undergo the formidable labour of thought.

For several reasons, it will be useful to trace back this philanthropic
movement to its small and unobvious beginnings—to note its
fountain-head, and show what mingled streams have from time to time
swelled its course.

We are inclined to date its origin from an event which would in vulgar
apprehension seem to have a less title to that than fany other
honourable distinction—the appearance of Mr. Malthus’s Essay on
Population. Though the assertion may be looked upon as a paradox, it is
historically true, that only from that time has the economical condition
of the labouring classes been regarded by thoughtful men as susceptible
of permanent improvement. We know that this was not the inference
originally drawn from the truth propounded by Mr. Malthus. Even by
himself, that truth was at first announced as an inexorable law, which,
by perpetuating the poverty and degradation of the mass of mankind, gave
a quietus to the visions of indefinite social improvement which had
agitated so fiercely a neighbouring nation. To these supposed
corollaries from Mr. Malthus’s principle, it was, we believe, indebted
for its early success with the more opulent classes, and for much of its
lasting unpopularity with the poorer. But this view of its Edition:
current; Page: [367] tendencies only continued to prevail while the
theory itself was but imperfectly understood; and now lingers nowhere
but in those dark corners into which no subsequent lights have
penetrated. The first promulgator of a truth is not always the best
judge of its tendencies and consequences; but Mr. Malthus early
abandoned the mistaken inferences he had at first drawn from his
celebrated principle, and adopted the very different views now almost
unanimously professed by those who recognise his doctrine.

So long as the necessary relation between the numbers of the labouring
population and their wages had escaped attention, the poverty, bordering
on destitution, of the great mass of mankind, being an universal fact,
was (by one of those natural illusions from which human reason is still
so incompletely emancipated) conceived to be inevitable;—a provision of
nature, and as some said, an ordinance of God; a part of human destiny,
susceptible merely of partial alleviation in individual cases, from
public or private charity. The only persons by whom any other opinion
seemed to be entertained, were those who prophesied advancements in
physical knowledge and mechanical art, sufficient to alter the
fundamental conditions of man’s existence on earth; or who professed the
doctrine, that poverty is a factitious thing, produced by the tyranny
and rapacity of governments and of the rich. Even so recent a thinker,
and one so much in advance of his predecessors, as Adam Smith, went no
further than to say, that the labourers might be well off in a rapidly
progressive state of the public wealth;[*]—a state which has never yet
comprehended more than a small portion of the earth’s surface at once,
and can nowhere last indefinitely; gbut thatg they must be pinched and
in a condition of hardship in the stationary state, which in a finite
world, composed of matter not changeable in its properties, is the state
towards which things must be at all times tending. The ideas, therefore,
of the most enlightened men, anterior to Mr. Malthus, led really to the
discouraging anticipations for which his doctrine has been made
accountable. But these anticipations vanished, so soon as the truths
brought to light by Mr. Malthus were correctly understood. It was then
seen that the capabilities of increase of the human species, as of
animal nature in general (being far greater than those of subsistence
under any except very unusual circumstances), must be, and are,
controlled, everywhere else, by one of two limiting
principles—starvation, or prudence and conscience: That, under the
operation of this conflict, the reward of ordinary unskilled labour is
always and everywhere (saving temporary variations, and rare
conjunctions of circumstances) at the lowest point to which the
labourers will consent to be reduced—the Edition: current; Page: [368]
point below which they will not choose to propagate their species: That
this hminimumh, though everywhere much too low for human happiness and
dignity, is different in different places, and in different ages of the
world; and, in an improving country, has on the whole a tendency to
rise. These considerations furnished a sufficient iexplanationi of the
state of extreme poverty in which the majority of mankind had almost
everywhere been foundj, without supposing any inherent necessity in the
case—any universal cause, other than the causes which have made human
progress altogether so imperfect and slow as it is. And the explanation
afforded a sure hope, that whatever accelerates that progress would tell
with full effect upon the physical condition of the labouring classes.
Whatever raises the civilization of the people at large—whatever
accustoms them to require a higher standard of subsistence, comfort,
taste, and enjoyment, affords of itself, according to this encouraging
view of human prospects, the means of satisfying the wants which it
engenders. In every moral or intellectual benefit conferred upon the
mass of the people, this doctrine teaches us to see an assurance also of
their physical advantage; a means of enabling them to improve their
worldly circumstances—not in the vulgar way of “rising in the world,” so
often recommended to them—not by endeavouring to escape out of their
class, as if to live by manual labour were a fate only endurable as a
step to something else; but by raising the class itself, in physical
well-being and in self-estimation. These are the prospects which the
vilified population principle has opened to mankind. True, indeed the
doctrine teaches this further lesson, that any attempt to produce the
same result by other means—any scheme of beneficence which trusts for
its moving power to anything but to the influence over the minds and
habits of the people, which it either directly aims at, or may happen
indirectly to promote—might, for any general effect of a beneficial kind
which it can produce, as well be let alone. And, the doctrine being
brought thus into conflict with those plans of easy beneficence which
accord so well with the inclinations of man, but so ill with the
arrangements of nature, we need not wonder that the epithets of
“Malthusians” and “Political Economists” are so often considered
equivalent to hard-hearted, unfeeling, and enemies of the
poor;—accusations so far from being true, that no thinkers, of any
pretensions to sobriety, cherish such hopeful views of the future social
position of labour, or have so long made the permanent increase of its
remuneration the turning-point of their political speculations, as those
who most broadly acknowledge the doctrine of Malthus.

But if the permanent place now occupied in the minds of thinking men by
the question of improving the condition of the labouring classes, may
Edition: current; Page: [369] be dated from the new light cast by
Malthus’s speculations upon the determining laws of that condition,
other causes are needful to account for the popularity of the subject as
one of the topics of the day; and we believe they will be found in the
stir and commotion of the national mind, consequent upon the passing of
the Reform Bill.[*]

It was foretold during the Reform crisis, that when the consequences of
the Bill should have had time to manifest themselves, the direct effects
with which all mouths were filled, would prove unimportant compared with
those indirect effects which were never mentioned in discussion, and
which hardly any one seemed to think of. The prophecy has been signally
verified. Considered as a great constitutional change, both friends and
enemies now seem rather surprised that they should have ascribed so much
efficacy to the Bill, for good or for evil. But its indirect
consequences have surpassed every calculation. The series of events,
commencing with Catholic Emancipation,[†] and consummated by the Reform
Act, brought home for the first time to the existing generation a
practical consciousness of living in a world of change. It gave the
first great shock to old habits. It was to politics what the Reformation
was to religion—it made reason the recognised standard, instead of
authority. By making it evident to the public that they were on a new
sea, it destroyed the force of the instinctive objection to new courses.
Reforms have still to encounter opposition from those whose interests
they affect, or seem to affect; but innovation is no longer under a ban,
merely as innovation. The existing system has lost its prestige; it has
ceased to be the system which Tories had been taught to venerate, and
has not become that which Liberals were accustomed to desire. When any
wide-spread social evil was brought before minds thus prepared, there
was such a chance as there had not been for the last two hundred years,
of its being examined with a real desire to find a remedy, or at least
without a predetermination to leave things alone. That the evils of the
condition of the working classes should be brought before the mind of
the nation in the most emphatic manner, was the care of those classes
themselves. Their “petition of grievances” was embodied in the People’s
Charter.

The democratic movement among the operative classes, commonly known as
Chartism, was the first open separation of interest, feeling, and
opinion, between the labouring portion of the commonwealth and all above
them. It was the revolt of nearly all the active talent, and a great
part of the physical force, of the working classes, against their whole
relation to society. Conscientious and sympathizing minds among the
ruling classes, could not but be strongly impressed by such a protest.
They could not but Edition: current; Page: [370] ask themselves, with
misgiving, what there was to say in reply to it; how the existing social
arrangements could best be justified to those who deemed themselves
aggrieved by them. It seemed highly desirable that the benefits derived
from those arrangements by the poor should be made less
questionable—should be such as could not easily be overlooked. If the
poor had reason for their complaints, the higher classes had not
fulfilled their duties as governors; if they had no reason, neither had
those classes fulfilled their duties in allowing them to grow up so
ignorant and uncultivated as to be open to these mischievous delusions.
While one sort of minds among the more fortunate classes were thus
influenced by the political claims put forth by the operatives, there
was another description upon whom that phenomenon acted in a different
manner, leading, however, to the same result. While some, by the
physical and moral circumstances which they saw around them, were made
to feel that the condition of the labouring classes ought to be attended
to, others were made to see that it would be attended to, whether they
wished to be blind to it or not. The victory of 1832, due to the
manifestation, though without the actual employment, of physical force,
had taught a lesson to those who, from the nature of the case, have
always the physical force on their side; and who only wanted the
organization, which they were rapidly acquiring, to convert their
physical power into a moral and social one. It was no longer disputable
that something must be done to render the multitude more content with
the existing state of things.

Ideas, unless outward circumstances conspire with them, have in general
no very rapid or immediate efficacy in human affairs; and the most
favourable outward circumstances may pass by, or remain inoperative, for
want of ideas suitable to the conjuncture. But when the right
circumstances and the right ideas meet, the effect is seldom slow in
manifesting itself. In the posture of things which has been described,
we attribute considerable effect to certain writers, by whom what many
were either thinking or prepared to think, was for the first time
expressly proclaimed. Among these must be reckoned Mr. Carlyle, whose
“Chartism”[*] and “Past and Present”[†] were openly, what much of his
previous writings had been incidentally, an indignant remonstrance with
the higher classes on their sins of omission against the lower;
contrasted with what he deemed the superior efficiency, in that
relation, of the rulers in older times. On both these points, he has met
with auxiliaries from a directly opposite point of the political
horizon; from those whom a spirit of reaction against the democratic
tendencies of the age, had flung off with the greatest violence in the
direction of feudal and sacerdotal ascendancy. As, in the Stuart times,
there were said to be Edition: current; Page: [371] Church Puritans and
State Puritans, so there are now Church Puseyites, and what may be
called State Puseyites; kmen who look back with fondness to times when
the poor had no notion of any other social state than to give obedience
to the nearest great landholder, and receive protection; and who assert,
in the meantime, the right of the poor to protection, in hopes that the
obedience will follow.

To complete the explanation of this increase of sympathy for the poor,
it ought to be noticed that, until lately, few were adequately aware of
their real condition. The agitation against the Poor-Law,[*] bad as it
was and is, both in its objects and in its effects, had in it this good,
that it incessantly invited attention to the details of distress. The
inquiries emanating from the Poor-Law Commission, and the official
investigations of the last few years, brought to light many facts which
made a great impression upon the public; and the poverty and
wretchedness of great masses of people were incidentally unveiled by the
struggles of parties respecting the Corn-Laws.[†] The Agriculturists
attempted to turn the tables upon their opponents, by highly coloured
pictures of the sufferings and degradation of the Factory loperativesl;
and the League repaid the attack with interest, by sending emissaries
into the rural districts, and publishing the deplorable poverty of the
agricultural labourers.

From these multifarious causes a feeling has been awakened, which would
soon be as influential in elections as the anti-slavery movement some
years ago, and dispose of funds equal to those of the missionary
societies, had it but as definite an object. The stream at present flows
in a multitude of small channels. Societies for the protection of
needlewomen, of governesses—associations to improve the buildings of the
labouring classes, to provide them with baths, with parks and
promenades, have started into existence. Legislative interference to
abridge the hours of labour in mmanufactoriesm has obtained large
minorities, and once a passing majority, in the House of Commons; and
attempts are multiplying to obtain, by the consent of employers, a
similar abridgment in many departments of retail trade. In the rural
districts, every expedient, practicable or not, for giving work to the
unemployed, finds advocates; public meetings for the discussion and
comparison of projects have lately been frequent; and the movement
towards the “allotment system” is becoming general.

If these, and other modes of relieving distress, were looked upon simply
in the light of ordinary charity, they would not fill the large space
they do Edition: current; Page: [372] in public discussion, and would
not demand any special comment. To give money in alms has never been,
either in this country or in most others, a rare virtue. Charitable
institutions, and subscriptions for relief of the destitute, already
abounded: and if new forms of suffering, or classes of sufferers
previously overlooked, were brought into notice, nothing was more
natural than to do for them what had already been done for others.
People usually give alms to gratify their feelings of compassion, or to
discharge what they think their duty by giving of their superfluity to
alleviate the wants of individual sufferers; and beyond this they do
not, nor are they, in general, qualified to look. But it is not in this
spirit that the new schemes of benevolence are conceived. They are
propounded as instalments of a great social reform. They are celebrated
as the beginning of a new moral order, or an old order revived, in which
the possessors of property are to resume their place as the paternal
guardians of those less fortunate; and which, when established, is to
cause peace and union throughout society, and to extinguish, not indeed
poverty—that hardly seems to be thought desirable—but the more abject
forms of vice, destitution, and physical wretchedness. What has hitherto
been done in this brilliant career of improvement, is of very little
importance compared with what is said; with the objects held up to
pursuit, and the theories avowed. These are not now confined to
speculative men and professed philanthropists. They are made familiar to
every reader of newspapers, by sedulous inculcation from day to day.

It is therefore not superfluous to consider whether these theories, and
the expectations built upon them, are rational or chimerical; whether
the attempt to carry them out would in the end be found to accord or
conflict with the nature of man, and of the world in which he is cast.
It would be unfair to the theorists to try them by anything which has
been commenced, or even projected. Were they asked if they expect any
good to the general interest of the labouring people, from a Labourers’
Friend Society, or a Society for Distressed Needlewomen, they would of
course answer that they do not; that these are but the first leaf-buds
of what they hope to nourish into a stately and spreading tree; that
they do not limit their intentions to mitigating the evils of a low
remuneration of labour, but must have a high remuneration; in the words
of the operatives in the late disturbances—“a fair day’s wages for a
fair day’s work;”[*]—that they hope to secure this, and will be
contented with nothing short of it. Here, then, is a ground on which we
can fairly meet them. That object is ours also. The question is of
means, not ends. Let us look a little into the means they propose.

Their theory appears to be, in few words, this—that it is the proper
Edition: current; Page: [373] function of the possessors of wealth, and
especially of the employers of labour and the owners of land, to take
care that the labouring people are well off:—that they ought always to
pay good wages;—that they ought to withdraw their custom, their
patronage, and any other desirable thing at their disposal, from all
employers who will not do the like;—that, at these good wages, they
ought to give employment to as great a number of persons as they can
afford; and to make them work for no greater number of hours in the
twenty-four, than is compatible with comfort, and with leisure for
recreation and improvement. That if they have land or houses to be let
to tenants, they should require and accept no higher rents than can be
paid with comfort; and should be ready to build, at such rents as can be
conveniently paid, warm, airy, healthy, and spacious cottages, for any
number of young couples who may ask for them.

All this is not said in direct terms; but something very little short of
it is. These principles form the standard by which we daily see the
conduct, both of classes and of individuals, measured and condemned; and
if these principles are not true, the new doctrines are without a
meaning. It is allowable to take this picture as a true likeness of the
“new moral world”[*] which the present philanthropic movement aims at
calling into existence.

Mankind are often cautioned by divines and moralists against
unreasonableness in their expectations. We attach greater value to the
more limited warning against inconsistency in them. The state of society
which this picture represents, is a conceivable one. We shall not at
present inquire if it is of all others the most eligible one, even as an
Utopia. We only ask if its promoters are willing to accept this state of
society, together with nits inevitable accompaniments.

It is quite possible to impose, as a moral or a legal obligation, upon
the higher classes, that they shall be answerable for the well-doing and
well-being of the lower. There have been times and places in which this
has in some measure been done. States of society exist, in which it is
the recognised duty of every owner of land, not only to see that all who
dwell and work thereon are fed, clothed, and housed, in a sufficient
manner; but to be, in so full a sense, responsible for their good
conduct, as to indemnify all other persons for any damage they do, or
offence they may commit. This must surely be the ideal state of society
which the new philanthropists are contending for. Who are the happy
labouring classes who enjoy the blessings of these wise ordinances? The
Russian boors. There are other labourers, not merely tillers of the
soil, but workers in great establishments Edition: current; Page: [374]
partaking of the nature of omanufactorieso, for whom the laws of our own
country, even in our own time, compelled their employers to find
wholesome food, and sufficient lodging and clothing. Who were these? The
slaves on a West pIndianp estate. The relation sought to be established
between the landed and manufacturing classes and the labourers, is
therefore by no means unexampled. The former have before now been forced
to maintain the latter, and to provide work for them, or support them in
idleness. But this obligation never has existed, and never will nor can
exist, without, as a countervailing element, absolute power, or
something approaching to it, in those who are bound to afford this
support, over those entitled to receive it. Such a relation has never
existed between human beings, without qimmediateq degradation to the
character of the dependent class. Shall we take another example, in
which things are not carried quite so far as this? There are governments
in Europe who look upon it as part of their duty to take care of the
physical well-being and comfort of the people. The Austrian government,
in its German dominions, does so. Several of the minor German
governments do so. But with paternal care is connected paternal
authority. In these states we find severe restrictions on marriage. No
one is permitted to marry, unless he satisfies the authorities that he
has a rational prospect of being able to support a family.

Thus much, at least, it might have been expected that the apostles of
the new theory would have been prepared for. They cannot mean that the
working classes should combine the liberty of action of independent
citizens, with the immunities of slaves. There are but two modes of
social existence for human beings: they must be left to the natural
consequences of their mistakes in life; or society must guard against
the mistakes, by prevention or punishment. Which will the new
philanthropists have? If it is really to be incumbent on whoever have
more than a mere subsistence, to give, so far as their means enable
them, good wages and comfortable homes to all who present themselves, it
is not surely intended that these should be permitted to follow the
instinct of multiplication at the expense of others, until all are
reduced to the same level as themselves. We should therefore have
expected that the philanthropists would have accepted the condition, and
contended for such a measure of restriction as might prevent the good
they meditate from producing an overbalance of evil. To our surprise, we
find them the great sticklers for the domestic liberty of the poor. The
outcry against the Poor-Law finds among them its principal organs. Far
from being willing that a man should be subject, when out of the
poorhouse, to any restraints other than his own prudence may dictate,
they will not submit to its being imposed upon him while actually
supported at the expense of Edition: current; Page: [375] others. It is
they who talk of Union Bastiles. They cannot bear that even a workhouse
should be a place of regulation and discipline; that any extrinsic
restraint should be applied even there. Their bitterest quarrel with the
present system of relief is, that it enforces the separation of the
sexes.

The higher and middle classes might randr ought to be willing to submit
to a very considerable sacrifice of their own means, for improving the
condition of the existing generation of labourers, if by this they could
hope to provide similar advantages for the generation to come. But why
should they be called upon to make these sacrifices, merely that the
country may contain a greater number of people, in as great poverty and
as great liability to destitution as now? If whoever has too little, is
to come to them to make it more, there is no alternative but
restrictions on marriage, combined with such severe penalties on
illegitimate births, as it would hardly be possible to enforce under a
social system in which all grown persons are, nominally at least, their
own masters. Without these provisions, the millennium promised would, in
little more than a generation, sink the people of any country in Europe
to one level of poverty. If, then, it is intended that the law, or the
spersonss of property, should assume a control over the multiplication
of the people, tell us so plainly, and inform us how you propose to do
it. But it will doubtless be said, that nothing of this sort would be
endurable; that such things are not to be dreamt of in the state of
English society and opinion; that the spirit of equality, and the love
of individual independence, have so pervaded even the poorest class,
that they would not take plenty to eat and drink, at the price of having
their most personal concerns regulated for them by others. If this be
so, all schemes for withdrawing wages from the control of supply and
demand, or raising the people by other means than by such changes in
their minds and habits as shall make them fit guardians of their own
physical condition, are schemes for combining incompatibilities. They
ought ton proper conditionst to be shielded, we hope they already are
so, by public or private charity, from actual want of mere necessaries,
and from any other extreme of bodily suffering. But if the whole income
of the country were divided among them in wages or poor-rates, still,
until there is a change in themselves, there can be no lasting
improvement in their outward condition.

And how is this change to be effected, while we continue inculcating
upon them that their wages are to be regulated for them, and that to
keep wages high is other people’s business and not theirs? All classes
are ready enough, without prompting, to believe that whatever ails them
is not their fault, but the crime of somebody else; and that they are
granting an indemnity to the crime if they attempt to get rid of the
evil by any effort or sacrifice Edition: current; Page: [376] of their
own. The National Assembly of France has been much blamed for talking in
a rhetorical style about the rights of man, and neglecting to say
anything about the duties. The same error is now in the course of being
repeated with respect to the rights of poverty. It would surely be no
derogation from any one’s philanthropy to consider, that it is one thing
to tell the rich that they ought to take care of the poor, and another
thing to tell the poor that the rich ought to take care of them; and
that it is rather idle in these days to suppose that a thing will not be
overheard by the poor, because it is not designed for their ears. It is
most true that the rich have much to answer for in their conduct to the
poor. But in the matter of their poverty, there is no way in which the
rich could have helped them, but by inducing them to help themselves;
and if, while we stimulate the rich to repair this omission, we do all
that depends on us to inculcate upon the poor that they need not attend
to the lesson, we must be little aware of the sort of feelings and
doctrines with which the minds of the poor are already filled. If we go
on in this course, we may succeed in bursting society asunder by a
Socialist revolution; but the poor, and their poverty, we shall leave
worse than we found them.

The first remedy, then, is to abstain from directly counteracting our
own end. The second, and most obvious, is Education. And this indeed is
not the principal, but the sole remedy, if understood in its widest
sense. Whatever acts upon the minds of the labouring classes, is
properly their education. But their minds, like those of other people,
are acted upon by the whole of their social circumstances; and often the
part of their education which is least efficacious as such, is that
which goes by the name.

Yet even in that comparatively narrow sense, too much stress can hardly
be laid upon its importance. We have scarcely seen more than the small
beginnings of what might be effected for the country even by mere
schooling. The religious rivalries, which are the unhappy price the
course of our history has compelled us to pay for such religious liberty
as we possess, have as yet thwarted every attempt to make this benefit
universal. But if the children of different religious bodies cannot be
instructed together, each can be instructed apart. And if we may judge
from the zeal manifested, and the sums raised, both by the Church and by
Dissenters, since the abandonment of the Government measure two years
ago, there is no deficiency of pecuniary means for the support of
schools, even without the aid which the State certainly will not refuse.
Unfortunately there is something wanting which pecuniary means will not
supply. There is a lack of sincere desire to attain the end. There have
been schools enough in England, these thirty years, to have regenerated
the people, if, wherever the means were found, the end had been desired.
But it is not always where there are schools that there is a wish to
educate. There may be a wish Edition: current; Page: [377] that children
should learn to read the Bible, and, in the Church Schools, to repeat
the Catechism. In most cases, there is little desire that they should be
taught more; in many, a decided objection to it. Schoolmasters, like
other public officers, are seldom inclined to do more than is exacted
from them; but we believe that teaching the poor is almost the only
public duty in which the payers are more a check than a stimulant to the
zeal of their own agents. A teacher whose heart is in the work, and who
attempts any enlargement of the instruction, often finds his greatest
obstacle in the fears of the patrons and managers lest the poor should
be “over-educated;” and is driven to the most absolute evasions to
obtain leave to teach the common rudiments of knowledge. The four rules
of arithmetic are often only tolerated through ridiculous questions
about Jacob’s lambs, or the number of the Apostles or uofu the
Patriarchs; and geography can only be taught through maps of Palestine,
to children who have yet to learn that the earth consists of Europe,
Asia, Africa, and America. A person must be beyond being argued with,
who believes that this is the way to teach religion, or that a child
will be made to understand the Bible by being taught to understand
nothing else. We forbear to comment on the instances in which Church
Schools have been opened, solely that through the influence of superiors
the children might be drawn away from a Dissenting School already
existing; and, as soon as that was shut up, the rival establishment,
having attained its end, has been allowed to fall into disuse.

This spirit could never be tolerated by any person of honest intentions,
who knew the value of even the commonest knowledge to the poor. We know
not how the case may be in other countries, among a more quick-witted
people; but in England, it would hardly be believed to what a degree all
that is morally objectionable in the lowest class of the working people
is nourished, if not engendered, by the low state of their
understandings. Their infantine credulity to what they hear, when it is
from their own class; their incapacity to observe what is before their
eyes; their inability to comprehend or believe purposes in others which
they have not been taught to expect, and are not conscious of in
themselves—are the known characteristics of persons of low intellectual
faculties in all classes. But what would not be equally credible without
experience, is an amount of deficiency in the power of reasoning and
calculation, which makes them insensible to their own direct personal
interests. Few have considered how any one who could instil into these
people the commonest worldly wisdom—who could render them capable of
even selfish prudential calculations—would improve their conduct in
every relation of life, and clear the soil for the growth of right
feelings and worthy propensities.

To know what schools may do, we have but to think of what vthev Edition:
current; Page: [378] Scottish Parochial Schools have formerly done. The
progress of wealth and population has outgrown the machinery of these
schools, and, in the towns especially, they no longer produce their full
fruits: but what do not the peasantry of Scotland owe to wthem!w For two
centuries, the Scottish peasant, compared with the same class in other
situations, has been a reflecting, an observing, and therefore naturally
a self-governing, a moral, and a successful human being—because he has
been a reading and a discussing one; and this he owes, above all other
causes, to the parish schools. What during the same period have the
English peasantry been?

Let us be assured that too much opportunity cannot be given to the poor
of exercising their faculties, nor too great a variety of ideas placed
within their reach. We hail, therefore, the cheap Libraries, which are
supplying even the poorest with matter more or less instructive, and,
what is of equal importance, calculated to interest their minds. But it
is not only, or even principally, books and book learning, that
constitutes education for the working or for any other class. Schools
for reading are but imperfect things, unless systematically united with
schools of industry; not to improve them as workmen merely, but as human
beings. It is by action that the faculties are called forth, more than
by words—more at least than by words unaccompanied by action. We want
schools in which the children of the poor should learn to use not only
their hands, but their minds, for the guidance of their hands; in which
they should be trained to the actual adaptation of means to ends; should
become familiar with the accomplishment of the same object by various
processes, and be made to apprehend with their intellects in what
consists the difference between the right way of performing industrial
operations and the wrong. Meanwhile they would acquire, not only manual
dexterity, but habits of order and regularity, of the utmost use in
after-life, and which have more to do with the formation of character
than many persons are aware of. xSuch things would do much more than is
usually believed towards converting these neglected creatures into
rational beings—beings capable of foresight, accessible to reasons and
motives addressed to their understanding; and therefore not governed by
the utterly senseless modes of feeling and action, which so much
astonish educated and observing persons ywheny brought into contact with
them.

But when education, in this its narrow sense, has done its best, and
even to enable it to do its best, an education of another sort is
required, such as schools cannot give. What is taught to a child at
school will be of little Edition: current; Page: [379] effect, if the
circumstances which surround the grown man or woman contradict the
lesson. zWez may cultivate his understanding, but what if he cannot
employ it without becoming discontented with his position, and
disaffected to the whole order of things in which he is cast? Society
educates the poor, for good or for ill, by its conduct to them, even
more than by direct teaching. A sense of this truth is the most valuable
feature in the new philanthropic agitation; and the recognition of it is
important, whatever mistakes may be at first made in practically
applying it.

In the work before us, and in the best of the other writings which have
appeared lately on the philanthropic side of the subject, a strong
conviction is expressed, that there can be no healthful state of
society, and no social or even physical welfare for the poor, where
there is no relation between them and the rich except the payment of
wages, and (we may add) the receipt of charity; no sense of co-operation
and common interest between those natural associates who are now called
the employers and the employed. In part of this we agree, though we
think the case not a little overstated. A well-educated labouring class
could, and we believe would, keep up its condition to a high standard of
comfort, or at least at a great distance from physical destitution, by
the exercise of the same degree of habitual prudence now commonly
practised by the middle class; among whom the responsibilities of a
family are rarely incurred without some prospect of being able to
maintain it with the customary decencies of their station. We believe,
too, that if this were the case, the poor could do very well without
those incessant attentions on the part of the rich, which constitute the
the new whole duty of man to his poorer neighbour. Seeing no necessary
reason why the poor should be hopelessly dependent, we do not look upon
them as permanent subjects for the exercise of those peculiar virtues
which are essentially intended to mitigate the humiliation and misery of
dependence. But the need of greater fellow-feeling and community of
interest between the mass of the people and those who are by courtesy
considered to guide and govern them, does not require the aid of
exaggeration. We yield to no one in our wish that “cash payment” should
be no longer “the universal nexus between man and man;”[*] that the
employers and employed should have the feelings of friendly allies, not
of hostile rivals whose gain is each other’s loss. But while we agree,
so far, with the new doctrines, it seems to us that some of those who
preach them are looking in the wrong quarter for what they seek. The
social relations of former times, and those of the present, not only are
not, but cannot possibly be, the same. The essential requirements of
human nature may be alike in all Edition: current; Page: [380] ages, but
each age has its own appropriate means of satisfying them. Feudality, in
whatever manner we may conceive it modified, is not the type on which
institutions or habits can now be moulded. The age that produces
railroads which, for a few shillings, will convey a labourer and his
family fifty miles to find work; in which agricultural labourers read
newspapers, and make speeches at public meetings called by themselves to
discuss low wages—is not an age in which a man can feel loyal and
dutiful to another because he has been born on his estate. Obedience in
return for protection, is a bargain only made when protection can be had
on no other terms. Men now make that bargain with society, not with an
individual. The law protects them, and they give their obedience to
that. Obedience in return for wages is a different matter. They will
make that bargain too, if necessity drives them to it. But good-will and
gratitude form no part of the conditions of such a contract. The
deference which a man now pays to his “brother of the earth,” merely
because the one was born rich and the other poor, is either hypocrisy or
servility. Real attachment, a genuine feeling of subordination, must now
be the result of personal qualities, and requires them on both sides
equally. Where these are wanting, in proportion to the enforced
observances will be the concealed enmity; not, perhaps, towards the
individual, for there will seldom be the extremes either of hatred or of
affection in a relation so merely transitory; but that sourde animosity
which is universal in this country towards the whole class of employers,
in the whole class of the employed.

As one of the correctives to this deep-seated alienation of feeling,
much stress is laid on the importance of personal demeanour. In the
“Claims of Labour” this is the point most insisted upon. The book
contains numerous aphorisms on this subject, and they are such as might
be expected from the author of “Essays written in the Intervals of
Business,”[*] and “Thoughts in the Cloister and the Crowd.”[†] A person
disposed to criticise might indeed object, that these earnest and
thoughtful sayings are chiefly illustrative of the duty of every one to
every one; and are applicable to the formation of our own character, and
to human relations generally, rather than to the special relation
between the rich and the poor. It is not as concerning the poor
specially, that these lessons are needed. The faults of the rich to the
poor are the universal faults. The demeanour fitting towards the poor,
is that which is fitting towards every one. It is a just charge against
the English nation, considered generally, that they do not know how to
be kind, courteous, and considerate of the feelings of others. It is
their character throughout Europe. They have much to learn from other
nations in the arts not only of being serviceable and amiable with
Edition: current; Page: [381] grace, but of being so at all. Whatever
brings the habitual feelings of human beings to one another nearer to
the Christian standard, will produce a better demeanour to every one,
and therefore to the poor. But it is not peculiarly towards them that
the deficiency manifests itself. On the contrary, speaking of the rich
individually (as distinguished from collective conduct in public life),
there is generally, we believe, a very sincere desire to be amiable to
the poor.

Where there exists the quality, so rare in England, of genuine
sociability, combined with as much knowledge of the feelings and ways of
the working classes as can enable any one to show interest in them to
any useful purpose, the effects obtained are even now very valuable. The
author of the “Claims of Labour” has done a useful thing by giving
additional publicity to the proceedings of a generous and right-minded
mill-owner, whom he does not name, but who is known to be Mr. Samuel
Greg, from whose letters to Mr. Leonard Horner[*] he has quoted largely.
Mr. Greg proceeded partly in the obvious course, of building good
cottages, granting garden allotments, establishing schools, and so
forth. But the essence of his plan consisted in becoming personally
acquainted with the operatives, showing interest in their pursuits,
taking part in their social amusements, and giving to the élite of
them—men, women, and young persons—periodical access to the society and
intercourse of his own home. He has afforded a specimen and model of
what can be done for the people under the calumniated Factory System.
And in nothing is he more to be commended, than in the steadiness with
which he upholds the one essential principle of all effectual
philanthropy. “The motto on our flag,” says he, “is Aide-toi, le ciel
t’aidera. It is the principle I endeavour to keep constantly in view. It
is the only principle on which it is safe to help anybody, or which can
prevent benevolence from being poisoned into a fountain of moral
mischief.” [P. 26.] His experiment has, for many years, been well
rewarded by success. But, for the cure of great social evils, too great
stress must not be laid upon it. The originator of such a scheme is,
most likely, a person peculiarly fitted by natural and acquired
qualifications for winning the confidence and attachment of untutored
minds. If the spirit should diffuse itself widely among the employers of
labour, there might be, in every large neighbourhood, some such man; we
could never expect that the majority would be such. Even Mr. Greg had to
begin, as he tells us, by selecting his labourers. He had to “get rid of
his aborigines.” He “endeavoured, as far as possible, to find such
families as we knew to be respectable, or thought likely to be so, and
who, we hoped, if they were made comfortable, would remain and settle
upon the place; thus finding and making themselves a home, and Edition:
current; Page: [382] losing by degrees that restless and migratory
spirit which is one of the peculiar characteristics of the manufacturing
population, and perhaps the greatest of all obstacles in the way of
permanent improvement among them.”[*] It is in the nature of things that
employers so much beyond the average should gather round them better
labourers than the average, and retain them, while so eligible a lot is
not to be had elsewhere. But ordinary human nature is so poor a thing,
that the same attachment and influence would not, with the same
certainty, attend similar conduct, if it no longer formed a contrast
with the indifference of other employers. The gratitude of men is for
things unusual and unexpected. This does not take from the value of Mr.
Greg’s exertions. Whoever succeeds in improving a certain number of the
working people, does so much towards raising the class; and all such
good influences have a tendency to spread. But, for creating a permanent
tie between employers and employed, we must not count upon the results
manifested in cases of exception, which would probably lose a part of
their beneficial efficacy if they became the rule.

If, on a subject on which almost every thinker has his Utopia, we might
be permitted to have ours; if we might point to the principle on which,
at some distant date, we place our chief hope for healing the widening
breach between those who toil and those who live on the produce of
former toil; it would be that of raising the labourer from a receiver of
hire—a mere bought instrument in the work of production, having no
residuary interest in the work itself—to the position of being, in some
sort, a partner in it. The plan of remunerating subordinates in whom
trust must be reposed, by a commission on the returns instead of only a
fixed salary, is already familiar in mercantile concerns, on the ground
of its utility to the employer. The wisdom, even in a worldly sense, of
associating the interest of the agent with the end he is employed to
attain, is so universally recognised in theory, that it is not
chimerical to expect it may one day be more extensively exemplified in
practice. In some form of this policy we see the only, or the most
practicable, means of harmonizing the “rights of industry” and those of
property; of making the employers the real chiefs of the people, leading
and guiding them in a work in which they also are interested—a work of
co-operation, not of mere hiring and service; and justifying, by the
superior capacity in which they contribute to the work, the higher
remuneration which they receive for their share of it.a

Edition: current; Page: [383]
But without carrying our view forward to changes of manners, or changes
in the relation of the different orders of society to one another, let
us consider what can be done immediately, and by the legislature, to
improve either the bodily or mental condition of the labouring people.

And let it here be remembered that we have to do with a class, a large
portion of which reads, discusses, and forms opinions on public
interests. Let it be remembered also, that we live in a political age;
in which the desire of political rights, or the abuse of political
privileges by the possessors of them, are the foremost ideas in the
minds of most reading men—an age, too, the whole spirit of which
instigates every one to demand fair play for helping himself, rather
than to seek or expect help from others. In such an age, and in the
treatment of minds so predisposed, justice is the one needful thing
rather than kindness. We may at least say that kindness will be little
appreciated, will have very little of the effect of kindness upon the
objects of it, so long as injustice, or what they cannot but deem to be
injustice, is persevered in. Apply this to several of the laws
maintained by our legislature. Apply it, for example, to the Corn-Laws.
Will the poor thank you for giving them money in alms; for subscribing
to build baths and lay out parks for them, or, as Lord John Manners
proposes, playing at cricket with them, if you are at the same time
taxing their bread to swell your rents? bWe could understand persons who
said—the people will not be better off whatever we do, and why should we
sacrifice our rents or open our purses for so meagre a cresult?c But we
cannot understand men who give alms with one hand, and take away the
bread of the labourer with the other. Can they wonder that the people
say—Instead of doling out to us a small fragment of what is rightfully
our own, why do you not disgorge your unjust gains? One of the evils of
the matter is, that the gains are so enormously exaggerated. Those who
have studied the question know that the landlords gain very little by
the Corn-Laws; and would soon have even Edition: current; Page: [384]
that little restored to them by the indirect consequences of the
abrogation. The rankling sense of gross injustice, which renders any
approximation of feeling between the classes impossible while even the
remembrance of it lasts, is inflicted for a quite insignificant
pecuniary advantage.

There are some other practices which, if the new doctrines are embraced
in earnest, will require to be reconsidered. For example, it seems to us
that mixing in the social assemblies of the country people, and joining
in their sports, would dassortd exceedingly ill with the preserving of
game. If cricketing is to be taken in common by erich and poor, why not
shooting? We confess that when we read of enormous game preserves, kept
up that great personages may slaughter hundreds of wild animals in a
day’s shooting, we are amazed at the puerility of taste which can call
this a sport; as much as we lament the want of just feeling which, for
the sake of sport, can keep open from generation to generation this
source of crime and bitterness in the class which it is now so much the
fashion to patronize.

We must needs think, also, that there is something out of joint, when so
much is said of the value of refining and humanizing tastes to the
labouring people—when it is proposed to plant parks and lay out gardens
for them, that they may enjoy more freely nature’s gift alike to rich
and poor, of sun, sky, and vegetation; and along with this a
counter-progress is fconstantlyf going on, of stopping up paths and
enclosing commonsg. Is not this another case of giving with one hand,
and taking back more largely with the other? We look with the utmost
jealously upon any further enclosure of commons. In the greater part of
this island, exclusive of the mountain and moor districts, there
certainly is not more land remaining in a state of natural wildness than
is desirable. Those who would make England resemble many parts of the
Continent, where every foot of soil is hemmed in by fences and covered
over with the traces of human labour, should remember that where this is
done, it is done for the use and benefit, not of the rich, but of the
poor; and that in the countries where there remain no commons, the rich
have no parks. The common is the peasant’s park. Every argument for
ploughing it up to raise more produce, applies à fortiori to the park,
which is generally far more fertile. The effect of either, when done in
the manner proposed, is only to make the poor more numerous, not better
offh. But what ought to be said when, as so often Edition: current;
Page: [385] happens, the common is taken from the poor, that the whole
or great part of it may be added to the enclosed pleasure domain of the
rich? Is the miserable compensation, and though miserable inot alwaysi
granted, of a small scrap of the land to each of the cottagers who had a
goose on the common, any equivalent to the poor generally, to the lovers
of nature, or to future generations, for this legalized spoliation?

These are things to be avoided. Among things to be done, the most
obvious is to remove every restriction, every artificial hindrance,
which legal and fiscal systems oppose to the attempts of the labouring
classes to forward their own improvement. These hindrances are sometimes
to be found in quarters in which they may not be looked for; as a few
instances will show.

Some years ago the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, in a
well-intended tract addressed to the working people, to correct the
prejudices entertained by some of them against the “claims of capital,”
gave some advice to the labourers, which produced considerable comment
at the time. It exhorted them to “make themselves capitalists.”[*] To
most labouring people who read it, this exhortation probably appeared
ironical. But some of the more intelligent of the class found a meaning
in it. It did occur to them that there was a mode in which they could
make themselves capitalists. Not, of course, individually; but by
bringing their small means into a common fund, by forming a numerous
partnership or joint stock, they could, as it seemed to them, become
their own employers—dispense with the agency of receivers of profit, and
share among themselves the entire produce of their labour. This was a
most desirable experiment. It would have been an excellent thing to have
ascertained whether any great industrial enterprise, a manufactory for
example, could be successfully carried on upon this principle. If it
succeeded, the benefit was obvious; if, after sufficient trial, it was
found impracticable, its failure also would be a valuable lesson. It
would prove to the operatives that the profits of the employer are but
the necessary price paid for the superiority of management produced by
the stimulus of individual interest; and that if the capitalist be the
costliest part of the machinery of production, he more than repays his
cost. But it was found that the defects of the law of partnership, as
applicable to numerous associations, presented difficulties rendering it
impracticable to give this experiment a fair trial. Here, then, is a
thing which Parliament might do for the labouring classes. The framing
of a good law of Partnership, giving every attainable facility to the
formation Edition: current; Page: [386] of large industrial capitals by
the aggregation of small savings, would be a real boon. It would be the
removal of no ideal grievance, but of one which we know to be felt, and
felt deeply, by the most intelligent and right-thinking of the
class—those who are most fitted to acquire, and best qualified to
exercise, a beneficent influence over the rest.

Again, it is often complained of, as one of the saddest features of the
constitution of society in the rural districts, that the class of
yeomanry has died out; that there is no longer any intermediate
connecting link between the mere labourer and the large farmer—no class
somewhat above his own, into which, by industry and frugality, a
labourer can hope to rise; that if he makes savings, they are less a
benefit to him than a burden and an anxiety, from the absence of any
local means of investment; unless indeed by becoming a shopkeeper in a
town or village, where an additional shop is probably not wanted, where
he has to form new habits, with great risk of failure, and, if he
succeeds, does not remain an example and encouragement to others like
himself. Is it not strange, then, that supposing him to have an
opportunity of investing this money in a little patch of land, the
Stamp-office would interfere and take a toll on the transaction? The
tax, too, which the State levies on the transfer of small properties, is
a trifling matter compared with the tax levied by the lawyers. The
stampduty bears some proportion to the pecuniary amount; but the law
charges are the same on the smallest transactions as on the greatest,
and these are almost wholly occasioned by the defects of the law. There
is no real reason why the transfer of land should be more difficult or
costly than the transfer of three per cent stock, except thatj more of
description is necessary to identify the subject-matter; all the rest is
the consequence of mere technicalities, growing out of the obsolete
incidents of the Feudal System.k

Many of the removable causes of ill-health are in the power of
Government; but there is no need to enlarge upon a subject to which
official Reports have drawn so much attention. The more effectual
performance by Government of any of its acknowledged duties; the more
zealous prosecution of any scheme tending to the general advantage, is
beneficial to the labouring classes. Of schemes destined specially to
give them employment, or add to their comforts, it may be said, once for
all, that there is a simple test by which to judge them. Is the
assistance of such a kind, and Edition: current; Page: [387] given in
such a manner, as to render them ultimately independent of the
continuance of similar assistance? If not, the best that can be said of
the plans is, that they are harmless. To make them useful, it is an
indispensable condition that there be a reasonable prospect of their
being at some future time self-supporting. Even upon the best
supposition, it appears to us that too much importance is attached to
them. lGivenl education and just laws, the poorer class would be as
competent as any other class to take care of their own personal habits
and mrequirementsm.n

Edition: current; Page: [389]

Edition: current; Page: [390] Edition: current; Page: [391]


DE QUINCEY’S LOGIC OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
 1845

Edition: current; Page: [392]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Westminster Review, XLIII (June, 1845), 319-31. Signed “A”; not
republished. Original heading: “Art. II.—The Logic of Political Economy.
By Thomas De Quincey. [Edinburgh:] Blackwood, 1844.” Running heads: “De
Quincey’s / Logic of Political Economy.” Identified in JSM’s
bibliography as “A review of De Quincey’s Logic of Political Economy in
the Westminster Review for June 1845” (MacMinn, 58). No corrections or
variants in Somerville College copy. When JSM turned later in 1845 to
the writing of his Principles of Political Economy, De Quincey’s work
was fresh in his mind (see 783 below).

Edition: current; Page: [393]


De Quincey’s Logic of Political Economy

this book can be interesting only to the very few who aspire to
scientific thinking, on a subject essentially practical; who are not
content with being, as they think, substantially right on those special
topics of inquiry, the connexion of which with practice may have been
brought into strong light by the political controversies of the day; but
who feel an intellectual necessity for the co-ordination of those
detached opinions; for fixing the relation of each to the others, and to
the deeper principles which ought to be at the foundation of all.

To that limited class, who however are the ultimate teachers of the
rest, such writings as the one before us are both pleasant and useful;
tending eminently to clear up the ideas of the reader, whether he be led
to adopt those of the writer or not. The title, however, of the book, is
a misnomer. Its subject is not “the Logic of Political Economy.” By the
logic of a science we understand its method; its particular modes of
investigation, and the nature of its evidence. Of these things Mr. De
Quincey does not treat. What he does treat of shall be told in his own
words:—

That the reader may not seek in this little work anything other or more
than was designed, I will briefly state its primary object. Political
Economy does not advance. Since the revolution effected in that science
by Ricardo (1817), upon the whole it has been stationary. But why? It
has always been my own conviction that the reason lies, not in any
material defect of facts (except as to the single question of money),
but in the laxity of some amongst the distinctions which are elementary
to the science. If it were possible that but three elementary
definitions, or axioms, or postulates, in geometry, should be liable to
controversy and to a precarious use (a use dependent upon petition and
momentary consent), what would follow? Simply this—that the whole vast
aërial synthesis of that science, at present towering upwards towards
infinity, would exhibit an edifice eternally, perhaps, renewing itself
by facts, but eternally tottering in some parts, and in other parts
mouldering eternally into ruins. . . . . Such, even to this moment, as
regards its practical application, is the science of Political Economy.
Nothing can be postulated—nothing can be demonstrated; for anarchy, even
as to the earliest principles, is predominant. [Pp. iii-v.]

Edition: current; Page: [394]
To give greater clearness and precision, therefore, to the elementary
distinctions, is the author’s object. We agree in his estimate of its
importance, though not for the reason which he indicates. We dissent
from the opinion that political economy does not advance. We think it is
in a state of most rapid progression. But, as with some other sciences
in certain of their stages, the superstructure seems to be overgrowing
the foundation. The science is growing at the extremities, without a
proportional and suitable enlargement of the main trunk. Many important
new views—new, at least, in having been previously overlooked—have
dawned upon political economists during the last twenty years. But for
want of sufficiently careful habits of systematic thought, these new
views have been too frequently promulgated as contradictions of the
doctrines previously received as fundamental; instead of being, what
they almost always are, developments of them; corollaries flowing from
these fundamental principles, certain conditions of fact being supposed.
We may notice, as cases in point, Mr. Wakefield’s theory of colonization
(to which full justice is incidentally done by our author),[*] and the
doctrines, so far as they are tenable, of Professor Jones’s “Essay on
the Distribution of Wealth.”[†] From any such error Mr. De Quincey is
free. One of his merits is his early and consistent appreciation of
Ricardo, the true founder of the abstract science of political economy,
and whose writings are still, after all that has been since written, its
purest source. What has been added to the science since Ricardo, does
not need to be substituted for his doctrines, but to be incorporated
with them. They do not require alteration or correction, so much as
fuller exposition and comment.

Mr. De Quincey has very partially supplied this want; but his book will
be useful to whoever may undertake to supply it. There is always a
benefit done to any department of knowledge, by digging about the roots
of its truths. Truths which have been long planted, are apt to die or
become unproductive, if we do not occasionally let in the air, and turn
up the soil which surrounds them. In plainer terms, it is a good service
to revivify old truths, by new illustrations and by altering the
language in which they are expressed. They then come out with the force,
because with the freshness, of discoveries; and are better understood
and more consistently followed to their consequences, for some time
after. And if mere novelty in the statement and exposition of principles
has a beneficial effect, still better is it when the new mode of
statement has any advantage over the old; when it brings prominently
forward some aspect of the truth, or some distinction Edition: current;
Page: [395] between it and a neighbouring error, which was liable to
escape notice, or which the modes of exposition previously in use tended
in any degree to disguise.

Mr. De Quincey is well qualified to render this kind of service to any
branch of speculation with which he is conversant. His mind has a
natural tendency to drawing distinctions; in doing which he frequently
manifests real subtlety, and occasionally that turn for subtleties,
which is not the same thing, but which simulates it. By means of his
subtlety he is often enabled to see very exactly in what respect some
received mode of expressing a scientific principle misses the
mark—failing to convey the whole truth, or conveying, under some
particular circumstances, more than the truth. A practised and skilful
wielder of philosophical terms, he is often happy in finding a form of
language, or a combination of several forms of language, which shall
just convey the whole of the intended meaning, and no more. In bringing
an abstract thought home to an unpractised comprehension, he is very
successful, and would be more so if he had not a strange delight in
drawing illustrations from subjects ten times more abstruse than what
they are designed to illustrate. He makes amends, however, by drawing
largely upon topics the most homely and familiar; of which his
miscellaneous knowledge furnishes him with an abundance, and which are
continually starting up and crossing the path of his dissertation in the
most unexpected and surprising manner. There is apparently something of
design in this; either from a notion of relieving the dryness of a
metaphysical discussion, or in connexion with a certain air of
self-consciousness, if not self-complacency, which considerably alloys
the pleasure arising from his liveliness and ingenuity. He never
surmounts any obstacle in the line of his course, without letting you
hear him soliloquize before he attempts the leap, and see him turn round
to measure it after it is done.

Altogether, he is a person who has a full right to be heard on any
subject connected with political economy, and who may be heard, even by
those best versed in the subject, with profit.

The larger half of the volume is occupied with the theory of Value;
which he rightly esteems the master-key to the principal difficulties of
the science. On this subject he claims to have thrown light upon “a
source of confusion which never has been exposed, and which, at the very
vestibule, has hitherto defeated all attempt at a systematic theory of
value.” [P. vii.] This confusion is one affecting the relation between
what is called, in the terminology of Adam Smith, value in use, and
value in exchange.

Although we cannot concede, to our author’s speculations on this
subject, all the originality which he ascribes to them, the merit must
be allowed him of having brought out into full theoretical explicitness
what was known to Edition: current; Page: [396] all clear thinkers, but
might easily be overlooked by the less advanced student. His exposition,
though somewhat prolix, is so clear and effective that we need no
apology for citing a considerable portion of it.

Almost all writers have agreed substantially, and have rightly agreed,
in founding exchangeable value upon two elements—power in the article
valued to meet some natural desire or some casual purpose of man, in the
first place, and in the second place, upon difficulty of attainment.
These two elements must meet, must come into combination, before any
value in exchange can be established. They constitute the two
co-ordinate conditions, of which where either is absent, no value in the
sense of exchange value can arise for a moment. Indeed, it is evident to
common sense, that any article whatever, to obtain that artificial sort
of value which is meant by exchange value, must begin by offering itself
as a means to some desirable purpose; and secondly, that even though
possessing incontestably this preliminary advantage, it will never
ascend to an exchange value in cases where it can be obtained
gratuitously, and without effort—of which last terms both are necessary
as limitations. For often it will happen that some desirable object may
be obtained gratuitously; stoop, and you gather it at your feet; but
still, because the continued iteration of this stooping exacts a
laborious effort, very soon it is found, that to gather for yourself
virtually is not gratuitous. In the vast forests of the Canadas, at
intervals wild strawberries may be gratuitously gathered by ship-loads:
yet such is the exhaustion of a stooping posture, and of a labour so
monotonous, that everybody is soon glad to resign the service into
mercenary hands.

The same idea, the same demand of a two-fold conditio sine qua non as
essential to the composition of an exchange value, is otherwise
expressed (and in a shape better fitted for subsequent reference) by the
two following cases, marked Epsilon and Omicron.

Case Epsilon.—A man comes forward with his overture: ‘Here is a thing
which I wish you to purchase; it has cost me in labour five guineas, and
that is the price I ask.’ ‘Very well,’ you reply; ‘but tell me this,
what desire or purpose of mine will the article promote?’ Epsilon
rejoins, ‘Why, as candour is my infirmity, none at all. But what of
that? Useful or not, the article embodies five guineas’ worth of
excellent labour.’ This man, the candid Epsilon, you dismiss.

Case Omicron.—Him succeeds Omicron, who praises your decisive conduct as
to the absurd family of the Epsilons. ‘That man,’ he observes, ‘is
weak—candid, but weak; for what was the cost in your eyes but so much
toil to no effect of real service? But that is what nobody can say of
the article offered by myself; it is serviceable always—nay, often you
will acknowledge it to be indispensable.’ ‘What is it?’ you demand. ‘Why
simply, then, it is a pound of water, and as good water as ever you
tasted.’ The scene lies in England, where water bears no value except
under that machinery of costly arrangements which delivers it as a
permanent and guaranteed succession into the very chambers where it is
to be used. Omicron accordingly receives permission to follow the candid
Epsilon. Each has offered for sale one element of value out of two, one
element in a state of insulation, where it was indispensable for any
operative value, i.e. price, to offer the two in combination; and
without such a combination it is impossible (neither does any economist
deny this by his principles) that value in exchange, under the most
romantic or imaginary circumstances, ever should be realized. [Pp.
13-15.]

Edition: current; Page: [397]
Thus far, as the author observes, is plain sailing; but in the next
step, he asserts, “a difficulty arises to all appearance insurmountable
. . . which seems, when stated, to include a metaphysical
impossibility.” [Pp. 15-16.] After what appears to us a most inordinate
over-statement of this metaphysical perplexity, he proceeds to state the
doctrine, in his opinion a novel one, which resolves it. This doctrine
is, that while both usefulness and difficulty of attainment are
necessary conditions to the existence of any exchange value, the amount
of the value is determined not by both jointly, but either wholly by one
or wholly by the other, according to the nature of the case.

The two elements are U and D. If both elements are to be present, and
both are to be operative, then indeed we have a contradiction in terms
such as never will be overcome. But how if both be uniformly present,
one only being at any time operative? How if both be indispensably
present, but alternately each become inert? How if both act as motives
on the buyer for buying at all, but one only (each in turn under its own
circumstances) as a force operating on the price?

This is the real case: this is the true solution; and thus is a
difference obtained—such a difference as will amply sustain a two-fold
subdivision from elements substantially the same. Both are co-present,
and always. Neither can be absent; for, if so, then the common idea of
exchange value would vanish, the case Epsilon or the case Omicron would
be realized. But each of the two is suspended alternately. Thus, by way
of illustration, walk into almost any possible shop, buy the first
article you see; what will determine its price? In ninety-nine cases out
of a hundred, simply the element D—difficulty of attainment. The other
element, U, or intrinsic utility, will be perfectly inoperative. Let the
thing (measured by its uses) be, for your purposes, worth ten guineas,
so that you would rather give ten guineas than lose it; yet, if the
difficulty of producing it be only worth one guinea, one guinea is the
price which it will bear. But still not the less, though U is
inoperative, can U be supposed absent? By no possibility; for, if it had
been absent, assuredly you would not have bought the article even at the
lowest price. U acts upon you, though it does not act upon the price. On
the other hand, in the hundredth case, we will suppose the circumstances
reversed: you are on Lake Superior in a steam-boat, making your way to
an unsettled region 800 miles a-head of civilization, and consciously
with no chance at all of purchasing any luxury whatsoever, little luxury
or big luxury, for the space of ten years to come: one fellow-passenger,
whom you will part with before sunset, has a powerful musical snuff-box;
knowing by experience the power of such a toy over your own feelings,
the magic with which at times it lulls your agitations of mind, you are
vehemently desirous to purchase it. In the hour of leaving London you
had forgot to do so; here is a final chance. But the owner, aware of
your situation not less than yourself, is determined to operate by a
strain pushed to the very uttermost upon U, upon the intrinsic worth of
the article in your individual estimate for your individual purposes. He
will not hear of D as any controlling power or mitigating agency in the
case: and finally, although at six guineas a-piece in London or Paris,
you might have loaded a waggon with such boxes, you pay sixty rather
than lose it when the last knell of the clock has sounded, which summons
you to buy now or to Edition: current; Page: [398] forfeit for ever.
Here, as before, only one element is operative: before it was D, now it
is U. But, after all, D was not absent, though inoperative. The
inertness of D allowed U to put forth its total effect. The practical
compression of D being withdrawn, U springs up like water in a pump,
when released from the pressure of air. Yet still that D was present to
your thoughts, though the price was otherwise regulated, is evident;
both because U and D must coexist in order to found any case of exchange
value whatever, and because undeniably you take into very particular
consideration this D, the extreme difficulty of attainment (which here
is the greatest possible, viz., an impossibility), before you consent to
have the price racked up to U. The special D has vanished; but it is
replaced in your thoughts by an unlimited D. Undoubtedly you have
submitted to U in extremity as the regulating force of the price; but it
was under the sense of D’s latent presence. Yet D is so far from
exerting any positive force, that the retirement of D from all agency
whatever on the price—this it is which creates as it were a perfect
vacuum, and through that vacuum U rushes up to its highest and ultimate
gradation. [Pp. 23-8.]

It would be difficult, we think, to cite a specimen of exposition on an
abstract subject, more transparently clear, and at the same time so
scientifically precise. But can Mr. De Quincey be serious in maintaining
that the doctrine which this passage embodies is a novel one? Have not
all political economists distinguished between articles which can be
multiplied to an indefinite extent by labour, and articles naturally or
artificially limited to a quantity short of the demand; and have they
not all, from Ricardo downwards, affirmed that in the former, and more
common case, the value conforms on an average to the cost of production,
while in the latter there are no limits to the value except the
necessities or desires of the purchaser? It is true that, as to some
part of the theory of this latter case, there would be a difference.
They would not, we conceive, agree with Mr. De Quincey in what follows:—

Suppose not D, but U, to become the ruling force; D has become infinite
(as in the case of the musical toy in Canada), that is, the difficulties
in the way of supplying the market by a continued reproduction of the
article (in one word, the resistance) must be supposed so vast as to be
quite beyond the power of any individual to overcome. Instantly, under
these circumstances, U springs up to its utmost height. The rare holders
of the article, as surviving from past times or regions now inaccessibly
distant, will fix a strain upon the few purchasers by means of the
intrinsic or U value; each of the candidates must submit to see his own
outside or extreme esteem for the article made operative against himself
as the law of the price. He must ascend to the very maximum of what he
will pay, under the known alternative of losing the article for ever if
he will not pay it. [P. 30.]

Now we apprehend that political economists generally (and common sense
can judge of this question as well as political economy) would deny
that, in the case supposed, the utmost price which the purchaser would
consent to pay, would necessarily be the actual price. They would say,
that Edition: current; Page: [399] it would be merely a possible price;
the extreme limit of price; which would be attained or not attained,
according to something else. And to what else? In the opinion of all
political economists, to the relation which might happen to subsist
between the demand and the supply. And this brings us to our chief point
of difference with the author. That supply and demand can of themselves
in any case regulate price, is a notion of which he speaks with
unbounded contempt. It is one of the delusions which he takes to himself
most credit for dissipating.

People fancy [he says in his preface] that the relation of supply to
demand could by possibility, and that in fact it often does, determine
separately per se the selling price of an article. Within a few months
this monstrous idea has been assumed for true by Colonel Torrens, in an
express work on Economic Politics; by Lord Brougham, in relation to the
foreign corn trade; and by almost every journal in the land that has
fallen under my own eye.[*] [And again (p. 127):—] A crazy maxim has got
possession of the whole world; viz., that price is, or can be,
determined by the relation between supply and demand.

We think it can be shown that Colonel Torrens, Lord Brougham, every
journal in the land, and finally the whole world, happen in this
particular case to be in the right, and Mr. De Quincey in the wrong. To
prove this we must be allowed to add one or two circumstances to his
hypothesis of the single musical box in the wilds of America.

Suppose, first, that the steam-boat contains not one, but two musical
boxes, and only one person anxious to be a purchaser. Suppose, too, that
neither of the possessors desires to keep the box; that both possess it
only for the purpose of sale. The buyer is in the same emergency as
before; willing to pay sixty guineas rather than lose the opportunity.
But the situation of the sellers is different. Supposing no combination
between them, and assuming that the purchaser wants only one of the
boxes—the competition between the two thus coming fully into action—what
will now be the price? No longer the highest which the buyer could be
induced to give, but the lowest which the seller would take; the lowest,
which would be a sufficient motive to him for selling the article then
and there, rather than taking it back to New York when he returns by the
steam-boat.

Suppose, secondly, instead of competition, the strictest monopoly, but
without limitation of quantity. Let there be only one passenger who has
any musical boxes, but let him possess not one but two. He can now, if
he pleases, as our author expresses it, strain U to the utmost; he can
obtain for one of his commodities the sum (supposed to be sixty guineas)
which is the very utmost that the buyer would pay, rather than forego
the purchase. But suppose that, by putting a somewhat lower price upon
his article, he can prevail on his customer to take both boxes off his
hands Edition: current; Page: [400] instead of one. The ordinary price,
as determined by cost of production, being by supposition only six
guineas, if the seller receives sixty-six for both, he gains as much as
by receiving sixty for one: if he receives seventy, he gains more. It
may be his interest therefore to fix thirty-five guineas, instead of
sixty, as the price of his commodity. Sixty, which Mr. De Quincey calls
the affirmative value[*] (six in this case being the negative), is
therefore only the limit of value. Beyond that amount the price cannot
go. But it may stop short at any intermediate point between the
affirmative value and the negative.

The two cases which we have put represent two large classes of cases, of
continual occurrence, in which, we apprehend, demand and supply do
regulate value; and even (within the admitted limits, of the cost price
on one side, and on the other the highest price which any one would
consent to give) are the sole regulators of it. Surely, then, there can
be no preliminary objection against listening to Colonel Torrens, or any
one who professes to be able to point out other cases of a like
description. The proposition may safely be generalized. Wherever cost of
production does not regulate the price, there demand and supply do
regulate it.

But we have not yet stated through what singular concatenation of ideas
this, which by his own admission seems obvious to “all the world,” [p.
127] appears to so ingenious a man as Mr. De Quincey a portentous
absurdity. He thinks there is a metaphysical impossibility in the very
idea.

Try to extract price for wheat from the simple relation of the supply to
the demand. Suppose the supply to be by one-tenth part beyond the
demand, what price will that indicate for eight imperial bushels of the
best red wheat, weighing sixty-four pounds a bushel? Will the price be a
shilling, or will it be a thousand pounds? You guess that the first
would be too little, and the second too much. Perhaps so; but what makes
you ‘guess’ this? Why, simply, your past experience. You fancy yourself
ascertaining the price by the relation of supply to demand, and in fact
you are ascertaining the price by privately looking for the cost in past
years; the very thing that you had pledged yourself to dispense with.
[P. 127.]

That Mr. De Quincey should find anything insuperable in such a
difficulty, is a mortifying example how little the acutest intellect can
be depended on for being always present. “Suppose the supply to be by
one-tenth part beyond the demand, what price will that indicate?” Why,
the price, whatever it happens to be, which will increase the demand by
one-tenth. If the harvest exceeds by one-tenth its ordinary amount, corn
will fall just as much below its ordinary price as will create a market
for the surplus, either through the increased consumption consequent on
cheapness, or by inducing dealers to buy corn for the purpose of
exporting it or Edition: current; Page: [401] storing it for future
years. To that price, and that price exactly, which will restore the
equality between demand and supply, will the commodities fall; unless
some of the sellers, rather than submit to so great a reduction, keep
their corn unsold, and thus re-establish the equilibrium in the other
possible mode, by withdrawing the excess of supply. This is, we
apprehend, the law of value, in the cases where cost of production is
inoperative. The value (or price) will so adjust itself that the demand
shall be equal to the supply. But if so, our author’s ingeniously
expressed theory, that “whilst natural price (the contradiction of
market price) is always a mononomial, price founded on the relation of
supply and demand must always be a binomial,” [p. ix] is, together with
all that he says in its behalf [pp. 118ff.], without meaning or reason.

We find scarcely anything else from which to dissent, in the economical
doctrines of the book. The chapters on Wages, Rent, and Profits, are all
they profess to be, a useful commentary on Ricardo; a thing much wanted,
and which very few persons could have done so well, or indeed done at
all. Ricardo, though in point of mere style by no means an obscure
writer, was as little fitted by nature and habit as Mr. De Quincey is
eminently so, for the popular exposition of his own doctrines. Mr. De
Quincey thoroughly understands his master, and is therefore able to
supply new developments and illustrations of the master’s doctrines. But
the most interesting, as well as the most original, of these
developments and illustrations are on the subject already touched upon,
that of value. As an example what pleasant reading he can make of a dry
scientific discussion, we will quote some passages from the fourth
section of the first chapter; which is devoted to the analysis of some
apparently anomalous cases of exchangeable value as influenced by U, the
capability of the object to serve a purpose, instead of D, the cost of
production.

In the reign of Charles II occurred the first sale of a rhinoceros. The
more interesting wild beasts—those distinguished by ferocity, by
cruelty, and agility—had long been imported from the Mediterranean; and
as some of them were ‘good fellows and would strike’ (though, generally
speaking, both the lion and the tiger are the merest curs in nature),
they bore tolerable prices, even in the time of Shakspeare. But a
rhinoceros had not yet been imported; and in fact that brute is a
dangerous connexion to form. As a great lady from Germany replied some
twenty years ago to an Englishman who had offered her an elephant, ‘Mit
nichten, by no means; him eat too mauch.’ In spite, however, of a
similar infirmity, the rhinoceros fetched, under Charles II, more than
2,000l. But why—on what principle? Was it his computed negative value
[cost of attainment][*]? Not at all. A granite obelisk from Thebes, or a
Cleopatra’s needle, though as heavy as a pulk of rhinoceroses, would not
have cost as much to sling and transport from the Niger to the Thames.
But in such a case there are two reasons why the purchaser is not
anxious to inquire about the costs. In Edition: current; Page: [402]
buying a loaf that is an important question, because a loaf will be
bought every day, and there is a great use in knowing the cost, or
negative value, as that which will assuredly govern an article of daily
reproduction. But in buying a rhinoceros, which it is to be hoped that
no man will be so ill-fated as to do twice in one world, it is scarcely
to be hoped that the importer will tell any truth at all, nor is it of
much consequence that he should; for the buyer cares little by
comparison as to the separate question on the negative price of the
brute to his importer. He cares, perhaps, not very much more as to the
separate question upon the affirmative return likely to arise for
himself in the case of his exhibiting such a monster. Neither value
taken singly was the practical reply to his anxieties. That reply was
found in both values, taken in combination; the negative balanced
against the affirmative. It was less important to hear that the cost had
been 1,000l., so long as the affirmative return was conjecturally
assigned at little beyond 2,200l., than to hear that the immediate cost
to the importer had been 2,000l., but with the important assurance that
5,000l., at the very least, might be almost guaranteed from the public
exhibition of so delicate a brute. The creature had not been brought
from the Barbary States, our staple market for monsters, but from some
part of Africa round the Cape; so that the cost had been unusually
great. But the affirmative value, founded on the public curiosity, was
greater; and when the two terms in the comparison came into collision,
then was manifested the excess of the affirmative value, in that one
instance, as measured against the negative. An ‘encore’ was hardly to be
expected for a rhinoceros in the same generation; but for that once it
turned out that a moderate fortune might be raised upon so brutal a
basis. [Pp. 61-3.]

Such cases are a sort of praxis to students of the science, to test the
completeness of their understanding of its principles.[*] Again:

Hunters, as against race-horses. If a man were to offer you a hunter,
master of your weight, and otherwise satisfactory, you would readily
give him a fair price. But what is a fair price? That which will
reproduce such a hunter—his cost; the total resistance to his being
offered in this condition. Such is the value, and such the law of value,
for a hunter. But it is no longer such for a racer. When a breeder of
horses finds one amongst his stud promising first-rate powers of
contending at Newmarket, he is no longer content to receive a cost price
for the horse, or anything like it. The man who (as a master of
pearl-divers) sells the ordinary seed-pearls at the mere cost and fair
profit on the day’s wages which have earned them, when he reaps a pearl
fit to embellish the Schah of Persia’s crown, looks to become a petty
schah himself. He might sell it with a profit by obtaining even that
whole day’s wages, during one hour of which it was produced; but will
he? No more than, amongst ourselves, the man who, by a twenty-guinea
lottery ticket, drew a prize of 10,000l., would have sold his ticket for
a profit of cent per cent upon its cost. The breeder of the race-horse
would take into his estimate the numerous and splendid stakes which the
horse might hereafter win; sometimes at Epsom, on one Derby day, as much
as from 5,000l. to 6,000l.; to say nothing of the Leger at Doncaster, or
other enormous prizes. It is true that the chances of mortality and
failure must also be weighed: and unluckily no insurance has yet been
done on racers, except as regards sea-risk. But after all drawbacks, the
owner may succeed finally in obtaining for Edition: current; Page: [403]
a first-rate horse (once known for good performances) as much as
4,000l.; whilst the whole value, computed on the resistance, might not
have been more than as many hundreds. And this fact, though standing
back in the rear as regards public knowledge, we may see daily
advertised in effect by that common regulation which empowers the loser
in many cases to insist on the winning horse being sold for 200l., or a
similar small sum. Were it not for this rule, which puts a stop to all
such attempts without hazard of personal disputes, it would be a capital
speculation for any first-rater, though beaten at Newmarket, to sweep
all the stakes without effort on a tour through the provincial courses;
justice would cease for the owners of inferior horses, and sport for the
spectators of the competition. [Pp. 77-8.]

Land is another illustration, and of the first rank. . . You may easily
bring it under examination, by contrasting it with the case of a machine
for displacing human labour. That machine, if it does the work in one
hundred days of one hundred men in the same time, will at first sell for
something approaching to the labour which it saves—say for the value of
eighty men’s labour; that is, it will sell for what it can produce, not
for what will produce itself: that is, it will sell for affirmative not
for negative value. But as soon as the construction of such a machine
ceases to be a secret, its value will totally alter. It will not sell
for the labour produced, but for the labour producing. By the
supposition, it produces work equal to that of a hundred men for one
hundred days; but, if it can itself be produced by twenty men in twenty
days, then it will finally drop in value to that price; it will no
longer be viewed as a cause equal to certain effects, but as an effect
certainly reproducible by a known cause at a known cost. Such is the
case eventually with all artificial machines; and for the plain reason,
that once ceasing to be a secret, they can be reproduced ad infinitum.
On the other hand, land is a natural machine—it is limited—it cannot be
reproduced. It will therefore always sell as a power—that is, in
relation to the effects which it can produce, not as itself an effect;
because no cause is adequate to the production of land. The rent
expresses one year’s value of land; and, if it is bought in perpetuity,
then the value is calculated on so many years’ purchase—a valuation
worthy, on another occasion, of a separate consideration. For the
present it is enough to say, that land is not valued on any principle of
cost—does not sell at negative value—but entirely on the principle of
its powers or intrinsic qualities; in short, it sells for affirmative
value—as a power, as a cause, not as an effect. [Pp. 84-5.]

A writer with so wide a range of ideas as Mr. De Quincey, and so
unusually disposed to give them out without distinction of occasion,
cannot be dismissed with a simple judgment of what his book is in
respect of the subject it professedly treats of. His writings treat of a
hundred things besides their ostensible subject, and it is necessary to
say what their worth is in that more extensive estimation. We will say,
then, that this book is enriched with many acute remarks; some of a
logical, some of a miscellaneous character; on any subject, important or
trifling, from the qualities of turbot to the laws of thought: while it
is deformed by ultra-Tory prejudices in a degree of virulence now seldom
seen in men at all approaching to his standard of intellect. It might
make the angels weep for the Edition: current; Page: [404] pretensions
of science and philosophy, when, even on the subject with which he is
most scientifically conversant, they cannot inspire such a man with
sufficient calmness, impartiality, and candour of judgment, to save him
from the incessant use of such phrases as “corn traitors,” “corn-law
incendiaries,”[*] and the like, to designate those who think that the
trade in food ought to be free; an opinion which the author himself is
bound to hold, by every fair deduction from his own principles. We are
quite unable to reconcile this wretched party invective with the respect
we sincerely wish to feel for Mr. De Quincey. We turn from it with
pleasure to an excellent passage with which, rather than any other of
the book, we may appropriately conclude, because it is a well-thought
and well-expressed explanation and justification of the purpose which
such writings as this are intended to serve; and because the lesson it
conveys is one which English thinkers in particular have pre-eminently
need to learn:—

Although a masculine good sense will generally escape in practice from
merely logical perplexities (that is, will cut the knot for all
immediate results of practice which it cannot untie); yet errors ‘in the
first intention’ come round upon us in subsequent stages, unless they
are met by their proper and commensurate solutions. Logic must be freed
by logic; a false dialectical appearance of truth must be put down by
the fullest exposure of the absolute and hidden truth, since also it
will continually happen that a plausible sophism, which had been
summarily crushed for the moment by a strong appeal to general good
sense upon the absurd consequences arising, will infallibly return upon
us when no such startling consequences are at hand. [Pp. 16-17.]

Edition: current; Page: [405]



