A SYSTEM OF LOGIC RATIOCINATIVE AND INDUCTIVE

Edition: current; Page: [2] Edition: current; Page: [3]


Introduction

§ 1. [A definition at the commencement of a subject must be provisional]
There is as great adiversity among authors in the modes which they have
adopted of defining logic, as in their treatment of the details of it.
This is what might naturally be expected on any subject on which writers
have availed themselves of the same language as a means of delivering
different ideas. Ethics and jurisprudence are liable to the remark in
common with logic. Almost every bwriterb having taken a different view
of some of the particulars which these branches of knowledge are usually
understood to include; each has so framed his definition as to indicate
beforehand his own peculiar tenets, and sometimes to beg the question in
their favour.

This diversity is not so much an evil to be complained of, as an
inevitable and in some degree a proper result of the imperfect state of
those sciences. cIt is not to be expected that there should be agreement
about the definition of anythingc, until there is agreement about the
thing itself. To defined, is to select from among all the properties of
a thing,d those which shall be understood to be designated and declared
by its name; and the properties must be ewell known to us before we can
be competent to determine which of them are fittest to be chosen for
this purpose. Accordingly, in the case of so complex an aggregation of
particulars as are comprehended in anything which can be called a
science, the definition we set out with is seldom that which a more
extensive knowledge of the subject shows to be the most appropriate.
Until we know the particulars themselves, we cannot fix upon the most
correct and compact mode of circumscribing them by a general
description. It was not funtilf after an extensive and accurate
acquaintance with the details of chemical phenomena, that it was found
possible to frame a rational definition of chemistry; and the definition
of the science of life and organization is still a matter of dispute. So
long as the sciences are imperfect, the definitions must partake of
their gimperfectiong; and if the former are progressive, the Edition:
current; Page: [4] latter ought to be so too. As much, therefore, as is
to be expected from a definition placed at the commencement of a
subject, is that it should define the scope of our inquiries: and the
definition which I am about to offer of the science of logic, pretends
to nothing more, than to be a statement of the question which I have put
to myself, and which this book is an attempt to resolve. The reader is
at liberty to object to it as a definition of logic; but it is at all
events a correct definition of the subject of these volumes.

§ 2. [Is logic the art and science of reasoning?] Logic has often been
called the Art of Reasoning. A writer* who has done more than any other
aperson to restore this study to the rank from which it had fallen in
the estimation of the cultivated bclassb in our own country, has adopted
the above definition with an amendment; he has defined Logic to be the
Science, as well as the Art, of reasoning; meaning by the former term,
the analysis of the mental process which takes place whenever we reason,
and by the latter, the rules, grounded on that analysis, for conducting
the process correctly. There can be no doubt as to the propriety of the
emendation. A right understanding of the mental process itself, of the
conditions it depends on, and the steps of which it consists, is the
only basis on which a system of rules, fitted for the direction of the
process, can possibly be founded. Art necessarily presupposes knowledge;
art, in any but its infant state, presupposes scientific knowledge: and
if every art does not bear the name of ca sciencec, it is only because
several sciences are often necessary to form the groundwork of a single
art. dSo complicated are the conditions which govern our practical
agencyd, that to enable one thing to be done, it is often requisite to
know the nature and properties of many things.

Logic, then, comprises the science of reasoning, as well as an art,
founded on that science. But the word Reasoning, again, like most other
scientific terms in popular use, abounds in ambiguities. In one of its
acceptations, it means syllogizing; or the mode of inference which may
be called (with sufficient accuracy for the present purpose) concluding
from generals to particulars. In another of its senses, to reason is
simply to infer any assertion, from assertions already admitted: and in
this sense induction is as much entitled to be called reasoning as the
demonstrations of geometry.

Writers on logic have generally preferred the former acceptation of the
term: the latter, and more extensive signification is that in which I
mean to use it. I do this by virtue of the right I claim for every
author, to give whatever Edition: current; Page: [5] provisional
definition he pleases of his own subject. But sufficient reasons will, I
believe, unfold themselves as we advance, why this should be not only
the provisional but the final definition. It involves, at all events, no
arbitrary change in the meaning of the word; for, with the general usage
of the English language, the wider signification, I believe, accords
better than the more restricted one.

§ 3. [Or is logic the art and science of the pursuit of truth?] But
Reasoning, even in the widest sense of which the word is susceptible,
does not seem to acomprehenda all that is included, either in the best,
or even in the most current, conception of the scope and province of our
science. The employment of the word Logic to denote the theory of
Argumentation, is derived from the Aristotelian, or, as they are
commonly termed, the scholastic, logicians. Yet even with them, in their
systematic treatises, Argumentation was the subject only of the third
part: the two former treated of Terms, and of Propositions; under one or
other of which heads were balsob included Definition and Division. cBy
some, indeed, these previous topics were professedlyc introduced only on
account of their connexion with reasoning, and as a preparation for the
doctrine and rules of the syllogism. Yet they were treated with greater
minuteness, and dwelt on at greater length, than was required for that
purpose alone. More recent writers on logic have generally understood
the term as it was employed by the able dauthord of the Port Royal
Logic;[*] viz. as equivalent to the Art of Thinking. Nor is this
acceptation confined to ebooks, and scientific inquiriese. Even in
fordinaryf conversation, the ideas gconnected with the word Logic
include at least precision of language, and accuracy of classification:
and we perhaps oftener hear persons speak of a logical arrangement, or
hofh expressions logically defined, than of conclusions logically
deduced from premises. iAgain,i a man is often called a great logician,
or a man of powerful logic, not for the accuracy of his deductions, but
for the extent of his command over premises; because the general
propositions required for explaining a difficulty or refuting a sophism,
copiously and promptly occur to himj: because, in short, his knowledge,
besides being Edition: current; Page: [6] ample, is well under his
command for argumentative usej. Whether, therefore, we conform to the
practice of those who have made the subject their particular study, or
to that of popular writers and common discourse, the province of logic
will include several operations of the intellect not usually considered
to fall within the meaning of the terms Reasoning and Argumentation.

These various operations might be brought within the compass of the
science, and the additional advantage be obtained of a very simple
definition, if, by an extension of the term, sanctioned by high
authorities, we were to define logic as the science which treats of the
operations of the human understanding in the pursuit of truth. For to
this ultimate end, naming, classification, definition, and all kother
operations over which logic has ever claimed jurisdiction, are
essentially subsidiary. They may all be regarded as contrivances for
enabling a person to know the truths which are needful to him, and to
know them at the precise moment at which they are needful. Other
purposes, indeed, are also served by these operations; for instance,
that of imparting our knowledge to others. But, viewed with regard to
this purpose, they have never been considered as within the province of
the logician. The sole object of Logic is the guidance of one’s own
thoughts: the communication of those thoughts to others falls under the
consideration of Rhetoric, in the large sense in which that art was
conceived by the ancients; or of the still more extensive art of
Education. Logic takes cognizance of lourl intellectual operations, only
as they conduce to our own knowledge, and to our command over that
knowledge for our own uses. If there were but one rational being in the
universe, that being might be a perfect logician; and the science and
art of logic would be the same for that one person as for the whole
human race.

§ 4. [Logic is concerned with inferences, not with intuitive truths]
But, if the definition which we formerly examined included too little,
that which is now suggested has the opposite fault of including too
much.

Truths are known to us in two ways: some are known directly, and of
themselves; some through the medium of other truths. The former are the
subject of Intuition, or Consciousness;* the latter, of Inference. The
truths known by intuition are the original premises from which all
others are inferred. Edition: current; Page: [7] Our assent to the
conclusion being grounded on the truth of the premises, we never could
arrive at any knowledge by reasoning, unless something could be known
antecedently to all reasoning.

Examples of truths known to us by immediate consciousness, are our own
bodily sensations and mental feelings. I know directly, and of my own
knowledge, that I was avexeda yesterday, or that I am hungry to-day.
Examples of truths which we know only by way of inference, are
occurrences which took place while we were absent, the events recorded
in history, or the theorems of mathematics. The two former we infer from
the testimony adduced, or from the traces of those past occurrences
which still bexist;b the latter, from the premises laid down in books of
geometry, under the title of definitions and axioms. Whatever we are
capable of knowing must belong to the one class or to the other; must be
in the number of the primitive data, or of the conclusions which can be
drawn cfrom thesec.

With the original data, or ultimate premises of our knowledge; with
their number or nature, the mode in which they are obtained, or the
tests by which they may be distinguished; logic, in a direct way at
least, has, in the sense in which I conceive the science, nothing to do.
These questions are partly not a subject of science at all, partly that
of a very different science.

Whatever is known to us by consciousness, is known beyond possibility of
question. What one sees or feels, whether bodily or mentally, one cannot
but be sure that one sees or feels. No science is required for the
purpose of establishing such truths; no rules of art can render our
knowledge of them more certain than it is in itself. There is no logic
for this portion of our knowledge.

But we may fancy that we see or feel what we in reality infer. dA truth,
or supposed truth, which is really the result of a very rapid inference,
may seem to be apprehended intuitively. It has long been agreed by
ethinkerse of the most opposite schools, that this mistake is actually
made in so familiar an instance as that of the eyesight. There is
nothing fof which we appear to ourselves to be more directly consciousf,
than the distance of an object from us. Yet it has long been
ascertained, that what is perceived by the eye, is at most nothing more
than a variously coloured surface; that when we fancy we see distance,
all we really see is certain variations of apparent size, and gdegrees
ofg faintness of colour; hthat our estimate of the object’s distance
from us Edition: current; Page: [8] is the result ipartly of a rapid
inference from the muscular sensations accompanying the adjustment of
the focal distance of the eye to objects unequally remote from us, and
partlyi of a comparison (made with so much rapidity that we are
unconscious of making it) between the size and colour of the object as
they appear at the time, and the size and colour of the same or of
similar objects as they appeared when close at hand, or when their
degree of remoteness was known by other evidence. The perception of
distance by the eye, which seems so like intuition, is thus, in reality,
an inference grounded on experience; an inference, too, which we learn
to make; and which we make with more and more correctness as our
experience increases; though in familiar cases it takes place so rapidly
as to appear exactly on a par with those perceptions of sight which are
really intuitive, our perceptions of colour.*

Of the science, therefore, which expounds the operations of the human
understanding in the pursuit of truth, one essential part is the
inquiry: What are the ofactso which are the objects of intuition or
consciousness, and what are those which we merely infer? But this
inquiry has never been considered a portion of logic. Its place is in
another and a perfectly distinct department of science, pto which the
name metaphysics more particularly belongs:p that portion of mental
philosophy which attempts to determine what part of the furniture of the
mind belongs to it originally, and what part is constructed qout of
materials furnished to itq from without. To this science appertain the
great and much debated questions of the existence of matter; rthe
existence of spirit, and of a distinction between it and matter;r the
reality of time and space, as things without the mind, and
distinguishable from the objects which are said to exist in them. For in
the present state of the discussion on these Edition: current; Page: [9]
topics, it is salmosts universally allowed that the existence of matter
or of spirit, of space or of time, is in its nature unsusceptible of
being proved; and that tif anything is known of them, it must bet by
immediate intuition. To the same science belong the inquiries into the
nature of Conception, Perception, Memory, and Belief; all of which are
operations of the understanding in the pursuit of truth; but with which,
as phenomena of the mind, or with the possibility which may or may not
exist of analysing any of them into simpler phenomena, the logician as
such has no concern. To this science must also be referred the
following, and all analogous questions: To what extent our intellectual
faculties and our emotions are innate—to what extent the result of
association: Whether God, and duty, are realities, the existence of
which is manifest to us à priori by the constitution of our rational
faculty; or whether our ideas of them are acquired notions, the origin
of which we are able to trace and explain; and the reality of the
objects themselves a question not of consciousness or intuition, but of
evidence and reasoning.

The province of logic must be restricted to that portion of our
knowledge which consists of inferences from truths previously known;
whether those antecedent data be general propositions, or particular
observations and perceptions. Logic is not the science of Belief, but
the science of Proof, or Evidence. uIn so faru as belief professes to be
founded on proof, the office of logic is to supply a test for
ascertaining whether or not the belief is well grounded. With the claims
which any proposition has to belief on vthe evidence of consciousnessv,
that is, without evidence in the proper sense of the word, logic has
nothing to do.

§ 5. [Relation of logic to the other sciences] aBy far the greatest
portion of our knowledge, whether of general truths or of particular
facts, beinga avowedly matter of inference, nearly the whole, not only
of science, but of human conduct, is amenable to the authority of logic.
To draw inferences has been said to be the great business of life. Every
one has daily, hourly, and momentary need of ascertaining facts which he
has not directly observed; not from any general purpose of adding to his
stock of knowledge, but because the facts themselves are of importance
to his interests or to his occupations. The business of the magistrate,
of the military commander, of the navigator, of the physician, of the
agriculturist, is merely to judge of evidence, and to act accordingly.
They all have to ascertain certain facts, in order that they may
afterwards apply certain rules, either devised by themselves, or
prescribed for their guidance by others; and as they do this well or
ill, so they Edition: current; Page: [10] discharge well or ill the
duties of their several callings. It is the only occupation in which the
mind never ceases to be engaged; and is the subject, not of logic, but
of knowledge in general.

bLogic, however, is not the same thing with knowledge, though the field
of logic is coextensive with the field of knowledge. Logic is the common
judge and arbiter of all particular investigations. It does not
undertake to find evidence, but to determine whether it has been found.
Logic neither observes, nor invents, nor discovers; but judges. It is no
part of the business of logic to inform the surgeon what appearances are
found to accompanyb a violent death. This he must learn from his own
experience and observation, or from that of others, his predecessors in
his peculiar cpursuitc. But logic sits in judgment on the sufficiency of
that observation and experience to justify his rules, and on the
sufficiency of his rules to justify his conduct. It does not give him
proofs, but teaches him what makes them proofs, and how he is to judge
of them. dIt does not teach that any particular fact proves any other,
but pointsd out to what conditions all facts must conform, in order that
they may prove other facts. To decide whether any given fact fulfils
these conditions, or whether facts can be found which fulfil them in eae
given case, belongs exclusively to the particular art or science, or to
our knowledge of the particular subject.

It is in this sense that logic is, what fit was so expressively called
by the schoolmen and by Baconf, ars artium;[*] the science of science
itself. All science consists of data and conclusions from those data, of
proofs and what they prove: now logic points out what relations must
subsist between data and whatever can be concluded from them, between
proof and everything which it can prove. If there be any such
indispensable relations, and if these can be precisely determined, every
particular branch of science, as well as every individual in the
guidance of his conduct, is bound to conform to those relations, under
the penalty of making false inferences—of drawing conclusions Edition:
current; Page: [11] which are not grounded in the realities of things.
Whatever has at any time been concluded justly, whatever knowledge has
been acquired otherwise than by immediate intuition, depended on the
observance of the laws which it is the province of logic to investigate.
If the conclusions are just, and the knowledge greal, those laws,
whether known or not, haveg been observed.

a§ 6.a [The utility of logic, how shown] We need not, therefore, seek
any farther for a solution of the question, so often agitated,
respecting the utility of logic. If a science of logic exists, or is
capable of existing, it must be useful. If there be rules to which every
mind bconsciously or unconsciouslyb conforms in every instance in which
it cinfersc rightly, there seems little necessity for discussing whether
a person is more likely to observe those rules, when he knows the rules,
than when he is unacquainted with them.

A science may undoubtedly be brought to a certain, not inconsiderable,
stage of advancement, without the application of any other logic to it
than what all persons, who are said to have a sound understanding,
acquire empirically in the course of their studies. dMankindd judged of
evidence, and often ecorrectly, before logic was a science, or they
never could have made it one. And they executed great mechanical works
before they understood the laws of mechanics. But there are limits both
to what mechanicians can do without principles of mechanics, and to what
thinkers can do without principles of logic. fA few individuals, gby
extraordinary genius, or by the accidental acquisition of a good set of
intellectual habits, may work without principles in the same way, hor
nearly the same way,h in which they would have worked if they had been
in possession of principles. Butg the bulk of mankind require either to
understand the theory of what they are doing, or to have rules laid down
for them by those who have understood the theory. Inf the progress of
science from its easiest to its more difficult problems, ieach great
step in advance has usuallyi had either as its precursor, or as its
accompaniment and necessary condition, a corresponding improvement in
the notions and principles of logic received among the most advanced
Edition: current; Page: [12] thinkers. And if several of the more
difficult sciences are still in so defective a state; if not only so
little is proved, but disputation has not terminated even about the
little which seemed to be so; the reason perhaps is, that men’s logical
notions have not yet acquired the degree of extension, or of accuracy,
requisite for the estimation of the evidence proper to those particular
departments of knowledge.

a§ 7.a [Definition of logic stated and illustrated] Logic, then, is the
science of the operations of the understanding which are subservient to
the estimation of evidence: both the process itself of badvancingb from
known truths to unknown, and all cother intellectual operations in so
far asc auxiliary to this. It includes, therefore, the operation of
Naming; for language is an instrument of thought, as well as a means of
communicating our thoughts. It includes, also, Definition, and
Classification. For, the use of these operations (putting all other
minds than one’s own out of consideration) is to serve not only for
keeping our evidences and the conclusions from them permanent and
readily accessible in the memory, but for so marshalling the facts which
we may at any time be engaged in investigating, as to enable us to
perceive more clearly what evidence there is, and to judge with fewer
chances of error whether it be sufficient. dThese, therefore, are
operations specially instrumental to the estimation of evidence, and, as
such, are within the province of Logic. There are other more elementary
processes, concerned in all thinking, such as Conception, Memory, and
the like; but of these it is not necessary that Logic should take any
peculiar cognizance, since they have no special connexion with the
problem of Evidence, further than that, like all other problems
addressed to the understanding, it presupposes them.d

Our object, ethene, will be, to attempt a correct analysis of the
intellectual process called Reasoning or Inference, and of such other
mental operations as are intended to facilitate this: as well as, on the
foundation of this analysis, and pari passu with it, to bring together
or frame a set of rules or canons for testing the sufficiency of any
given evidence to prove any given proposition.

With respect to the first part of this undertaking, I do not attempt to
decompose the mental operations in question into their ultimate
elements. It is enough if the analysis as far as it goes is correct, and
if it goes far enough for the practical purposes of logic considered as
an art. The separation of a complicated Edition: current; Page: [13]
phenomenon into its component parts is not like a connected and
interdependent chain of proof. If one link of an argument breaks, the
whole drops to the ground; but one step towards an analysis holds good
and has an independent value, though we should never be able to make a
second. The results fwhich have been obtained byf analytical chemistry
are not the less valuable, though it should be discovered that all which
we now call simple substances are really compounds. All other things are
at any rate compounded of those elements: whether the elements
themselves admit of decomposition, is an important inquiry, but does not
affect the certainty of the science up to that point.

gI shall, accordingly, attempt to analyse the process of inference, and
the processes subordinate to inference, so far only as may be requisite
for ascertaining the difference between a correct and an incorrect
performance of those processes. The reason for thus limiting our design,
is evident. It has been said by objectors to logic, that we do not learn
to use our muscles by studying their anatomy.[*] The fact is not quite
fairly stated; for if the action of any of our muscles were vitiated by
local weakness, or other physical defect, a knowledge of their anatomy
might be very necessary for effecting a cure. But we should be justly
liable to the criticism involved in this objection, were we, in a
treatise on logic, to carry the analysis of the reasoning process beyond
the point at which any inaccuracy which may have crept into it must
become visible. In learning bodily exercises (to carry on the same
illustration) we do, and must, analyse the bodily motions so far as is
necessary for distinguishing those which ought to be performed from
those which ought not. To a similar extent, and no further, it is
necessary that the logician should analysis the mental processes with
which Logic is concerned. hLogic has no interest in carrying the
analysis beyond the point at which it becomes apparent whether the
operations have in any individual case been rightly or wrongly
performed: in the same manner as the science of music teaches us to
discriminate between musical notes, and to know the combinations of
which they are susceptible, but not what number of vibrations in a
second correspond to each; which, though useful to be known, is useful
for totally different purposes. The extension of Logic as a Science is
determined by its necessities as an Art: whatever it does not need for
its practical ends, it leaves to the larger science which may be said to
correspond, not to any particular Edition: current; Page: [14] art, but
to art in general; the science which deals with the constitution of the
human faculties; and to which, in the part of our mental nature which
concerns Logic, as well as in all other parts, it belongs to decideh
what are ultimate facts, and what are resolvable into other facts. And I
believe it will be found that imost ofi the conclusions arrived at in
this work have no necessary connexion with any particular views
respecting the ulterior analysis. Logic is common ground on which the
partisans of Hartley and of Reid, of Locke and of Kant, may meet and
join hands. Particular and detached opinions of all these jthinkersj
will no doubt occasionally be controverted, since all of them were
logicians as well as metaphysicians; but the field on which their
kprincipalk battles have been fought, lies beyond the boundaries of our
sciencel.

It cannot, indeed, be pretended that logical principles can be
altogether irrelevant to those more abstruse discussions; nor is it
possible but that the view we are led to take of the problem which logic
proposes, must have a tendency favourable to the adoption of some one
opinion, on these controverted subjects, rather than another. mFor
metaphysics, in endeavouring to solve its own peculiar problem, must
employ means, the validity of which falls under the cognizance of logic.
It proceeds, no doubt, as far as possible, merely by a closer and more
attentive interrogation of our consciousness, or more properly speaking,
of our memory; and so far is not amenable to logic. But wherever this
method is insufficient to attain the end of its inquiries, it must
proceed, like other sciences, by means of evidence. Now, the moment this
science begins to draw inferences from evidence, logic becomes the
sovereign judge whether its inferences are well grounded, or what other
inferences would be so.

nThis, however, constitutes no nearer or other relation between logic
and metaphysics, than that which exists between logic and oevery other
scienceo. Andn I can conscientiously affirm, that no one proposition
laid down in this work has been adopted for the sake of establishing, or
with any reference to its fitness for being employed in establishing,
preconceived opinions in any Edition: current; Page: [15] department of
knowledge or of inquiry on which the speculative world is still
undecided.*

Edition: current; Page: [16] Edition: current; Page: [a]
[lf0223-07_figure_003.jpg]
The opening folio of Book I, Chapter i, of the Press-copy Manuscript
British Museum

Edition: current; Page: [17]


BOOK I: OF NAMES AND PROPOSITIONS

Edition: current; Page: [18]
“La scolastique, qui produisit dans la logique, comme dans la morale, et
dans une partie de la métaphysique, une subtilité, une précision
d’idées, dont l’habitude inconnue aux anciens, a contribué plus qu’on ne
croit au progrès de la bonne philosophie.” [Marie Jean Caritat, marquis
de] Condorcet, Vie de Turgot [London: n.p., 1786, p. 9.]

[56] “To the schoolmen the vulgar languages are principally indebted for
what precision and analytic subtlety they possess.” Sir William
Hamilton, Discussions in Philosophy [2nd ed. London: Longman, 1853, p.
5n].

Edition: current; Page: [19]


CHAPTER I: Of the Necessity of Commencing with an Analysis of Language

§ 1. [Theory of names, why a necessary part of logic] It is so much the
established practice of writers on logic to commence their treatises by
a few general observations (in most cases, it is true, rather meagre) on
Terms and their varieties, that it will, perhaps, scarcely be required
from me in merely following the common usage, to be as particular in
assigning my reasons, as it is usually expected that those should be who
deviate from it.

The practice, indeed, is recommended by considerations far too obvious
to require a formal justification. Logic is a portion of the Art of
Thinking: Language is evidently, and by the admission of all
philosophers, one of the principal instruments or helps of thought; and
any imperfection in the instrument, or in the mode of employing it, is
confessedly liable, still more than in almost any other art, to confuse
and impede the process, and destroy all ground of confidence in the
result. For a mind not previously versed in the meaning and right use of
the various kinds of words, to attempt the study of methods of
philosophizing, would be as if some one should attempt to abecomea an
astronomical observer, having never learned to adjust the focal distance
of his optical instruments so as to see distinctly.

Since Reasoning, or Inference, the principal subject of logic, is an
operation which usually takes place by means of words, and in
bcomplicated cases can take place in no other way; those who have not a
thorough insight into the signification and purposes of words, will be
under cchances, amounting almost to certainty,c of reasoning or
inferring incorrectly. And logicians have generally felt that unless, in
the very first stage, they removed this dsource of error; unless they
taught their pupil to put away the glasses which distort the object, and
to use those which are adapted to his purpose in such a manner as to
assist, not perplex, his vision; he would not be in a condition to
practise the remaining part of their discipline with any prospect of
advantage. Therefore it is that an inquiry into language, so far as is
needful to guard Edition: current; Page: [20] against the errors to
which it gives rise, has at all times been deemed a necessary
preliminary to the estudye of logic.

But there is another reason, of a still more fundamental nature, why the
import of words should be the earliest subject of the logician’s
consideration: because without it he cannot examine into the import of
Propositions. Now this is a subject which stands on the very threshold
of the science of logic.

The object of logic, as defined in the Introductory Chapter, is to
ascertain how we come by that portion of our knowledge (much the
greatest portion) which is not intuitive: and by what criterion we can,
in matters not self-evident, distinguish between things proved and
things not proved, between what is worthy and what is unworthy of
belief. Of the various questions which fpresent themselves to our
inquiring faculties, some receive an answer from direct consciousness,
others, if resolved at all, can only be resolvedf by means of evidence.
Logic is concerned with these last. gBut before inquiring into the mode
of resolving questions, it is necessary to inquire what are hthose which
offerh themselves; what questions are conceivable; what inquiries are
there, to which imankindi have either obtained, or been able to imagine
it possible that they should obtain, an answer. This point is best
ascertained by a survey and analysis of Propositions.

§ 2. [First step in the analysis of Propositions] The answer to every
question which it is possible to frame, amust bea contained in a
Proposition, or Assertion. Whatever can be an object of belief, or even
of disbelief, must, when put into words, assume the form of a
proposition. All truth and all error lie in propositions. What, by a
convenient misapplication of an abstract term, we call a Truth, bmeansb
simply a True Proposition; and errors are false propositions. To know
the import of all possible propositions, would be to know all questions
which can be raised, all matters which are susceptible of being either
believed or disbelieved. How many kinds of inquiries can be propounded;
how many kinds of judgments can be cmadec; and how many kinds of
propositions it is possible to frame with a meaning; are but different
forms of one and the same question. Since, then, the objects of all
Belief and of all Inquiry express themselves in propositions; a
sufficient scrutiny of Propositions and of their varieties will apprize
us what questions mankind have actually asked dofd themselves, and what,
in the nature of answers to those questions, they have actually thought
they had grounds to believe.

Edition: current; Page: [21]
Now the first glance at a proposition shows that it is formed by putting
together two names. A proposition, according to the common simple
definition, which is sufficient for our purpose, is, discourse, in which
something is affirmed or denied of something. Thus, in the proposition,
Gold is yellow, the quality yellow is affirmed of the substance gold. In
the proposition, Franklin was not born in England, the fact expressed by
the words born in England is denied of the man Franklin.

Every proposition consists of three parts: the Subject, the Predicate,
and the Copula. The predicate is the name denoting that which is
affirmed or denied. The subject is the name denoting the person or thing
which something is affirmed or denied of. The copula is the sign
denoting that there is an affirmation or denial; and thereby enabling
the hearer or reader to distinguish a proposition from any other kind of
discourse. Thus, in the proposition, The earth is round, the Predicate
is the word round, which denotes the quality affirmed, or (as the phrase
is) predicated: the earth, words denoting the object which that quality
is affirmed of, compose the Subject; the word is, which serves as the
connecting mark between the subject and predicate, to show that one of
them is affirmed of the other, is called the Copula.

Dismissing, for the present, the copula, of which more will be said
hereafter, every proposition, then, consists of at least two names;
brings together two names, in a particular manner. This is already a
first step towards what we are in quest of. It appears from this, that
for an act of belief, one object is not sufficient; the simplest act of
belief supposes, and has something to do with, two objects: two names,
to say the least; and (since the names must be names of something) two
nameable things. A large class of thinkers would cut the matter short by
saying, two ideas. They would say, that the subject and predicate are
both of them names of ideas; the idea of gold, for instance, and the
idea of yellow; and that what takes place (or epart of what takes place)
in the act of belief, consists in bringing (as it is often expressed)
one of these ideas under the other. But this we are not yet in a
condition to say: whether such be the correct mode of describing the
phenomenon, is an after consideration. The result with which for the
present we must be contented, is, that in every act of belief two
objects are in some manner taken cognizance of; that there can be no
belief claimed, or question propounded, which does not embrace two
distinct (either material or intellectual) subjects of thought; each of
them capable, or not, of being conceived by itself, but incapable of
being believed by itself.

I may say, for instance, “the sun.” The word has a meaning, and suggests
that meaning to the mind of any one who is listening to me. But suppose
I ask him, Whether it is true: whether he believes it? He can give no
answer. There is as yet nothing to believe, or to disbelieve. Now,
however, let me make, of all possible assertions respecting the sun, the
one which involves Edition: current; Page: [22] the least of reference
to any object besides itself; let me say, “the sun exists.” Here, at
once, is something which a person can say he believes. But here, instead
of only one, we find two distinct objects of conception: the sun is one
object; existence is another. Let it not be said that this second
conception, existence, is involved in the first; for the sun may be
conceived as no longer existing. “The sun” does not convey all the
meaning that is conveyed by “the sun exists:” “my father” does not
include all the meaning of “my father exists,” for he may be dead; “a
round square” does not include the meaning of “a round square exists,”
for it does not and cannot exist. When I say “the sun,” “my father,” or
a “round square,” I fdo not call upon the hearer for anyf belief or
disbelief, nor can either the one or the other be afforded me; but if I
say, “the sun exists,” “my father exists,” or “a round square exists,” I
call for belief; and should, in the first of the three instances, meet
with it; in the second, with belief or disbelief, as the case might be;
in the third, with disbelief.

§ 3. [Names must be studied before things] This first step in the
analysis of the object of belief, which, though so obvious, will be
found to be not unimportant, is the only one which we shall find it
practicable to make without a preliminary survey of language. If we
attempt to proceed further in the same path, that is, to analyse any
further the import of Propositions; we find forced upon us, as a subject
of previous consideration, the import of Names. For every proposition
consists of two names; and every proposition affirms or denies one of
these names, of the other. Now what we do, what passes in our mind, when
we affirm or deny two names of one another, must depend on what they are
names of; since it is with reference to that, and not to the mere names
themselves, that we make the affirmation or denial. Here, therefore, we
find a new reason why the signification of names, and the relation
generally between names and the things signified by them, must occupy
the preliminary stage of the inquiry we are engaged in.

It may be objected that the meaning of names can guide us at most only
to the opinions, possibly the foolish and groundless opinions, which
mankind have formed concerning things, and that as the object of
philosophy is truth, not opinion, the philosopher should dismiss words
and look into things themselves, to ascertain what questions can be
asked and answered in regard to them. This advice (which ano one has it
in his power to follow) is in reality an exhortation to discard the
whole fruits of the labours of his predecessors, and bconductb himself
as if he were the first person who had ever turned an inquiring eye upon
nature. What does any one’s personal knowledge of Edition: current;
Page: [23] Things amount to, after subtracting all which he has acquired
by means of the words of other people? Even after he has learned as much
as cpeoplec usually do learn from others, will the notions of things
contained in his individual mind afford as sufficient a basis for a
catalogue raisonné as the notions which are in the minds of all mankind?

dIn any enumeration and classification of Things, which does not set out
from their names, no varieties of things will of course be comprehended
but those recognised by the particular inquirer; and it will still
remain eto be establishede, by a subsequent examination of names, that
fthef enumeration has omitted nothing which ought to have been included.
But if we begin with names, and use them as our clue to the things, we
bring at once before us all the distinctions which have been recognised,
not by a single inquirerg, but by all inquirers taken togetherg. It
doubtless may, and I believe it will, be found, that mankind have
multiplied the varieties unnecessarily, and have imagined distinctions
among things, where there were only distinctions in the manner of naming
them. But we are not entitled to assume this in the commencement. We
must begin by recognising the distinctions made by ordinary language. If
some of these appear, on a close examination, not to be fundamental,
htheh enumeration of the different kinds of realities may be abridged
accordingly. But to impose upon the facts in the first instance the yoke
of a theory, while the grounds of the theory are reserved for discussion
in a subsequent stage, is inot a course which a logician can reasonably
adopt.

Edition: current; Page: [24]


CHAPTER II: Of Names

§ 1. [Names are names of things, not of our ideas] “A name,” says
Hobbes,* “is a word taken at pleasure to serve for a mark which may
raise in our mind a thought like to some thought we had before, and
which being pronounced to others, may be to them a sign of what thought
the speaker had† before in his mind.” This simple definition of a name,
as a word (or set of words) serving the double purpose of a mark to
recall to ourselves the likeness of a former thought, and a sign to make
it known to others, appears unexceptionable. Names, indeed, do much more
than this; but whatever else they do, grows out of, and is the result of
this: as will appear in its proper place.

Are names more properly said to be the names of things, or of our ideas
of things? The first is the expression in common use; the last is that
of some ametaphysiciansa, who conceived that in adopting it they were
introducing a highly important distinction. The eminent thinker, just
quoted, seems to countenance the latter opinion. “But seeing,” he
continues, “names ordered in speech (as is defined) are signs of our
conceptions, it is manifest they are not signs of the things themselves;
for that the sound of this word stone should be the sign of a stone,
cannot be understood in any sense but this, that he that hears it
collects that he that pronounces it thinks of a stone.”[*]

If it be merely meant that the conception alone, and not the thing
itself, is recalled by the name, or imparted to the hearer, this of
course cannot be denied. Nevertheless, there seems good reason for
adhering to the common usage, and calling b(as indeed Hobbes himself
does in other places)b the word sun the name of the sun, and not the
name of our idea of the sun. For names are not intended only to make the
hearer conceive what we conceive, but also to inform him what we
believe. Now, when I use a name for the purpose of expressing a belief,
it is a belief concerning the thing itself, not Edition: current; Page:
[25] concerning my idea of it. When I say, “the sun is the cause of
day,” I do not mean that my idea of the sun causes or excites in me the
idea of day; cor in other words, that thinking of the sun makes me think
of day. I mean, that a certain physical fact, which is called the sun’s
presence (and which, in the ultimate analysis, resolves itself into
sensations, not ideas) causes another physical fact, which is called
dayc. It seems proper to consider a word as the name of that which we
intend to be understood by it when we use it; of that which any fact
that we assert of it is to be understood of; that, in short, concerning
which, when we employ the word, we intend to give information. Names,
therefore, shall always be spoken of in this work as the names of things
themselves, and not merely of our ideas of things.

But the question now arises, of what things? and to answer this it is
necessary to take into consideration the different kinds of names.

§ 2. [Words which are not names, but parts of names] It is usual, before
examining the various classes into which names are commonly divided, to
begin by distinguishing from names of aeverya description, those words
which are not names, but only parts of names. Among such are reckoned
particles, as of, to, truly, often; the inflected cases of nouns
substantive, as me, him, John’s; band even adjectives, as large, heavy.
These words do not express things of which anything can be affirmed or
denied. We cannot say, Heavy fell, or A heavy fell; Truly, or A truly,
was asserted; Of, or An of, was in the room. Unless, indeed, we are
speaking of the mere words themselves, as when we say, Truly is an
English word, or, Heavy is an adjective. In that case they are complete
names, viz. names of those particular sounds, or of those particular
collections of written characters. This employment of a word to denote
the mere letters and syllables of which it is composed, was termed by
the schoolmen the suppositio materialis of the word. In any other sense
we cannot introduce one of these words into the subject of a
proposition, unless in combination with other words; as, A heavy body
fell, A truly important fact was asserted, A member of parliament was in
the room.

An adjective, however, is capable of standing by itself as the predicate
of a proposition; as when we say, Snow is white; and occasionally even
as the subject, for we may say, White is an agreeable colour. The
adjective is often said to be so used by a grammatical ellipsis: Snow is
white, instead of Snow Edition: current; Page: [26] is a white object;
White is an agreeable colour, instead of, A white colour, or, The colour
cwhite, is agreeable. The Greeks and Romans were dallowedd, by the rules
of their language, to employ this ellipsis universally in the subject as
well as in the predicate of a proposition. In English this cannot,
generally speaking, be done. We may say, The earth is round; but we
cannot say, Round is easily moved; we must say, A round object. eThise
distinction, however, is rather grammatical than logical. Since there is
no difference of meaning between round, and a round object, it is only
custom which prescribes that on any given occasion one shall be used,
and not the other. We shall, therefore, without scruple, speak of
adjectives as names, whether in their own right, or as representative of
the more circuitous forms of expression above exemplified. The other
classes of subsidiary words have no title whatever to be considered as
names. An adverb, or an accusative case, cannot under any circumstances
(except when their mere letters and syllables are spoken of) figure as
one of the terms of a proposition.

Words which are not capable of being used as names, but only as parts of
names, were called by some of the schoolmen Syncategorematic terms: from
σὺν, with, and κατηγορέω, to predicate, because it was only with some
other word that they could be predicated. A word which could be used
either as the subject or predicate of a proposition without being
accompanied by any other word, was termed by the same authorities a
Categorematic term. A combination of one or more Categorematic, and one
or more Syncategorematic words, as A heavy body, or A court of justice,
they sometimes called a mixed term; but this seems a needless
multiplication of technical expressions. A mixed term is, in the only
useful sense of the word, Categorematic. It belongs to the class of what
have been called many-worded names.

For, as one word is frequently not a name, but only part of a name, so a
number of words often compose one single name, and no more. fThese
words, “The place which the wisdom or policy of antiquity had destined
for the residence of the Abyssinian princes,”f[*] form in the estimation
of the logician only one name; one Categorematic gtermg. A mode of
determining whether any set of words makes only one name, or more than
one, is by Edition: current; Page: [27] predicating something of it, and
observing whether, by this predication, we make only one assertion or
several. Thus, when we say, John Nokes, who was the mayor of the town,
died yesterday—by this predication we make but one assertion; whence it
appears that “John Nokes, who was the mayor of the town,” is no more
than one name. It is true that in this proposition, besides the
assertion that John Nokes died yesterday, there is included another
assertion, namely, that John Nokes was hmayor of the town. But this last
assertion was already made: we did not make it by adding the predicate,
“died yesterday.” Suppose, however, that the words had been, John Nokes
and the mayor of the town, they would have formed two names instead of
one. For when we say, John Nokes and the mayor of the town died
yesterday, we make two assertions: one, that John Nokes died yesterday;
the other, that the mayor of the town died yesterday.

It being needless to illustrate at any greater length the subject of
many-worded names, we proceed to the distinctions which have been
established among names, not according to the words they are composed
of, but according to their signification.

§ 3. [General and Singular names] All names are names of something, real
or imaginary; but all things have not names appropriated to them
individually. For some individual objects we require, and consequently
have, separate distinguishing names; there is a name for every person,
and for every remarkable place. Other objects, of which we have not
occasion to speak so frequently, we do not designate by a name of their
own; but when the necessity arises for naming them, we do so by putting
together several words, each of which, by itself, might be and is used
for an indefinite number of other objects; as when I say, this stone:
“this” and “stone” being, each of them, names that may be used of many
other objects besides the particular one meant, though the only object
of which they can both be used at the given moment, consistently with
their signification, may be the one of which I wish to speak.

Were this the sole purpose for which names, that are common to more
things than one, could be employed; if they only served, by mutually
limiting each other, to afford a designation for such individual objects
as have no names of their own: they could only be ranked among
contrivances for economizing the use of language. But it is evident that
this is not their sole function. It is by their means that we are
enabled to assert general propositions; to affirm or deny any predicate
of an indefinite number of things at once. The distinction, therefore,
between general names, and individual or singular names, is fundamental;
and may be considered as the first grand division of names.

Edition: current; Page: [28]
A general name is familiarly defined, a name which is capable of being
truly affirmed, in the same sense, of each of an indefinite number of
things. An individual or singular name is a name which is only capable
of being truly affirmed, in the same sense, of one thing.

Thus, man is capable of being truly affirmed of John, aGeorge, Marya,
and other persons without assignable blimitb; and it is affirmed of all
of them in the same sense; for the word man expresses certain qualities,
and when we predicate it of those persons, we assert that they all
possess those qualities. But John is only capable of being truly
affirmed of one single person, at least in the same sense. For, though
there are many persons who bear that name, it is not conferred upon them
to indicate any qualities, or anything which belongs to them in common;
and cannot be said to be affirmed of them in any sense at all,
consequently not in the same sense. c“The king who succeeded William the
Conqueror,”c is also an individual name. For, that there dcannot be more
than one persond of whom it can be truly affirmed, is implied in the
meaning of the words. eEven “the king,” when the occasion or the context
defines the individual of whom it is to be understood, may justly be
regarded as an individual name.e

It is not unusual, by way of explaining what is meant by a general name,
to say that it is the name of a class. But this, though a convenient
mode of expression for some purposes, is objectionable as a definition,
since it explains the clearer of two things by the more obscure. It
would be more logical to reverse the proposition, and turn it into a
definition of the word class: “A class is the indefinite multitude of
individuals denoted by a general name.”

It is necessary to distinguish general from collective names. A general
name is one which can be predicated of each individual of a multitude; a
collective name cannot be predicated of each separately, but only of all
taken together. “The 76th regiment of foot fin the British armyf,” which
is a collective name, is not a general but an individual name; for
though it can be predicated of a multitude of individual soldiers taken
jointly, it cannot be predicated of them severally. We may say, Jones is
a soldier, and Thompson is a soldier, and Smith is a soldier, but we
cannot say, Jones is the 76th regiment, and Thompson is the 76th
regiment, and Smith is the 76th regiment. We can only say, Jones, and
Thompson, and Smith, and Brown, and so forth (enumerating all the
soldiers), are the 76th regiment.

“The 76th regiment” is a collective name, but not a general one: “a
Edition: current; Page: [29] regiment” is both a collective and a
general name. General with respect to all individual regiments, of each
of which separately it can be affirmed: collective with respect to the
individual soldiers of whom any regiment is composed.

§ 4. [Concrete and Abstract names] The second general division of names
is into concrete and abstract. A concrete name is a name which stands
for a thing; an abstract name is a name which stands for an attribute of
a thing. Thus John, the sea, this table, are names of things. White,
also, is a name of a thing, or rather of things. Whiteness, again, is
the name of a quality or attribute of those things. Man is a name of
many things; humanity is a name of an attribute of those things. Old is
a name of things; old age is a name of one of their attributes.

I have used the words concrete and abstract in the sense annexed to them
by the schoolmen, who, notwithstanding the imperfections of their
philosophy, were unrivalled in the construction of technical language,
and whose definitions, in logic at least, though they never went more
than a little way into the subject, have seldom, I think, been altered
but to be spoiled. A practice, however, has grown up in more modern
times, which, if not introduced by Locke, has gained currency chiefly
from his example, of applying the expression “abstract name” to all
names which are the result of abstraction or generalization, and
consequently to all general names, instead of confining it to the names
of attributes. The metaphysicians of the Condillac school,—whose
admiration of Locke, passing over the profoundest speculations of that
truly original genius, usually fastens with peculiar eagerness upon his
weakest points,—have gone on imitating him in this abuse of language,
until there is now some difficulty in restoring the word to its original
signification. A more wanton alteration in the meaning of a word is
rarely to be met with; for the expression general name, the exact
equivalent of which exists in all languages I am acquainted with, was
already available for the purpose to which abstract has been
misappropriated, while the misappropriation leaves that important class
of words, the names of attributes, without any compact distinctive
appellation. The old acceptation, however, has not gone so completely
out of use, as to deprive those who still adhere to it of all chance of
being understood. By abstract, then, I shall aalways, in Logic proper,
meana the opposite of concrete; by an abstract name, the name of an
attribute; by a concrete name, the name of an object.

Do abstract names belong to the class of general, or to that of singular
names? Some of them are certainly general. I mean those which are names
not of one single and definite attribute, but of a class of attributes.
Such is the word colour, which is a name common to whiteness, redness,
&c. Such is Edition: current; Page: [30] even the word whiteness, in
respect of the different shades of whiteness to which it is applied in
common; the word magnitude, in respect of the various degrees of
magnitude and the various dimensions of space; the word weight, in
respect of the various degrees of weight. Such also is the word
attribute itself, the common name of all particular attributes. But when
only one attribute, neither variable in degree nor in kind, is
designated by the name; as visibleness; tangibleness; equality;
squareness; milkwhiteness; then the name can hardly be considered
general; for though it denotes an attribute of many different objects,
the attribute itself is always conceived as one, not many.* bTo avoid
needless logomachies, the best course would probablyb be to consider
these names as neither general nor individual, candc to place them in a
class apart.

It may be objected to our definition of an abstract name, that not only
the names which we have called abstract, but adjectives, which we have
placed in the concrete class, are names of attributes; that white, for
example, is as much the name of the colour as whiteness is. But (as
before remarked) a word ought to be considered as the name of that which
we intend to be understood by it when we put it to its principal use,
that is, when we employ it in predication. When we say snow is white,
milk is white, linen is white, we do not mean it to be understood that
snow, or linen, or milk, is a colour. We mean that they are things
having the colour. The reverse is the case with the word whiteness; what
we affirm to be whiteness is not snow, but the colour of snow.
Whiteness, therefore, is the name of the colour exclusively: white is a
name of all things whatever having the colour; a name, not of the
quality whiteness, but of every white object. It is true, this name was
given to all those various objects on account of the quality; and we may
therefore say, without impropriety, that the quality forms part of its
signification; but a name can only be said to stand for, or to be a name
of, the things of which it can be predicated. We shall presently see
that all names which can be said to have any signification, dall namesd
by applying which to an individual we give any information respecting
that individual, may be said to imply an attribute of some sort; but
they are not names of the attribute; it has its own proper abstract
name.

§ 5. [Connotative and Non-connotative names] This leads ato the
consideration of aa third great division of names, into connotative and
non-connotative, Edition: current; Page: [31] the latter sometimes, but
improperly, called absolute. This is one of the most important
distinctions which we shall have occasion to point out, and one of those
which go deepest into the nature of language.

A non-connotative term is one which signifies a subject only, or an
attribute only. A connotative term is one which denotes a subject, and
implies an attribute. By a subject is here meant anything which
possesses attributes. Thus John, or London, or England, are names which
signify a subject only. Whiteness, length, virtue, signify an attribute
only. None of these names, therefore, are connotative. But white, long,
virtuous, are connotative. The word white, denotes all white things, as
snow, paper, the foam of the sea, &c., and implies, or bin the language
ofb the schoolmen, connotes,* the attribute whiteness. The word white is
not predicated of the attribute, but of the subjects, snow, &c.; but
when we predicate it of them, we cconvey the meaningc that the attribute
whiteness belongs to them. The same may be said of the other words above
cited. Virtuous, for example, is the name of a class, which includes
Socrates, Howard, the Man of Ross, and an dundefinabled number of other
individuals, past, present, and to come. eThesee individuals,
collectively and severally, can alone be said with propriety to be
denoted by the word: of them alone can it properly be said to be a name.
But it is a name applied to fall of themf in consequence of an attribute
which they gare supposed tog possess in common, the attribute which hhas
received the name ofh virtue. It is applied to all beings that are
considered to possess this attribute; and to none which are not so
considered.

All concrete general names are connotative. The word man, for example,
denotes Peter, iJanei, John, and an indefinite number of other
individuals, of whom, taken as a class, it is the name. But it is
applied to them, because they possess, and to signify that they possess,
certain attributes. These seem to be, corporeity, animal life,
rationality, and a certain external form, which for distinction we call
the human. Every existing thing, which possessed all these attributes,
would be called a man; and anything which possessed none of them, or
only one, or two, or even three of them without the fourth, would not be
so called. For example, if in the interior of Africa there were to be
discovered a race of animals possessing reason equal to that of human
beings, Edition: current; Page: [32] but with the form of an elephant,
they would not be called men. Swift’s Houyhnhnms[*] jwould not bej so
called. Or if such newly-discovered beings possessed the form of man
without any vestige of reason, it is probable that some other name than
that of man would be found for them. How it happens that there can be
any doubt about the matter, will appear hereafter. The word man,
therefore, signifies all these attributes, and all subjects which
possess these attributes. But it can be predicated only of the subjects.
What we call men, are the subjects, the individual Stiles and Nokes; not
the qualities by which their humanity is constituted. The name,
therefore, is said to signify the subjects directly, the attributes
indirectly; it denotes the subjects, and implies, or involves, or
indicates, or as we shall say henceforth connotes, the attributes. It is
a connotative name.

Connotative names have hence been also called denominative, because the
subject which they denote is denominated by, or receives a name from the
attribute which they connote. Snow, and other objects, receive the name
white, because they possess the attribute which is called whiteness;
kPeter, James, and othersk receive the name man because they possess the
attributes which are considered to constitute humanity. The attribute,
or attributes, may therefore be said to denominate those objects, or to
give them a common name.*

It has been seen that all concrete general names are connotative. Even
abstract names, though the names only of attributes, may in some
instances be justly considered as connotative; for attributes themselves
may have attributes ascribed to them; and a word which denotes
attributes may connote an attribute of those attributes. mOf this
description, for example, ism such a word as fault; equivalent to bad or
hurtful quality. This word is a name common to many attributes, and
connotes hurtfulness, an attribute of those various attributes. When,
for example, we say that slowness, in a horse, is a fault, we do not
mean that the slow movement, the actual change of place of the slow
horse, nis a bad thingn, but that the property or peculiarity of the
horse, from which it derives that name, the quality of being a slow
mover, is an undesirable peculiarity.

Edition: current; Page: [33]
In regard to those concrete names which are not general but individual,
a distinction must be made.

Proper names are not connotative: they denote the individuals who are
called by them; but they do not indicate or imply any attributes as
belonging to those individuals. When we name a child by the name oPaulo,
or a dog by the name Cæsar, these names are simply marks used to enable
those individuals to be made subjects of discourse. It may be said,
indeed, that we must have had some reason for giving them those names
rather than any others; and this is true; but the name, once given, pisp
independent of the reason. A man may have been named John, because that
was the name of his father; a town may have been named Dartmouth,
because it is situated at the mouth of the Dart. But it is no part of
the signification of the word John, that the father of the person so
called bore the same name; nor even of the word Dartmouth, to be
situated at the mouth of the Dart. If sand should choke up the mouth of
the river, or an earthquake change its course, and remove it to a
distance from the town, qthe name of the town would not necessarilyq be
changed. That fact, therefore, can form no part of the signification of
the word; for otherwise, when the fact rconfessedly ceased to be true,
no one would any longer think of applying the namer. Proper names are
attached to the objects themselves, and are not dependent on the
continuance of any attribute of the object.

But there is another kind of names, which, although they are individual
names, that is, predicable only of one object, are really connotative.
For, though we may give to an individual a name utterly unmeaning, which
we call a proper name,—a word which answers the purpose of showing what
thing it is we are talking about, but not of telling anything about it;
yet a name peculiar to an individual is not necessarily of this
description. It may be significant of some attribute, or some union of
attributes, which, being possessed by no object but one, determines the
name exclusively to that individual. “The sun” is a name of this
description; “God,” when used by a smonotheists, is another. These,
however, are scarcely examples of what we are now attempting to
illustrate, being, in strictness of language, general, tnot individual
names: for, however they may be in fact predicable only of one object,
there is nothing in the meaning of the words themselves which implies
this: and, accordingly, when we are imagining and not affirming, we may
speak of many suns; and the majority of mankind have believed, and still
believe, that there are many gods. But it is easy to produce words which
Edition: current; Page: [34] are real instances of connotative
individual names. It may be part of the meaning of the connotative name
itself, that there ucan existu but one individual possessing the
attribute which it connotes: as, for instance, “the only son of John
Stiles;” “the first emperor of Rome.” Or the attribute connoted may be a
connexion with some determinate event, and the connexion may be of such
a kind as only one individual could have; or may at least be such as
only one individual actually had; and this may be implied in the form of
the expression. “The father of Socrates” is an example of the one kind
(since Socrates could not have had two fathers); “the author of the
Iliad,” “the murderer of Henri Quatre,” of the second. For, though it is
conceivable that more persons than one might have participated in the
authorship of the Iliad, or in the murder of Henri Quatre, the
employment of the article the implies that, in fact, this was not the
case. What is here done by the word the, is done in other cases by the
context: thus, “Cæsar’s army” is an individual name, if it appears from
the context that the army meant is that which Cæsar commanded in a
particular battle. The still more general expressions, “the Roman army,”
or “the Christian army,” may be individualized in a similar manner.
Another case of frequent occurrence has already been noticed; it is the
following. The name, being a many-worded one, may consist, in the first
place, of a general name, capable therefore in itself of being affirmed
of more things than one, but which is, in the second place, so limited
by other words joined with it, that the entire expression can only be
predicated of one object, consistently with the meaning of the general
term. This is exemplified in such an instance as the following: “the
present prime minister of England.” Prime Minister of England is a
general name; the attributes which it connotes may be possessed by an
indefinite number of persons: in succession however, not simultaneously;
since the meaning of the vnamev itself imports (among other things) that
there can be only one such person at a time. This being the case, and
the application of the name being afterwards limited by wthe article
andw the word present, to such individuals as possess the attributes at
one indivisible point of time, it becomes applicable only to one
individual. And as this appears from the meaning of the name, without
any extrinsic proof, it is strictly an individual name.

From the preceding observations it will easily be collected, that
whenever the names given to objects convey any information, that is,
whenever they have properly any meaning, the meaning resides not in what
they denote, but in what they connote. The only names of objects which
connote nothing are proper names; and these have, strictly speaking, no
signification.*

Edition: current; Page: [35]
If, like the robber in the Arabian Nights,[*] we make a mark with chalk
on a house to enable us to know it again, the mark has a purpose, but it
has not properly any meaning. The chalk does not declare anything about
the house; it does not mean, This is such a person’s house, or This is a
house which contains booty. The object of making the mark is merely
distinction. I say to myself, All these houses are so nearly alike that
if I lose sight of them I shall not again be able to distinguish that
which I am now looking at, from any of the others; I must therefore
contrive to make the appearance of this one house unlike that of the
others, that I may hereafter know when I see the mark—not indeed any
attribute of the house—but simply that it is the same house which I am
now looking at. Morgiana chalked all the other houses in a similar
manner, and defeated the scheme: how? simply by obliterating the
difference of appearance between that house and the others. The chalk
was still there, but it no longer served the purpose of a distinctive
mark.

When we impose a proper name, we perform an operation in some degree
analogous to what the robber intended in chalking the house. We put a
mark, not indeed upon the object itself, but, xso tox speak, upon the
idea of the object. A proper name is but an unmeaning mark which we
connect in our minds with the idea of the object, in order that whenever
the mark meets our eyes or occurs to our thoughts, we may think of that
individual object. Not being attached to the thing itself, it does noty,
like the chalk, enable usy to distinguish the object when we see it; but
it enables us to distinguish it when it is spoken of, either in the
records of our own experience, or in the discourse of others; to know
that what we find asserted in any proposition of which it is the
subject, is asserted of the individual thing with which we were
previously acquainted.

When we predicate of anything its proper name; when we say, pointing to
a man, this is Brown or Smith, or pointing to a city, that it is York,
we do not, merely by so doing, convey to the hearer any information
about them, Edition: current; Page: [36] except that those are their
names. By enabling him to identify the individuals, we may connect them
with information previously possessed by him; by saying, This is York,
we may tell him that it contains the Minster. But this is in virtue of
what he has previously heard concerning York; not by anything implied in
the name. It is otherwise when objects are spoken of by connotative
names. When we say, The town is built of marble, we give the hearer what
may be entirely new information, and this merely by the signification of
the many-worded connotative name, “built of marble.” Such names are not
signs of the mere objects, invented because we have occasion to think
and speak of those objects individually; but signs which accompany an
attribute: a kind of livery in which the attribute clothes all objects
which are recognised as possessing it. They are not mere marks, but
more, that is to say, significant marks; and the connotation is what
constitutes their significance.

As a proper name is said to be the name of the one individual which it
is predicated of, so (as well from the importance of adhering to
analogy, as for the other reasons formerly assigned) a connotative name
ought to be considered a name of all the various individuals which it is
predicable of, or in other words denotes, and not of what it connotes.
But by learning what things it is a name of, we do not learn the meaning
of the name: for to the same thing we may, with equal propriety, apply
many names, not equivalent in meaning. Thus, I call a certain man by the
name Sophroniscus: I call him by another name, The father of Socrates.
Both these are names of the same individual, but their meaning is
altogether different; they are applied to that individual for two
different purposes: the one, merely to distinguish him from other
persons who are spoken of; the other to indicate a fact relating to him,
the fact that Socrates was his son. I further apply to him these other
expressions: a man, a Greek, an Athenian, a sculptor, an old man, an
honest man, a brave man. All these arez, or may be,z names of
Sophroniscus, not indeed of him alone, but of him and each of an
indefinite number of other human beings. Each of these names is applied
to Sophroniscus for a different reason, and by each whoever understands
its meaning is apprised of a distinct fact or number of facts concerning
him; but those who knew nothing about the names except that they were
applicable to Sophroniscus, would be altogether ignorant of their
meaning. It is even apossiblea that I might know every single individual
of whom a given name could be with truth affirmed, and yet could not be
said to know the meaning of the name. A child knows who are its brothers
and sisters, long before it has any definite conception of the nature of
the facts which are involved in the signification of those words.

In some cases it is not easy to decide precisely how much a particular
word does or does not connote; that is, we do not exactly know (the case
not Edition: current; Page: [37] having arisen) what degree of
difference in the object would occasion a difference in the name. Thus,
it is clear that the word man, besides animal life and rationality,
connotes also a certain external form; but it would be impossible to say
precisely what form; that is, to decide how great a deviation from the
form ordinarily found in the beings whom we are accustomed to call men,
would suffice in a newly-discovered race to make us refuse them the name
of man. Rationality, also, being a quality which admits of degrees, it
has never been settled what is the lowest degree of that quality which
would entitle any creature to be considered a human being. In all such
cases, the meaning of the general name is so far unsettled and vague;
mankind have not come to any positive agreement about the matter. When
we come to treat of Classification, we shall have occasion to show under
what conditions this vagueness may exist without practical
inconvenience; and cases will appear in which the ends of language are
better promoted by it than by complete precision; in order that, in
natural history for instance, individuals or species of no very marked
character may be ranged with those more strongly characterized
individuals or species to which, in all their properties taken together,
they bear the nearest resemblance.

But this partial uncertainty in the connotation of names can only be
free from mischief when guarded by strict precautions. One of the chief
sources, indeed, of lax habits of thought, is the custom of using
connotative terms without a distinctly ascertained connotation, and
bwith nob more precise notion of their meaning than can be loosely
collected from observing what objects they are used to cdenotec. It is
in this manner that we all acquire, and inevitably so, our first
knowledge of our vernacular language. A child learns the meaning of the
words man, or white, by hearing them applied to a variety of individual
objects, and finding out, by a process of generalization and analysis
dwhich he could not himself described, what those different objects have
in common. In the case of these two words the process is so easy as to
require no assistance from culture; the objects called human beings, and
the objects called white, differing from all others by qualities of a
peculiarly definite and obvious character. But in many other cases,
objects bear a general resemblance to one another, which eleads to their
being familiarly classed together under a common name, while, without
more analytic habits than the generality of mankind possess, it is not
immediately apparent what are the particular attributes, upon the
possession of which in common by them all, their general resemblance
depends. When this is the case, fpeoplef use the name without any
recognised connotation, that is, without any precise Edition: current;
Page: [38] meaning; they talk, and consequently think, vaguely, and
remain contented to attach only the same degree of significance to their
own words, which a child gthree years old attaches to the words brother
and sister. The child at least is seldom puzzled by the starting up of
new individuals, on whom he is ignorant whether or not to confer the
title; because there is usually an authority close at hand competent to
solve all doubts. But a similar resource does not exist in the
generality of cases; and new objects are continually presenting
themselves to men, women, and children, which they are called upon to
class proprio motu. They, accordingly, do this on no other principle
than that of superficial similarity, giving to each new object the name
of that familiar object, the idea of which it most readily recalls, or
which, on a cursory inspection, it seems to them most to resemble: as an
unknown substance found in the ground will be called, according to its
texture, earth, sand, or a stone. In this manner, names creep on from
subject to subject, until all traces of a common meaning sometimes
disappear, and the word comes to denote a number of things not only
independently of any common attribute, but which have actually no
attribute in common; or none but what is shared by other things to which
the name is capriciously refused.* Even iscientific writersi have aided
in this perversion of general language from its Edition: current; Page:
[39] purpose; sometimes because, like the vulgar, they knew no better;
and sometimes in deference to that aversion to admit new words, which
induces mankind, on all subjects not considered technical, to attempt to
make the original jstock of names serve with but little augmentation to
express a constantly increasing number of objects and distinctions, and,
consequently, to express them in a manner progressively more and more
imperfect.

To what kak degree this loose mode of classing and denominating objects
has rendered the vocabulary of mental and moral philosophy unfit for the
purposes of accurate thinking, is best known to whoever has most
lmeditatedl on the present condition of those branches of knowledge.
Since, however, the introduction of a new technical language as the
vehicle of speculations on msubjects belonging to the domain of daily
discussion, is extremely difficult to effect, and would not be free from
inconvenience even if effected,m the problem for the philosopher, and
one of the most difficult which he has to resolve, is, in retaining the
existing phraseology, how best to alleviate its imperfections. This can
only be accomplished by giving to every general concrete name which
nthere isn frequent occasion to predicate, a definite and fixed
connotation; in order that it may be known what attributes, when we call
an object by that name, we really mean to predicate of the object. And
the question of most nicety is, how to give this fixed connotation to a
name, with the least possible change in the objects which the name is
habitually employed to odenoteo; with the least possible disarrangement,
either by adding or subtraction, of the group of objects whichp, in
however imperfect a manner, it servesp to circumscribe and hold
together; and with the least vitiation of the truth of any propositions
which are commonly received as true.

This desirable purpose, of giving a fixed connotation where it is
wanting, is the end aimed at whenever any one attempts to give a
definition of a general name already in use; every definition of a
connotative name being an attempt either merely to declare, or to
declare and analyse, the connotation of the name. And the fact, that no
questions which have arisen in the moral sciences have been subjects of
keener controversy than the definitions of almost all the leading
expressions, is a proof how great an extent the evil to which we have
adverted has attained.

Edition: current; Page: [40]
Names with indeterminate connotation are not to be confounded with names
which have more than one connotation, that is to say, qambiguous words.
A word may have several meanings, but all of them fixed and recognised
ones; as the word post, for example, ror the word box,r the various
senses of which it would be endless to enumerate. And the paucity of
existing names, in comparison with the demand for them, may often render
it advisable and even necessary to retain a name in this multiplicity of
acceptations, distinguishing these so clearly as to prevent their being
confounded with one another. Such a word may be considered as two or
more names, accidentally written and spoken alike.*

Edition: current; Page: [41]
§ 6. [Positive and Negative names] The fourth principal division of
names, is into positive and negative. Positive, as man, atreea, good;
negative, as not-man, bnot-treeb, not-good. To every positive concrete
name, a corresponding negative one might be framed. After giving a name
to any one thing, or to any plurality of things, we might create a
second name which should be a name of all things whatever, except that
particular thing or things. These negative names are employed whenever
we have occasion to speak collectively of all things other than some
thing or class of things. When the positive name is connotative, the
corresponding negative name is connotative likewise; but in a peculiar
way, connoting not the presence but the absence of an attribute. Thus,
not-white denotes all things whatever except white things; and connotes
the attribute of not possessing whiteness. For the non-possession of any
given attribute is also an attribute, and may receive a name as such;
and thus negative concrete names may obtain negative abstract names to
correspond to them.*

Names which are positive in form are often negative in reality, and
others Edition: current; Page: [42] are really positive though their
form is negative. The word inconvenient, for example, does not express
the mere absence of convenience; it expresses a positive attribute, that
of being the cause of discomfort or annoyance. So the word unpleasant,
notwithstanding its negative form, does not connote the mere absence of
pleasantness, but a less degree of what is signified by the word
painful, which, it is hardly necessary to say, is positive. Idle, on the
other hand, is a word which, though positive in form, expresses nothing
but what would be signified either by the phrase not working, or by the
phrase not disposed to work; and sober, either by not drunk or by not
drunken.

There is a class of names called privative. A privative name is
equivalent in its signification to a positive and a negative name taken
together; being the name of something which has once had a particular
attribute, or for some other reason might have been expected to have it,
but which has it not. Such is the word blind, which is not equivalent to
not seeing, or to not capable of seeing, for it would not, except by a
poetical or rhetorical figure, be applied to stocks and stones. A thing
is not usually said to be blind, unless the class to which it is most
familiarly referred, or to which it is referred on the particular
occasion, be chiefly composed of things which can see, as in the case of
a blind man, or a blind horse; or unless it is supposed for any reason
that it ought to see; as in saying of a man, that he rushed blindly into
an abyss, or of philosophers or the clergy that the greater part of them
are blind guides. The names called privative, therefore, connote two
things; the absence of certain attributes, and the presence of others,
from which the presence also of the former might naturally have been
expected.

§ 7. [Relative and Absolute names] The fifth leading division of names
is into relative and absolute, or let us rather say, relative and
non-relative; for the word absolute is put upon much too hard duty in
metaphysics, not to be willingly spared when its services can be
dispensed with. It resembles the word civil in the language of
jurisprudence, which stands for the opposite of criminal, the opposite
of ecclesiastical, the opposite of military, the opposite of
political—in short, the opposite of any positive word which wants a
negative.

Relative names are such as father, son; ruler, subject; like; equal;
unlike; unequal; longer, shorter; cause, effect. Their characteristic
property is, that they are always given in pairs. Every relative name
which is predicated of an object, supposes another object (or objects),
of which we may predicate either that same name or another relative name
which is said to be the correlative of the former. Thus, when we call
any person a son, we suppose other persons who must be called parents.
When we call any event a cause, we suppose another event which is an
effect. When we say of any distance that it is longer, we suppose
another distance which is shorter. When we say Edition: current; Page:
[43] of any object that it is like, we mean that it is like some other
object, which is also said to be like the first. In this alasta case
both objects receive the same name; the relative term is its own
correlative.

It is evident that these words, when concrete, are, like other concrete
general names, connotative; they denote a subject, and connote an
attribute; and each of them has or might have a corresponding abstract
name, to denote the attribute connoted by the concrete. Thus the
concrete like has its abstract likeness; the concretes, father and son,
haveb, or might have,b the abstracts, paternity, and cfiliety, or
sonshipc. The concrete name connotes an attribute, and the abstract name
which answers to it denotes that attribute. But of what nature is the
attribute? Wherein consists the peculiarity in the connotation of a
relative name?

The attribute signified by a relative name, say some, is a relation; and
this they give, if not as a sufficient explanation, at least as the only
one attainable. If they are asked, What then is a relation? they do not
profess to be able to tell. It is generally regarded as something
peculiarly recondite and mysterious. I cannot, however, perceive in what
respect it is more so than any other attribute; indeed, it appears to me
to be so in a somewhat less degree. I conceive rather, that it is by
examining into the signification of relative names, or, in other words,
into the nature of the attribute which they connote, that a clear
insight may best be obtained into the nature of all attributes: of all
that is meant by an attribute.

It is obvious, in fact, that if we take any two correlative names,
father and son for instance, though the objects denoted by the names are
different, they both, in a certain sense, connote the same thing. They
cannot, indeed, be said to connote the same attribute: to be a father,
is not the same thing as to be a son. But when we call one man a father,
another dad son, what we mean to affirm is a set of facts, which are
exactly the same in both cases. To predicate of A that he is the father
of B, and of B that he is the son of A, is to assert one and the same
fact in different words. The two propositions are exactly equivalent:
neither of them asserts more or asserts less than the other. The
paternity of A and the efilietye of B are not two facts, but two modes
of expressing the same fact. That fact, when analysed, consists of a
series of physical events or phenomena, in which both A and B are
parties concerned, and from which they both derive names. What those
names really connote, is fthisf series of events: that is the meaning,
and the whole meaning, which either of them is intended to convey. The
series of events may be said to Edition: current; Page: [44] constitute
the relation; the schoolmen called it the foundation of the relation,
fundamentum relationis.

In this manner any fact, or series of facts, in which two different
objects are implicated, and which is therefore predicable of both of
them, may be either considered as constituting an attribute of the one,
or an attribute of the other. According as we consider it in the former,
or in the latter aspect, it is connoted by the one or the other of the
two correlative names. Father connotes the fact, regarded as
constituting an attribute of A; son connotes the same fact, as
constituting an attribute of B. It may evidently be regarded with equal
propriety in either light. And all that appears necessary to account for
the existence of relative names, is, that whenever there is a fact in
which two individuals are gconcerned, an attribute grounded on that fact
may be ascribed to either of these individuals.

A name, therefore, is said to be relative, when, over and above the
object which it denotes, it implies in its signification the existence
of another object, also deriving a denomination from the same fact which
is the ground of the first name. Or (to express the same meaning in
other words) a name is relative, when, being the name of one thing, its
signification cannot be explained but by mentioning another. Or we may
state it thus—when the name cannot be employed in discourse so as to
have a meaning, unless the name of some other thing than what it is
itself the name of, be either expressed or understood. hThese
definitionsh are all, at bottom, equivalent, being modes of variously
expressing this one distinctive circumstance—that every other attribute
of an object might, without any contradiction, be conceived still to
exist if ino object besides that one had ever existedi;* but those of
its attributes which are expressed by relative names, would on that
supposition be swept away.

§ 8. [Univocal and Æquivocal names] Names have been further
distinguished into univocal and æquivocal: these, however, are not two
kinds of names, but two different modes of employing names. A name is
univocal, or Edition: current; Page: [45] applied univocally, with
respect to all things of which it can be predicated in the same sense;
ait is æquivocal, or applied æquivocally, as respects those things of
which it is predicated in different senses. It is scarcely necessary to
give instances of a fact so familiar as the double meaning of a word. In
reality, as has been already observed, an æquivocal or ambiguous word is
not one name, but two names, accidentally coinciding in sound. File
bmeaning a steelb instrument, and file cmeaningc a line of soldiers,
have no more title to be considered one word, because written alike,
than grease and Greece have, because they are pronounced alike. They are
one sound, appropriated to form two different words.

An intermediate case is that of a name used analogically or
metaphorically; that is, a name which is predicated of two things, not
univocally, or exactly in the same signification, but in significations
somewhat similar, and which being derived one from the other, one of
them may be considered the primary, and the other a secondary
signification. As when we speak of a brilliant light and a brilliant
achievement. The word is not applied in the same sense to the light and
to the achievement; but having been applied to the light in its original
sense, that of brightness to the eye, it is transferred to the
achievement in a derivative signification, supposed to be somewhat like
the primitive one. The word, however, is just as properly two names
instead of one, in this case, as in that of the most perfect ambiguity.
And one of the commonest forms of fallacious reasoning arising from
ambiguity, is that of arguing from a metaphorical expression as if it
were literal; that is, as if a word, when applied metaphorically, were
the same name as when taken in its original sense: which will be seen
more particularly in its place.

Edition: current; Page: [46]


CHAPTER III: Of the Things Denoted by Names

§ 1. [Necessity of an enumeration of Nameable Things. The Categories of
Aristotle] Looking back now to the commencement of our inquiry, let us
attempt to measure how far it has advanced. Logic, we found, is the
Theory of Proof. But proof supposes something provable, which must be a
Proposition or Assertion; since nothing but a Proposition can be an
object of belief, aora therefore of proof. A Proposition is, discourse
which affirms or denies something of some other thing. This is one step:
there must, it seems, be two things concerned in every act of belief.
But what are these Things? They can be no other than those signified by
the two names, which being joined together by a copula constitute the
Proposition. If, therefore, we knew what all names signify, we should
know everything whichb, in the existing state of human knowledge,b is
capable either of being made a subject of affirmation or denial, or of
being itself affirmed or denied of a subject. We have accordingly, in
the preceding chapter, reviewed the various kinds of Names, in order to
ascertain what is signified by each of them. And we have now carried
this survey far enough to be able to take an account of its results, and
to exhibit an enumeration of all ckinds of Things which are capable of
being made predicates, or of having anything predicated of them: after
which to determine the import of Predication, that is, of Propositions,
can be no arduous task.

The necessity of an enumeration of Existences, as the basis of Logic,
did not escape the attention of the schoolmen, and of their master
Aristotle, the most comprehensive, if not dalsod the most sagacious, of
the ancient philosophers.[*] The Categories, or Predicaments—the former
a Greek word, the latter its literal translation in the Latin
language—were ebelieved to bee an enumeration of all things capable of
being named; an enumeration by the summa genera, i.e. the most extensive
classes into which things could be distributed; which, therefore, were
so many highest Predicates, one or other Edition: current; Page: [47] of
which was supposed capable of being affirmed with truth of every
nameable thing whatsoever. The following are the classes into which,
according to this school of philosophy, Things in general might be
reduced:

  ---------- -------------
  Οὐσία,     Substantia.
  Ποσόν,     Quantitas.
  Ποιόν,     Qualitas.
  Πρός τι,   Relatio.
  Ποιει̑ν,    Actio.
  Πάσχειν,   Passio.
  Που̑,       Ubi.
  Πότε,      Quando.
  Κει̑σθαι,   Situs.
  Ἔχειν,     Habitus.
  ---------- -------------

The imperfections of this classification are too obvious to require, and
its merits are not sufficient to reward, a minute examination. It is a
mere catalogue of the distinctions rudely marked out by the language of
familiar life, with little or no attempt to penetrate, by philosophic
analysis, to the rationale even of those common distinctions. Such an
analysis, however superficially conducted, would have shown the
enumeration to be both redundant and defective. Some objects are
omitted, and others repeated several times under different heads. It is
like a division of animals into men, quadrupeds, horses, asses, and
ponies. That, for instance, could not be a very comprehensive view of
the nature of Relation which could exclude action, passivity, and local
situation from that category. The same observation applies to the
categories Quando (or position in time), and Ubi (or position in space);
while the distinction between the latter and Situs is merely verbal. The
incongruity of erecting into a summum genus the class which forms the
tenth category is manifest. On the other hand, the enumeration takes no
notice of anything besides substances and attributes. In what category
are we to place sensations, or any other feelings and states of mind; as
hope, joy, fear; sound, smell, taste; pain, pleasure; thought, judgment,
conception, and the like? Probably all these would have been placed by
the Aristotelian school in the categories of actio and passio; and the
relation of such of them as are active, to their objects, and of such of
them as are passive, to their causes, would rightly be so placed; but
the things themselves, the feelings or states of mind, wrongly.
Feelings, or states of consciousness, are assuredly to be faccountedf
among realities, but they cannot be reckoned either among substances or
attributes.*

Edition: current; Page: [48]
§ 2. [Ambiguity of the most general names] Before recommencing, under
better auspices, the attempt made with such imperfect success by the
aearly logiciansa, we must take notice of an unfortunate ambiguity in
all the concrete names which correspond to the most general of all
abstract terms, the word Existence. When we have occasion for a name
which shall be capable of denoting whatever exists, as
contradistinguished from non-entity or Nothing, there is hardly a word
applicable to the purpose which is not also, and even more familiarly,
taken in a sense in which it denotes only substances. But substances are
not all that bexistsb; attributes, if such things are to be spoken of,
must be said to exist; feelings ccertainlyc exist. Yet when we speak of
an object, or of a thing, we are almost always supposed to mean a
substance. There seems a kind of contradiction in using such an
expression as that one thing is merely an attribute of another thing.
And the announcement of a Classification of Things would, I believe,
prepare most readers for an enumeration like those in natural history,
beginning with the great divisions of animal, vegetable, and mineral,
and subdividing them into classes and Edition: current; Page: [49]
orders. If, rejecting the word Thing, we endeavour to find another of a
more general import, or at least more exclusively confined to that
general import, a word denoting all that exists, and connoting only
simple existence; no word might be presumed fitter for such a purpose
than being: originally the present participle of a verb which in one of
its meanings is exactly equivalent to the verb dexistsd; and therefore
suitable, even by its grammatical formation, to be the concrete of the
abstract existence. But this word, strange as the fact may appear, is
still more completely spoiled for the purpose which it seemed expressly
made for, than the word Thing. Being is, by custom, exactly synonymous
with substance; except that it is free from a slight taint of a second
ambiguity; being applied impartially to matter and to mind, while
substance, though originally and in strictness applicable to both, is
apt to suggest in preference the idea of matter. Attributes are never
called Beings; nor are feelings. A Being is that which excites feelings,
and which possesses attributes. The soul is called a Being; God and
angels are called Beings; but if we were to say, extension, colour,
wisdom, virtue, are beings, we should perhaps be suspected of thinking
with some of the ancients, that the cardinal virtues are animals; or, at
the least, of holding with the Platonic school the doctrine of
self-existent Ideas, or with the followers of Epicurus that of Sensible
Forms, which detach themselves in every direction from bodies, and by
coming in contact with our organs, cause our perceptions. We should be
supposed, in short, to believe that Attributes are Substances.

In consequence of this perversion of the word Being, philosophers
looking about for something to supply its place, laid their hands upon
the word Entity, a piece of barbarous Latin, invented by the schoolmen
to be used as an abstract name, in which class its grammatical form
would seem to place it; but being seized by logicians in distress to
stop a leak in their terminology, it has ever since been used as a
concrete name. The kindred word essence, born at the same time and of
the same parents, scarcely underwent a more complete transformation
when, from being the abstract of the verb to be, it came to denote
something sufficiently concrete to be enclosed in a glass bottle. The
word Entity, since it settled down into a concrete name, has retained
its universality of signification somewhat less eimpairede than any of
the names before mentioned. Yet the same gradual decay to which, after a
certain age, all the language of psychology seems liable, has been at
work even here. If you call virtue an entity, you are indeed somewhat
less strongly suspected of believing it to be a substance than if you
called it a being; but you are by no means free from the suspicion.
Every word which was originally intended to connote mere existence,
seems, after a ftime, to enlarge its connotation to separate existence,
or existence freed from the condition of Edition: current; Page: [50]
belonging to a substance; which condition being precisely what
constitutes an attribute, attributes are gradually shut out; and along
with them feelings, which in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred have no
other name than that of the attribute which is grounded on them. Strange
that when the greatest embarrassment gfelt byg all who have any
considerable number of thoughts to express, is to find a sufficient
variety of hpreciseh words ifittedi to express them, there should be no
practice to which even jscientific thinkersj are more addicted than that
of taking valuable words to express ideas which are sufficiently
expressed by other words already appropriated to them.

When it is impossible to obtain good tools, the next best thing is to
understand thoroughly the defects of those we have. I have therefore
warned the reader of the ambiguity of the knames which, for want of
better, I am necessitated to employ. It must now be the writer’s
endeavour so to employ them as in no case to leave lthel meaning
doubtful or obscure. No one of the above terms being altogether
unambiguous, I shall not confine myself to any one, but shall employ on
each occasion the word which seems least likely in the particular case
to lead to mmisunderstandingm; nor do I pretend to use either these or
any other words with a rigorous adherence to one single sense. To do so
would often leave us without a word to express what is signified by a
known word in some one or other of its senses: unless authors had an
unlimited licence to coin new words, together with (what it would be
more difficult to assume) unlimited power of making nreaders understandn
them. Nor would it be wise in a writer, on a subject involving so much
of abstraction, to deny himself the advantage derived from even an
improper use of a term, when, by means of it, some familiar association
is called up which brings the meaning home to the mind, as it were by a
flash.

The difficulty both to the writer and reader, of the attempt which must
be made to use vague words so as to convey a precise meaning, is not
wholly a matter of regret. It is not unfitting that logical treatises
should afford an example of that, to facilitate which is among the most
important uses of logic. Philosophical language will for a long time,
and popular language ostill longero, retain so much of vagueness and
ambiguity, that logic would be of little value if it did not, among its
other advantages, exercise the understanding in doing its work neatly
and correctly with these imperfect tools.

Edition: current; Page: [51]
After this preamble it is time to proceed to our enumeration. We shall
commence with Feelings, the simplest class of nameable things; the term
Feeling being of course understood in its most enlarged sense.


I.: Feelings, or States of Consciousness

§ 3. [Feelings, or states of consciousness] A Feeling and a State of
Consciousness are, in the language of philosophy, equivalent
expressions: everything is a feeling of which the mind is conscious;
everything which it feels, or, in other words, which forms a part of its
own sentient existence. In popular language Feeling is not always
synonymous with State of Consciousness; being often taken more
peculiarly for those states which are conceived as belonging to the
sensitive, or to the emotional, phasis of our nature, and sometimes,
with a still narrower restriction, to the emotional alone, as
distinguished from what are conceived as belonging to the percipient or
ato thea intellectual phasis. But this is an admitted departure from
correctness of language; just as, by a popular perversion the exact
converse of this, the word Mind is withdrawn from its rightful
generality of signification, and restricted to the intellect. The still
greater perversion by which Feeling is sometimes confined not only to
bodily sensations, but to the sensations of a single sense, that of
touch, needs not be more particularly adverted to.

Feeling, in the proper sense of the term, is a genus, of which
Sensation, Emotion, and Thought, are subordinate species. Under the word
Thought is here to be included whatever we are internally conscious of
when we are said to think; from the consciousness we have when we think
of a red colour without having it before our eyes, to the most recondite
thoughts of a philosopher or poet. Be it remembered, however, that by a
thought is to be understood what passes in the mind itself, and not any
object external to the mind, which the person is commonly said to be
thinking of. He may be thinking of the sun, or of God, but the sun and
God are not thoughts; his mental image, however, of the sun, and his
idea of God, are thoughts; states of his mind, not of the objects
themselves; and so also is his belief of the existence of the sun, or of
God; or his disbelief, if the case be so. Even imaginary objects (which
are said to exist only in our ideas) are to be distinguished from our
ideas of them. I may think of a hobgoblin, as I may think of the loaf
which was eaten yesterday, or of the flower which will bloom to-morrow.
But the hobgoblin which never existed is not the same thing with my idea
of a hobgoblin, any more than the loaf which once existed is the same
thing with my idea of a loaf, or the flower which does not yet exist,
but which will exist, is the same with my idea of a flower. They are
all, not thoughts, but Edition: current; Page: [52] objects of thought;
though at the present time all the objects are alike non-existent.

In like manner, a Sensation is to be carefully distinguished from the
object which causes the sensation; our sensation of white from a white
object: nor is it less to be distinguished from the attribute whiteness,
which we ascribe to the object in consequence of its exciting the
sensation. Unfortunately for clearness and due discrimination in
considering these subjects, our sensations seldom receive separate
names. We have a name for the objects which produce in us a certain
sensation: the word white. We have a name for the quality in those
objects, to which we ascribe the sensation: the name whiteness. But when
we speak of the sensation itself (as we have not occasion to do this
often except in our bscientificb speculations), language, which adapts
itself for the most part only to the common uses of life, has provided
us with no single-worded or immediate designation; we must employ a
circumlocution, and say, The sensation of white, or The sensation of
whiteness; we must denominate the sensation either from the object, or
from the attribute, by which it is excited. Yet the sensation, though it
never does, might very well be conceived to exist, without anything
whatever to excite it. We can conceive it as arising spontaneously in
the mind. But if it so arose, we should have no name to denote it which
would not be a misnomer. In the case of our sensations of hearing we are
better provided; we have the word Sound, and a whole vocabulary of words
to denote the various kinds of sounds. For as we are often conscious of
these sensations in the absence of any perceptible object, we can more
easily conceive having them in the absence of any object whatever. We
need only shut our eyes and listen to music, to have a conception of an
universe with nothing in it except sounds, and ourselves hearing them:
and what is easily conceived separately, easily obtains a separate name.
But in general our names of sensations denote indiscriminately the
sensation and the attribute. Thus, colour stands for the sensations of
white, red, &c., but also for the quality in the coloured object. We
talk of the colours of things as among their properties.

§ 4. [Feelings must be distinguished from their physical antecedents.
Perceptions, what] In the case of sensations, another distinction has
also to be kept in view, which is often confounded, and never without
mischievous consequences. This is, the distinction between the sensation
itself, and the state of the bodily organs which precedes the sensation,
and which constitutes the physical agency by which it is produced. One
of the sources of confusion on this subject is the division commonly
made of feelings into Bodily and Mental. Philosophically speaking, there
is no foundation at all for this distinction: even sensations are states
of the sentient mind, not states of the Edition: current; Page: [53]
body, as distinguished from it. What I am conscious of when I see the
colour blue, is a feeling of blue colour, which is one thing; the
picture on my retina, or the phenomenon of hitherto mysterious nature
which takes place in my optic nerve or in my brain, is another thing, of
which I am not at all conscious, and which scientific investigation
alone could have apprised me of. These are states of my body; but the
sensation of blue, which is the consequence of these states of body, is
not a state of body: that which perceives and is conscious is called
Mind. When sensations are called bodily feelings, it is only as being
the class of feelings which are immediately occasioned by bodily states;
whereas the other kinds of feelings, thoughts, for instance, or
emotions, are immediately excited not by anything acting upon the bodily
organs, but by sensations, or by previous thoughts. This, however, is a
distinction not in our feelings, but in the agency which produces our
feelings: all of them when actually produced are states of mind.

Besides the affection of our bodily organs from without, and the
sensation thereby produced in our minds, many writers admit a third link
in the chain of phenomena, which they acalla a Perception, and which
consists in the recognition of an external object as the exciting cause
of the sensation. This perception, they say, is an act of the mind,
proceeding from its own spontaneous activity; while in bab sensation the
mind is passive, being merely acted upon by the outward object. And
according to some cmetaphysicians,c it is by an act of the mind, similar
to perception, except in not being preceded by any sensation, that dthe
existence of God, the soul, and other hyperphysical objects is
recognisedd.

These acts of ewhat is termede perception, whatever be the conclusion
ultimately come to respecting their nature, must, I conceive, take their
place among the varieties of feelings or states of mind. In so classing
them, I have not the smallest intention of declaring or insinuating any
theory as to the law of mind in which these mental processes may be
supposed to originate, or the conditions under which they may be
legitimate or the reverse. Far less do I mean (as Dr. Whewell seems to
suppose must be meant in an analogous case*) to indicate that as they
are “merely states of mind,” it is superfluous to inquire into their
distinguishing peculiarities. I abstain from the inquiry as irrelevant
to the science of logic. In these so-called perceptions, or direct
recognitions by the mind, of objects, whether physical or spiritual,
which are external to itself, I can see only cases of belief; but of
belief which claims to Edition: current; Page: [54] be intuitive, or
independent of external evidence. When a stone lies before me, I am
conscious of certain sensations which I receive from it; but fiff I say
that these sensations come to me from an external object which I
perceive, the meaning of these words is, that receiving the sensations,
I intuitively believe that an external cause of those sensations exists.
The laws of intuitive belief, and the conditions under which it is
legitimate, are a subject which, as we have already so often remarked,
belongs not to logic, but to the gscience of the ultimate laws of the
human mindg.

hTo the same region of speculation belongs all that can be said
respecting the distinction which the German metaphysicians and their
French and English followers iso elaborately draw between the acts of
the mind and its merely passive states; between what it receives from,
and what it gives to, the crude materials of its experience. I am aware
that with reference to the view which those writers take of the primary
elements of thought and knowledge, this distinction is fundamental. But
for jthe presentj purpose, which is to examine, not the original
groundwork of our knowledge, but how we come by that portion of it which
is not original; the difference between active and passive states of
mind is of secondary importance. For us, they are all states of mind,
they all are feelings; by which, let it be said once more, I mean to
imply nothing of passivity, but simply that they are psychological
facts, facts which take place in the mind, and karek to be carefully
distinguished from the external or physical facts with which they may be
connected either as effects or as causes.

a§ 5.a [Volitions, and Actions, what] Among active states of mind, there
is, however, one species which merits particular attention, because it
forms a principal part of the connotation of some important classes of
names. I mean volitions, or acts of the will. When we speak of sentient
beings by relative names, a large portion of the connotation of the name
usually consists of the actions of those beings; actions past, present,
and possible or probable future. Take, for instance, the words Sovereign
and Subject. What meaning do these words convey, but that of innumerable
actions, done or to be done by the sovereign and the subjects, to or in
regard to one another reciprocally? So with the words physician and
patient, leader and follower, btutor and pupilb. In many cases the words
also connote actions which would be done under certain contingencies by
persons other than those denoted: as the words mortgagor and mortgagee,
obligor and obligee, and many other words expressive Edition: current;
Page: [55] of legal relation, which connote what a court of justice
would do to enforce the legal obligation if not fulfilled. There are
also words which connote actions previously done by persons other than
those denoted either by the name itself or by its correlative; as the
word brother. From these instances, it may be seen how large a portion
of the connotation of names consists of actions. Now what is an action?
Not one thing, but a series of two things: the state of mind called a
volition, followed by an effect. The volition or intention to produce
the effect, is one thing; the effect produced in consequence of the
intention, is another thing; the two together constitute the action. I
form the purpose of instantly moving my arm; that is a state of my mind:
my arm (not being tied corc paralytic) moves in obedience to my purpose;
that is a physical fact, consequent on a state of mind. The intention,
dfollowed by the fact, or (if we prefer the expression) the fact when
preceded and caused by the intention, is called the action of moving my
arm.

§ 6. [Substance and Attribute] Of the first leading division of nameable
things, viz. Feelings or States of Consciousness, we began by
recognising three sub-divisions; Sensations, Thoughts, and Emotions. The
first two of these we have illustrated at considerable length; the
third, Emotions, not being perplexed by similar ambiguities, does not
require similar exemplification. And, finally, we have found it
necessary to add to these three a fourth species, commonly known by the
name Volitions. aWe shall bnowb proceed to the two remaining classes of
nameable things; all things which are cregarded asc external to the mind
being considered as belonging either to the class of Substances or to
that of Attributes.


II.: Substances

Logicians have endeavoured to define Substance and Attribute; but their
definitions are not so much attempts to draw a distinction between the
things themselves, as instructions what difference it is customary to
make in the grammatical structure of the sentence, according as dwed are
speaking of substances or of attributes. Such definitions are rather
lessons of English, or of Greek, Latin, or German, than of mental
philosophy. An attribute, say the school logicians, must be the
attribute of something; colour, for example, Edition: current; Page:
[56] must be the colour of something; goodness must be the goodness of
something: and if this something should cease to exist, or should cease
to be connected with the attribute, the existence of the attribute would
be at an end. A substance, on the contrary, is self-existent; in
speaking about it, we need not put of after its name. A stone is not the
stone of anything; the moon is not the moon of anything, but simply the
moon. Unless, indeed, the name which we choose to give to the substance
be a relative name; if so, it must be followed either by of, or by some
other particle, implying, as that preposition does, a reference to
something else: but then the other characteristic peculiarity of an
attribute would fail; the something might be destroyed, and the
substance might still subsist. Thus, a father must be the father of
something, and so far resembles an attribute, in being referred to
something besides himself: if there were no child, there would be no
father: but this, when we look into the matter, only means that we
should not call him father. The man called father might still exist
though ethere were no child, as he existed before there was a child:e
and there would be no contradiction in supposing him to exist, though
the whole universe except himself were destroyed. But destroy all white
substances, and where would be the attribute whiteness? Whiteness,
without any white thing, is a contradiction in terms.

This is the nearest approach to a solution of the difficulty, that will
be found in the common treatises on logic. It will scarcely be thought
to be a satisfactory one. If an attribute is distinguished from a
substance by being the attribute of something, it seems highly necessary
to understand what is meant by of; a particle which needs explanation
too much itself, to be placed in front of the explanation of anything
else. And as for the self-existence of fsubstancef, it is very true that
a substance may be conceived to exist without any other substance, but
so also may an attribute without any other attribute: and we can no more
imagine a substance without attributes than we can imagine attributes
without a substance.

Metaphysicians, however, have probed the question deeper, and given an
account of Substance considerably more satisfactory than this.
Substances are usually distinguished as Bodies or Minds. Of geachg of
these, philosophers have at length provided us with a definition which
seems unexceptionable.

§ 7. [Body] A body, according to the received doctrine of modern
metaphysicians, may be defined, the external cause to which we ascribe
our sensations. When I see and touch a piece of gold, I am conscious of
a sensation of yellow colour, and sensations of hardness and weight; and
by varying the mode of handling, I may add to these sensations many
others completely distinct from them. The sensations are all of which I
am directly conscious; Edition: current; Page: [57] but I consider them
as produced by something not only existing independently of my will, but
external to my bodily organs and to my mind. This external something I
call a body.

It may be asked, how come we to ascribe our sensations to any external
cause? And is there sufficient ground for so ascribing them? It is
known, that there are metaphysicians who have raised a controversy on
the point; maintaining athat we are not warranted in referring our
sensations to a cause such as we understand by the word Body, or to any
bexternal cause whateverb. Though we have no concern here with this
controversy, nor with the metaphysical niceties on which it turns, one
of the best ways of showing what is meant by Substance is, to consider
what position it is necessary to take up, in order to maintain its
existence against opponents.

It is certain, then, that a part of our notion of a body consists of the
notion of a number of sensations of our own, or of other sentient
beings, habitually occurring simultaneously. My conception of the table
at which I am writing is compounded of its visible form and size, which
are complex sensations of sight; its tangible form and size, which are
complex sensations of our corgansc of touch and of our muscles; its
weight, which is also a sensation of touch and of the muscles; its
colour, which is a sensation of sight; its hardness, which is a
sensation of the muscles; its composition, which is another word for all
the varieties of sensation which we receive under various circumstances
from the wood of which it is made, and so forth. All or most of these
various sensations frequently are, and, as we learn by experience,
always might be, experienced simultaneously, or in many different orders
of succession at our own choice: and hence the thought of any one of
them makes us think of the others, and the whole dbecomesd mentally
amalgamated into one mixed state of consciousness, which, in the
language of the school of Locke and Hartley, is termed a Complex Idea.

Now, there are philosophers who have argued as follows. If we econceive
an orangee to be divested of its natural colour without acquiring any
new one; to lose its softness without becoming hard, its roundness
without becoming square or pentagonal, or of any other regular or
irregular figure whatever; to be deprived of size, of weight, of taste,
of smell; to lose all its mechanical and all its chemical properties,
and acquire no new ones; to become, in short, invisible, intangible,
fimperceptible not only by all our senses, but by the senses of all
other sentient beings, real or possible; nothing, Edition: current;
Page: [58] say these gthinkersg, would remain. For of what nature, they
ask, could be the residuum? and by what token could it manifest its
presence? To the unreflecting its existence seems to rest on the
evidence of the senses. But to the senses nothing is apparent except the
sensations. We know, indeed, that these sensations are bound together by
some law; they do not come together at random, but according to a
systematic order, which is part of the order established in the
universe. When we experience one of these sensations, we usually
experience the others also, or know that we have it in our power to
experience them. But a fixed law of connexion, making the sensations
occur together, does not, say these philosophers, necessarily require
what is called a substratum to support them. The conception of a
substratum is but one of many possible forms in which that connexion
presents itself to our imagination; a mode of, as it were, realizing the
idea. If there be such a substratum, suppose it hath this instant
imiraculously annihilatedi, and let the sensations continue to occur in
the same order, and how would the substratum be missed? By what signs
should we be able to discover that its existence had terminated? Should
we not have as much reason to believe that it still existed as we now
have? And if we should not then be warranted in believing it, how can we
be so now? A body, therefore, according to these metaphysicians, is not
anything intrinsically different from the sensations which the body is
said to produce in us; it is, in short, a set of sensationsj, or rather,
of possibilities of sensation,j joined together according to a fixed
law.

kThe controversies to which these speculationsk have given rise, and the
doctrines which have been developed in the attempt to find a conclusive
answer to them, have been fruitful of important consequences to the
Science of Mind. The sensations (it was answered) which we are conscious
of, and which we receive, not at random, but joined together in a
certain uniform manner, imply not only a law or laws of connexion, but a
cause external to our mind, which cause, by its own laws, determines the
laws according to which the sensations are connected and experienced.
The schoolmen used to call this external cause by the name we have
already employed, a substratum; and its attributes (as they expressed
themselves) inhered, literally stuck, in it. To this substratum the name
Matter is usually given in philosophical discussions. It was soon,
however, acknowledged by all who reflected on the subject, that the
existence of matter lcannotl be proved by extrinsic evidence. The
answer, therefore, now usually made to Berkeley and his followers, is,
Edition: current; Page: [59] that the belief is intuitive; that mankind,
in all ages, have felt themselves compelled, by a necessity of their
nature, to refer their sensations to an external cause: that even those
who deny it in theory, yield to the necessity in practice, and both in
speech, thought, and feeling, do, equally with the vulgar, acknowledge
their sensations to be the effects of something external to them: this
knowledge, therefore, mit is affirmed,m is as evidently intuitive as our
knowledge of our sensations themselves is intuitive. And here the
question merges in the fundamental problem of nmetaphysics properly so
called:n to which science we leave it.

But although the extreme doctrine of the Idealist metaphysicians, that
objects are nothing but our sensations and the laws which connect them,
has onot been generally adopted by subsequent thinkers; the point of
mosto real importance is one on which those metaphysicians are now very
generally considered to have made out their case: viz., that all we know
of objects is the sensations which they give us, and the order of the
occurrence of those sensations. Kant himself, on this point, is as
explicit as Berkeley or Locke. However firmly convinced that there
exists an universe of “Things in themselves,” totally distinct from the
universe of phenomena, or of things as they appear to our senses; and
even when bringing into use pap technical expression (Noumenon) to
denote what the thing is in itself, as contrasted with the
representation of it in our minds; he allows that this representation
(the matter of which, he says, consists of our sensations, though the
form is given by the laws of the mind itself) is all we know of the
object: and that the real nature of the Thing is, and by the
constitution of our faculties ever must remain, at least in qthe present
state ofq existence, an impenetrable mystery to us.

rOf things absolutely or in themselves, [says Sir William Hamilton,*] be
they external, be they internal, we know nothing, or know them only as
incognisable; and become aware of their incomprehensible existence, only
as this is indirectly and accidentally revealed to us, through certain
qualities related to our faculties of knowledge, and which qualities,
again, we cannot think as unconditioned, irrelative, existent in and of
themselves. All that we know is therefore phænomenal,—phænomenal of the
unknown.†

Edition: current; Page: [60]
The same doctrine is laid down in the clearest and strongest terms by M.
Cousin, whose observations on the subject are the more worthy of
attention, as, in consequence of the ultra-German and ontological
character of his philosophy in other respects, they may be regarded as
the admissions of an opponent.r*

Edition: current; Page: [61]
uThere is not the slightest reason for believing that what we call the
sensible qualities of the object are a type of anything inherent in
itself, or bear any affinity to its own nature. A cause does not, as
such, resemble its effects; an east wind is not like the feeling of
cold, nor vheat like the steam of boiling water. Why then should matter
resemble our sensations? Why should the inmost nature of fire or water
resemble the impressions made by wthosew objects upon our senses?* dOr
on what principle are we authorized Edition: current; Page: [62] to
deduce from the effects, anything concerning the cause, except that it
is a cause adequate to produce those effects?d It may, therefore, safely
be laid down as a truth both obvious in itself, and admitted by all whom
it is at present necessary to take into consideration, that, of the
outward world, we know and can know absolutely nothing, except the
sensations which we experience from it.*f

Edition: current; Page: [63]
§ 8. [Mind] Body having now been defined the external cause, and
(according to the more reasonable opinion) the aunknowna external cause,
to which we refer our sensations; it remains to frame a definition of
Mind. Nor, after the preceding observations, will this be difficult.
For, as our conception of a body is that of an unknown exciting cause of
sensations, so our conception of a mind is that of an unknown recipient,
or percipient, of them; and not of them alone, but of all our other
feelings. As body is bunderstood to beb the mysterious something which
excites the mind to feel, so mind is the mysterious something which
feels and thinks. It is unnecessary to give in the Edition: current;
Page: [64] case of mind, as we gave in the case of matter, a particular
statement of the sceptical system by which its existence as a Thing in
itself, distinct from the series of what are denominated its states, is
called in question. But it is necessary to remark, that on the inmost
nature c(whatever be meant by inmost nature)c of the thinking principle,
as well as on the inmost nature of matter, we are, and with our
dfaculties must always remain, entirely in the dark. All which we are
aware of, even in our own minds, is (in the words of eJamese Mill) a
certain “thread of consciousness;”[*] a series of feelings, that is, of
sensations, thoughts, emotions, and volitions, more or less numerous and
complicated. There is a something I call Myself, or, by another form of
expression, my mind, which I consider as distinct from these sensations,
thoughts, &c.; a something which I conceive to be not the thoughts, but
the being that has the thoughts, and which I can conceive as existing
for ever in a state of quiescence, without any thoughts at all. But what
this being is, though it is myself, I have no knowledge, fotherf than
the series of its states of consciousness. As bodies manifest themselves
to me only through the sensations of which I regard them as the causes,
so the thinking principle, or mind, in my own nature, makes itself known
to me only by the feelings of which it is conscious. I know nothing
about myself, save my capacities of feeling or being conscious
(including, of course, thinking and willing): and were I to learn
anything new concerning gmy own natureg, I cannot with my present
faculties conceive this new information to be anything else, than that I
have some additional capacities, has yeth unknown to me, of feeling,
thinking, or willing.

Thus, then, as body is the unsentient cause to which we are naturally
prompted to refer a certain portion of our feelings, so mind may be
described as the sentient subject (in the ischolastici sense of the
term) of all feelings; that which has or feels them. But of the nature
of either body or mind, further than the feelings which the former
excites, and which the latter experiences, we do not, according to the
best existing doctrine, know anything; and if anything, logic has
nothing to do with it, or with the manner in which jthe knowledgej is
acquired. With this result we may conclude this portion of our subject,
and pass to the third and only remaining class or division of Nameable
Things.

Edition: current; Page: [65]


III.: Attributes: and, first, Qualities

§ 9. [Qualities] From what has already been said of Substance, what is
to be said of Attribute is easily deducible. For if we know not, and
cannot know, anything of bodies but the sensations which they excite in
us or aina others, those sensations must be all that we can, at bottom,
mean by their attributes; and the distinction which we verbally make
between the properties of things and the sensations we receive from
them, must originate in the convenience of discourse rather than in the
nature of what is bsignifiedb by the terms.

Attributes are usually distributed under the three heads of Quality,
Quantity, and Relation. We shall come to the two latter presently: in
cthe firstc place we shall confine ourselves to the former.

Let us take, then, as our example, one of what are termed the sensible
qualities of objects, and let that example be whiteness. When we ascribe
whiteness to any substance, as, for instance, snow; when we say that
snow has the quality whiteness, what do we really assert? Simply, that
when snow is present to our organs, we have a particular sensation,
which we are accustomed to call the sensation of white. But how do I
know that snow is present? Obviously by the sensations which I derive
from it, and not otherwise. I infer that the object is present, because
it gives me a certain assemblage or series of sensations. And when I
ascribe to it the attribute whiteness, my meaning is only, that, of the
sensations composing this group or series, that which I call the
sensation of white colour is one.

This is one view which may be taken of the subject. But there is also
another and a different view. It may be said, that it is true we know
nothing of sensible objects, except the sensations they excite in us;
that the fact of our receiving from snow the particular sensation which
is called a sensation of white, is the ground on which we ascribe to
that substance the quality whiteness; the sole proof of its possessing
that quality. But because one thing may be the sole evidence of the
existence of another thing, it does not follow that the two are one and
the same. The attribute whiteness (it may be said) is not the fact of
dreceiving the sensation, but something in the object itself; a power
inherent in it; something in virtue of which the object produces the
sensation. And when we affirm that snow possesses the attribute
whiteness, we do not merely assert that the presence of snow produces in
us that sensation, but that it does so through, and by reason of, that
power or quality.

For the purposes of logic it is not of material importance which of
these eopinionse we adopt. The full discussion of the subject belongs to
the fother Edition: current; Page: [66] department of scientificf
inquiry, so often alluded to under the name of gmetaphysics; but it may
be said here, that for the doctrine of the existence of a peculiar
species of entities called qualities, I can see no foundation except in
a tendency of the human mind which is the cause of many delusions. I
mean, the disposition, wherever we meet with two names which are not
precisely synonymous, to suppose that they must be the names of two
different things; whereas in reality they may be names of the same thing
viewed in two different lights, horh under different suppositions as to
surrounding circumstances. Because quality and sensation cannot be put
indiscriminately one for the other, it is supposed that they cannot both
signify the same thing, namely, the impression or feeling with which we
are affected through our senses by the presence of an object; though
there is at least no absurdity in supposing that this identical
impression or feeling may be called a sensation when considered merely
in itself, and a quality when ilooked at in relation toi any one of the
numerous objects, the presence of which to our organs excites in our
minds that among various other sensations or feelings. And if this be
admissible as a supposition, it rests with those who contend for an
entity per se called a quality, to show that their opinion is
preferable, or is anything in fact but a lingering remnant of the joldj
doctrine of occult causes; the very absurdity which Molière so happily
ridiculed when he made one of his pedantic physicians account for the
fact that kopium produces sleep by the maxim, Because it has a soporific
virtue.k[*]

It is evident that when the physician stated that opium lhas a soporific
virtue,l he did not account for, but merely asserted over again, the
fact that it mproduces sleepm. In like manner, when we say that snow is
white because it has the quality of whiteness, we are only re-asserting
in more technical language the fact that it excites in us the sensation
of white. If it be said that the sensation must have some cause, I
answer, its cause is the presence of the nassemblage of phenomena which
is termed then object. When we have asserted that as often as the object
is present, and our organs in their normal state, the sensation takes
place, we have stated all that we know about the matter. There is no
need, after assigning a certain and intelligible cause, to suppose an
occult cause besides, for the purpose of enabling the real cause
Edition: current; Page: [67] to produce its effect. If I am asked, why
does the presence of the object cause this sensation in me, I cannot
tell: I can only say that such is my nature, and the nature of the
object; othat the fact forms a part of the constitution of thingso. And
to this we must at last come, even after interpolating the imaginary
entity. Whatever number of links the chain of causes and effects may
consist of, how any one link produces the one which is next to it,
remains equally inexplicable to us. It is as easy to comprehend that the
object should produce the sensation directly and at once, as that it
should produce the same sensation by the aid of something else called
the power of producing it.

But, as the difficulties which may be felt in adopting this view of the
subject cannot be removed without discussions transcending the bounds of
our science, I content myself with a passing indication, and shall, for
the purposes of logic, adopt a language compatible with either view of
the nature of qualities. I shall say,—what at least admits of no
dispute,—that the quality of whiteness ascribed to the object snow, is
grounded on its exciting in us the sensation of white; and adopting the
language already used by the school logicians in the case of pthep kind
of attributes called Relations, I shall term the sensation of white the
foundation of the quality whiteness. For logical purposes the sensation
is the only essential part of what is meant by the word; the only part
which we ever can be concerned in proving. When that is proved, the
quality is proved; if an object excites a sensation, it has, of course,
the power of exciting it.


IV.: Relations

§ 10. [Relations] The qualities of a body, we have said, are the
attributes grounded on the sensations which the presence of that
particular body to our organs excites in our minds. But when we ascribe
to any object the kind of attribute called a Relation, the foundation of
the attribute must be something in which other objects are concerned
besides itself and the percipient.

As there may with propriety be said to be a relation between any two
things to which two correlative names are or may be given, we may expect
to discover what constitutes a relation in general, if we enumerate the
principal cases in which mankind have imposed correlative names, and
observe what athese cases have in common.

What, then, is the character which is possessed in common by states of
circumstances so heterogeneous and discordant as these: one thing like
another; one thing unlike another; one thing near another; one thing far
from another; one thing before, after, along with another; one thing
greater, equal, Edition: current; Page: [68] less, than another; one
thing the cause of another, the effect of another; one person the
master, servant, child, parent, bdebtor, creditorb, sovereign, subject,
attorney, client, of another, and so on?

Omitting, for the present, the case of Resemblance, (a relation which
requires to be considered separately,) there seems to be one thing
common to all these cases, and only one; that in each of them there
exists or occurs, or has existed or occurred, cor may be expected to
exist or occur,c some fact or phenomenon, into which the two things
which are said to be related to each other, both enter as parties
concerned. This fact, or phenomenon, is what the Aristotelian logicians
called the fundamentum relationis. Thus in the relation of greater and
less between two magnitudes, the fundamentum relationis is the fact that
done of the two magnitudes could, under certain conditions, be included
in, without entirely filling, the space occupied by the other
magnituded. eIn the relation of master and servant, the fundamentum
relationis is the fact that the one has undertaken, or is compelled, to
perform certain services for the benefit and at the bidding of the
other.e fExamples might be indefinitely multiplied; but it is already
obvious that whenever two things are said to be related, there is some
fact, or series of facts, into which they both enter; and that whenever
any two things are involved in some one fact, or series of facts, we may
ascribe to those two things a mutual relation grounded on the fact. Even
if they have nothing in common but what is common to all things, that
they are members of the universe, we call that a relation, and
denominate them fellow-creatures, fellow-beings, or fellow-denizens of
the universe. But in proportion as the fact into which the two objects
enter as parts is of a more special and peculiar, or of a more
complicated nature, so also is the relation grounded upon it. And there
are as many conceivable relations as there are conceivable kinds of fact
in which two things can be jointly concerned.

In the same manner, therefore, as a quality is an attribute grounded on
the fact that a certain sensation or sensations are produced in us by
the object, so an attribute grounded on some fact into which the object
enters jointly with another object, is a relation between it and that
other object. But the fact in the latter case consists of the very same
kind of elements as the Edition: current; Page: [69] fact in the former;
namely, states of consciousness. In the caseg, for example, of any legal
relation, as debtor and creditor, principal and agent, guardian and
ward,g the fundamentum relationis consists entirely of thoughts,
hfeelingsh, and volitions (actual or contingent), either of the ipersons
themselves or of other personsi concerned in the same series of
transactions; as, for instance, the intentions which would be formed by
a judge, in case a complaint were made to his tribunal of the
infringement of any of the legal jobligations imposedj by kthe
relationk; and the acts which the judge would perform in consequence;
acts being (as we have already seen) another word for intentions
followed by an effect, and that effect lbeing but another word for
sensations, or some other feelings, occasioned either to mthe agent
himselfm or to somebody else. There is no part nof what the names
expressive of the relation imply, that is not resolvable into states of
consciousness; outward objects being, no doubt, supposed throughout as
the causes by which some of those states of consciousness are excited,
and minds as the subjects by which all of them are experienced, but
neither the external objects nor the minds making their existence known
otherwise than by the states of consciousness.

Cases of relation are not always so complicated as othoseo to which we
last alluded. The simplest of all cases of relation are those expressed
by the words antecedent and consequent, pandp by the word simultaneous.
If we say, for instance, that dawn preceded sunrise, the fact in which
the two things, dawn and sunrise, were jointly concerned, consisted only
of the two things themselves; no third thing entered into the fact or
phenomenon at all. Unless, indeed, we choose to call the succession of
the two objects a third thing; but their succession is not something
added to the things themselves; it is something involved in them. Dawn
and sunrise announce themselves to our consciousness by two successive
sensations. Our consciousness of the succession of these sensations is
not a third sensation or feeling added to them; we have not first the
two feelings, and then a feeling of their succession. To have two
feelings at all, implies having them either successively, or else
simultaneously. Sensations, or other feelings, being given, succession
and simultaneousness are the two conditions, to the alternative of which
they are subjected by the nature of our faculties; and no one has been
able, or needs expect, to analyse the matter any farther.

Edition: current; Page: [70]
§ 11. [Resemblance] In a somewhat similar position are two other sorts
of arelationsa, Likeness and Unlikeness. I have two sensations; we will
suppose them to be simple ones; two sensations of white, or one
sensation of white and another of black. I call the first two sensations
like; the last two unlike. What is the fact or phenomenon constituting
the fundamentum of this relation? The two sensations first, and then
what bweb call a feeling of resemblance, or cof want of resemblance. Let
us confine ourselves to the former case. Resemblance is evidently a
feeling; a state of the consciousness of the observer. Whether the
feeling of the resemblance of the two colours be a third state of
consciousness, which I have after having the two sensations of colour,
or whether (like the feeling of their succession) it is involved in the
sensations themselves, may be a matter of discussion. But in either
case, these feelings of resemblance, and of its opposite dissimilarity,
are parts of our nature; and parts so far from being capable of
analysis, that they are presupposed in every attempt to analyse any of
our other feelings. Likeness and unlikeness, therefore, as well as
antecedence, sequence, and simultaneousness, must stand apart among
relations, as things sui generis. They are attributes grounded on facts,
that is, on states of consciousness, but on states which are peculiar,
unresolvable, and inexplicable.

But, though likeness or unlikeness cannot be resolved into anything
else, complex cases of likeness or unlikeness can be resolved into
simpler ones. When we say of two things which consist of parts, that
they are like one another, the likeness of the wholes does admit of
analysis; it is compounded of likenesses between the various parts
respectivelyd, and of likeness in their arrangementd Of how vast a
variety of resemblances of parts must that resemblance be composed,
which induces us to say that a portrait, or a landscape, is like its
original. If one person mimics another with any success, of how many
simple likenesses must the general or complex likeness be compounded:
likeness in a succession of bodily postures; likeness in voice, or in
the accents and intonations of the voice; likeness in the choice of
words, and in the thoughts or sentiments expressed, whether by word,
countenance, or gesture.

All likeness and unlikeness of which we have any cognizance, resolve
themselves into likeness and unlikeness between states of our own, or
some other, mind. When we say that one body is like another, (since we
know nothing of bodies but the sensations which they excite,) we mean
really that there is a resemblance between the sensations excited by the
two bodies, or between some eportionse at least of fthosef sensations.
If we say that two attributes are like one another, (since we know
nothing of attributes except Edition: current; Page: [71] the sensations
or states of feeling on which they are grounded,) we mean really that
those sensations, or states of feeling, resemble each other. We may also
say that two relations are alike. The fact of resemblance between
relations is sometimes called analogy, forming one of the numerous
meanings of that word. The relation in which Priam stood to Hector,
namely, that of father and son, resembles the relation in which Philip
stood to Alexander; resembles it so closely that they are called the
same relation. The relation in which Cromwell stood to England resembles
the relation in which Napoleon stood to France, though not so closely as
to be called the same relation. The meaning in both these instances must
be, that a resemblance existed between the facts which constituted the
fundamentum relationis.

This resemblance may exist in all conceivable gradations, from perfect
undistinguishableness to something gextremely slightg. When we say, that
a thought suggested to the mind of a person of genius is like a seed
cast into the ground, because the former produces a multitude of other
thoughts, and the latter a multitude of other seeds, this is saying that
between the relation of an inventive mind to a thought contained in it,
and the relation of a fertile soil to a seed contained in it, there
exists a resemblance: the real resemblance being in the two fundamenta
relationis, in each of which there occurs a germ, producing by its
development a multitude of other things similar to itself. And as,
whenever two objects are jointly concerned in a phenomenon, this
constitutes a relation between those objects, so, if we suppose a second
pair of objects concerned in a second phenomenon, the slightest
resemblance between the two phenomena is sufficient to admit of its
being said that the two relations resemble; provided, of course, the
points of resemblance are found in those portions of the two phenomena
respectively which are connoted by the relative names.

While speaking of resemblance, it is necessary to take notice of an
ambiguity of language, against which scarcely any one is sufficiently on
his guard. Resemblance, when it exists in the highest degree of all,
amounting to undistinguishableness, is often called identity, and the
two similar things are said to be the same. I say often, not always; for
we do not say that two visible objects, two persons for instance, are
the same, because they are so much alike that one might be mistaken for
the other: but we constantly use this mode of expression when speaking
of feelings; as when I say that the sight of any object gives me the
same sensation or emotion to-day that it did yesterday, or the same
which it gives to some other person. This is evidently an incorrect
application of the word same; for the feeling which I had yesterday is
gone, never to return; hwhat I have to-day is another feeling, exactly
like the former perhaps, but distinct from it; and it is evident that
two different Edition: current; Page: [72] persons cannot be
experiencing the same feeling, in the sense in which we say that they
are both sitting at the same table. By a similar ambiguity we say, that
two persons are ill of the same disease; that two ipersonsi hold the
same office; not in the sense in which we say that they are engaged in
the same adventure, or sailing in the same ship, but in the sense that
they fill offices exactly similar, though, perhaps, in distant places.
Great confusion of ideas is often produced, and many fallacies
engendered, in otherwise enlightened understandings, by not being
sufficiently alive to the fact (in itself not always to be avoided),
that they use the same name to express ideas so different as those of
identity and undistinguishable resemblance. Among modern writers,
Archbishop Whately stands almost alone in having drawn attention to this
distinction, and to the ambiguity connected with it.j

Several relations, generally called by other names, are really cases of
resemblance. As, for example, equality; which is but another word for
kthe exact resemblancek commonly called identity, considered as
subsisting between things in respect of their quantity. And this example
forms a suitable transition to the third and last of the three heads
under which, as already remarked, Attributes are commonly arranged.

Edition: current; Page: [73]


V.: Quantity

§ 12. [Quantity] Let us imagine two things, between which there is no
difference (that is, no dissimilarity), except in quantity alone: for
instance, a gallon of water, and more than a gallon of water. A gallon
of water, like any other external object, makes its presence known to us
by a set of sensations which it excites. Ten gallons of water are also
an external object, making its presence known to us in a similar manner;
and as we do not mistake ten gallons of water for a gallon of water, it
is plain that the set of sensations is more or less different in the two
cases. In like manner, a gallon of water, and a gallon of awinea, are
two external objects, making their presence known by two sets of
sensations, which sensations are different from each other. In the first
case, however, we say that the difference is in quantity; in the last
there is a difference in quality, while the quantity of the water and of
the bwineb is the same. What is the real distinction between the two
cases? It is not cwithinc the province of Logic to analyse it; nor to
decide whether it is susceptible of analysis or not. For us the
following considerations are sufficient. It is evident that the
sensations I receive from the gallon of water, and those I receive from
the gallon of dwined, are not the same, that is, not precisely alike;
neither are they altogether unlike: they are partly similar, partly
dissimilar; and that in which they resemble is precisely that in which
alone the gallon of water and the ten gallons do not resemble. That in
which the gallon of water and the gallon of wine are like each other,
and in which the gallon and the ten gallons of water are unlike each
other, is called their quantity. This likeness and unlikeness I do not
pretend to explain, no more than any other kind of likeness or
unlikeness. But my object is to show, that when we say of two things
that they differ in quantity, just as when we say that they differ in
quality, the assertion is always grounded on a difference in the
sensations which they excite. Nobody, I presume, will say, that to see,
or to lift, or to drink, ten gallons of water, does not include in
itself a different set of sensations from those of seeing, lifting, or
drinking one gallon; or that to see or handle a foot-rule, and to see or
handle a yard-measure made exactly like it, are the same sensations. I
do not undertake to say what the difference in the sensations is.
Everybody knows, and nobody can tell; no more than any one could tell
what white is to a person who had never had the sensation. But the
difference, so far as cognizable by our faculties, lies in the
sensations. Whatever difference we say there is in the things
themselves, ise, in this as in all other cases, groundede, and grounded
exclusively, on a difference in the sensations excited by them.

Edition: current; Page: [74]


VI.: Attributes Concluded

§ 13. [All attributes of bodies are grounded on states of consciousness]
Thus, then, all the attributes of bodies which are classed under Quality
or Quantity, are grounded on the sensations which we receive from those
bodies, and may be defined, the powers which the bodies have of exciting
those sensations. And the same general explanation has been found to
apply to most of the attributes usually classed under the head of
Relation. They, too, are grounded on some fact or phenomenon into which
the related objects enter as parts; that fact or phenomenon having no
meaning and no existence to us, except the series of sensations or other
states of consciousness by which it makes itself known; and the relation
being simply the power or capacity which the object possesses of taking
part along with the correlated object in the production of that series
of sensations or states of consciousness. We have been obliged, indeed,
to recognise a somewhat different character in certain peculiar
relations, those of succession and simultaneity, of likeness and
unlikeness. These, not being grounded on any fact or phenomenon distinct
from the related objects themselves, do not admit of the same kind of
analysis. But these relations, though not, like other relations,
grounded on states of consciousness, are themselves states of
consciousness: resemblance is nothing but our feeling of resemblance;
succession is nothing but our feeling of succession. Or, if this be
disputed (and we cannot, without transgressing the bounds of our
science, discuss it here), at least our knowledge of these relations,
and even our possibility of knowledge, is confined to those which
subsist between sensations, or other states of consciousness; for,
though we ascribe resemblance, or succession, or simultaneity, to
objects and to attributes, it is always in virtue of resemblance or
succession or simultaneity in the sensations or states of consciousness
which those objects excite, and on which those attributes are grounded.

§ 14. [So also are all attributes of minds grounded on states of
consciousness] In the preceding investigation we have, for the sake of
simplicity, considered bodies only, and omitted minds. But what we have
said, is applicable, mutatis mutandis, to the latter. The attributes of
minds, as well as those of bodies, are grounded on states of feeling or
consciousness. But in the case of a mind, we have to consider its own
states, as well as those which it produces in other minds. Every
attribute of a mind consists either in being itself affected in a
certain way, or affecting other minds in a certain way. Considered in
itself, we can predicate nothing of it but the series of its own
feelings. When we say of any mind, that it is devout, or superstitious,
or meditative, or cheerful, we mean that the ideas, emotions, aora
volitions implied in Edition: current; Page: [75] those words, from a
frequently recurring part of the series of feelings, or states of
consciousness, which fill up the sentient existence of that mind.

In addition, however, to those attributes of a mind which are grounded
on its own states of feeling, attributes may also be ascribed to it, in
the same manner as to a body, grounded on the feelings which it excites
in other minds. A mind does not, indeed, like a body, excite sensations,
but it may excite thoughts or emotions. The most important example of
attributes ascribed on this ground, is the employment of terms
expressive of approbation or blame. When, for example, we say of any
character, or (in other words) of any mind, that it is admirable, we
mean that the contemplation of it excites the sentiment of admiration;
and indeed somewhat more, for the word implies that we not only feel
admiration, but approve that sentiment in ourselves. In some cases,
under the semblance of a single attribute, two are really predicated:
one of them, a state of the mind itself; the other, a state with which
other minds are affected by thinking of it. As when we say of any one
that he is generous. The word generosity expresses a certain state of
mind, but being a term of praise, it also expresses that this state of
mind excites in us another mental state, called approbation. The
assertion made, therefore, is twofold, and of the following purport:
Certain feelings form habitually a part of this person’s sentient
existence; and bthe idea of those feelings of his, excites the sentiment
of approbation in ourselves or others.

As we thus ascribe attributes to minds on the ground of ideas and
emotions, so may we to bodies on similar grounds, and not solely on the
ground of sensations: as in speaking of the beauty of a statute; since
this attribute is grounded on the peculiar feeling of pleasure which the
statue produces in our minds; cwhich is not a sensation, but an emotion.


VII.: General aResultsa

§ 15. [Recapitulation] Our survey of the varieties of Things which have
been, or which are capable of being, named—which have been, or are
capable of being, either predicated of other Things, or bthemselves
madeb the subject of predications—is now cconcludedc.

Our enumeration commenced with Feelings. These we scrupulously
distinguished from the objects which excite them, and from the organs by
which they are, or may be supposed to be, conveyed. Feelings are of four
sorts: Sensations, Thoughts, Emotions, and Volitions. What are called
Perceptions are merely a particular case of Belief, and belief is a kind
of thought. Actions are merely volitions followed by an effect.d

Edition: current; Page: [76]
After Feelings we proceeded to Substances. These are either Bodies or
Minds. Without entering into the grounds of the metaphysical doubts
which have been raised concerning the existence of Matter and Mind as
objective realities, we stated as sufficient for us the conclusion in
which the best thinkers are now efor the most parte agreed, that all we
can know of Matter is the sensations which it gives us, and the order of
occurrence of those sensations; and that while the substance Body is the
unknown cause of our sensations, the substance Mind is the unknown
frecipientf.

The only remaining class of Nameable Things is Attributes; and these are
of three kinds, Quality, Relation, and Quantity. Qualities, like
substances, are known to us no otherwise than by the sensations or other
states of consciousness which they excite: and while, in compliance with
common usage, we have continued to speak of them as a distinct class of
Things, we showed that in predicating them no one means to predicate
anything but those sensations or states of consciousness, on which they
may be said to be grounded, and by which alone they can be defined gor
describedg. Relations, except the simple cases of likeness and
unlikeness, succession and simultaneity, are similarly grounded on some
fact or phenomenon, that is, on some series of sensations or states of
consciousness, more or less complicated. The third species of Attribute,
Quantity, is also manifestly grounded on something in our sensations or
states of feeling, since there is an indubitable difference in the
sensations excited by a larger and a smaller bulk, or by a greater or a
less degree of intensity, in any object of sense or of consciousness.
All attributes, therefore, are to us nothing but either our sensations
and other states of feeling, or something inextricably involved therein;
and to this even the peculiar and simple relations just adverted to are
not exceptions. Those peculiar relations, however, are so important,
and, even if they might in strictness be classed among hstates of
consciousness, are so fundamentally distinct from any other of those
states, that it would be a vain subtlety to ibring them under that
common descriptioni, and it is necessary that they should be classed
apart.*

Edition: current; Page: [77]
As the result, therefore, of our analysis, we obtain the following as an
enumeration and classification of all Nameable Things:

1st. Feelings, or States of Consciousness.

2nd. The Minds which experience those feelings.

3rd. The jBodies, orj external objects which excite certain of those
feelings, together with the powers or properties whereby they excite
them; kthese latter (at least)k being included rather in compliance with
common opinion, and because their existence is taken for granted in the
common language from which I cannot prudently deviate, than because the
recognition of such powers or properties as real existences appears to
lbel warranted by a sound philosophy.

4th, and last. The Successions and Co-existences, the Likenesses and
Unlikenesses, between feelings or states of consciousness. Those
relations, when considered as subsisting between other things, mexistm
in reality only between the states of consciousness which those things,
if bodies, excite, if minds, either excite or experience.

This, until a better can be suggested, nmay serven as a substitute for
the oCategories of Aristotle considered as a Classification of
Existenceso. The practical application of it will appear when we
commence the inquiry into the Import of Propositions; in other words,
when we inquire what it is which the mind actually believes, when it
gives what is called its assent to a proposition.

These four classes comprising, if the classification be correct, all
Nameable Things, these or some of them must of course compose the
signification of all names; and of these, or some of them, is made up
whatever we call a fact.

For distinction’s sake, every fact which is solely composed of feelings
or states of consciousness considered as such, is often called a
Psychological or Subjective fact; while every fact which is composed,
either wholly or in part, of something different from these, that is, of
substances and attributes, is called an Objective fact. We may say,
then, that every objective fact is grounded on a corresponding
subjective one; and has no meaning to us, (apart from the subjective
fact which corresponds to it,) except as a name for the unknown and
inscrutable process by which that subjective or psychological fact is
brought to pass.

Edition: current; Page: [78]


CHAPTER IV: Of Propositions

§ 1. [Nature and office of the copula] In treating of Propositions, as
already in treating of Names, some considerations of a comparatively
elementary nature respecting their form and varieties must be premised,
before entering upon that analysis of the import conveyed by them, which
is the real subject and purpose of this preliminary book.

A proposition, we have before said, is a portion of discourse in which a
predicate is affirmed or denied of a subject. A predicate and a subject
are all that is necessarily required to make up a proposition: but as we
cannot conclude from merely seeing two names put together, that they are
a predicate and a subject, that is, that one of them is intended to be
affirmed or denied of the other, it is necessary that there should be
some mode or form of indicating that such is the intention; some sign to
distinguish a predication from any other kind of discourse. This is
sometimes done by a slight alteration of one of the words, called an
inflection; as when we say, Fire burns; the change of the second word
from burn to burns showing that we mean to affirm the predicate burn of
the subject fire. But this function is more commonly fulfilled by the
word is, when an affirmation is intended, is not, when a negation; or by
some other part of the verb to be. The word which thus serves the
purpose of a sign of predication is called, as we formerly observed, the
copula. It is aimportanta that there should be no indistinctness in our
conception of the nature and office of the copula; for confused notions
respecting it are among the causes which have spread mysticism over the
field of logic, and perverted its speculations into logomachies.

It is apt to be supposed that the copula is bsomethingb more than a mere
sign of predication; that it also signifies existence. In the
proposition, Socrates is just, it may seem to be implied not only that
the quality just can be affirmed of Socrates, but moreover that Socrates
is, that is to say, exists. This, however, only shows that there is an
ambiguity in the word is; a word which not only performs the function of
the copula in affirmations, but has also a meaning of its own, in virtue
of which it may itself be made the predicate of a proposition. That the
employment of it as a copula does not necessarily Edition: current;
Page: [79] include the affirmation of existence, appears from such a
proposition as this, A centaur is a fiction of the poets; where it
cannot possibly be implied that a centaur exists, since the proposition
itself expressly asserts that the thing has no real existence.

Many volumes might be filled with the frivolous speculations concerning
the nature of Being, (τὸ ὄν, οὐσία, Ens, Entitas, Essentia, and the
like) which have arisen from overlooking this double meaning of the
cwordc to be; from supposing that when it signifies to exist, and when
it signifies to be some specified thing, as to be a man, to be Socrates,
to be seen or spoken of, to be a phantom, even to be a nonentity, it
must still, at bottom, answer to the same idea; and that a meaning must
be found for it which shall suit all these cases. The fog which rose
from this narrow spot diffused itself at an early period over the whole
surface of metaphysics. Yet it becomes us not to triumph over the
dgreatd intellects of Plato and Aristotle because we are now able to
preserve ourselves from many errors into which they, perhaps inevitably,
fell. The fire-teazer of a modern steam-engine produces by his exertions
far greater effects than Milo of Crotona could, but he is not therefore
a stronger man. The Greeks seldom knew any language but their own. This
rendered it far more difficult for them than it is for us, to acquire a
readiness in detecting ambiguities. One of the advantages of having
eaccuratelye studied a plurality of languages, especially of those
languages which feminent thinkersf have used as the vehicle of their
thoughts, is the practical lesson we learn respecting the ambiguities of
words, by finding that the same word in one language corresponds, on
different occasions, to different words in another. When not thus
exercised, even the strongest understandings find early period over the
whole surface of metaphysics. Yet it becomes us not to some respect or
other a common nature; and often expend much labour gvery unprofitablyg
(as was frequently done by the two philosophers just mentioned) hinh
vain attempts to discover in what this common nature consists. But, the
habit once formed, intellects much inferior are capable of detecting
even ambiguities which are common to many languages: and it is
surprising that the one now under consideration, though it exists in the
modern languages as well as in the ancient, should have been overlooked
by almost all authors. The quantity of futile speculation which had been
caused by a misapprehension of the nature of the copula, was hinted at
by Hobbes;[*] Edition: current; Page: [80] but iMr. Jamesi Mill* was, I
believe, the first who distinctly characterized the ambiguity, and
pointed out how many errors in the received systems of philosophy it has
had to answer for. It has indeed misled the moderns scarcely less than
the ancients, though their mistakes, because our understandings are not
yet so completely emancipated from their influence, do not appear
equally jirrationalj.

We shall now briefly review the principal distinctions which exist among
propositions, and the technical terms most commonly in use to express
those distinctions.

§ 2. [Affirmative and Negative propositions] A proposition being a
portion of discourse in which something is affirmed or denied of
something, the first division of propositions is into affirmative and
negative. An affirmative proposition is that in which the predicate is
affirmed of the subject; as, Cæsar is dead. A negative proposition is
that in which the predicate is denied of the subject; as, Cæsar is not
dead. The copula, in this last species of proposition, consists of the
words is not, which are the sign of negation; is being the sign of
affirmation.

Some logicians, among whom may be mentioned Hobbes,[*] state this
distinction differently; they recognise only one form of copula, is, and
attach the negative sign to the predicate. “Cæsar is dead,” and “Cæsar
is not dead,” according to these writers, are propositions agreeing not
in the subject and predicate, but in the subject only. They do not
consider “dead,” but “not dead,” to be the predicate of the second
proposition, and they accordingly define a negative proposition to be
one in which the predicate is a negative name. The point, though not of
much practical moment, deserves notice as an example (not unfrequent in
logic) where by means of an apparent simplification, but which is merely
verbal, matters are made more complex than before. The anotiona of these
writers was, that they could get rid of the distinction between
affirming and denying, by treating every case of denying as the
affirming bofb a negative name. But what is meant by a negative name? A
name expressive of the absence of an attribute. So that when we affirm a
negative name, what we are really predicating is absence and not
presence; we are asserting not that anything is, but that something is
not; to express which operation no word seems so proper as the word
denying. The fundamental distinction is between a fact and the
non-existence of that fact; between Edition: current; Page: [81] seeing
something and not seeing it, between Cæsar’s being dead and his not
being dead; and if this were a merely verbal distinction, the
generalization which brings both within the same form of assertion would
be a real simplification: the distinction, however, being real, and in
the facts, it is the generalization confounding the distinction that is
merely verbal; and tends to obscure the subject, by treating the
difference between two kinds of ctruthsc as if it were only a difference
between two kinds of words. To put things together, and to put them or
keep them asunder, will remain different operations, whatever tricks we
may play with language.

A remark of a similar nature may be applied to most of those
distinctions among propositions which are said to have reference to
their modality; as, difference of tense or time; the sun did rise, the
sun is rising, the sun will rise. dThesed differences, like that between
affirmation and negation, might be glossed over by considering the
incident of time as a mere modification of the predicate: thus, The sun
is an object having risen, The sun is an object now rising, The sun is
an object to rise hereafter. But the simplification would be merely
verbal. Past, present, eande future, do not constitute so many different
kinds of rising; they are fdesignations belonging to the event asserted,
to the sun’s rising to-day. They affect, not the predicate, but the
applicability of the predicate to the particular subject. That which we
affirm to be past, present, or future, is not what the subject
signifies, nor what the predicate signifies, but specifically and
expressly what the predication signifies; what is expressed only by the
proposition as such, and not by either or both of the terms. Therefore
the circumstance of time is properly considered as attaching to the
copula, which is the sign of predication, and not to the predicate. If
the same cannot be said of such modifications as these, Cæsar may be
dead; Cæsar is perhaps dead; it is possible that Cæsar is dead; it is
only because these fall altogether under another head, being properly
assertions not of anything relating to the fact itself, but of the state
of our own mind in regard to it; namely, our absence of disbelief of it.
Thus “Cæsar may be dead” means “I am not sure that Cæsar is alive.”

§ 3. [Simple and Complex propositions] The next division of propositions
is into Simple and Complexa; more aptly (by Professor Bain*) termed
Compounda. A simple proposition is that in which one predicate is
affirmed or denied of one subject. A bcompoundb proposition is that in
which there is more than one predicate, or more than one subject, or
both.

Edition: current; Page: [82]
At first sight this division has the air of an absurdity; a solemn
distinction of things into one and more than one; as if we were to
divide horses into single horses and teams of horses. And it is true
that what is called a complex c(or compound)c proposition is often not a
proposition at all, but several propositions, held together by a
conjunction. Such, for example, is this: Cæsar is dead, and Brutus is
alive: or even this, Cæsar is dead, but Brutus is alive. There are here
two distinct assertions; and we might as well call a street a complex
house, as these two propositions a complex proposition. It is true that
the syncategorematic words and and but have a meaning; but that meaning
is so far from making the two propositions one, that it adds a third
proposition to them. All particles are abbreviations, and generally
abbreviations of propositions; a kind of short-hand, whereby dsomethingd
which, to be expressed fully, would have required a proposition or a
series of propositions, is suggested to the mind at once. Thus the
words, Cæsar is dead and Brutus is alive, are equivalent to these: Cæsar
is dead; Brutus is alive; it is edesirede that the two preceding
propositions should be thought of together. If the words were, Cæsar is
dead, but Brutus is alive, the sense would be equivalent to the same
three propositions together with a fourth; “between the two preceding
propositions there exists a contrast:” viz. either between the two facts
themselves, or between the feelings with which it is fdesiredf that they
should be regarded.

In the instances cited the two propositions are kept visibly distinct,
each subject having its separate predicate, and each predicate its
separate subject. For brevity, however, and to avoid repetition, the
propositions are often blended together: as in this, “Peter and James
preached at Jerusalem and in Galilee,” which contains four propositions:
Peter preached at Jerusalem, Peter preached in Galilee, James preached
at Jerusalem, James preached in Galilee.

We have seen that when the two or more propositions gcomprised ing what
is called a complex proposition are stated absolutely, and not under any
condition or proviso, it is not a proposition at all, but a plurality of
propositions; since what it expresses is not a single assertion, but
several assertions, which, if true when joined, are true also when
separated. But there is a kind of proposition which, though it contains
a plurality of subjects and of predicates, and may be said in one sense
of the hwordh to consist of several propositions, contains but one
assertion; and its truth does not at all imply that of the simple
propositions which compose it. An example of this is, when the simple
propositions are connected by the particle or; as, either A is B or C is
D; or by the particle if; as, A is B if C is D. In the former case,
Edition: current; Page: [83] the proposition is called disjunctive, in
the latter, conditional: the name hypothetical was originally common to
both. As has been well remarked by Archbishop Whately[*] and others, the
disjunctive form is resolvable into the conditional; every disjunctive
proposition being equivalent to two or more conditional ones. “Either A
is B or C is D,” means, “if A is not B, C is D; and if C is not D, A is
B.” All hypothetical propositions, therefore, though disjunctive in
form, are conditional in meaning; and the words hypothetical and
conditional may be, as indeed they generally are, used synonymously.
Propositions in which the assertion is not dependent on a condition, are
said, in the language of logicians, to be categorical.

An hypothetical proposition is not, like the pretended complex
propositions which we previously considered, a mere aggregation of
simple propositions. The simple propositions which form part of the
words in which it is couched, form no part of the assertion which it
conveys. When we say, If the Koran comes from God, Mahomet is the
prophet of God, we do not intend to affirm either that the Koran does
come from God, or that Mahomet is really his prophet. Neither of these
simple propositions may be true, and yet the truth of the hypothetical
proposition may be indisputable. What is asserted is not the truth of
either of the propositions, but the inferribility of the one from the
other. What, then, is the subject, and what the predicate of the
hypothetical proposition? “The Koran” is not the subject of it, nor is
“Mahomet:” for nothing is affirmed or denied either of the Koran or of
Mahomet. The real subject of the predication is the entire proposition,
“Mahomet is the prophet of God;” and the affirmation is, that this is a
legitimate inference from the proposition, “The Koran comes from God.”
The subject and predicate, therefore, of an hypothetical proposition are
names of propositions. The subject is some one proposition. The
predicate is a general relative name applicable to propositions; of this
form—“an inference from so and so.” A fresh instance is here afforded of
the remark, that iparticles are abbreviations; since “If A is B, C is
D,” is found to be an abbreviation of the following: “The proposition C
is D, is a legitimate inference from the proposition A is B.”

The distinction, therefore, between hypothetical and categorical
propositions, is not so great as it at first appears. In the
conditional, as well as in the categorical form, one predicate is
affirmed of one subject, and no more: but a conditional proposition is a
proposition concerning a proposition; the subject of the assertion is
itself an assertion. Nor is this a property peculiar to hypothetical
propositions. There are other classes of assertions concerning
propositions. Like other things, a proposition has attributes which may
be Edition: current; Page: [84] predicated of it. The attribute
predicated of it in an hypothetical proposition, is that of being an
inference from a certain other proposition. But this is only one of many
attributes that might be predicated. We may say, That the whole is
greater than its part, is an axiom in mathematics: That the Holy Ghost
proceeds from the Father alone, is a tenet of the Greek Church: The
doctrine of the divine right of kings was renounced by Parliament at the
Revolution: The infallibility of the Pope has no countenance from
Scripture. In all these cases the subject of the predication is an
entire proposition. That which these different predicates are affirmed
of, is the proposition, “the whole is greater than its part;” the
proposition, “the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father alone;” the
proposition, “kings have a divine right;” the proposition, “the Pope is
infallible.”

Seeing, then, that there is much less difference between hypothetical
propositions and any others, than one might be led to imagine from their
form, we should be at a loss to account for the conspicuous position
which they have been selected to fill in treatises on logic, if we did
not remember that what they predicate of a proposition, namely, its
being an inference from something else, is precisely that one of its
attributes with which most of all a logician is concerned.

§4. [Universal, Particular, and Singular propositions] The next of the
common divisions of Propositions is into Universal, Particular,
Indefinite, and Singular: a distinction founded on the degree of
generality in which the name, which is the subject of the proposition,
is to be understood. The following are examples:

  -------------------------- -------------
  _All men_ are mortal       Universal.
  _Some men_ are mortal      Particular.
  _Man_ is mortal            Indefinite.
  _Julius Cæsar_ is mortal   Singular.
  -------------------------- -------------

The proposition is Singular, when the subject is an individual name. The
individual name needs not be a proper name. “The Founder of Christianity
was crucified,” is as much a singular proposition as “Christ was
crucified.”

When the name which is the subject of the proposition is a general name,
we may intend to affirm or deny the predicate, either of all the things
that the subject denotes, or only of some. When the predicate is
affirmed or denied of all and each of the things denoted by the subject,
the proposition is universal; when of some aundefineda portion of them
only, it is particular. Thus, All men are mortal; Every man is mortal;
are universal propositions. No man is immortal, is also an universal
proposition, since the predicate, immortal, is denied of each and every
individual denoted by the term man; the negative proposition being
exactly equivalent to the following, Every man Edition: current; Page:
[85] is not-immortal. But “some men are wise,” “some men are not wise,”
are particular propositions; the predicate wise being in the one case
affirmed and in the other denied not of each and every individual
denoted by the term man, but only of each and every one of some portion
of those individuals, without specifying what portion; for if this were
specified, the proposition would be changed either into a singular
proposition, or into an universal proposition with a different subject;
as, for instance, “all bproperlyb instructed men are wise.” There are
other forms of particular propositions; cas,c “Most men are dimperfectly
educated:d” it being immaterial how large a portion of the subject the
predicate is asserted of, as long as it is left uncertain how that
portion is to be distinguished from the rest.*

When the form of the expression does not clearly show whether the
general name which is the subject of the proposition is meant to stand
for all the individuals denoted by it, or only for some of them, the
proposition ise, by some logicians,e called Indefinite; but this, as
Archbishop Whately observes, is a solecism, of the same nature as that
committed by some grammarians when in their list of genders they
enumerate the doubtful gender.[*] The speaker must mean to assert the
proposition either as an universal or as a particular proposition,
though he has failed to declare which: and it often happens that though
the words do not show which of the two he intends, the context, or the
custom of speech, supplies the deficiency. Thus, when it is affirmed
that “Man is mortal,” nobody doubts that the assertion is intended of
all human beings; and the word indicative of universality is commonly
omitted, only because the meaning is evident without it. fIn the
proposition, “Wine is good,” it is understood with equal readiness,
though for somewhat different reasons, that the assertion is not
intended to be universal, but Edition: current; Page: [86] particular.f*
gAs is observed by Professor Bain,† the chief examples of Indefinite
propositions occur “with names of material, which are the subjects
sometimes of universal, and at other times of particular predication.
‘Food is chemically constituted by carbon, oxygen, &c.,’ is a
proposition of universal quantity; the meaning is all food—all kinds of
food. ‘Food is necessary to animal life’ is a case of particular
quantity; the meaning is some sort of food, not necessarily all sorts.
‘Metal is requisite in order to strength’ does not mean all kinds of
metal. ‘Gold will make a way,’ means a portion of gold.”g

When a general name stands for each and every individual which it is a
name of, or in other words, which it denotes, it is said by logicians to
be distributed, or taken distributively. Thus, in the proposition, All
men are mortal, the subject, Man, is distributed, because mortality is
affirmed of each and every man. The predicate, Mortal, is not
distributed, because the only mortals who are spoken of in the
proposition are those who happen to be men; while the word may, for
aught that appears, and in fact does, comprehend hwithinh it an
indefinite number of objects besides men. In the proposition, Some men
are mortal, both the predicate and the subject are undistributed. In the
following, No men ihave wingsi, both the predicate and jthej subject are
distributed. Not only kis the attribute of having wingsk denied of the
entire class Man, but that class is severed and cast out from the whole
of the class lWingedl, and not merely from some part of that class.

This phraseology, which is of great service in stating and demonstrating
the rules of the syllogism, enables us to express very concisely the
definitions of an universal and a particular proposition. An universal
proposition is that of which the subject is distributed; a particular
proposition is that of which the subject is undistributed.

There are many more distinctions among propositions than those we have
here stated, some of them of considerable importance. But, for
explaining and illustrating these, more suitable opportunities will
occur in the sequel.

Edition: current; Page: [87]


CHAPTER V: Of the Import of Propositions

§ 1. [Doctrine that a proposition is the expression of a relation
between two ideas] An inquiry into the nature of propositions must have
one of two objects: to analyse the state of mind called Belief, or to
analyse what is believed. All language recognises a difference between a
doctrine or opinion, and the afacta of entertaining the opinion; between
assent, and what is assented to.

Logic, according to the conception here formed of it, has no concern
with the nature of the act of judging or believing; the consideration of
that act, as a phenomenon of the mind, belongs to another science.
Philosophers, however, from Descartes downwards, and especially from the
era of Leibnitz and Locke, have by no means observed this distinction;
and bwould have treated with great disrespect any attempt to analyse the
import of Propositions, unless founded on an analysis of the act of
Judgment. A proposition, they would have said, is but the expression in
words of a Judgment. The thing expressed, not the mere verbal
expression, is the important matter. When the mind assents to a
proposition, it judges. Let us find out what the mind does when it
judges, and we shall know what propositions mean, and not otherwise.

Conformably to these views, almost all the writers on Logic in the last
two centuries, whether English, German, or French, have made their
theory of Propositions, from one end to the other, a theory of
Judgments. They considered a Proposition, or a Judgment, for they used
the two words indiscriminately, to consist in affirming or denying one
idea of another. To judge, was to put two ideas together, or to bring
one idea under another, or to compare two ideas, or to perceive the
agreement or disagreement between two ideas: and the whole doctrine of
Propositions, together with the theory of Reasoning, (always necessarily
founded on the theory of Propositions,) was stated as if Ideas, or
Conceptions, or whatever other term the writer preferred as a name for
mental representations generally, constituted essentially the subject
matter and substance of those operations.

It is, of course, true, that in any case of judgment, as for instance
when we judge that gold is yellow, a process takes place in our minds,
of which some Edition: current; Page: [88] one or other of these
theories is a partially correct account. We must have the idea of gold
and the idea of yellow, and these two ideas must be brought together in
our mind. But in the first place, it is evident that this is only a part
of what takes place; for we may put two ideas together without any act
of belief; as when we merely imagine something, such as a golden
mountain; or when we actually disbelieve: for in order even to
disbelieve that Mahomet was an apostle of God, we must put the idea of
Mahomet and that of an apostle of God together. To determine what it is
that happens in the case of assent or dissent besides putting two ideas
together, is one of the most intricate of metaphysical problems. But
whatever the solution may be, we may venture to assert that it can have
nothing whatever to do with the import of propositions; for cthisc
reason, that propositions (except dsometimes whend the mind itself is
the subject treated of) are not assertions respecting our ideas of
things, but assertions respecting the things themselves. In order to
believe that gold is yellow, I must, indeed, have the idea of gold, and
the idea of yellow, and something having reference to those ideas must
take place in my mind; but my belief has not reference to the ideas, it
has reference to the things. What I believe, is a fact relating to the
outward thing, gold, and to the impression made by that outward thing
upon the human organs; not a fact relating to my conception of gold,
which would be a fact in my mental history, not a fact of external
nature. It is true, that in order to believe this fact in external
nature, another fact must take place in my mind, a process must be
performed upon my ideas; but so it must in everything else that I do. I
cannot dig the ground unless I have the idea of the ground, and of a
spade, and of all the other things I am operating upon, and unless I put
those ideas together.* But it would be a very ridiculous description of
digging the ground to say that it is putting one idea into another.
Digging is an operation which is performed upon the things themselves,
though it cannot be performed unless I have in my mind the ideas of
them. And fin like manner, believing is an act which has for its subject
the facts themselves, though a previous mental conception of the facts
is an indispensable condition. When I say that Edition: current; Page:
[89] fire causes heat, do I mean that my idea of fire causes my idea of
heat? No: I mean that the natural phenomenon, fire, causes the natural
phenomenon, heat. When I mean to assert anything respecting the ideas, I
give them their proper name, I call them ideas: as when I say, that a
child’s idea of a battle is unlike the reality, or that the ideas
entertained of the Deity have a great effect on the characters of
mankind.

The notion that what is of primary importance to the logician in a
proposition, is the relation between the two ideas corresponding to the
subject and predicate, (instead of the relation between the two
phenomena which they respectively express,) seems to me one of the most
fatal errors ever introduced into the philosophy of Logic; and the
principal cause why the theory of the science has made such
inconsiderable progress during the last two centuries. The treatises on
Logic, and on the branches of Mental Philosophy connected with Logic,
which have been produced since the intrusion of this cardinal error,
though sometimes written by men of extraordinary abilities and
attainments, almost always tacitly imply a theory that the investigation
of truth consists in contemplating and handling our ideas, or
conceptions of things, instead of the things themselves: a gdoctrine
tantamount to the assertion, that the only mode of acquiring knowledge
of nature is to study it at second hand, as represented in our own
mindsg. Meanwhile, inquiries into every kind of natural phenomena were
incessantly establishing great and fruitful truths on hmost important
subjects, by processes upon which these views of the nature of Judgment
and Reasoning threw no light, and in which they afforded no assistance
whatever. No wonder that those who knew by practical experience how
truths are iarrivedi at, should deem a science futile, which consisted
chiefly of such speculations. What has been done for the advancement of
Logic since these doctrines came into vogue, has been done not by
professed logicians, but by discoverers in the other sciences; in whose
methods of investigation many jprinciples of logic, not previously
thought of, have successively come forth into light, but who have
generally committed the error of supposing that nothing whatever was
known of the art of philosophizing by the old logicians, because their
modern interpreters have written to so little purpose respecting it.

We have to inquire, then, on the present occasion, not into Judgment,
but judgments; not into the act of believing, but into the thing
believed. What is the immediate object of belief in a Proposition? What
is the matter of fact signified by it? What is it to which, when I
assert the proposition, I give my Edition: current; Page: [90] assent,
and call upon others to give theirs? What is that which is expressed by
the form of discourse called a Proposition, and the conformity of which
to fact constitutes the truth of the proposition?

§ 2. [Doctrine that a proposition is the expression of a relation
between the meaning of two names] One of the clearest and most
consecutive thinkers whom this country or the world has produced, I mean
Hobbes, has given the following answer to this question. In every
proposition (says he)[*] what is signified is, the belief of the speaker
that the predicate is a name of the same thing of which the subject is a
name; and if it really is so, the proposition is true. Thus the
proposition, All men are living beings (he would say) is true, because
living being is a name of everything of which man is a name. All men are
six feet high, is not true, because six feet high is not a name of
everything (though it is of some things) of which man is a name.

What is stated ain this theorya as the definition of a true proposition,
must be allowed to be a property which all true propositions possess.
The subject and predicate being both of them names of things, if they
were names of quite different things the one name could not,
consistently with its signification, be predicated of the other. If it
be true that some men are copper-coloured, it must be true—and the
proposition does really assert—that among the individuals denoted by the
name man, there are some who are also among those denoted by the name
copper-coloured. If it be true that all oxen ruminate, it must be true
that all the individuals denoted by the name ox are also among those
denoted by the name ruminating; and whoever asserts that all oxen
ruminate, undoubtedly does assert that this relation subsists between
the two names.

The assertion, therefore, which, according to Hobbes, is the only one
made in any proposition, really is made in every proposition: and his
analysis has consequently one of the requisites for being the true one.
We may go a step farther; it is the only analysis that is rigorously
true of all propositions without exception. What he gives as the meaning
of propositions, is part of the meaning of all propositions, and the
whole meaning of some. This, however, only shows what an extremely
minute fragment of meaning it is quite possible to include within the
logical formula of a proposition. It does not show that no proposition
means more. To warrant us in putting together two words with a copula
between them, it is really enough that the thing or things denoted by
one of the names should be capable, without violation of usage, of being
called by the other name also. If, then, this be all the meaning
necessarily implied in the form of discourse called a Proposition, why
do bIb Edition: current; Page: [91] object to it as the scientific
definition of what a proposition means? Because, though the mere
collocation which makes the proposition a proposition, conveys no more
cthan this scanty amount of meaningc, that same collocation combined
with other circumstances, that form combined with other matter, does
convey more, and dthe proposition in those other circumstances does
assert more, than merely that relation between the two namesd.

The only propositions of which Hobbes’ principle is a sufficient
account, are that limited and unimportant class in which both the
predicate and the subject are proper names. For, as has already been
remarked, proper names have strictly no meaning; they are mere marks for
individual objects: and when a proper name is predicated of another
proper name, all the signification conveyed is, that both the names are
marks for the same object. But this is precisely what Hobbes produces as
a theory of predication in general. His doctrine is a full explanation
of such predications as these: Hyde was Clarendon, or, Tully is Cicero.
It exhausts the meaning of those propositions. But it is a sadly
inadequate theory of any others. That it should ever have been thought
of as such, can be accounted for only by the fact, that Hobbes, in
common with the other Nominalists, bestowed little or no attention upon
the connotation of words; and sought for their meaning exclusively in
what they edenotee: as if all names had been (what none but proper names
really are) marks put upon individuals; and as if there were no
difference between a proper and a general name, except that the first
denotes only one individual, and the last a greater number.

It has been seen, however, that the meaning of all names, except proper
names and that portion of the class of abstract names which are not
connotative, resides in the connotation. When, therefore, we are
analysing the meaning of any proposition in which the predicate and the
subject, or either of them, are connotative names, it is to the
connotation of those terms that we must exclusively look, and not to
what they fdenotef, or in the language of Hobbes (language so far
correct) are names of.

In asserting that the truth of a proposition depends on the conformity
of gimport betweeng its terms, as, for instance, that the proposition,
Socrates is wise, is a true proposition, because Socrates and wise are
names happlicable to, or, as he expresses it, names of, the same
personh; it is very remarkable that so powerful a thinker should not
have asked himself the question, But how came they to be names of the
same ipersoni?[*] Surely not because such Edition: current; Page: [92]
was the intention of those who invented the words. When mankind fixed
the meaning of the word wise, they were not thinking of Socrates, nor,
when his parents gave him the name jofj Socrates, were they thinking of
wisdom. The names happen to fit the same kpersonk because of a certain
fact, which fact was not known, nor in being, when the names were
invented. If we want to know what the fact is, we shall find the clue to
it in the connotation of the names.

A bird, or a stone, a man, or a wise man, means simply, an object having
such and such attributes. The real meaning of the word man, is those
attributes, and not lSmith, Brown, and the remainder of the
individualsl. The word mortal, in like manner connotes a certain
attribute or attributes; and when we say, All men are mortal, the
meaning of the proposition is, that all beings which possess the one set
of attributes, possess also the other. If, in our experience, the
attributes connoted by man are always accompanied by the attribute
connoted by mortal, it will follow as a consequence, that the class man
will be wholly included in the class mortal, and that mortal will be a
name of all things of which man is a name: but why? Those objects are
brought under the name, by possessing the attributes connoted by it: but
their possession of the attributes is the real condition on which the
truth of the proposition depends; not their being called by the name.
Connotative names do not precede, but follow, the attributes which they
connote. If one attribute happens to be always found in conjunction with
another attribute, the concrete names which answer to those attributes
will of course be predicable of the same subjects, and may be said, in
Hobbes’ language, (in the propriety of which on this moccasionm I fully
concur,) to be two names for the same things. But the possibility of a
concurrent application of the two names, is a mere consequence of the
conjunction between the two attributes, and was, in most cases, never
thought of when the names were nintroducedn and their signification
fixed. That the diamond is combustible, was a proposition certainly not
dreamt of when the words Diamond and Combustible ofirst received theiro
meaning; and could not have been discovered by the most ingenious and
refined analysis of the signification of those words. It was found out
by a very different process, namely, by exerting the psenses, and
learning from them, that the attribute of combustibility existed in
qtheq diamonds upon which the experiment was tried; rthe number sors
character Edition: current; Page: [93] of the experiments beingr such,
that what was true of those individuals might be concluded to be true of
all substances “tcalled byt the name,” that is, of all substances
possessing the attributes which the name connotes. The assertion,
therefore, when analysed, is, that uwherever we find certain attributes,
there will be found a certain other attribute: whichu is not a question
of the signification of names, but of vlaws of nature; the order
existing among phenomena.

§ 3. [Doctrine that a proposition consists in referring something to, or
excluding something from, a class] Although Hobbes’ theory of
Predication has not, in the terms in which he stated it, met with a very
favourable reception from asubsequent thinkersa, a theory virtually
identical with it, and not by any means so perspicuously expressed, may
almost be said to have taken the rank of an established opinion. The
most generally received notion of Predication decidedly is that it
consists in referring something to a class, i.e., either placing an
individual under a class, or placing one class under another class.
Thus, the proposition, Man is mortal, asserts, according to this view of
it, that the class man is included in the class mortal. “Plato is a
philosopher,” asserts that the individual Plato is one of those who
compose the class philosopher. If the proposition is negative, then
instead of placing something in a class, it is said to exclude something
from a class. Thus, if the following be the proposition, The elephant is
not carnivorous; what is asserted (according to this theory) is, that
the elephant is excluded from the class carnivorous, or is not numbered
among the things comprising that class. There is no real difference,
except in language, between this theory of Predication and the theory of
Hobbes. For a class is absolutely nothing but an indefinite number of
individuals denoted by a general name. The name given to them in common,
is what makes them a class. To refer anything to a class, therefore, is
to look upon it as one of the things which are to be called by that
common name. To exclude it from a class, is to say that the common name
is not applicable to it.

How widely these views of predication have prevailed, is evident from
this, that they are the basis of the celebrated dictum de omni et nullo.
When the syllogism is resolved, by all who treat of it, into an
inference that what is true of a class is true of all things whatever
that belong to the class; and when this is laid down by almost all
professed logicians as the ultimate principle to which all reasoning
owes its validity; it is clear that in the general estimation of
logicians, the propositions of which reasonings are composed Edition:
current; Page: [94] can be the expression of nothing but the process of
dividing things into classes, and referring everything to its proper
class.

This theory appears to me a signal example of a logical error very often
committed in logic, that of ὕστερον πρότερον, or explaining a thing by
something which presupposes it. When I say that snow is white, I may and
ought to be thinking of snow as a class, because I am asserting a
proposition as true of all snow: but I am certainly not thinking of
white objects as a class; I am thinking of no white object whatever
except snow, but only of that, and of the sensation of white which it
gives me. When, indeed, I have judged, or assented to the propositions,
that snow is white, and that several other things bare alsob white, I
gradually begin to think of white objects as a class, including snow and
those other things. But this is a conception which followed, not
preceded, those judgments, and therefore cannot be given as an
explanation of them. Instead of explaining the effect by the cause, this
doctrine explains the cause by the effect, and is, I conceive, founded
on a latent misconception of the nature of classification.

There is a sort of language very generally prevalent in these
discussions, which seems to suppose that classification is an
arrangement and grouping of definite and known individuals: that when
names were imposed, mankind took into consideration all the individual
objects in the universe, cdistributed themc into parcels or lists, and
gave to the objects of each list a common name, repeating this operation
toties quoties until they had invented all the general names of which
language consists; which having been once done, if a question
subsequently arises whether a certain general name can be truly
predicated of a certain particular object, we have only (as it were) to
read the roll of the objects upon which that name was conferred, and see
whether the object about which the question arises is to be found among
them. The framers of language (it would seem to be supposed) have
predetermined all the objects that are to compose each class, and we
have only to refer to the record of an antecedent decision.

So absurd a doctrine will be owned by nobody when thus nakedly stated;
but if the commonly received explanations of classification and naming
do not imply this theory, it requires to be shown how they admit of
being reconciled with any other.

General names are not marks put upon definite objects; classes are not
made by drawing a line round a given number of assignable individuals.
The objects which compose any given class are perpetually fluctuating.
We may frame a class without knowing the individuals, or even any of the
individuals, of which it dmayd be composed; we may do so while believing
that no such individuals exist. If by the meaning of a general name are
to be understood Edition: current; Page: [95] the things which it is the
name of, no general name, except by accident, has a fixed meaning at
all, or ever long retains the same meaning. The only mode in which any
general name has a definite meaning, is by being a name of an
eindefinitee variety of things; namely, of all things, known or unknown,
past, present, or future, which possess certain definite attributes.
When, by studying not the meaning of words, but the phenomena of nature,
we discover that fthesef attributes are possessed by some object not
previously known to possess them, (as when chemists found that the
diamond was combustible), we include this new object in the class; but
it did not already belong to the class. We place the individual in the
class because the proposition is true; the proposition is not true
because the object is placed in the class.*

It will appear hereafter, in treating of reasoning, how much the theory
of that intellectual process has been vitiated by the influence of these
erroneous gnotionsg, and by the habit which they exemplify of
assimilating all the operations of the human understanding which have
truth for their object, to processes of mere classification and naming.
Unfortunately, the minds which have been entangled in this net are
precisely those which have escaped the other cardinal error commented
upon in the beginning of the present chapter. Since the revolution which
dislodged Aristotle from the schools, logicians may almost be divided
into those who have looked upon reasoning as essentially an affair of
Ideas, and those who have looked upon it as essentially an affair of
Names.

hAlthough, however,h Hobbes’ theory of Predication, according to the
well-known remark of Leibnitz, and the avowal of Hobbes himself,†
renders Edition: current; Page: [96] truth and falsity completely
arbitrary, with no standard but the will of men, it must not be
concluded that either Hobbes, or any of the other ithinkersi who have in
the main agreed with him, did in fact consider the distinction between
truth and error as less real, or attached jlessj importance to it, than
other people. To suppose that they did so would argue total
unacquaintance with their other speculations. But this shows how little
hold their doctrine possessed over their own minds. No person, at
bottom, ever imagined that there was nothing more in truth than
propriety of expression; than using language in conformity to a previous
convention. kWhen the inquiry was brought down from generals to a
particular case, it has always been acknowledged that there is a
distinction between verbal and real questions; that some false
propositions are uttered from ignorance of the meaning of words, but
that in others the source of the error is a misapprehension of things;
that a person who has not the use of language at all may form
propositions mentally, and that they may be untrue, that is, he may
believe as matters of fact what are not really so. This last admission
cannot be made in stronger terms than it is by Hobbes himself,* though
he will not allow such erroneous belief to be called falsity, but only
error. And lhe has himself laid down, in other places, doctrines in
which the true theory of predication is by implication contained. He
distinctly says that general names are given to things on account of
their attributes, and that abstract names are the names of those
attributes. “Abstract is that which in any subject denotes the cause of
the concrete name. . . . And these causes of names are the same with the
causes of our conceptions, namely, some power of action, or affection,
of the thing conceived, which some call the manner by which anything
works upon our Edition: current; Page: [97] senses, but by most men they
are called accidents.”* It is strange that having gone so far, he should
not have gone one step mfartherm, and seen that what he calls the cause
of the concrete name, is in reality the meaning of it; and that when we
predicate of any subject a name which is given because of an attribute
(or, as he calls it, an accident), our object is not to affirm the name,
but, by means of the name, to affirm the attribute.

§ 4. [What a proposition really is] Let the predicate be, as we have
said, a connotative term; and to take the simplest case first, let the
subject be a proper name: “The summit of Chimborazo is white.” The word
white connotes an attribute which is possessed by the individual object
designated by the words “summit of Chimborazo;” which attribute consists
in the physical fact, of its exciting in human beings the sensation
which we call a sensation of white. It will be admitted that, by
asserting the proposition, we wish to communicate information of that
physical fact, and are not thinking of the names, except as the
necessary means of making that communication. The meaning of the
proposition, therefore, is, that the individual thing denoted by the
subject, has the attributes connoted by the predicate.

If we now suppose the subject also to be a connotative name, the meaning
expressed by the proposition has advanced a step farther in
complication. Let us first suppose the proposition to be universal, as
well as affirmative: “All men are mortal.” In this case, as in the last,
what the proposition asserts (or expresses a belief aofa) is, of course,
that the objects bdenotedb by the subject (man) possess the attributes
connoted by the predicate (mortal). But the characteristic of this case
is, that the objects are no longer individually designated. They are
pointed out only by some of their attributes: they are the objects
called men, that is, cpossessing the attributes connoted by the name
man; and the only thing known of them may be those attributes: indeed,
as the proposition is general, and the objects denoted by the subject
are therefore indefinite in number, most of them are not known
individually at all. The assertion, therefore, is not, as before, that
the attributes which the predicate connotes are possessed by any given
individual, or by any number of individuals previously known as John,
Thomas, d&c., but that those attributes are possessed by each and every
individual possessing certain other attributes; that whatever has the
attributes connoted by the subject, has also those connoted by the
predicate; that the latter set of attributes constantly Edition:
current; Page: [98] accompany the former set. Whatever has the
attributes of man has the attribute of mortality; mortality constantly
accompanies the attributes of man.*

If it be remembered that every attribute is grounded on some fact or
phenomenon, either of outward sense or of inward consciousness, and that
to possess an attribute is another phrase for fbeing the cause of, or
formingf part of, the fact or phenomenon upon which the attribute is
grounded; we may add one more step to complete the analysis. The
proposition which asserts that one attribute always accompanies another
attribute, greally assertsg thereby no other thing than this, that one
phenomenon always accompanies another phenomenon; insomuch that where we
find the hlatter, we have assurance of the existence of the formerh.
Thus, in the proposition, All men are mortal, the word man connotes the
attributes which we ascribe to a certain kind of living creatures, on
the ground of certain phenomena which they exhibit, and which are partly
physical phenomena, namely the impressions made on our senses by their
bodily form and structure, and partly mental phenomena, namely the
sentient and intellectual life which they have of their own. All this is
understood when we utter the word man, by any one to whom the meaning of
the word is known. Now, when we say, Man is mortal, we mean that
wherever these various physical and mental phenomena are all found,
there we have assurance that the other physical and mental phenomenon,
called death, will not fail to take place. The proposition does not
affirm when; for the connotation of the word mortal goes no Edition:
current; Page: [99] ifartheri than to the occurrence of the phenomenon
at some time or other, leaving the jparticularj time undecided.

§ 5. [A proposition asserts (or denies) a sequence, a coexistence, a
simple existence, a causation] We have already proceeded far enough, not
only to demonstrate the error of Hobbes, but to ascertain the real
import of by far the most numerous class of propositions. The object of
belief in a proposition, when it asserts anything more than the meaning
of words, is generally, as in the cases which we have examined, either
the co-existence or the sequence of two phenomena. At the very
commencement of our inquiry, we found that every act of belief implied
two Things: we have now ascertained what, in the most frequent case,
these two things are, namely two Phenomena, in other words, two states
of consciousness; and what it is which the proposition affirms (or
denies) to subsist between them, namely either succession or
co-existence. And this case includes innumerable instances which no one,
previous to reflection, would think of referring to it. Take the
following example: A generous person is worthy of honour. Who would
expect to recognise here a case of co-existence between phenomena? But
so it is. The attribute which causes a person to be termed generous, is
ascribed to him on the ground of states of his mind, and particulars of
his conduct: both are phenomena: the former are facts of internal
consciousness; the latter, so far as distinct from the former, are
physical facts, or perceptions of the senses. Worthy of honour admits of
a similar analysis. Honour, as here used, means a state of approving and
admiring emotion, followed on occasion by corresponding outward acts.
“Worthy of honour” connotes all this, together with our approval of the
act of showing honour. All these are phenomena; states of internal
consciousness, accompanied or followed by physical facts. When we say, A
generous person is worthy of honour, we affirm co-existence between the
two complicated phenomena connoted by the two terms respectively. We
affirm, that wherever and whenever the inward feelings and outward facts
implied in the word generosity have place, then and there the existence
and manifestation of an inward feeling, honour, would be followed in our
minds by another inward feeling, approval.

After the analysis, in a former chapter, of the import of names, many
examples are not needed to illustrate the import of propositions. When
there is any obscurity, or difficulty, it does not lie in the meaning of
the proposition, but in the meaning of the names which compose it; in
the aextremely complicateda connotation of many words; the immense
multitude and prolonged series of facts which often constitute the
phenomenon connoted by a name. Edition: current; Page: [100] But bwhereb
it is seen what the phenomenon is, there is seldom any difficulty in
seeing that the assertion conveyed by the proposition is, the
co-existence of one such phenomenon with another; or the succession of
one such phenomenon to another: cso that where the one is found, we may
calculate on finding the other, though perhaps not converselyc.

This, however, though the most common, is not the only meaning which
propositions are ever intended to convey. In the first place, sequences
and co-existences are not only asserted respecting Phenomena; we make
propositions also respecting those hidden causes of phenomena, which are
named substances and attributes. A substance, however, being to us
nothing but either that which causes, or that which is conscious of,
phenomena; and the same being true, mutatis mutandis, of attributes; no
assertion can be made, at least with a meaning, concerning these unknown
and unknowable entities, dexcept in virtue of the Phenomena by which
alone they manifest themselves to our faculties. When we say, Socrates
was ecotemporarye with the Peloponnesian war, the foundation of this
assertion, as of all assertions concerning substances, is an assertion
concerning the phenomena which they exhibit,—namely, that the series of
facts by which Socrates manifested himself to mankind, and the series of
mental states which constituted his fsentientf existence, went on
simultaneously with the series of facts known by the name of the
Peloponnesian war. Still, the proposition gas commonly understoodg does
not assert that alone; it asserts that the Thing in itself, the noumenon
Socrates, was existing, and doing or experiencing those various facts
during the same time. Co-existence and sequence, therefore, may be
affirmed or denied not only between phenomena, but between noumena, or
between a noumenon and phenomena. And hboth of noumena and of phenomena
we may affirmh simple existence. But what is a noumenon? An unknown
cause. In affirming, therefore, the existence of a noumenon, we affirm
causation. Here, therefore, are two additional kinds of fact, capable of
being asserted in a proposition. Besides the propositions which assert
Sequence or Coexistence, there are some which assert simple Existence;*
and others assert Causation, which, Edition: current; Page: [101]
subject to the explanations which will follow in the Third Book, must be
considered provisionally as a distinct and peculiar kind of assertion.

Edition: current; Page: [102]
§ 6. [Or it asserts (or denies) a resemblance] To these four kinds of
matter-of-fact or assertion, must be added a fifth, Resemblance. This
was a species of attribute which we found it impossible to analyse; for
which no fundamentum, distinct from the objects themselves, could be
assigned. aBesidesa propositions which assert a sequence or coexistence
between two phenomena, there are therefore also propositions which
assert resemblance between them; as, This colour is like that
colour;—The heat of to-day is equal to the heat of yesterday. It is true
that such an assertion might with some plausibility be brought within
the description of an affirmation of sequence, by considering it as an
assertion that the simultaneous contemplation of the two colours is
followed by a specific feeling termed the feeling of resemblance. But
there would be nothing gained by encumbering ourselves, especially in
this place, with a generalization which may be looked upon as strained.
Logic does not undertake to analyse bmental factsb into their ultimate
elements. Resemblance between two phenomena is more intelligible in
itself than any explanation could make it, and under any classification
must remain specifically distinct from the ordinary cases of sequence
and coexistence.

It is sometimes said, that all propositions whatever, of which the
predicate is a general name, do, in point of fact, affirm or deny
resemblance. All such propositions affirm that a thing belongs to a
class; but things being classed together according to their resemblance,
everything is of course classed with the things which it cis supposed to
resemblec most; and thence, it may be said, when we affirm that Gold is
a metal, or that Socrates is a man, the affirmation intended is, that
gold resembles other metals, and Socrates other men, more nearly than
they resemble the objects contained in any other of the classes
co-ordinate with these.

There is some slight degree of foundation for this remark, but no more
than a slight degree. The arrangement of things into classes, such as
the class metal, or the class man, is grounded indeed on a resemblance
among the things which are placed in the same class, but not on a mere
general resemblance: the resemblance it is grounded on consists in the
possession by all those things, of certain common peculiarities; and
those peculiarities it is which the terms connote, and which the
propositions consequently assert; not the resemblance. For though when I
say, Gold is a metal, I say by implication that if there be any other
metals it must resemble them, yet if there were no other metals I might
still assert the proposition with the same meaning as at present,
namely, that gold has the various properties implied in the word metal;
just as it might be said, Christians are men, even if there were no
Edition: current; Page: [103] men who were not Christiansd.
Propositions, therefore, in which objects are referred to a class
because they possess the attributes constituting the class, are so far
from asserting nothing but resemblance, that they do not, properly
speaking, assert resemblance at all.

But we remarked some time ago (and the reasons of the remark will be
more fully entered into in a subsequent Book*) that there is sometimes a
convenience in extending the boundaries of a class so as to include
things which possess in a very inferior degree, if in any, esome ofe the
characteristic properties of the class,—provided they resemble that
class more than any other, insomuch that the general propositions which
are true of the class, will be nearer to being true of those things than
any other equally general propositions. fForf instance, there are
substances called metals which have very few of the properties by which
metals are commonly recognised; and almost every great family of plants
or animals has a few anomalous ggenera org species on its borders, which
are admitted into it by a sort of courtesy, and concerning which it has
been matter of discussion to what family they properly belonged. Now
when the class-name is predicated of any object of this description, we
do, by so predicating it, affirm resemblance and nothing more. And in
order to be scrupulously correct it ought to be said, that in every case
in which we predicate a general name, we affirm, not absolutely that the
object possesses the properties designated by the name, but that it
either possesses those properties, or if it does not, at any rate
resembles the things which do so, more than it resembles any other
things. hIn most cases, however,h it is unnecessary to suppose any such
alternative, the latter of the two grounds being very seldom that on
which the assertion is made: and when it is, there is generally some
slight difference in the form of the expression, as, This species (or
genus) is considered, or may be ranked, as belonging to such and such a
family: we should hardly say positively that it does belong to it,
unless it possessed unequivocally the properties of which the class-name
is scientifically significant.

There is still another exceptional case, in which, though the predicate
is ithei name of a class, yet in predicating it we affirm nothing but
resemblance, the class being founded not on resemblance in any jgiven
particularj, but on general unanalysable resemblance. The classes in
question are those into which our simple sensations, or other simple
feelings, are divided. Sensations of white, for instance, are classed
together, not because we can take them to pieces, and say they are alike
in this, and not alike in that, but because we Edition: current; Page:
[104] feel them to be alike altogether, though in different degrees.
When, therefore, I say, The colour I saw yesterday was a white colour,
kor,k The sensation I feel is one of tightness, in both lcases the
attribute I affirm of the colour or of the other sensation is mere
resemblance—simple likeness to sensations which I have had before, and
which have had those names bestowed upon them. The names of feelings,
like other concrete general names, are connotative; but they connote a
mere resemblance. When predicated of any individual feeling, the
information they convey is that of its likeness to the other feelings
which we have been accustomed to call by the same name. mThus muchm may
suffice in illustration of the kind of propositions in which the
matter-of-fact asserted (or denied) is simple Resemblance.

Existence, Coexistence, Sequence, Causation, Resemblance: one or other
of these is asserted (or denied) in every proposition nwhich is not
merely verbaln. This five-fold division is an exhaustive classification
of matters-of-fact; of all things that can be believed, or tendered for
belief; of all questions that can be propounded, and all answers that
can be returned to them.

oProfessor Bain* distinguishes two kinds of Propositions of Coexistence.
“In the one kind, account is taken of Place; they may be described as
propositions of Order in Place.” In the other kind, the coexistence
which is predicated is termed by Mr. Bain Co-inherence of Attributes.

This is a distinct variety of Propositions of Coexistence. Instead of an
arrangement in place with numerical intervals, we have the concurrence
of two or more attributes or powers in the same part or locality. A mass
of gold contains, in every atom, the concurring attributes that mark the
substance—weight, hardness, colour, lustre, incorrosibility, &c. An
animal, besides having parts situated in place, has co-inhering
functions in the same parts, exerted by the very same masses and
molecules of its substance. . . . The Mind, which affords no
Propositions of Order in Place, has co-inhering functions. We affirm
mind to contain Feeling, Will, and Thought, not in local separation, but
in commingling exercise. The concurring properties of minerals, of
plants, and of the bodily and the mental structure of animals, are
united in affirmations of co-inherence.

The distinction is real and important. But, as has been seen, an
Attribute, when it is anything but a simple unanalysable Resemblance
between the subject and some other things, consists in causing
impressions of some sort on consciousness. Consequently, the
co-inherence of two attributes is but the coexistence of the two states
of consciousness implied in their meaning: with the difference, however,
that this coexistence is sometimes potential only, the attribute being
considered as in existence though the fact on which it is Edition:
current; Page: [105] grounded may not be actually, but only potentially
present. Snow, for instance, is, with great convenience, said to be
white even in a state of total darkness, because, though we are not now
conscious of the colour, we shall be conscious of it as soon as morning
breaks. Coinherence of attributes is therefore still a case, though a
complex one, of coexistence of states of consciousness: a totally
different thing, however, from Order in Place. Being a part of
simultaneity, it belongs not to Place but to Time.o

pWe may therefore (and we shall sometimes find it a convenience) instead
of Coexistence and Sequence,p say, for greater particularity, Order in
Place and Order in Time: Order in Place being qa specific modeq of
coexistence, not necessary to be more particularly analysed here; while
the mere fact of coexistence, rwhether between actual sensations, or
between the potentialities of causing them, known by the name of
attributesr, may be classed, together with Sequence, under the head of
Order in Time.

§ 7. [Propositions of which the terms are abstract] In the foregoing
inquiry into the import of Propositions, we have thought it necessary to
analyse directly those alone, in which the terms of the proposition (or
the predicate at least) are concrete terms. But, in doing so, we have
indirectly analysed those in which the terms are abstract. The
distinction between an abstract term and its corresponding concrete,
adoes not turn upon anya difference in what they are appointed to
signify; for the real signification of a concrete general name is, as we
have so often said, its connotation; and what the concrete term
connotes, forms the entire meaning of the abstract name. Since there is
nothing in the import of an abstract name which is not in the import of
the corresponding concrete, it is natural to suppose that neither can
there be anything in the import of a proposition of which the terms are
abstract, but what there is in some proposition which can be framed of
concrete terms.

And this presumption a closer examination will confirm. An abstract name
is the name of an attribute, or combination of attributes. The
corresponding concrete is a name given to things, because of, and in
order to express, their possessing that attribute, or that combination
of attributes. When, therefore, we predicate of anything a concrete
name, the attribute is what we in reality predicate of it. But bit has
now beenb shown that in all propositions of which the predicate is a
concrete name, what is really predicated is one of five things:
Existence, Coexistence, Causation, Sequence, or Resemblance. An
attribute, therefore, is necessarily either an existence, a coexistence,
a causation, Edition: current; Page: [106] a sequence, or a resemblance.
When a proposition consists of a subject and predicate which are
abstract terms, it consists of terms which must necessarily signify one
or other of these things. When we predicate of anything an abstract
name, we affirm of the thing that it is one or other of these five
things; that it is a case of Existence, or of Coexistence, or of
Causation, or of Sequence, or of Resemblance.

It is impossible to imagine any proposition expressed in abstract terms,
which cannot be transformed into a precisely equivalent proposition in
which the terms are concrete; namely, either the concrete names which
connote the attributes themselves, or the names of the fundamenta of
those attributes; the facts or phenomena on which they are grounded. To
illustrate the latter case, let us take this proposition, of which cthe
subject only isc an abstract name, “Thoughtlessness is dangerous.”
Thoughtlessness is an attribute, grounded on the facts which we call
thoughtless actions; and the proposition is equivalent to this,
Thoughtless actions are dangerous. In the next example the predicate as
well as the subject are abstract names: “Whiteness is a colour;” or “The
colour of snow is a whiteness.” These attributes being grounded on
sensations, the equivalent propositions in the concrete would be, The
sensation of white is one of the sensations called those of colour,—The
sensation of sight, caused by looking at snow, is one of the sensations
called sensations of white. In these propositions, as we have before
seen, the matter-of-fact asserted is a Resemblance. In the following
examples, the concrete terms are those dwhich directly correspondd to
the abstract names; connoting the attribute which these denote.
“Prudence is a virtue:” this may be rendered, “All prudent persons, in
so far as prudent, are virtuous:” “Courage is deserving of honour,”
thus, “All courageous persons are deserving of honour ein so fare as
they are courageous:” which is equivalent to this—“All courageous
persons deserve an addition to the honour, or a diminution of the
disgrace, which would attach to them on other grounds.”

In order to throw still further light upon the import of propositions of
which the terms are abstract, we will subject one of the examples given
above to a minuter analysis. The proposition we shall select is the
following: “Prudence is a virtue.” Let us substitute for the word virtue
an equivalent but more definite expression, fsuchf as “a mental quality
beneficial to society,” or “a mental quality pleasing to God,” or
gwhatever else we adopt as the definition of virtueg. What the
proposition asserts is a sequence, accompanied with causation; namely,
that benefit to society, or that the approval of God, Edition: current;
Page: [107] is consequent on, and caused by, prudence. Here is a
sequence; but between what? We understand the consequent of the
sequence, but we have yet to analyse the antecedent. Prudence is an
attribute; and, in connexion with it, two things besides itself are to
be considered; prudent persons, who are the subjects of the attribute,
and prudential conduct, which may be called the foundation of it. Now is
either of these the antecedent? and, first, is hit meant, that the
approval of God, or benefit to society, ish attendant upon all prudent
persons? No; except iin so fari as they are prudent; for prudent persons
who are scoundrels can seldom on the whole be beneficial to society,
jnor can they be acceptable to a good beingj. Is it upon prudential
conduct, then, that divine approbation and benefit to mankind are
ksupposed to bek invariably consequent? Neither is this the assertion
meant, when lit is saidl that prudence is a virtue; except with the same
reservation as before, and for the same reason, namely, that prudential
conduct, although in so far as it is prudential it is beneficial to
society, may yet, by reason of some other of its qualities, be
productive of an injury outweighing the benefit, and mdeserve a
displeasurem exceeding the approbation which would be due to the
prudence. Neither the substance, therefore, (viz. the person,) nor the
phenomenon, (nthe conduct,) is an antecedent on which the other term of
the sequence is universally consequent. But the proposition, “Prudence
is a virtue,” is an universal proposition. What is it, then, upon which
the proposition affirms the effects in question to be universally
consequent? Upon that in the person, and in the conduct, which causes
them to be called prudent, and which is equally in them when the action,
though prudent, is wicked; namely, a correct foresight of consequences,
oao just estimation of their importance to the object in view, and
repression of any unreflecting impulse at variance with the deliberate
purpose. These, which are states of the person’s mind, are the real
antecedent in the sequence, the real cause in the causation, passerted
by the proposition. But these are also the real ground, or foundation,
of the attribute Prudence; since wherever these states of mind exist we
may predicate prudence, even before we know whether any conduct has
followed. And in this manner every assertion respecting an attribute,
may be transformed into an assertion exactly equivalent respecting the
fact or phenomenon which Edition: current; Page: [108] is the ground of
the attribute. And no case can be assigned, where that which is
predicated of the fact or phenomenon, does not belong to one or other of
the five species formerly enumerated: it is either simple Existence, or
it is some Sequence, Coexistence, Causation, or Resemblance.

And as these five are the only things which can be affirmed, so are they
the only things which can be denied. “No horses are web-footed” denies
that the attributes of a horse ever co-exist with web-feet. It is
scarcely necessary to apply the same analysis to Particular affirmations
and negations. “Some birds are web-footed,” affirms that, with the
attributes connoted by bird, the phenomenon web-feet is sometimes
co-existent: “Some birds are not web-footed,” asserts that there are
other instances in which this co-existence does not have place. Any
qfurtherq explanation of a thing which, if the previous exposition has
been assented to, is so obvious, may rherer be spared.

Edition: current; Page: [109]


CHAPTER VI: Of Propositions Merely Verbal

§ 1. [Essential and Accidental propositions] As a preparation for the
inquiry which is the proper object of Logic, namely, in what manner
propositions are to be proved, we have found it necessary to inquire
what they contain which requires, or is susceptible of, proof; or (which
is the same thing) what they assert. In the course of this preliminary
investigation into the import of Propositions, we examined the opinion
of the Conceptualists, that a proposition is the expression of a
relation between two ideas; and the doctrine of the aextremea
Nominalists, that it is the expression of an agreement or disagreement
between the meanings of two names. We decided that, as general theories,
both of these are erroneous; and that, though propositions may be made
both respecting names and respecting ideas, neither the one nor the
other are the subject-matter of Propositions considered generally. We
then examined the different kinds of Propositions, and bfound that, with
the exception of those which are merely verbal, they assert five
different kinds of matters of fact, namely, Existence, Order in Place,
Order in Time, Causation, and Resemblance; that in every proposition one
of these five is either affirmed, or denied, of some fact or phenomenon,
or of some object the unknown source of a fact or phenomenon.

In distinguishing, however, the different kinds of matters of fact
asserted in propositions, we reserved one class of propositions, which
do not relate to any matter of fact, in the proper sense of the term, at
all, but to the meaning of names. Since names and their signification
are entirely arbitrary, such propositions are not, strictly speaking,
susceptible of truth or falsity, but only of conformity or disconformity
to usage or convention; and all the proof they are capable of, is proof
of usage; proof that the words have been employed by others in the
acceptation in which the speaker or writer desires to use them. These
propositions occupy, however, a conspicuous place in philosophy; and
their nature and characteristics are of as much importance in logic, as
those of any cof the otherc classes of propositions previously adverted
to.

If all propositions respecting the signification of words were as simple
and unimportant as those which served us for examples when examining
Hobbes’ Edition: current; Page: [110] theory of predication, viz. those
of which the subject and predicate are proper names, and which assert
only that those names have, or that they have not, been conventionally
assigned to the same individual, there would be little to attract to
such propositions the attention of philosophers. But the class of merely
verbal propositions embraces not only much more than these, but much
more than any propositions which at first sight present themselves as
verbal; comprehending a kind of assertions which have been regarded not
only as relating to things, but as having actually a more intimate
relation with them than any other propositions whatever. The student in
philosophy will perceive that I allude to the distinction on which so
much stress was laid by the schoolmen, and which has been retained
either under the same or under other names by most metaphysicians to the
present day, viz. between what were called essential, and what were
called accidental, propositions, and between essential and accidental
properties or attributes.

§ 2. [All essential propositions are identical propositions] Almost all
metaphysicians prior to Locke, as well as many since his time, have made
a great mystery of Essential Predication, and of predicates which aarea
said to be of the essence of the subject. The essence of a thing, they
said, was that without which the thing could neither be, nor be
conceived to be. Thus, rationality was of the essence of man, because
without rationality, man could not be conceived to exist. The different
attributes which made up the essence of the thing were called its
essential properties; and a proposition in which any of these were
predicated of it was called an Essential Proposition, and was considered
to go deeper into the nature of the thing, and to convey more important
information respecting it, than any other proposition could do. All
properties, not of the essence of the thing, were called its accidents;
were supposed to have nothing at all, or nothing comparatively, to do
with its inmost nature; and the propositions in which any of these were
predicated of it were called Accidental Propositions. A connexion may be
traced between this distinction, which originated with the schoolmen,
and the well-known dogmas of substantiæ secundæ or general substances,
and substantial forms, doctrines which under varieties of language
pervaded alike the Aristotelian and the Platonic schools, and of which
more of the spirit has come down to modern times than might be
conjectured from the disuse of the phraseology. The false views of the
nature of classification and generalization which prevailed among the
schoolmen, and of which these dogmas were the technical expression,
afford the only explanation which can be given of their having
misunderstood the real nature of those Essences which held so
conspicuous a place in their philosophy. They said, truly, that man
cannot be conceived Edition: current; Page: [111] without rationality.
But though man cannot, a being may be conceived exactly like a man in
all points except that one quality, and those others which are the
conditions or consequences of it. All therefore which is really true in
the assertion that man cannot be conceived without rationality, is only,
that if he had not rationality, he would not be reputed a man. There is
no impossibility in conceiving the thing, nor, for aught we know, in its
existing: the impossibility is in the conventions of language, which
will not allow the thing, even if it exist, to be called by the name
which is reserved for rational beings. Rationality, in short, is
involved in the meaning of the word man: bis one of the attributes
connoted by the name. The essence of man, simply means the whole of the
attributes connoted by the word; and any one of those attributes taken
singly, is an essential property of man.

cBut these reflections, so easy to us, would have been difficult to
persons who thought, as most of the dlaterd Aristotelians did, that
objects were made what they were called, that egold (for instance) was
made golde, not by the possession of certain properties to which mankind
have chosen to attach that name, but by participation in the nature of a
certain general substance, called fgoldf in general, which substance,
together with all the properties that belonged Edition: current; Page:
[112] to it, inhered in every individual piece of ggoldg.* As they did
not consider these universal substances to be attached to all general
names, but only to some, they thought that an object borrowed only a
part of its properties from an universal substance, and that the rest
belonged to it individually: the former they called its essence, and the
latter its accidents. The scholastic doctrine of essences long survived
the theory on which it rested, that of the existence of real entities
corresponding to general terms; and it was reserved for Locke at the end
of the seventeenth century, to convince philosophers that the supposed
essences of classes were merely the signification of their names; nor,
among the signal services which hhis writingsh rendered to philosophy,
was there one more needful or more valuable.i

Now, as the most familiar of the general names jby which an object is
designatedj usually connotes not one only, but several attributes of the
object, each of which attributes separately forms also the bond of union
of some class, and the meaning of some general name; we may predicate of
a name which connotes a variety of attributes, another name which
connotes only one of these attributes, or some smaller number of them
than all. In such cases, the universal affirmative proposition will be
true; since whatever possesses Edition: current; Page: [113] the whole
of any set of attributes, must possess any part of that same set. A
proposition of this sort, however, conveys no information to any one who
previously understood the whole meaning of the terms. The propositions,
Every man is a corporeal being, Every man is a living creature, Every
man is rational, convey no knowledge to any one who was already aware of
the entire meaning of the word man, for the meaning of the word includes
all this: and that every man has the attributes connoted by all these
predicates, is already asserted when he is called a man. Now, of this
nature are all the propositions which have been called essential. They
are, in fact, identical propositions.

It is true that a proposition which predicates any attribute, even
though it be one implied in the name, is in most cases understood to
involve a tacit assertion that there exists a thing corresponding to the
name, and possessing the attributes connoted by it; and this implied
assertion may convey information, even to those who understood the
meaning of the name. But all information of this sort, conveyed by all
the essential propositions of which man can be made the subject, is
included in the assertion, Men exist. And this assumption of real
existence is, after all, kthe result of an imperfection of language. It
arises from the ambiguity of the copula, which, in addition to its
proper office of a mark to show that an assertion is made, is also, as
lformerly remarked, a concrete word connoting existence. The actual
existence of the subject of the proposition is therefore only
apparently, not really, implied in the predication, if an essential one:
we may say, A ghost is a disembodied spirit, without believing in
ghosts. But an accidental, or non-essential, affirmation, does imply the
real existence of the subject, because in the case of a non-existent
subject there is nothing for the proposition to assert. Such a
proposition as, The ghost of a murdered person haunts the couch of the
murderer, can only have a meaning if understood as implying a belief in
ghosts; for since the signification of the word ghost implies nothing of
the kind, the speaker either means nothing, or means to assert a thing
which he wishes to be believed mto have reallym taken place.

It will be hereafter seen that when any important consequences seem to
follow, as in mathematics, from an essential proposition, or, in other
words, from a proposition involved in the meaning of a name, what they
really flow from is the tacit assumption of the real existence of the
nobjectsn so named. Apart from this assumption of real existence, the
class of propositions in which the predicate is of the essence of the
subject (that is, in which the predicate connotes the whole or part of
what the subject connotes, but nothing besides) answer no purpose but
that of unfolding the whole or some part of the meaning of the name, to
those who did not previously know it. Accordingly, Edition: current;
Page: [114] the most useful, and in strictness the only useful kind of
essential propositions, are Definitions: which, to be complete, should
unfold the whole of what is involved in the meaning of the word defined;
that is, (when it is a connotative word,) the whole of what it connotes.
In defining a name, however, it is not usual to specify its entire
connotation, but so much only as is sufficient to mark out the objects
usually denoted by it from all other known objects. And sometimes a
merely accidental property, not involved in the meaning of the name,
answers this purpose equally well. The various kinds of definition which
these distinctions give rise to, and the purposes to which they are
respectively subservient, will be minutely considered in the proper
place.

§ 3. [Individuals have no essences] According to the above view of
essential propositions, no proposition can be reckoned such which
relates to an individual by name, that is, in which the subject is a
proper name. Individuals have no essences. When the schoolmen talked of
the essence of an individual, they did not mean the properties implied
in its name, for the names of individuals imply no properties. They
regarded as of the essence of an individual, whatever was of the essence
of the species in which they were accustomed to place that individual;
i.e. of the class to which it was most familiarly referred, and to
which, therefore, they conceived that it by nature belonged. Thus,
because the proposition Man is a rational being, was an essential
proposition, they affirmed the same thing of the proposition, Julius
Cæsar is a rational being. This followed very naturally if genera and
species were to be considered as entities, distinct from, but inhering
in, the individuals composing them. If man was a substance inhering in
each individual man, the essence of man (whatever that might mean) was
naturally supposed to accompany it; to inhere in John Thompson, and atoa
form the common essence of Thompson and Julius Cæsar. It might then be
fairly said, that rationality, being of the essence of Man, was of the
essence also of Thompson. But if Man altogether be only the individual
men and a name bestowed upon them in consequence of certain common
properties, what becomes of John Thompson’s essence?

A fundamental error is seldom expelled from philosophy by a single
victory. It retreats slowly, defends every inch of ground, and oftenb,
after it has been driven from the open country, retains a footing in
some remote fastnessb. The essences of individuals were an unmeaning
figment arising from a misapprehension of the essences of classes, yet
even Locke, when he extirpated the parent error, could not shake himself
free from that which was its fruit. Edition: current; Page: [115] He
distinguished two sorts of essences, Real and Nominal. His nominal
essences were the essences of classes, explained nearly as we have now
explained them. Nor is anything wanting to render the third book of
Locke’s Essay[*] a nearly cunexceptionablec treatise on the connotation
of names, except to free its language from the assumption of what are
called Abstract Ideas, which unfortunately is involved in the
phraseology, though not necessarily connected with the thoughts
contained in that immortal Third Book.* But besides nominal essences, he
admitted real essences, or essences of individual objects, which he
supposed to be the causes of the sensible properties of those objects.
We know not (said he) what these are; (and this acknowledgment rendered
the fiction comparatively innocuous;) but if we did, we could, from them
alone, demonstrate the sensible properties of the object, as the
properties of the triangle are demonstrated from the definition of the
triangle. gIg shall have occasion to revert to this theory in treating
of Demonstration, and of the conditions under which one property of a
thing admits of being demonstrated from another property. It is enough
here to remark that, according to this definition, the real essence of
an object has, in the progress of physics, come to be conceived as
nearly equivalent, in the case of bodies, to their corpuscular
structure: what it is now supposed to mean in the case of any other
entities, I would not take upon myself to define.

§ 4. [Real propositions, how distinguished from verbal] An essential
proposition, then, is one which is purely verbal; which asserts of a
thing under a particular name, only what is asserted of it in the fact
of calling it by that name; and which therefore either gives no
information, or gives it respecting the name, not the thing.
Non-essential, or accidental propositions, on the contrary, may be
called Real Propositions, in opposition to Verbal. They predicate of a
thing some fact not involved in the signification of the name by
Edition: current; Page: [116] which the proposition speaks of it; some
attribute not connoted by that name. Such are all propositions
concerning things individually designated, and all general or particular
propositions in which the predicate connotes any attribute not connoted
by the subject. All these, if true, add to our knowledge: they convey
information, not already involved in the names employed. When I am told
that all, or even that some objects, which have certain qualities, or
which stand in certain relations, have also certain other qualities, or
stand in certain other relations, I learn from this proposition a new
fact; a fact not included in my knowledge of the meaning of the words,
nor even of the existence of Things answering to the signification of
those words. It is this class of propositions only which are in
themselves instructive, or from which any instructive propositions can
be inferred.*

Nothing has probably contributed more to the opinion so alonga prevalent
of the futility of the school logic, than the circumstance that almost
all the examples used in the common school books to illustrate the
bdoctrineb of predication and cthatc of the syllogism, consist of
essential propositions. They were usually taken either from the branches
or from the main trunk of the Predicamental Tree, which included nothing
but what was of the essence of the species: Omne corpus est substantia,
Omne animal est corpus, Omnis homo est corpus, Omnis homo est animal,
Omnis homo est rationalis, and so forth. It is far from wonderful that
the syllogistic art should have been thought to be of no use in
assisting correct reasoning, when almost the only propositions which, in
the hands of its professed teachers, it was employed to prove, were such
as every one assented to without proof the moment he comprehended the
meaning of the words; and stood exactly on a level, in point of
evidence, with the premises from which they were drawn. I have,
therefore, throughout this work, davoided the employment of essential
propositions as examples, except where the nature of the principle to be
illustrated specifically required them.

§ 5. [Two modes of arepresentinga the import of a Real proposition] With
respect to propositions which do convey information—which assert
something of a Thing, under a name that does not already presuppose what
is about to be asserted; there are two different aspects in which these,
or rather such of them as are general propositions, may be considered:
we may either look at them as portions of speculative truth, or as
memoranda for practical Edition: current; Page: [117] use. According as
we consider propositions in one or the other of these lights, their
import may be conveniently expressed in one or in the other of two
formulas.

According to the formula which we have hitherto employed, and which is
best adapted to express the import of the proposition as a portion of
our theoretical knowledge, All men are mortal, means that the attributes
of man are always accompanied by the attribute mortality: No men are
gods, means that the attributes of man are never accompanied by the
attributes, or at least never by all the attributes, bsignified by the
wordb god. But when the proposition is considered as a memorandum for
practical use, we shall find a different mode of expressing the same
meaning better adapted to indicate the office which the proposition
performs. The practical use of a proposition is, to apprise or remind us
what we have to expect, in any individual case which comes within the
assertion contained in the proposition. In reference to this purpose,
the proposition, All men are mortal, means that the attributes of man
are evidence of, are a mark of, mortality; an indication by which the
presence of that attribute is made manifest. No men are gods, means that
the attributes of man are a mark or evidence that some or all of the
attributes cunderstood to belong toc a god are not there; that where the
former are, we need not expect to find the latter.

dThesed two forms of expression are at bottom equivalent; but the one
points the attention more directly to what a proposition means, the
latter to the manner in which it is to be used.

Now it is to be observed that Reasoning (the subject to which we are
next to proceed) is a process into which propositions enter not as
ultimate results, but as means to the establishment of other
propositions. We may expect, therefore, that the mode of exhibiting the
import of a general proposition which shows it in its application to
practical use, will best express the function which propositions
performs in Reasoning. And accordingly, in the theory of Reasoning, the
mode of viewing the subject which considers a Proposition as asserting
ethat one fact or phenomenon ise a mark or evidence of another fact or
phenomenon, will be found almost indispensable. For the purposes of that
Theory, the best mode of defining the import of a proposition is not the
mode which shows fmost clearly what it is in itself, but that which most
distinctly suggests the manner in which it may be made available for
advancing from it to other propositions.

Edition: current; Page: [118]


CHAPTER VII: Of the Nature of Classification, and the Five Predicables

§ 1. [Classification, how connected with Naming] In examining into the
nature of general propositions, we have adverted much less than is usual
with logicians to the ideas of a Class, and Classification; ideas which,
since the Realist doctrine of General Substances went out of vogue, have
formed the basis of almost every attempt at a philosophical theory of
general terms and general propositions. We have considered general names
as having a meaning, quite independently of their being the names of
classes. That circumstance is in truth accidental, it being wholly
immaterial to the signification of the name whether there are many
objects, or only one, to which it happens to be applicable, or whether
there be any at all. God is as much a general term to the Christian or
aJew as to the Polytheist; and dragon, hippogriff, chimera, mermaid,
ghost, are as much so as if real objects existed, corresponding to those
names. Every name the signification of which is constituted by
attributes, is potentially a name of an indefinite number of objects;
but it needs not be actually the name of any; and if of any, it may be
the name of only one. As soon as we employ a name to connote attributes,
the things, be they more or fewer, which happen to possess those
attributes, are constituted ipso facto a class. But in predicating the
name we predicate only the attributes; and the fact of belonging to a
class does not, in bmanyb cases, come into view at all.

Although, however, Predication does not presuppose Classification, and
though the theory of Names and of Propositions is not cleared up, but
only encumbered, by intruding the idea of classification into it, there
is nevertheless a close connexion between Classification and the
employment of General Names. By every general name which we introduce,
we create a class, if there be any cthings, real or imaginary,c to
compose it; that is, any Things corresponding to the signification of
the name. Classes, therefore, mostly owe their existence to general
language. But general language, also, though that is not the most common
case, sometimes owes its existence to classes. A general, which is as
much as to say a significant, name, is indeed mostly Edition: current;
Page: [119] introduced because we have a signification to express by it;
because we need a word by means of which to predicate the attributes
which it connotes. But it is also true that a name is sometimes
introduced because we have found it convenient to create a class;
because we have thought it useful for the regulation of our mental
operations, that a certain group of objects should be thought of
together. A naturalist, for purposes connected with his particular
science, sees reason to distribute the animal or vegetable creation into
certain groups rather than into any others, and he requires a name to
bind, as it were, each of his groups together. It must not however be
supposed that such names, when introduced, differ in any respect, as to
their mode of signification, from other connotative names. The classes
which they denote are, as much as any other classes, constituted by
certain common attributes, and their names are significant of those
attributes, and of nothing else. The names of Cuvier’s classes and
orders, Plantigrades, Digitigrades, &c., are as much the expression of
attributes as if those names had preceded, instead of dgrownd out of,
his classification of animals. The only peculiarity of the case is, that
the convenience of classification was here the primary motive for
introducing the names; while in other cases the name is introduced as a
means of predication, and the formation of a class denoted by it is only
an indirect consequence.

The principles which ought to regulate Classification as a logical
process subservient to the investigation of truth, cannot be discussed
to any purpose until a much later stage of our inquiry. But, of
Classification as resulting from, and implied in, the fact of employing
general language, we cannot forbear to treat here, without leaving the
theory of general names, and of their employment in predication,
mutilated and formless.

§ 2. [The Predicables, what] This portion of the theory of general
language is the subject of what is termed the doctrine of the
Predicables; a set of distinctions handed down from Aristotle, and his
follower Porphyry, many of which have taken a firm root in scientific,
and some of them even in popular, phraseology. The predicables are a
five-fold division of General Names, not grounded as usual on a
difference in their meaning, that is, in the attribute which they
connote, but on a difference in the kind of class which they adenotea.
We may predicate of a thing five different varieties of class-name:

  ------------------------ ---------------
  A _genus_ of the thing   (γένος).
  A _species_              (εἰ̑δος).
  A _differentia_          (διαϕορά).
  A _proprium_             (ἴδιον).
  An _accidens_            (συμβεβηκός).
  ------------------------ ---------------

Edition: current; Page: [120]
It is to be remarked of these distinctions, that they express, not what
the predicate is in its own meaning, but what relation it bears to the
subject of which it happens on the particular occasion to be predicated.
There are not some names which are exclusively genera, and others which
are exclusively species, or differentiæ; but the same name is referred
to one or another predicable, according to the subject of which it is
predicated on the particular occasion. Animal, for instance, is a genus
with respect to man, or John; a species with respect to Substance, or
Being. Rectangular is one of the Differentiæ of a geometrical square; it
is merely one of the Accidentia of the table batb which I am writing.
The words genus, species, &c. are therefore relative terms; they are
names applied to certain predicates, to express the relation between
them and some given subject: a relation grounded, as we shall see, not
on what the predicate connotes, but on the class which it cdenotesc, and
on the place which, in some given classification, that class occupies
relatively to the particular subject.

§ 3. [Genus and Species] Of these five names, two, Genus and Species,
are not only used by naturalists in a technical acceptation not
precisely agreeing with their philosophical meaning, but have also
acquired a popular acceptation, much more general than either. In this
popular sense any two classes, one of which includes the whole of the
other and more, may be called a Genus and a Species. Such, for instance,
are Animal and Man; Man and Mathematician. Animal is a Genus; Man and
Brute are its two species; or we may divide it into a greater number of
species, as man, horse, dog, &c. Biped, or two-footed animal, may also
be considered a genus, of which man and bird are two species. Taste is a
genus, of which sweet taste, sour taste, salt taste, &c. are species.
Virtue is a genus; justice, prudence, courage, fortitude, generosity,
&c. are its species.

The same class which is a genus with reference to the sub-classes or
species included in it, may be itself a species with reference to a more
comprehensive, or, as it is often called, a superior genus. Man is a
species with reference to animal, but a genus with reference to the
species Mathematician. Animal is a genus, divided into two species, man
and brute; but animal is also a species, which, with another species,
vegetable, makes up the genus, organized being. Biped is a genus with
reference to man and bird, but a species with respect to the superior
genus, animal. Taste is a genus divided into species, but also a species
of the genus sensation. Virtue, a genus with reference to justice,
temperance, &c., is one of the species of the genus, mental quality.

In this popular sense the words Genus and Species have passed into
common discourse. And it should be observed that in ordinary parlance,
not the Edition: current; Page: [121] name of the class, but the class
itself, is said to be the genus or species; not, of course, the class in
the sense of each individual of athea class, but the individuals
collectively, considered as an aggregate whole; the name by which the
class is designated being then called not the genus or species, but the
generic or specific name. And this is an admissible form of expression;
nor is it of any importance which of the two modes of speaking we adopt,
provided the rest of our language is consistent with it; but, if we call
the class itself the genus, we must not talk of predicating the genus.
We predicate of man the name mortal; and by predicating the name, we may
be said, in an intelligible sense, to predicate what the name expresses,
the attribute mortality; but in no allowable sense of the word
predication do we predicate of man the class mortal. We predicate of him
the fact of belonging to the class.

By the Aristotelian logicians, the terms genus and species were used in
a more restricted sense. They did not admit every class which could be
divided into other classes to be a genus, or every class which could be
included in a larger class to be a species. Animal was by them
considered a genus; bman and brute co-ordinate species under that genus:
bipedc, however,c would not have been admitted to be a genus with
reference to man, but a proprium or accidens only. It was requisite,
according to their theory, that genus and species should be of the
essence of the subject. Animal was of the essence of man; biped was not.
And in every classification they considered some one class as the lowest
or infima species. Man, for instance, was a lowest species. Any further
divisions into which the class might be capable of being broken down, as
man into white, black, and red man, or into priest and layman, they did
not admit to be species.

It has been seen, however, in the preceding chapter, that the
distinction between the essence of a class, and the attributes or
properties which are not of its essence—a distinction which has given
occasion to so much abstruse speculation, and to which so mysterious a
character was formerly, and by many writers is still, attached,—amounts
to nothing more than the difference between those attributes of the
class which are, and those which are not, involved in the signification
of the class-name. As applied to individuals, the word Essence, we
found, has no meaning, except in connexion with the exploded tenets of
the Realists; and what the schoolmen chose to call the essence of an
individual, was simply the essence of the class to which that individual
was most familiarly referred.

Is there no difference, then, dsaved this merely verbal one, between the
classes which the schoolmen admitted to be genera or species, and those
to which they refused the title? Is it an error to regard some of the
differences which exist among objects as differences in kind (genere or
specie), and Edition: current; Page: [122] others only as differences in
the accidents? Were the schoolmen right or wrong in giving to some of
the classes into which things may be divided, the name of kinds, and
considering others as secondary divisions, grounded on differences of a
comparatively superficial nature? Examination will show that the
Aristotelians did mean something by this distinction, and something
important; but which, being but indistinctly conceived, was inadequately
expressed by the phraseology of essences, and ethe various other modes
of speech to which they had recourse.

§ 4. [Kinds have a real existence in nature] It is a fundamental
principle in logic, that the power of framing classes is unlimited, as
long as there is any (even the smallest) difference to found a
distinction upon. Take any attribute whatever, and if some things have
it, and others have anot, we may ground on the attribute a division of
all things into two classes; and we actually do so, the moment we create
a name which connotes the attribute. The number of possible classes,
therefore, is boundless; and there are as many actual classes (either of
real or of imaginary things) as there are bgeneral names, positive and
negative together.

But if we contemplate any one of the classes so formed, such as the
class animal or plant, or the class sulphur or phosphorus, or the class
white or red, and consider in what particulars the individuals included
in the class differ from those which do not come within it, we find a
very remarkable diversity in this respect between some classes and
others. There are some classes, the things contained in which differ
from other things only in certain particulars which may be numbered,
while others differ in more than can be numbered, more even than we need
ever expect to know. Some classes have little or nothing in common to
characterize them by, except precisely what is connoted by the name:
white things, for example, are not distinguished by any common
properties except whiteness; or if they are, it is only by such as are
in some way dependent on, or connected with, whiteness. But a hundred
generations have not exhausted the common properties of animals or of
plants, of sulphur or of phosphorus; nor do we suppose them to be
exhaustible, but proceed to new observations and experiments, in the
full confidence of discovering new properties which were by no means
implied in those we previously knew. While, if any one were to propose
for investigation the common properties of all things which are of the
same colour, the same shape, or the same specific gravity, the absurdity
would be palpable. We have no ground to believe that any such common
properties exist, except such as may be shown to be involved in the
supposition itself, or to be derivable from it by some law of causation.
It appears, therefore, that the Edition: current; Page: [123]
properties, on which we ground our classes, sometimes exhaust all that
the class has in common, or contain it all by some mode of implication;
but in other instances we make a selection of a few properties from
among not only a greater number, but a number inexhaustible by us, and
to which as we know no bounds, they may, so far as we are concerned, be
regarded as infinite.

There is no impropriety in saying that, of these two classifications,
the one answers to a much more radical distinction in the things
themselves, than the other does. And if any one even chooses to say that
the one classification is made by nature, the other by us for our
convenience, he will be right; provided he means no more than this:
cWherec a certain apparent difference between things (though perhaps in
itself of little moment) answers to we know not what number of other
differences, pervading not only their known properties, but properties
yet undiscovered, it is not optional but imperative to recognise this
difference as the foundation of a specific distinction; while, on the
contrary, differences that are merely finite and determinate, like those
designated by the words white, black, or red, may be disregarded if the
purpose for which the classification is made does not require attention
to those particular properties. The differences, however, are made by
nature, in both cases; while the recognition of those differences as
grounds of classification and of naming, is, equally in both cases, the
act of man: only in the one case, the ends of language and of
classification would be subverted if no notice were taken of the
difference, while in the other case, the necessity of taking notice of
it depends on the importance or unimportance of the particular qualities
in which the difference happens to consist.

Now, these classes, distinguished by unknown multitudes of properties,
and not solely by a few determinate onesd—which are parted off from one
another by an unfathomable chasm, instead of a mere ordinary ditch with
a visible bottom—dare the only classes which, by the Aristotelian
logicians, were considered as genera or species. Differences which
extended eonlye to a certain property or properties, and there
terminated, they considered as differences only in the accidents of
things; but where any class differed from other things by an infinite
series of differences, known and unknown, they considered the
distinction as one of kind, and spoke of it as being an essential
difference, which is also one of the fcurrentf meanings of that vague
expression at the present day.

Conceiving the schoolmen to have been justified in drawing a broad line
of separation between these two kinds of classes and of
class-distinctions, I shall not only retain the division itself, but
continue to express it in their language. According to that language,
the proximate (or lowest) Kind to Edition: current; Page: [124] which
any individual is referrible, is called its species. Conformably to
this, gIsaac Newton would be said to be of the species man. There are
indeed numerous sub-classes included in the class man, to which hNewton
also belongs; ifor example, Christian, and Englishman, and
Mathematician. But these, though distinct classes, are not, in our sense
of the term, distinct Kinds of men. A Christian, for example, differs
from other human beings; but he differs only in the attribute which the
word expresses, namely, belief in Christianity, and whatever else that
implies, either as involved in the fact itself, or connected with it
through some law of cause and effect. We should never think of inquiring
what properties, unconnected with Christianity, jeither as cause or
effect,j are common to all Christians and peculiar to them; while in
regard to all Men, physiologists are perpetually carrying on such an
inquiry; nor is the answer ever likely to be completed. Man, therefore,
we may kcall a species; Christian, or Mathematician, we cannot.

Note here, that it is by no means intended to imply that there may not
be different Kinds, or logical species, of man. The various races and
temperaments, the two sexes, and even the various ages, may be
differences of kind, within our meaning of the term. lI do not say that
they are so.l For in the progress of physiology it may malmost be said
to be made out, that the differences which really exist between
different races, sexes, &c.m, follow as consequences, under laws of
nature, from na small number ofn primary differences which can be
precisely determined, and which, as the phrase is, account for all the
rest. If this be so, these are not distinctions in kind; no more than
Christian, Jew, Mussulman, and Pagan, a difference which also carries
many consequences along with it. And in this way classes are often
mistaken for real Kinds, which are afterwards proved not to be so. But
if it oturned out that the differences were not capable of being thuso
accounted for, then pCaucasian, Mongolian,p Negro, &c. qwould beq really
different Kinds of human beings, and entitled to be ranked as species by
the logician; though not by the naturalist. For (as already rnoticedr)
the word species is used in a sdifferent signification in logic and in
natural history. By the naturalist, Edition: current; Page: [125]
organized beings are tnot usuallyt said to be of different species, if
it is supposed that they uhave descended from the same stock. That,
however, is a sense artificially given to the word, for the technical
purposes of a particular science. To the logician, if a negro and a
white man differ in the same manner (however less in degree) as a horse
and a camel do, that is, if their differences are inexhaustible, and not
referrible to any common cause, they are different species, whether they
are vdescended from common ancestorsv or not. But if their differences
can all be traced to climate and habits, wor to some one xor a few
special differencesx in structure,w they are not, in the logician’s
view, yspecificallyy distinct.

When the infima species, or proximate Kind, to which an individual
belongs, has been ascertained, the properties common to that Kind
include necessarily the whole of the common properties of every other
real Kind to which the individual can be referrible. Let the individual,
for example, be Socrates, and the proximate Kind, man. Animal, or living
creature, is also a real Kind, and includes Socrates; but, since it
likewise includes man, or in other words, since all men are animals, the
properties common to animals form a portion of the common properties of
the sub-class, man. And if there be any class which includes Socrates
without including man, that class is not a real Kind. Let the class, for
example, be flat-nosed; that being a class which includes Socrates,
without including all men. To determine whether it is a real Kind, we
must ask ourselves this question: Have all flat-nosed animals, in
addition to whatever is implied in their flat noses, any common
properties, other than those which are common to all animals whatever?
If they had; if a flat nose were a mark or index to an indefinite number
of other peculiarities, not deducible from the former by zanz
ascertainable law, then out of the class man we might cut another class,
flat-nosed man, which according to our definition, would be a Kind. But
if we could do this, man would not be, as it was assumed to be, the
proximate Kind. Therefore, the properties of the proximate Kind do
comprehend those (whether known or unknown) of all other Kinds to which
the individual belongs; which was the point we undertook to prove. And
hence, every other Kind which is predicable of the individual, will be
to the proximate Kind in the relation of a genus, according to even the
popular acceptation of the terms genus and species; that is, it will be
a larger class, including it and more.

Edition: current; Page: [126]
We are now able to fix athe logical meaning of btheseb terms. Every
class which is a real Kind, that is, which is distinguished from all
other classes by an indeterminate multitude of properties not derivable
from conec another, is either a genus or a species. A Kind which is not
divisible into other Kinds, cannot be a genus, because it has no species
under it; but it is itself a species, both with reference to the
individuals below and to the genera above (Species Prædicabilis and
Species Subjicibilis.) But every Kind which admits of division into real
Kinds (as animal into dmammal, bird, fish, &c., or bird into various
species of birdsd) is a genus to all below it, a species to all genera
in which it is itself included. And here we may close this part of the
discussion, and pass to the three remaining predicables, Differentia,
Proprium, and Accidens.

§ 5. [Differentia] To begin with Differentia. This word is correlative
with the words genus and species, and as all aadmita, it signifies the
attribute which distinguishes a given species from every other species
of the same genus. This is so far clear: but bwe may still ask, which of
the distinguishing attributes it signifies.b For we have seen that every
Kind (and a species must be a Kind) is distinguished from other Kinds,
not by any one attribute, but by an indefinite number. Man, for
instance, is a species of the genus animal: Rational (or rationality,
for it is of no consequence cherec whether we use the concrete or the
abstract form) is generally assigned by logicians as the Differentia;
and doubtless this attribute serves the purpose of distinction: but it
has also been remarked of man, that he is a cooking animal; the only
animal that dresses its food. This, therefore, is another of the
attributes by which the species man is distinguished from other species
of the same genus: would this attribute serve equally well for a
differentia? The Aristotelians say No; having laid it down that the
differentia must, like the genus and species, be of the essence of the
subject.

And here we lose even that vestige of a meaning grounded in the nature
of the things themselves, which may be supposed to be attached to the
word essence when it is said that genus and species must be of the
essence of the thing. There can be no doubt that when the schoolmen
talked of the essences of things as opposed to their accidents, they had
confusedly in view the distinction between differences of kind, and the
differences which are not of Edition: current; Page: [127] kind; they
meant to intimate that genera and species must be Kinds. Their notion of
the essence of a thing was a vague notion of a something which makes it
what it is, i.e. which makes it the Kind of thing that it is—which
causes it to have all that variety of properties which distinguish its
Kind. But when the matter came to be looked at more closely, nobody
could discover what caused the thing to have all those properties, nor
even that there was anything which caused it to have them. Logicians,
however, not liking to admit this, and being unable to detect what made
the thing to be what it was, satisfied themselves with what made it to
be what it was called. Of the innumerable properties, known and unknown,
that are common to the class man, a portion only, and of course a very
small portion, are connoted by its name; these few, however, will
naturally have been thus distinguished from the rest either for their
greater obviousness, or for greater supposed importance. These
properties, then, which were connoted by the name, logicians seized
upon, and called them the essence of the species; and not stopping
there, they affirmed them, in the case of the infima species, to be the
essence of the individual too; for it was their maxim, that the species
contained the “whole essence” of the thing. Metaphysics, that fertile
field of delusion propagated by language, does not afford a more signal
instance of such delusion. On this account it was that rationality,
being connoted by the name man, was allowed to be a differentia of the
class; but the peculiarity of cooking their food, not being connoted,
was relegated to the class of accidental properties.

The distinction, therefore, between Differentia, Proprium, and Accidens,
is not dgroundedd in the nature of things, but in the connotation of
names; and we must seek it there, if we wish to find what it is.

From the fact that the genus includes the species, in other words
denotes more than the species, or is predicable of a greater number of
individuals, it follows that the species must connote more than the
genus. It must connote all the attributes which the genus connotes, or
there would be nothing to prevent it from denoting individuals not
included in the genus. And it must connote something besides, otherwise
it would include the whole genus. Animal denotes all the individuals
denoted by man, and many more. Man, therefore, must connote all that
animal connotes, otherwise there might be men who earee not animals; and
it must connote something more than animal connotes, otherwise all
animals would be men. This surplus of connotation—this which the species
connotes over and above the connotation of the genus—is the Differentia,
or specific difference; or, to state the same proposition in other
words, the Differentia is that which must be added to the connotation of
the genus, to complete the connotation of the species.

Edition: current; Page: [128]
The word man, for instance, exclusively of what it connotes in common
with animal, also connotes rationality, and at least some approximation
to that external form which we all know, but which as we have no name
for it considered in itself, we are content to call the human. The
Differentia, or specific difference, therefore, of man, as referred to
the genus animal, is that outward form and the possession of reason. The
Aristotelians said, the possession of reason, without the outward form.
But if they adhered to this, they would have been obliged to call the
Houyhnhnms men. The question never arose, and they were never called
upon to decide how such a case would have affected their notion of
essentiality. fHowever this may be, theyf were satisfied with taking
such a portion of the differentia as sufficed to distinguish the species
from all other existing things, though by so doing they might not
exhaust the connotation of the name.

§ 6. [Differentia for general purposes, and differentia for special or
technical purposes] And here, to prevent the notion of differentia from
being restricted within too narrow limits, it is necessary to remark,
that a species, even as referred to the same genus, will not always have
the same differentia, but a different one, according to the principle
and purpose which apresidea over the particular classification. For
example, a naturalist surveys the various kinds of animals, and looks
out for the classification of them most in accordance with the order in
which, for zoological purposes, bhe considers it desirable that we
should think of themb. With this view he finds it advisable that one of
his fundamental divisions should be into warm-blooded and cold-blooded
animals; or into animals which breathe with lungs and those which
breathe with gills; or into carnivorous, and frugivorous or
graminivorous; or into those which walk on the flat part and those which
walk on the extremity of the foot, a distinction on which ctwoc of
Cuvier’s families are founded. In doing this, the naturalist creates
dasd many new classes; which are by no means those to which the
individual animal is familiarly and spontaneously referred; nor should
we ever think of assigning to them so prominent a position in our
arrangement of the animal kingdom, unless for a epreconceivede purpose
of scientific convenience. And to the liberty of doing this there is no
limit. In the examples we have given, fmost of thef classes are real
Edition: current; Page: [129] Kinds, since each of the peculiarities is
an index to a multitude of properties belonging to the class which it
characterizes: but even if the case were otherwise—if the other
properties of those classes could all be derived, by any process known
to us, from the one peculiarity on which the class is founded—even then,
if gtheseg derivative properties were of primary importance for the
purposes of the naturalist, he would be warranted in founding his
primary hdivisionsh on them.

If, however, practical convenience is a sufficient warrant for making
the main demarcations in our arrangement of objects run in lines not
coinciding with any distinction of Kind, and so creating genera and
species in the popular sense which are not genera or species in the
rigorous sense at all; à fortiori must we be warranted, when our genera
and species are real genera and species, in marking the distinction
between them by those of their properties which considerations of
practical convenience most strongly recommend. If we cut a species out
of a given genus—the species man, for instance, out of the genus
animal—with an intention on our part that the peculiarity by which we
are to be guided in the application of the name man should be
rationality, then rationality is the differentia of the species man.
Suppose, however, that being naturalists, we, for the purposes of our
particular study, cut out of the genus animal the same species man, but
with an intention that the distinction between man and all other species
of animal should be, not rationality, but the possession of “four
incisors in each jaw, tusks solitary, and erect posture.” It is evident
that the word man, when used by us as naturalists, no longer connotes
rationality, but connotes the three other properties specified; for that
which we have expressly in view when we impose a name, assuredly forms
part of the meaning of that name. We may, therefore, lay it down as a
maxim, that wherever there is a Genus, and a Species marked out from
that genus by an assignable differentia, the name of the species must be
connotative, and must connote the differentia; but the connotation may
be special—not involved in the signification of the term as ordinarily
used, but given to it when employed as a term of art or science. The
word Man in common use, connotes rationality and a certain form, but
does not connote the number or character of the teeth; in the Linnæan
system it connotes the number of incisor and canine teeth, but does not
connote rationality nor any particular form. The word man has,
therefore, two different meanings; though not commonly considered as
ambiguous, because it happens in both cases to denote the same
individual objects. But a case is conceivable in which the ambiguity
would become evident: we have only to imagine that some new kind of
animal were discovered, having Linnæus’s three characteristics of
humanity, but not rational, or not of the human form. Edition: current;
Page: [130] In ordinary parlance, these animals would not be called men;
but in natural history they must still be called so by those, if any
there ishouldi be, who adhere to the Linnæan classification; and the
question would arise, whether the word should continue to be used in two
senses, or the classification be given up, and the technical sense of
the term be abandoned along with it.

Words not otherwise connotative may, in the mode just adverted to,
acquire a special or technical connotation. Thus the word whiteness, as
we have so often remarked, connotes nothing; it merely jdenotesj the
attribute corresponding to a certain sensation: but if we are making a
classification of colours, and desire to justify, or even merely to
point out, the particular place assigned to whiteness in our
arrangement, we may define it “the colour produced by the mixture of all
the simple rays;” and this fact, though by no means implied in the
meaning of the word whiteness as ordinarily used, but only known by
subsequent scientific investigation, kisk part of its meaning in the
particular essay or treatise, and becomes the differentia of the
species.*

The differentia, therefore, of a species may be defined to be, that part
of the connotation of the specific name, whether ordinary or special and
technical, which distinguishes the species in question from all other
species of the genus to which on the particular occasion we are
referring it.

§ 7. [Proprium] Having disposed of Genus, Species, and Differentia, we
shall not find much difficulty in attaining a clear conception of the
distinction between the other two predicablesa, as well as between them
and the first threea.

In the Aristotelian phraseology, Genus and Differentia are of the
essence of the subject; by which, as we have seen, is really meant that
the properties signified by the genus and those signified by the
differentia, form part of the connotation of the name denoting the
species. Proprium and Accidens, on the other hand, form no part of the
essence, but are predicated of the species only accidentally. Both are
Accidents, in the wider sense in which the accidents of a thing are
opposed to its essence; though, in the doctrine of the Predicables,
Accidens is used for one sort of accident only, Proprium being another
sort. Proprium, continue the schoolmen, is predicated accidentally,
indeed, but necessarily; or, as they further explain it, signifies an
attribute which is not indeed part of the essence, but which flows from,
or is a consequence of, Edition: current; Page: [131] the essence, and
is, therefore, inseparably attached to the species; e.g. the various
properties of a triangle, which, though no part of its definition, must
necessarily be possessed by whatever comes under that definition.
Accidens, on the contrary, has no connexion whatever with the essence,
but may come and go, and the species still remain what it was before. If
a species could exist without its Propria, it must be capable of
existing without that on which its Propria are necessarily consequent,
and therefore without its essence, without that which constitutes it a
species. But an Accidens, whether separable or inseparable from the
species in actual experience, may be supposed separated, without the
necessity of supposing any other alteration; or at least, without
supposing any of the essential properties of the species bto beb
altered, since with them an Accidens has no connexion.

A Proprium, therefore, of the species, may be defined, any attribute
which belongs to all the individuals included in the species, and which,
though not connoted by the specific name, c(either ordinarily if the
classification we are considering be for ordinary purposes, or specially
if it be for a special purpose,)c yet follows from some attribute which
the name either ordinarily or specially connotes.

One attribute may follow from another in two ways; and there are
consequently two kinds of Proprium. It may follow as a conclusion
follows premises, or it may follow as an effect follows a cause. Thus,
the attribute of having the opposite sides equal, which is not one of
those connoted by the word Parallelogram, nevertheless follows from
those connoted by it, namely, from having the opposite sides straight
lines and parallel, and the number of sides four. The attribute,
therefore, of having the opposite sides equal, is a Proprium of the
class parallelogram; and a Proprium of the first kind, which follows
from the connoted attributes by way of demonstration. The attribute of
being capable of understanding language, is a Proprium of the species
man, since without being connoted by the word, it follows from an
attribute which the word does connote, viz., from the attribute of
rationality. But this is a Proprium of the second kind, which follows by
way of causation. How it is that one property of a thing follows, or can
be inferred, from another; under what conditions this is possible, and
what is the exact meaning of the phrase; are among the questions which
will occupy us in the two succeeding Books. At present it needs only be
said, that whether a Proprium follows by demonstration or by causation,
it follows necessarily; that is to say, dits not following would be
inconsistentd with some law which we regard as a part of the
constitution either of our thinking faculty or of the universe.

Edition: current; Page: [132]
§ 8. [Accidens] Under the remaining predicable, Accidens, are included
all attributes of a thing which are neither involved in the
signification of the name (whether ordinarily or as a term of art), nor
have, so far as we know, any necessary connexion with attributes which
are so involved. They are commonly divided into Separable and
Inseparable Accidents. Inseparable accidents are those which—although we
know of no connexion between them and the attributes constitutive of the
species, and although, therefore, so far as we are aware, they might be
absent without making the name inapplicable and the species a different
species—are yet never in fact known to be absent. A concise mode of
expressing the same meaning is, that inseparable accidents are
properties which are universal to the species, but not necessary to it.
Thus, blackness is an attribute of a crow, and, as far as we know, an
universal one. But if we were to discover a race of white birds, in
other respects resembling crows, we should not say, These are not crows;
we should say, These are white crows. Crow, therefore, does not connote
blackness; nor, from any of the attributes which it does connote,
whether as a word in popular use or as a term of art, could blackness be
inferred. Not only, therefore, can we conceive a white crow, but we know
of no reason why such an animal should not exist. Since, however, none
but black crows are known to exist, blackness, in the present state of
our knowledge, ranks as an accident, but an inseparable accident, of the
species crow.

Separable Accidents are those which are found, in point of fact, to be
sometimes absent from the species; which are not only not necessary, but
not even universal. They are such as do not belong to every individual
of the species, but only to some individuals; or if to all, not at all
times. Thus the colour of an European is one of the separable accidents
of the species man, because it is not an attribute of all human
creatures. Being born, is also a(speaking in the logical sense)a a
separable accident of the species man, because, though an attribute of
all human beings, it is so only at one particular time. A fortiori those
attributes which are not constant even in the same individual, as, to be
in one or in another place, to be hot or cold, sitting or walking, must
be ranked as separable accidents.

Edition: current; Page: [133]


CHAPTER VIII: Of Definition

§ 1. a[A definition, what]a One necessary part of the theory of Names
and of Propositions remains to be treated of in this place: the theory
of Definitions. As being the most important of the class of propositions
which we have characterized as purely verbal, they have already received
some notice in the chapter preceding the last. But their fuller
treatment was at that time postponed, because definition is so closely
connected with classification, that, until the nature of the latter
process is in some measure understood, the former cannot be discussed to
much purpose.

bThe simplest and most correct notion of a Definition is, a proposition
declaratory of the meaning of a word; namely, either the meaning which
it bears in common acceptation, or that which the speaker or writer, for
the particular purposes of his discourse, intends to annex to it.

The definition of a word being the proposition which enunciates its
meaning, words which have no meaning are unsusceptible of definition.
Proper names, therefore, cannot be defined. A proper name being a mere
mark put upon an individual, and of which it is the characteristic
property to be destitute of meaning, its meaning cannot of course be
declared; though we may indicate by language, as we might indicate still
more conveniently by pointing with the finger, upon what individual that
particular mark has been, or is intended to be, put. It is no definition
of “John Thomson” to say he is “the son of General Thomson;” for the
name John Thomson does not express this. Neither is it any definition of
“John Thomson” to say he is “the man now crossing the street.” These
propositions may serve to make known who is the particular man to whom
the name belongs, but that may be done still more unambiguously by
pointing to him, which, however, has not cbeen esteemed one of the modes
of definition.

In the case of connotative names, the meaning, as has been so often
observed, is the connotation; and the definition of a connotative name,
is dthed proposition which declares its connotation. This emighte be
done either directly or indirectly. The direct mode would be by a
proposition in this Edition: current; Page: [134] form: “Man” (or
whatsoever the word may be) “is a name connoting such and such
attributes,” or “is a name which, when predicated of anything, signifies
the possession of such and such attributes by that thing.” Or thus: Man
is everything which possesses such and such attributes: Man is
everything which possesses corporeity, organization, life, rationality,
and fcertain peculiarities of external formf.

This form of definition is the most precise and least equivocal of any;
but it is not brief enough, and is besides too technical gfor common
discourse. The more usual mode of declaring the connotation of a name,
is to predicate of it another name or names of known signification,
which connote the same aggregation of attributes. This may be done
either by predicating of the name intended to be defined, another
connotative name exactly synonymous, as, “Man is a human being,” which
is not commonly accounted a definition at all; or by predicating two or
more connotative names, which make up among them the whole connotation
of the name to be defined. In this last case, again, we may either
compose our definition of as many connotative names as there are
attributes, each attribute being connoted by one, as, Man is a
corporeal, organized, animated, rational being, shaped so and so; or we
may employ names which connote several of the attributes at once, as,
Man is a rational animal, shaped so and so.

The definition of a name, according to this view of it, is the sum total
of all the essential propositions which can be framed with that name for
their subject. All propositions the truth of which is implied in the
name, all hthoseh which we are made aware of by merely hearing the name,
are included in the definition, if complete, and may be evolved from it
without the aid of any other premises; whether the definition expresses
them in two or three words, or in a larger number. It is, therefore, not
without reason that Condillac and other writers have affirmed a
definition to be an analysis.[*] To resolve any complex whole into the
elements of which it is compounded, is the meaning of analysis: and this
we do when we replace one word which connotes a set of attributes
collectively, by two or more which connote the same attributes singly,
or in smaller groups.

a§ 2.a [Every name can be defined, whose meaning is susceptible of
analysis] From this, however, the question naturally arises, in what
manner are we to define a name which connotes only a single attribute:
for instance, Edition: current; Page: [135] “white,” which connotes
nothing but whiteness; “rational,” which connotes nothing but the
possession of reason. It might seem that the meaning of such names could
only be declared in two ways; by a synonymous term, if any such can be
found; or in the direct way already alluded to: “White is a name
connoting the attribute whiteness.” Let us see, however, whether the
analysis of the meaning of the name, that is, the breaking down of that
meaning into bseveralb parts, admits of being carried farther. Without
at present deciding this question as to the word white, it is obvious
that in the case of rational some further explanation may be given of
its meaning than is contained in the proposition, “Rational is that
which possesses the attribute of reason;” since the attribute reason
itself admits of being defined. And here we must turn our attention to
the definitions of attributes, or rather of the names of attributes,
that is, of abstract names.

In regard to such names of attributes as are connotative, and express
attributes of those attributes, there is no difficulty: like other
connotative names they are defined by declaring their connotation. Thus
the word fault may be defined, “a quality productive of evil or
inconvenience.” Sometimes, again, the attribute to be defined is not one
attribute, but an union of several: we have only, therefore, to put
together the names of all the attributes taken separately, and we obtain
the definition of the cname which belongsc to them all taken together; a
definition which will correspond exactly to that of the corresponding
concrete name. For, as we define a concrete name by enumerating the
attributes which it connotes, and as the attributes connoted by a
concrete name form the entire signification of the corresponding
abstract dnamed, the same enumeration will serve for the definition of
both. Thus, if the definition of a human being be this, “a being,
corporeal, animated, rational, eshaped so and so,” the definition of
humanity will be corporeity and animal life, combined with rationality,
and with such and such a shape.

When, on the other hand, the abstract name does not express a
complication of attributes, but a single attribute, we must remember
that every attribute is grounded on some fact or phenomenon, from which,
and which alone, it derives its meaning. To that fact or phenomenon,
called in a former chapter the foundation of the attribute, we must,
therefore, have recourse for its definition. Now, the foundation of the
attribute may be a phenomenon of any degree of complexity, consisting of
many different parts, either coexistent or in succession. To obtain a
definition of the attribute, we must analyse the phenomenon into these
parts. Eloquence, for example, is the name of one attribute only; but
this attribute is grounded on external effects of a complicated Edition:
current; Page: [136] nature, flowing from acts of the person to whom we
ascribe the attribute; and by resolving this phenomenon of causation
into its two parts, the cause and the effect, we obtain a definition of
eloquence, viz. the power of influencing the ffeelings byf speech or
writing.

A name, therefore, whether concrete or abstract, admits of definition,
provided we are able to analyse, that is, to distinguish into parts, the
attribute or set of attributes which constitute the meaning both of the
concrete name and of the corresponding abstract: if a set of attributes,
by enumerating them; if a single attribute, by dissecting the fact or
phenomenon (whether of perception or of internal consciousness) which is
the foundation of the attribute. But, further, even when the fact is one
of our simple feelings or states of consciousness, and therefore
unsusceptible of analysis, the names both of the object and of the
attribute still admit of definition: or rather, would do so if all our
simple feelings had names. Whiteness may be defined, the property or
power of exciting the sensation of white. A white object may be defined,
an object which excites the sensation of white. The only names which are
unsusceptible of definition, because their meaning is unsusceptible of
analysis, are the names of the simple feelings themselves. These are in
the same condition as proper names. They are not indeed, like proper
names, unmeaning; for the words sensation of white signify, that the
sensation which I so denominate resembles other sensations which I
remember to have had before, and to have called by that name. But as we
have no words by which to recal those former sensations, except the very
word which we seek to define, or some other which, being exactly
synonymous with it, requires definition as much, words cannot unfold the
signification of this class of names; and we are obliged to make a
direct appeal to the personal experience of the individual whom we
address.

a§ 3.a [Complete, how distinguished from incomplete definitions] Having
stated what seems to be the true idea of a Definition, bIb proceed to
examine some opinions of philosophers, and some popular conceptions on
the subject, which conflict more or less with cthat ideac.

The only adequate definition of a name is, as already remarked, one
which declares the facts, and the whole of the facts, which the name
involves in its signification. But with most persons the object of a
definition does not embrace so much; they look for nothing more, in a
definition, than a guide to the correct use of the term—a protection
against applying it in a manner inconsistent with custom and convention.
Anything, therefore, is to them a Edition: current; Page: [137]
sufficient definition of a term, which will serve as a correct index to
what the term denotes; though not embracing the whole, and sometimes,
perhaps, not even any part, of what it connotes. This gives rise to two
sorts of imperfect, or unscientific definition; dEssential but
incomplete Definitions, and Accidental Definitions, or Descriptions. In
the former, a connotative name is defined by a part only of its
connotation; in the latter, by something which forms no part of the
connotation at all.

An example of the first kind of imperfect definitions is the
following:—Man is a rational animal. It is impossible to consider this
as a complete definition of the word Man, since (as before remarked) if
we adhered to it we should be obliged to call the Houyhnhnms men; but as
there happen to be no Houyhnhnms, this imperfect definition is
sufficient to mark out and distinguish from all other things, the
objects at present edenotede by “man;” all the beings actually known to
exist, of whom the name is predicable. Though the word is defined by
some only among the attributes which it connotes, not by all, it happens
that all known objects which possess the enumerated attributes, possess
also those which are omitted; so that the field of predication which the
word covers, and the employment of it which is conformable to usage, are
as well indicated by the inadequate definition as by an adequate one.
Such definitions, however, are always liable to be overthrown by the
discovery of new objects in nature.

Definitions of this kind are what logicians have had in view, when they
laid down the rule, that the definition of a species should be per genus
et differentiam. Differentia being seldom taken to mean the whole of the
peculiarities constitutive of the species, but some one of those
peculiarities only, a complete definition would be per genus et
differentias, rather than differentiam. It would include, with the name
of the superior genus, not merely some attribute which distinguishes the
species intended to be defined from all other species of the same genus,
but all the attributes implied in the name of the species, which the
name of the superior genus has not already implied. The assertion,
however, that a definition must of necessity consist of a genus and
differentiæ, is not tenable. It was early remarked by logicians, that
the summum genus in any classification, having no genus superior to
itself, could not be defined in this manner. Yet we have seen that all
names, except those of our elementary feelings, are susceptible of
definition in the strictest sense; by setting forth in words the
constituent parts of the fact or phenomenon, of which the connotation of
every word is ultimately composed.

a§ 4.a [And how complete definitions are distinguished from
descriptions] Although the first kind of imperfect definition, (which
defines a connotative Edition: current; Page: [138] term by a part only
of what it connotes, but a part sufficient to mark out correctly the
boundaries of its denotation,) has been considered by the ancients, and
by logicians in general, as a complete definition; it has always been
deemed necessary that the attributes employed should really form part of
the connotation; for the rule was that the definition must be drawn from
the essence of the class; and this would not have been the case if it
had been in any degree made up of attributes not connoted by the name.
The second kind of imperfect definition, therefore, in which the name of
a class is defined by any of its accidents,—that is, by attributes which
are not included in its connotation,—has been rejected from the rank of
genuine Definition by all blogiciansb, and has been termed Description.

This kind of imperfect definition, however, takes its rise from the same
cause as the other, namely, the willingness to accept as a definition
anything which, whether it expounds the meaning of the name or not,
enables us to discriminate the things denoted by the name from all other
things, and consequently to employ the term in predication without
deviating from established usage. This purpose is duly answered by
stating any (no matter what) of the attributes which are common to the
whole of the class, and peculiar to it; or any combination of attributes
which chappensc to be peculiar to it, though separately each of those
attributes may be common to it with some other things. It is only
necessary that the definition (or description) thus formed, should be
convertible with the name which it professes to define; that is, should
be exactly co-extensive with it, being predicable of everything of which
it is predicable, and of nothing of which it is not predicable; though
the attributes specified may have no connexion with those which
dmankindd had in view when they formed or recognised the class, and gave
it a name. The following are correct definitions of Man, according to
this test: Man is a mammiferous animal, having (by nature) two hands
(for the human species answers to this description, and no other animal
does): Man is an animal who cooks his food: Man is a featherless biped.

What would otherwise be a mere description, may be raised to the rank of
a real definition by the peculiar purpose which the speaker or writer
has in view. As was seen in the preceding chapter, it may, for the ends
of a particular art or science, or for the more convenient statement of
an author’s particular edoctrinese, be advisable to give to some general
name, without altering its denotation, a special connotation, different
from its ordinary one. When this is done, a definition of the name by
means of the attributes which make up the special connotation, though in
general a mere accidental definition or description, becomes on the
particular occasion and for the particular purpose a complete and
genuine definition. This actually occurs with respect Edition: current;
Page: [139] to one of the preceding examples, “Man is a mammiferous
animal having two hands,” which is the scientific definition of man,
considered as one of the species in Cuvier’s distribution of the animal
kingdom.[*]

In cases of this sort, though the definition is still a declaration of
the meaning which in the particular instance the name is appointed to
convey, it cannot be said that to state the meaning of the word is the
purpose of the definition. The purpose is not to expound a name, but fa
classification. The special meaning which Cuvier assigned to the word
Man, (quite foreign to its ordinary meaning, though involving no change
in the gdenotationg of the word,) was incidental to a plan of arranging
animals into classes on a certain principle, that is, according to a
certain set of distinctions. And since the definition of Man according
to the ordinary connotation of the word, though it would have answered
every other purpose of a definition, would not have pointed out the
place which the species ought to occupy in that particular
classification; he gave the word a special connotation, that he might be
able to define it by the kind of attributes on which, for reasons of
scientific convenience, he had resolved to found his division of
animated nature.

Scientific definitions, whether they are definitions of scientific
terms, or of common terms used in a scientific sense, are almost always
of the kind last spoken of: their main purpose is to serve as the
landmarks of scientific classification. And since the classifications in
any science are continually modified as scientific knowledge advances,
the definitions in the sciences are also constantly varying. A striking
instance is afforded by the words Acid and Alkali, especially the
former. As experimental discovery advanced, the substances classed with
acids have been constantly multiplying, and by a natural consequence the
attributes connoted by the word have receded and become fewer. At first
it connoted the attributes, of combining with an alkali to form a
neutral substance (called a salt); being compounded of a base and
oxygen; causticity to the taste and touch; fluidity, &c. The true
analysis of muriatic acid, into chlorine and hydrogen, caused the second
property, composition from a base and oxygen, to be excluded from the
connotation. The same discovery fixed the attention of chemists upon
hydrogen as an important element in acids; and more recent discoveries
having led to the recognition of its presence in sulphuric, nitric, and
many other acids, where its existence was not previously suspected,
there is now a tendency to include the presence of this element in the
connotation of the word. But carbonic acid, silica, sulphurous acid,
have no hydrogen in their composition; that property cannot therefore be
connoted by the term, unless those substances Edition: current; Page:
[140] are no longer to be considered acids. Causticity and fluidity have
long since been excluded from the characteristics of the class, by the
inclusion of silica and many other substances in it; and the formation
of neutral bodies by combination with alkalis, together with such
electro-chemical peculiarities as this is supposed to imply, are now the
only differentiæ which form the fixed connotation of the word Acid, as a
term of chemical science.h

What is true of the definition of any term of science, is of course true
of the definition of a science itself; and accordingly, i(as observed in
the Introductory Chapter of this work,)i the definition of a science
must necessarily be progressive and provisionalj. Anyj extension of
knowledge or alteration in the current opinions respecting the subject
matter, may lead to a change more or less extensive in the particulars
included in the science; and its composition being thus altered, it may
easily happen that a different set of characteristics will be kfoundk
better adapted as differentiæ for defining its name.

In the same manner in which la special or technical definition has for
its object to expound the artificial classification out of which it
grows; the Aristotelian logicians seem to have imagined that it mwasm
also the business of ordinary definition to expound the ordinary, and
what they deemed the natural, classification of things, namely, the
division of them into Kinds; and to show the place which each Kind
occupies, as superior, collateral, or subordinate, among other Kinds.
This notion would account for the rule that all definition must
necessarily be per genus et differentiam, and would also explain why na
singlen differentia was deemed sufficient. But to expound, or express in
words, a distinction of Kind, has already been shown to be an Edition:
current; Page: [141] impossibility: the very meaning of a Kind is, that
the properties which distinguish it do not grow out of one another, and
cannot therefore be set forth in words, even by implication, otherwise
than by enumerating them all: and all are not known, nor oare ever
likely to be soo. It is idle, therefore, to look to this as one of the
purposes of a definition: while, if it be only required that the
definition of a Kind should indicate what kinds include it or are
included by it, any definitions which expound the connotation of the
names will do this: for the name of each class must pnecessarilyp
connote enough of its properties to fix the boundaries of the class. If
the definition, therefore, be a full statement of the connotation, it is
all that a definition can be required to be.*

Edition: current; Page: [142]
a§ 5.a [What are called definitions of Things, are definitions of Names
with an implied assumption of the existence of Things corresponding to
them] Of the two incomplete band popular modesb of definition, and in
what they differ from the complete or cphilosophical modec, enough has
now been said. We shall next examine an ancient doctrine, once generally
prevalent and still by no means exploded, which I regard as the source
of a great part of the obscurity hanging over some of the most important
processes of the understanding in the pursuit of truth. According to
this, the definitions of which we have now treated are only one of two
sorts into which definitions may be divided, viz. definitions of names,
and definitions of things. The former are intended to explain the
meaning of a term; the latter, the nature of a thing; the last being
incomparably the most important.

This opinion was held by the ancient philosophers, and by their
followers, with the exception of the Nominalists; but as the spirit of
modern metaphysics, until a recent period, has been on the whole a
Nominalist spirit, the notion of definitions of things has been to a
certain extent in abeyance, still continuing, however, to breed
confusion in logic, by its consequences indeed rather than by itself.
Yet the doctrine in its own proper form now and then breaks out, and has
appeared (among other places) where it was scarcely to be expected, in a
djustly admiredd work, Archbishop Whately’s Logic.* In a Edition:
current; Page: [143] review of that work published by me in the
Westminster Review for January 1828,[*] and containing some opinions
which I no longer entertain, I find the following observations on the
question now before us; observations with which my present eview of that
question ise still sufficiently in accordance.

The distinction between nominal and real definitions, between
definitions of words and what are called definitions of things, though
conformable to the ideas of most of the Aristotelian logicians, cannot,
as it appears to us, be maintained. We apprehend that no definition is
ever intended to ‘explain and unfold the nature of faf thing.’ It is
some confirmation of our opinion, that none of those writers who have
thought that there were definitions of things, have ever succeeded in
discovering any criterion by which the definition of a thing can be
distinguished from any other proposition relating to the thing. The
definition, they say, unfolds the nature of the thing: but no definition
can unfold its whole nature; and every proposition in which any quality
whatever is predicated of the thing, unfolds some part of its nature.
The true state of the case we take to be this. All definitions are of
names, and of names only; but, in some definitions, it is clearly
apparent, that nothing is intended except to explain the meaning of the
word; while in others, besides explaining the meaning of the word, it is
intended to be implied that there exists a thing, corresponding to the
word. Whether this be or be not implied in any given case, cannot be
collected from the mere form of the expression. ‘A centaur is an animal
with the upper parts of a man and the lower parts of a horse,’ and ‘A
triangle is a rectilineal figure with three sides,’ are, in form,
expressions precisely similar; although in the former it is not implied
that any thing, conformable to the term, really exists, while in the
latter it is; as may be seen by substituting, in both definitions, the
word means for is. In the first expression, ‘A centaur means an animal,’
&c., the sense would remain unchanged: in the second, ‘A triangle
means,’ &c., the meaning would be altered, since it would be obviously
impossible to deduce any of the truths of geometry from a Edition:
current; Page: [144] proposition expressive only of the manner in which
we intend to employ a particular sign.

There are, therefore, expressions, commonly passing for definitions,
which include in themselves more than the mere explanation of the
meaning of a term. But it is not correct to call an expression of this
sort a peculiar kind of definition. Its difference from the other kind
consists in this, that it is not a definition, but a definition and
something more. The definition above given of a triangle, obviously
comprises not one, but two propositions, perfectly distinguishable. The
one is, ‘There may exist a figure, bounded by three straight lines;’ the
other, ‘And this figure may be termed a triangle.’ The former of these
propositions is not a definition at all: the latter is a mere nominal
definition, or explanation of the use and application of a term. The
first is susceptible of truth or falsehood, and may therefore be made
the foundation of a train of reasoning. The latter can neither be true
nor false; the only character it is susceptible of is that of conformity
or discomformity to the ordinary usage of language.

There is a real distinction, then, between definitions of names, and
what are erroneously called definitions of things; but it is, that the
latter, along with the meaning of a name, covertly gassertsg a matter of
fact. This covert assertion is not a definition, but a postulate. The
definition is a mere identical proposition, which gives information only
about the use of language, and from which no conclusions affecting
matters of fact can possibly be drawn. The accompanying postulate on the
other hand, affirms a fact, which may lead to consequences of every
degree of importance. It affirms the hactual or possibleh existence of
Things possessing the combination of attributes set forth in the
definition; and thisi, if true, may bei foundation sufficient on which
to build a whole fabric of scientific truth.

We have already made, and shall often have to repeat, the remark, that
the philosophers who overthrew Realism by no means got rid of the
consequences of Realism, but retained long afterwards, in their own
philosophy, numerous propositions which could only have a rational
meaning as part of a Realistic system. It had been handed down from
Aristotle, and probably from earlier times, as an obvious truth, that
the science of Geometry is deduced from definitions. This, so long as a
definition was considered to be a proposition “unfolding the nature of
the thing,” did well enough. But Hobbes jfollowedj, and rejected utterly
the notion that a definition declares the nature of the thing, or does
anything but state the meaning of a name; yet he continued to affirm as
broadly as any of his predecessors, that the ἀρχαὶ, principia, or
original premises of mathematics, and even of all science, are
definitions;[*] producing the singular paradox, that systems of
scientific truth, nay, all truths whatever at which we arrive by
reasoning, are deduced Edition: current; Page: [145] from the arbitrary
conventions of mankind concerning the signification of words.

To save the credit of the doctrine that definitions are the premises of
scientific knowledge, the proviso is sometimes added, that they are so
only under a certain condition, namely, that they be framed conformably
to the phenomena of nature; that is, that they ascribe such meanings to
terms as shall suit objects actually existing. But this is only an
instance of the attempt ksok often made, to escape from the necessity of
abandoning old language after the ideas which it expresses have been
exchanged for contrary ones. From the meaning of a name (we are told) it
is possible to infer physical facts, provided the name has corresponding
to it an existing thing. But if this proviso be necessary, from which of
the two is the inference really drawn? From the existence of a thing
having the properties, or from the existence of a name meaning them?

Take, for instance, any of the definitions laid down as premises in
Euclid’s Elements; the definition, let us say, of a circle. This, being
analysed, consists of two propositions; the one an assumption with
respect to a matter of fact, the other a genuine definition. “A figure
may exist, having all the points in the line which bounds it equally
distant from a single point within it:” “Any figure possessing this
property is called a circle.”[*] Let us look at one of the
demonstrations which are said to depend on this definition, and observe
lto which of the two propositions contained in it the demonstration
really appealsl. “About the centre A, describe the circle B C D.”[†]
Here is an assumption that a figure, such as the definition expresses,
may be described; which is no other than the postulate, or covert
assumption, involved in the so-called definition. But whether that
figure be called a circle or not is quite immaterial. The purpose would
be as well answered, in all respects except brevity, were we to say,
“Through the point B, draw a line returning into itself, of which every
point shall be at an equal distance from the point A.” By this the
definition of a circle would be got rid of, and rendered needless; but
not the postulate implied in it; without that the demonstration could
not stand. The circle being now described, let us proceed to the
consequence. “Since B C D is a circle, the radius B A is equal to the
radius C A.” B A is equal to C A, not because B C D is a circle, but
because B C D is a figure with the radii equal. Our warrant for assuming
that such a figure about the centre A, with the radius B A, may be made
to exist, is the postulate. Edition: current; Page: [146] mWhether the
admissibility of these postulates rests on intuition, or on proof, may
be a matter of disputem; but in either case they are the premises on
which the ntheorems dependn; and while these are retained it would make
no difference in the certainty of geometrical truths, though every
definition in Euclid, and every technical term therein defined, were
laid aside.

It is, perhaps, superfluous to dwell at so much length on what is so
nearly self-evident; but when a distinction, obvious as it may appear,
has been confounded, and by opowerful intellectso, it is better to say
too much than too little for the purpose of rendering such mistakes
impossible in future. pI will, therefore, detain the reader while Ip
point out one of the absurd consequences flowing from the supposition
that definitions, as such, are the premises in any of our reasonings,
except such as relate to words only. If this supposition were true, we
might argue correctly from true premises, and arrive at a false
conclusion. We should only have to assume as a premise the definition of
a nonentity; or rather of a name which has no entity corresponding to
it. Let this, for instance, be our definition:

A dragon is a serpent breathing flame.

This proposition, considered only as a definition, is indisputably
correct. A dragon is a serpent breathing flame: the word means that. The
tacit assumption, indeed, (if there were any such understood assertion),
of the existence of an object with properties corresponding to the
definition, would, in the present instance, be false. Out of this
definition we may carve the premises of the following syllogism:

A dragon is a thing which breathes flame:

qAq dragon is a serpent:

From which the conclusion is,

Therefore some serpent or serpents breathe flame:

an unexceptionable syllogism in the first mode of the third figure, in
which both premises are true and yet the conclusion false; which every
logician knows to be an absurdity. The conclusion being false and the
syllogism correct, the premises cannot be true. But the premises,
considered as parts of a definition, are truer. Therefore, the premises
considered as parts of a definition cannot be the real ones. The real
premises must be—

A dragon is a really existing thing which breathes flame:

A dragon is a really existing serpent:

which implied premises being false, the falsity of the conclusion
presents no absurdity.

Edition: current; Page: [147]
sIf we would determine what conclusion follows from the same ostensible
premises when the tacit assumption of real existence is left out, let
us, according to the recommendation in ta previous paget, substitute
means for is.[*] We then have—

uDragonu is a word meaning a thing which breathes flame:

vDragonv is a word meaning a serpent:

From which the conclusion is,

Some word or words which mean a serpent, also mean a thing which
breathes flame:

where the conclusion (as well as the premises) is true, and is the only
kind of conclusion which can ever follow from a definition, namely, a
proposition relating to the meaning of words.

wThere is still another shape into which we may transform this
syllogism. We may suppose the middle term to be the designation neither
of a thing nor of a name, but of an idea. We then have—

The idea of a dragon is an idea of a thing which breathes flame:

The idea of a dragon is an idea of a serpent:

Therefore, there is an idea of a serpent, which is an idea of a thing
breathing flame.

Here the conclusion is true, and also the premises; but the premises are
not definitions. They are propositions affirming that an idea existing
in the mind, includes certain ideal elements. The truth of the
conclusion follows from the existence of the psychological phenomenon
called the idea of a dragon; and therefore still from the tacit
assumption of a matter of fact.*

Edition: current; Page: [148]
When, as in this last syllogism, the conclusion is a proposition
respecting an idea, the assumption on which it depends may be merely
that of the existence of an idea. But when the conclusion is a
proposition concerning a Thing, the postulate involved in the definition
which stands as the apparent premise, is the existence of a thing
conformable to the definition, and not merely of an idea conformable to
it. This assumption of real existence xwex always convey the impression
that we intend to makew, when we profess to define any name which is
already known to be a name of really existing objects. On this account
it is, that the assumption was not necessarily implied in the definition
of a dragon, while there was no doubt of its being included in the
definition of a circle.

a§ 6.a [What are called definitions of Things are definitions of Names
even when such Things do not in reality exist] One of the circumstances
which have contributed to keep up the notion, that demonstrative truths
follow from definitions rather than from the postulates implied in those
definitions, is, that the postulates, even in those sciences which are
considered to surpass all others in demonstrative certainty, are not
always exactly true. It is not true that a circle exists, or can be
described, which has all its radii exactly equal. Such accuracy is ideal
only; it is not found in nature, still less can it be realized by art.
People had a difficulty, therefore, in conceiving that the most certain
of all conclusions could rest on premises which, instead of being
certainly true, are certainly not true to the bfullb extent asserted.
This apparent paradox will be examined when we come to treat of
Demonstration; where we shall be able to show that as much of the
postulate is true, as is required to support as much as is true of the
conclusion. Philosophers, however, Edition: current; Page: [149] to whom
this view had not occurred, or whom it did not satisfy, have thought it
indispensable that there should be found in definitions something more
certain, or at least more accurately true, than the implied postulate of
the real existence of a corresponding object. And this something they
flattered themselves they had found, when they laid it down that a
definition is a statement and analysis not of the mere meaning of a
word, nor yet of the nature of a thing, but of an idea. Thus, the
proposition, “A circle is a plane figure bounded by a line all the
points of which are at an equal distance from a given point within it,”
was considered by them, not as an assertion that any real circle has
that property, (which would not be exactly true,) but that we conceive a
circle as having it; that our abstract idea of a circle is an idea of a
figure with its radii exactly equal.

Conformably to this it is said, that the subject-matter of mathematics,
and of every other demonstrative science, is not things as they really
exist, but abstractions of the mind. A geometrical line is a line
without breadth; but no such line exists in nature; it is a cnotion
merely suggested to the mind by its experience ofc nature. The
definition (it is said) is a definition of this mental line, not of any
actual line: and it is only of the mental line, not of any line existing
in nature, that the theorems of geometry are accurately true.

Allowing this doctrine respecting the nature of demonstrative truth to
be correct (which, in a subsequent place, I shall endeavour to prove
that it is not;) even on that supposition, the conclusions which seem to
follow from a definition, do not follow from the definition as such, but
from an implied postulate. Even if it be true that there is no object in
nature answering to the definition of a line, and that the geometrical
properties of lines are not true of any lines in nature, but only of the
idea of a line; the definition, at all events, postulates the real
existence of such an idea: it assumes that the mind can frame, or rather
has framed, the notion of length without breadth, and without any other
sensible property whatever. dTo me, indeed, it appears thatd the mind
cannot form any such notion; it cannot conceive length without breadth;
it can only, in contemplating objects, attend to their length,
exclusively of their other sensible qualities, and so determine what
properties may be predicated of them in virtue of their length alone. If
this be true, the postulate involved in the geometrical definition of a
line, is the real existence, not of length without breadth, but merely
of length, that is, of long objects. This is quite enough to support all
the truths of geometry, since every property of a geometrical line is
really a property of all physical objects ein so far ase possessing
length. But even what I hold to be the false doctrine on Edition:
current; Page: [150] the subject, leaves the conclusion that our
reasonings are grounded on the matters of fact postulated in
definitions, and not on the definitions themselves, entirely unaffected;
and accordingly fthis conclusion is one which I have in common with Dr.
Whewell, in hisf Philosophy of the Inductive gSciences: though, ong the
nature of demonstrative truth, Dr. Whewell’s opinions are greatly at
variance with mineh. And here, as in many other instances, iI gladly
acknowledge thati his writings are eminently serviceable in clearing
from confusion the initial steps in the analysis of the mental
processes, even where his views respecting the ultimate analysis jare
such as (though with unfeigned respect) I cannot but regard as
fundamentally erroneous.

a§ 7.a [Definitions, though of names only, must be grounded on knowledge
of the corresponding things] Although, according to the bopinionb here
presented, Definitions are properly of names only, and not of things, it
does not follow cfrom this that definitions are arbitraryc. How to
define a name, may not only be an inquiry of considerable difficulty and
intricacy, but may dinvolved considerations going deep into the nature
of the things which are denoted by the name. Such, for instance, are the
inquiries which form the subjects of the most important of Plato’s
Dialogues; as, “What is rhetoric?” the topic of the “Gorgias,” or “What
is justice?” that of the “Republic.” Such, also, is the question
scornfully asked by Pilate, “What is truth?”[*] and the fundamental
question with speculative moralists in all ages, “What is virtue?”

It would be a mistake to represent these difficult and noble inquiries
as having nothing in view beyond ascertaining the conventional meaning
of a name. They are inquiries not so much to determine what is, as what
should be, the meaning of a name; which, like other practical questions
of terminology, requires for its solution that we should enter, and
sometimes enter very deeply, into the properties not merely of names but
of the things named.

Although the meaning of every concrete general name resides in the
attributes Edition: current; Page: [151] which it connotes, the objects
were named before the attributes; as appears from the fact that in all
languages, abstract names are mostly compounds or eothere derivatives of
the concrete names which correspond to them. Connotative names,
therefore, were, after proper names, the first which were used: and in
the simpler cases, no doubt, a distinct connotation was present to the
minds of those who first used the name, and was distinctly intended by
them to be conveyed by it. The first person who used the word white, as
applied to snow or to any other object, knew, no doubt, very well what
quality he intended to predicate, and had a perfectly distinct
conception in his mind of the attribute signified by the name.

But where the resemblances and differences on which our classifications
are founded are not of this palpable and easily determinable kind;
especially where they consist not in any one quality but in a number of
qualities, the effects of which, being blended together, are not very
easily discriminated, and referred each to its true source; it often
happens that names are applied to nameable objects, with no distinct
connotation present to the minds of those who apply them. They are only
influenced by a general resemblance between the new object and all or
some of the old familiar objects which they have been accustomed to call
by that name. This, as we have seen, is the law which even the mind of
the philosopher must follow, in giving names to the simple elementary
feelings of our nature: but, where the things to be named are complex
wholes, a philosopher is not content with noticing a general
resemblance; he examines what the resemblance consists in: and he only
gives the same name to things which resemble one another in the same
definite particulars. The philosopher, therefore, habitually employs his
general names with a definite connotation. But language was not made,
and can only in some small degree be mended, by philosophers. In the
minds of the real arbiters of language, general names, especially where
the classes they denote cannot be brought before the tribunal of the
outward senses to be identified and discriminated, connote little more
than a vague gross resemblance to the things which they were earliest,
or have been most, accustomed to call by those names. When, for
instance, ordinary persons predicate the words just or unjust of any
action, fnoble or meanf of any sentiment, expression, or demeanour,
statesman or charlatan of any personage figuring in politics, do they
mean to affirm of those various subjects any determinate attributes, of
whatever kind? No: they merely recognise, as they think, some likeness,
more or less vague and loose, between gtheseg and some other things
which they have been accustomed to denominate or to hear denominated by
those appellations.

Language, as Sir James Mackintosh used to say of governments, “is not
Edition: current; Page: [152] made, but grows.”[*] A name is not imposed
at once and by previous purpose upon a class of objects, but is first
applied to one thing, and then extended by a series of transitions to
another and another. By this process (as has been remarked by several
writers, and illustrated with great force and clearness by Dugald
Stewart in his Philosophical Essays)[†] a name not unfrequently passes
by successive links of resemblance from one object to another, until it
becomes applied to things having nothing in common with the first things
to which the name was given; which, however, do not, for that reason,
drop the name; so that it at last denotes a confused huddle of objects,
having nothing whatever in common; and connotes nothing, not even a
vague and general resemblance. When a name has fallen into this state,
in which by predicating it of any object we assert literally nothing
about the object, it has become unfit for the purposes either of thought
or of the communication of thought; and can only be made serviceable by
stripping it of some part of its multifarious denotation, and confining
it to objects possessed of some attributes in common, which it may be
made to connote. Such are the inconveniences of a language which “is not
made, but grows.” Like hthe governments which are in a similar case, it
may be compared toh a road which is not made but has made itself: it
requires continual mending in order to be passable.

From this it is already evident, why the question respecting the
definition of an abstract name is often one of so much difficulty. The
question, What is justice? is, in other words, What is the attribute
which mankind mean to predicate when they call an action just? To which
the first answer is, that having come to no precise agreement on the
point, they do not mean to predicate distinctly any attribute at all.
Nevertheless, all believe that there is some common attribute belonging
to all the actions which they are in the habit of calling just. The
question then must be, whether there is any such common attribute? and,
in the first place, whether mankind agree sufficiently with one another
as to the particular actions which they do or do not call just, to
render the inquiry, what quality those actions have in common, a
possible one: if so, whether the actions really have any quality in
common; and if they have, what it is. Of these three, the first alone is
an inquiry into usage and convention; the other two are inquiries into
matters of fact. And if the second question (whether the actions form a
class at all) has been answered negatively, there remains a fourth,
often more arduous than all the rest, namely, how best to form a class
artificially, which the name may denote.

Edition: current; Page: [153]
And here it is fitting to remark, that the study of the spontaneous
growth of languages is of the utmost importance to ithosei who would
logically remodel them. The classifications rudely made by established
language, when retouched, as they almost jallj require to be, by the
hands of the logician, are often in themselves excellently suited to
khis purposes. lAsl compared with the classifications of a philosopher,
they are like the customary law of a country, which has grown up as it
were spontaneously, compared with laws methodized and digested into a
code: the former are a far less perfect instrument than the latter; but
being the result of a long, though unscientific, course of experience,
they contain ma mass of materials which may be made very usefully
available in the formation of the systematic body of written lawm. In
like manner, the established grouping of objects under a common name,
neven whenn founded only on a gross and general resemblance, is
evidence, in the first place, that the resemblance is obvious, and
therefore considerable; and, in the next place, that it is a resemblance
which has struck great numbers of persons during a series of years and
ages. Even when a name, by successive extensions, has come to be applied
to things among which there does not exist othiso gross resemblance
common to them all, still at every step in its progress we shall find
such a resemblance. And these transitions of the meaning of words are
often an index to real connexions between the things denoted by them,
which might otherwise escape the notice pof thinkersp; of those at least
who, from using a different language, or from any difference in their
habitual associations, have fixed their attention in preference on some
other aspect of the things. The history of philosophy abounds in
examples of such oversights, qcommitted for want of perceivingq the
hidden link that connected together the seemingly disparate meanings of
some ambiguous word.*

Edition: current; Page: [154]
Whenever the inquiry into the definition of the name of any real object
consists of anything else than a mere comparison of authorities, we
tacitly assume that a meaning must be found for the name, compatible
with its continuing to denote, if possible all, but at any rate the
greater or the more important part, of the things of which it is
commonly predicated. The inquiry, therefore, into the definition, is an
inquiry into the resemblances and differences among those things:
whether there be any resemblance running through them all; if not,
through what portion of them such a general resemblance can be traced:
and finally, what are the common attributes, the possession of which
gives to them all, or to that portion of them, the character of
resemblance which has led to their being classed together. When these
common attributes have been ascertained and specified, the name which
belongs in common to the resembling objects acquires a distinct instead
of a vague connotation; and by possessing this distinct connotation,
becomes susceptible of definition.

In giving a distinct connotation to the general name, the philosopher
will endeavour to fix upon such attributes as, while they are common to
all the things usually denoted by the name, are also of greatest
importance in themselves; either directly, or from the number, the
conspicuousness, or the interesting character, of the consequences to
which they lead. He will select, as far as possible, such differentiæ as
lead to the greatest number of interesting propria. For these, rather
than the more obscure and recondite qualities on which they often
depend, give that general character and aspect to a set of objects,
which determine the groups into which they naturally fall. But to
rpenetrater to the more hidden agreement on which these obvious and
superficial agreements depend, is often one of the most difficult of
scientific problems. As it is among the most difficult, so it seldom
fails to be among the most important. And since upon the result of this
inquiry respecting the causes of the properties of a class of things,
there incidentally depends the question what shall be the meaning of a
word; some of the most profound and most valuable investigations which
philosophy presents to us, have been introduced by, and have offered
themselves under the guise of, inquiries into the definition of a name.

Edition: current; Page: [155]


BOOK II: OF REASONING

Edition: current; Page: [156]
Διωρισμένων δὲ τούτων λέγωμεν ἤδη, διὰ τίνων, καὶ πότε, καὶ πω̑ς γίνεται
πα̑ς συλλογισμός· ὔστερον δὲ λεκτέον περὶ ἀποδείξεως. πρότερον γὰρ περὶ
συλλογισμου̑ λεκτέον, ἢ περὶ ἀποδείξεως. διὰ τὸ καθόλου μα̑λλον εἰναὶ τὸν
συλλογισμόν. ὴ μὲν γὰρ ἀπόδειξις συλλογισμός τις· ὸ συλλογισμός δὲ οὐ
πα̑ς, ἀπόδειξις.

Aristotle, Analytica Priora, Bk. I, Chap. iv [(25b26-31). In Organon, p.
208].

Edition: current; Page: [157]


CHAPTER I: Of Inference, or Reasoning, in General

§ 1. [Retrospect of the preceding book] In the preceding Book, we have
been occupied not with the nature of Proof, but with the nature of
Assertion: the import conveyed by a Proposition, whether that
Proposition be true or false; not the means by which to discriminate
true from false Propositions. The proper subject, however, of Logic is
Proof. Before we could understand what Proof is, it was necessary to
understand what that is to which proof is applicable; what that is which
can be a subject of belief or disbelief, of affirmation or denial; what,
in short, the different kinds of Propositions assert.

This preliminary inquiry we have prosecuted to a definite result.
Assertion, in the first place, relates either to the meaning of words,
or to some property of the things which words signify. Assertions
respecting the meaning of words, among which definitions are the most
important, hold a place, and an indispensable one, in philosophy; but as
the meaning of words is essentially arbitrary, this class of assertions
are not susceptible of truth or falsity, nor therefore of proof or
disproof. Assertions respecting Things, or what may be called Real
Propositions, in contradistinction to verbal ones, are of various sorts.
We have analysed the import of each sort, and have ascertained the
nature of the things they relate to, and the nature of what they
severally assert respecting those things. We found that whatever be the
form of the proposition, and whatever its nominal subject or predicate,
the real subject of every proposition is some one or more facts or
phenomena of consciousness, or some one or more of the hidden causes or
powers to which we ascribe those facts; and that what is predicated or
asserted, either in the affirmative or negative, of those phenomena or
athosea powers, is always either Existence, Order in Place, Order in
Time, Causation, or Resemblance. This, then, is the theory of the Import
of Propositions, reduced to its ultimate elements: but there is another
and a less abstruse expression for it, which, though stopping short in
an earlier stage of the analysis, is sufficiently scientific Edition:
current; Page: [158] for many of the purposes for which such a general
expression is required. This expression recognises the commonly received
distinction between Subject and Attribute, and gives the following as
the analysis of the meaning of propositions:—Every Proposition asserts,
that some given subject does or does not possess some attribute; or that
some attribute is or is not (either in ballb or in some portion of the
subjects in which it is met with) conjoined with some other attribute.

We shall now for the present take our leave of this portion of our
inquiry, and proceed to the peculiar problem of the Science of Logic,
namely, how the assertions, of which we have analysed the import, are
proved or disproved; such of them, at least, as, not being amenable to
direct consciousness or intuition, are appropriate subjects of proof.

We say of a fact or statement, that it is proved, when we believe its
truth by reason of some other fact or statement from which it is said to
follow. Most of the propositions, whether affirmative or negative,
universal, particular, or singular, which we believe, are not believed
on their own evidence, but on the ground of something previously
assented to, cfrom which they are said to be inferred. To infer a
proposition from a previous proposition or propositions; to give
credence to it, or claim credence for it, as a conclusion from something
else; is to reason, in the most extensive sense of the term. There is a
narrower sense, in which the name reasoning is confined to the form of
inference which is termed ratiocination, and of which the syllogism is
the general type. The reasons for not conforming to this restricted use
of the term were stated in an dearlierd stage of our inquiry, and
additional motives will be suggested by the considerations on which we
are now about to enter.

§ 2. [Inferences improperly so called] In proceeding to take into
consideration the cases in which inferences can legitimately be drawn,
we shall first mention some cases in which the inference is apparent,
not real; and which require notice chiefly that they may not be
confounded with cases of inference properly so called. This occurs when
the proposition ostensibly inferred from another, appears on analysis to
be merely a repetition of the same, or part of the same, assertion,
which was contained in the first. All the cases mentioned in books of
Logic as examples of æquipollency or equivalence of propositions, are of
this nature. Thus, if we were to argue, No man is incapable of reason,
for every man is rational; or, All men are mortal, for no man is exempt
from death; it would be plain that we were not proving the proposition,
but only appealing to another mode of wording it, which may or Edition:
current; Page: [159] may not be more readily comprehensible by the
hearer, or better adapted to suggest the real proof, but which contains
in itself no shadow of proof.

Another case is where, from an universal proposition, we affect to infer
another which differs from it only in being particular: as All A is B,
therefore Some A is B: No A is B, therefore Some A is not B. This, too,
is not to conclude one proposition from another, but to repeat a second
time something which had been asserted at first; with the difference,
that we do not here repeat the whole of the previous assertion, but only
an indefinite part of it.

A third case is where, the antecedent having affirmed a predicate of a
given subject, the consequent affirms of the same subject something
already connoted by the former predicate: as, Socrates is a man,
therefore Socrates is a living creature; where all that is connoted by
living creature was affirmed of Socrates when he was asserted to be a
man. If the propositions are negative, we must invert their order, thus:
Socrates is not a living creature, therefore he is not a man; for if we
deny the less, the greater, which includes it, is already denied by
implication. These, therefore, are not really cases of inference; and
yet the trivial examples by which, in manuals of Logic, the rules of the
syllogism are illustrated, are often of this ill-chosen kind; aformal
demonstrationsa of conclusions to which whoever understands the terms
used in the statement of the data, has already, and consciously,
assented.*

The most complex case of this sort of apparent inference is what is
called the Conversion of propositions; which consists in bturning the
predicate into a subject, and the subject intob a predicate, and framing
out of the same terms thus reversed, another proposition, which must be
true if the former is true. Thus, from the particular affirmative
proposition, Some A is B, we may infer that Some B is A. From the
universal negative, No A is B, we may conclude that No B is A. From the
universal affirmative proposition, All A is B, it cannot be inferred
that All B is A; though all water is liquid, it is not implied that all
liquid is water; but it is implied that some liquid is so; and hence the
proposition, All A is B, is legitimately convertible into Some B is A.
This process, which converts an universal proposition into a particular,
is termed conversion per accidens. From the proposition, Some A is not
B, we cannot even infer that some B is not A; though some men are not
Englishmen, it does not follow that some Englishmen are not men. The
only cmode usually Edition: current; Page: [160] recognised of
convertingc a particular negative proposition, is in the form, Some A is
not B, therefore, something which is not B is A; and this is termed
conversion by contraposition. In this case, however, the predicate and
subject are not merely reversed, but one of them is dchangedd. Instead
of [A] and [B], the terms of the new proposition are [a thing which is
not B], and [A]. The original proposition, Some A is not B, is first
changed into a proposition æquipollent with it, Some A is “a thing which
is not B;” and the proposition, being now no longer a particular
negative, but a particular affirmative, admits of conversion in the
first mode, or as it is called, simple conversion.*

In all these cases there is not really any inference; there is in the
conclusion no new truth, nothing but what was already asserted in the
premises, and obvious to whoever apprehends them. The fact asserted in
the conclusion is either the very same fact, or part of the fact,
asserted in the original proposition. This follows from our previous
analysis of the Import of Propositions. When we say, for example, that
some lawful sovereigns are tyrants, what is the meaning of the
assertion? That the attributes connoted by the term “lawful sovereign,”
and the attributes connoted by the term “tyrant,” sometimes coexist in
the same individual. Now this is also precisely what we mean, when we
say that some tyrants are lawful sovereigns; which, therefore, is not a
second proposition inferred from the first, any more than the English
translation of Euclid’s Elements is a collection of theorems different
from, and consequences of, those contained in the Greek original. Again,
if we assert that no great general is a erash mane, we mean that the
attributes connoted by “great general,” and those connoted by “frashf,”
never coexist in the same subject; which is also the exact meaning which
gwould be expressed by saying, that no rash mang is a great general.
When we say that all quadrupeds are warm-blooded, we assert, not only
that the attributes connoted by “quadruped” and those connoted by
“warm-blooded” sometimes coexist, but that the former never exist
without the latter: now the proposition, Some warm-blooded creatures are
quadrupeds, expresses the first half of this meaning, dropping the
latter half; and therefore has been already affirmed in the antecedent
proposition, All quadrupeds are warm-blooded. But that all warm-blooded
creatures are quadrupeds, or, in other words, that the hattributes
connoted by “warm-blooded” never existh without those connoted by
“quadruped,” has not been asserted, and cannot be inferred. In order to
reassert, Edition: current; Page: [161] in an inverted form, the whole
of what was affirmed in the proposition, All quadrupeds are
warm-blooded, we must convert it by contraposition, thus, Nothing which
is not warm-blooded is a quadruped. This proposition, and the one from
which it is derived, are exactly equivalent, and either of them may be
substituted for the other; for, to say that when the attributes of a
quadruped are present, those of a warm-blooded creature are present, is
to say that when the latter are absent the former are absent.

In a manual for young students, it would be proper to dwell at greater
length on the conversion and æquipollency of propositions. For though
that cannot be called reasoning or inference which is a mere reassertion
in different words of what had been asserted before, there is no more
important intellectual habit, nor any the cultivation of which falls
more strictly within the province of the art of logic, than that of
discerning rapidly and surely the identity of an assertion when
disguised under diversity of language. That important chapter in logical
treatises which relates to the Opposition of Propositions, and the
excellent technical language which logic provides for distinguishing the
different kinds or modes of opposition, are of use chiefly for this
purpose. Such considerations as these, that contrary propositions may
both be false, but cannot both be true; that subcontrary propositions
may both be true, but cannot both be false; that of two contradictory
propositions one must be true and the other false; that of two
subalternate propositions the truth of the universal proves the truth of
the particular, and the falsity of the particular proves the falsity of
the universal, but not vice versâ;* are apt to appear, at first sight,
very technical and mysterious, but when explained, seem almost too
obvious to require so formal a statement, since the same amount of
explanation which is necessary to make the principles intelligible,
would enable the truths which they convey to be apprehended in any
particular case which can occur. In this respect, however, these axioms
of logic are on a level with those of mathematics. That things which are
equal to the same thing are equal to one another, is as obvious in any
particular case as it is in the general statement: and if no such
general maxim had ever been laid down, the demonstrations in Euclid
would never have halted for any difficulty in stepping across the gap
which this axiom at present Edition: current; Page: [162] serves to
bridge over. Yet no one has ever censured iwritersi on geometry, for
placing a list of these elementary generalizations at the head of jtheir
treatisesj, as a first exercise to the learner of the faculty which will
be required in him at every step, that of apprehending a general truth.
And the student of logic, in the discussion even of such truths as we
have cited above, acquires habits of circumspect interpretation of
words, and of exactly measuring the length and breadth of his
assertions, which are among the most indispensable conditions of any
considerable kmental attainmentk, and which it is one of the primary
objects of logical discipline to cultivate.

§ 3. [Inferences proper, distinguished into inductions and
ratiocinations] Having noticed, in order to exclude from the province of
Reasoning or Inference properly so called, the cases in which the
aprogressiona from one truth to another is only apparent, the logical
consequent being a mere repetition of the logical antecedent; we now
pass to those which are cases of inference in the proper acceptation of
the term, those in which we set out from known truths, to arrive at
others really distinct from them.

Reasoning, in the extended sense in which I use the term, and in which
it is synonymous with Inference, is popularly said to be of two kinds:
reasoning from particulars to generals, and reasoning from generals to
particulars; the former being called Induction, the latter Ratiocination
or Syllogism. It will presently be shown that there is a third species
of reasoning, which falls under neither of these descriptions, and
which, nevertheless, is not only valid, but bisb the foundation of both
the others.

cItc is necessary to observe, that the expressions, reasoning from
particulars to generals, and reasoning from generals to particulars, are
recommended by brevity rather than by precision, and do not adequately
mark, without the aid of a commentary, the distinction between Induction
d(in the sense now adverted to)d and Ratiocination. The meaning intended
by these expressions is, that Induction is inferring a proposition from
propositions less general than itself, and Ratiocination is inferring a
proposition from propositions equally or more general. When, from the
observation of a number of individual instances, we ascend to a general
proposition, or when, by combining a number of general propositions, we
conclude from them eanother proposition still more general, the process,
which is substantially the same in both instances, is called Induction.
When from a general proposition, not alone (for from a single
proposition nothing can be concluded which is not involved in the
terms), but by combining it with other propositions, we Edition:
current; Page: [163] infer a proposition of the same degree of
generality with itself, or a less general proposition, or a proposition
merely individual, the process is Ratiocination. When, in short, the
conclusion is more general than the largest of the premises, the
argument is fcommonly calledf Induction; when less general, or equally
general, it is Ratiocination.

As all experience begins with individual cases, and proceeds from them
to generals, it might seem most conformable to the natural order of
thought that Induction should be treated of before we touch upon
Ratiocination. It will, however, be advantageous, in a science which
aims at tracing our acquired knowledge to its sources, that the inquirer
should commence with the glatterg rather than with the earlier stages of
the process of constructing our knowledge; and should trace derivative
truths backward to the truths from which they are deduced, and on which
they depend for their evidence, before attempting to point out the
original spring from which both ultimately take their rise. The
advantages of this order of proceeding in the present instance will
manifest themselves as we advance, in a manner superseding the necessity
of any further justification or explanation.

Of Induction, therefore, we shall say no more at present, than that it
at least is, without doubt, a process of real inference. The conclusion
in an induction embraces more than is contained in the premises. The
principle or law collected from particular instances, the general
proposition in which we embody the result of our experience, covers a
much larger extent of ground than the individual experiments which hform
its basis. A principle ascertained by experience, is more than a mere
summing up of what ihas been specifically observed in the individual
cases which have beeni examined; it is a generalization grounded on
those cases, and expressive of our belief, that what we there found true
is true in an indefinite number of cases which we have not examined, and
are never likely to examine. The nature and grounds of this inference,
and the conditions necessary to make it legitimate, will be the subject
of discussion in the Third Book: but that such inference really takes
place is not susceptible of question. In every induction we proceed from
truths which we knew, to truths which we did not know; from facts
certified by observation, to facts which we have not observed, and even
to facts not capable of being now observed; future facts, for example;
but which we do not hesitate to believe on the sole evidence of the
induction itself.

Induction, then, is a real process of Reasoning or Inference. Whether,
and in what sense, jasj much can be said of the Syllogism, remains to be
determined by the examination into which we are about to enter.

Edition: current; Page: [164]


CHAPTER II: Of Ratiocination, or Syllogism

§ 1. [Analysis of the Syllogism] The analysis of the Syllogism has been
so accurately and fully performed in the common manuals of Logic, that
in the present work, which is not designed as a manual, it is sufficient
to recapitulate, memoriæ causâ, the leading results of that analysis, as
a foundation for the remarks to be afterwards made on the functions of
the Syllogism, and the place which it holds in asciencea.

To a legitimate syllogism it is essential that there should be three,
and no more than three, propositions, namely, the conclusion, or
proposition to be proved, and two other propositions which together
prove it, and which are called the premises. It is essential that there
should be three, and no more than three, terms, namely, the subject and
predicate of the conclusion, and another called the middleterm, which
must be found in both premises, since it is by means of it that the
other two terms are to be connected together. The predicate of the
conclusion is called the major term of the syllogism; the subject of the
conclusion is called the minor term. As there can be but three terms,
the major and minor terms must each be found in one, and only one, of
the premises, together with the middleterm which is in them both. The
premise which contains the middleterm and the major term is called the
major premise; that which contains the middleterm and the minor term is
called the minor premiseb.

Syllogisms are divided by some logicians into three figures, by others
into four, according to the position of the middleterm, which may either
be the subject in both premises, the predicate in both, or the subject
in one and the predicate in the other. The most common case is that in
which the middleterm is the subject of the major premise and the
predicate of the minor. This is reckoned as the first figure. When the
middleterm is the predicate in both premises, the syllogism belongs to
the second figure; when it is the subject in both, to the third. In the
fourth figure the middleterm is the subject of the minor premise and the
predicate of the major. Those writers who reckon no more than three
figures, include this case in the first.

Edition: current; Page: [165]
Each figure is cdividedc into dmoodsd, according to what are called the
quantity and quality of the propositions, that is, according as they are
universal or particular, affirmative or negative. The following are
examples of all the legitimate moods, that is, all those in which the
conclusion correctly follows from the premises. A is the minor term, C
the major, B the middle-term.

  ------------ ------------ ------------- -----------------
  All B is C   No B is C    All B is C    No B is C
  All A is B   All A is B   Some A is B   Some A is B
  therefore    therefore    therefore     therefore
  All A is C   No A is C    Some A is C   Some A is not C
  ------------ ------------ ------------- -----------------

  : FIRST FIGURE

  ------------ ------------ ----------------- -----------------
  No C is B    All C is B   No C is B         All C is B
  All A is B   No A is B    Some A is B       Some A is not B
  therefore    therefore    therefore         therefore
  No A is C    No A is C    Some A is not C   Some A is not C
  ------------ ------------ ----------------- -----------------

  : SECOND FIGURE

  ------------- ----------------- ------------- ------------- ----------------- -----------------
  All B is C    No B is C         Some B is C   All B is C    Some B is not C   No B is C
  All B is A    All B is A        All B is A    Some B is A   All B is A        Some B is A
  therefore     therefore         therefore     therefore     therefore         therefore
  Some A is C   Some A is not C   Some A is C   Some A is C   Some A is not C   Some A is not C
  ------------- ----------------- ------------- ------------- ----------------- -----------------

  : THIRD FIGURE

FOURTH FIGURE
_e_not_e_+46, 51, 56, 62, 65, 68, 72
All C is B
All C is B
Some C is B
No C is B
No C is B
All B is A
No B is A
All B is A
All B is A
Some B is A
therefore
therefore
therefore
therefore
therefore
Some A is C
Some A is _e_not_e_ C
Some A is C
Some A is not C
Some A is not C

In these exemplars, or blank forms for making syllogisms, no place is
assigned to singular propositions; not, of course, because such
propositions are not used in ratiocination, but because, their predicate
being affirmed or denied of the whole of the subject, they are ranked,
for the purposes of the syllogism, with universal propositions. Thus,
these two syllogisms—

  ----------------------- ---------------------
  All men are mortal,     All men are mortal,
  All kings are men,      Socrates is a man,
  therefore               therefore
  All kings are mortal,   Socrates is mortal,
  ----------------------- ---------------------

Edition: current; Page: [166]
are arguments precisely similar, and are both ranked in the first mood
of the first figure.*

The reasons why syllogisms in any of the above forms are legitimate,
that is, why, if the premises faref true, the conclusion must
ginevitablyg be so, and why this is not the case in any other possible
mood, (that is, in any other combination of universal and particular,
affirmative and negative propositions,) any person taking interest in
these inquiries may be presumed to have either learned from the common
school books of the syllogistic logic, or to be capable of hdiscoveringh
for himself. The reader may, however, be referred, for every needful
explanation, to Archbishop Whately’s Elements of Logic, where he will
find stated with philosophical precision, and explained with
iremarkablei perspicuity, the whole of the common doctrine of the
syllogism.

All valid ratiocination; all reasoning by which, from general
propositions previously admitted, other propositions equally or less
general are inferred; may be exhibited in some of the above forms. The
whole of Euclid, for example, might be thrown without difficulty into a
series of syllogisms, regular in mood and figure.

Edition: current; Page: [167]
Though a syllogism framed according to any of these formulæ is a valid
argument, all correct ratiocination admits of being stated in syllogisms
of the first figure alone. The rules for throwing an argument in any of
the other figures into the first figure, are called rules for the
reduction of syllogisms. It is done by the conversion of one or other,
or both, of the premises. Thus an argument in the first mood of the
second figure, as—

-   

    No C is B
-   

    All A is B
-   

    therefore
-   

    No A is C,

Edition: current; Page: [168]
may be reduced as follows. The proposition, No C is B, being an
universal negative, admits of simple conversion, and may be changed into
No B is C, which, as we showed, is the very same assertion in other
words—the same fact differently expressed. This transformation having
been effected, the argument assumes the following form:

-   

    No B is C
-   

    All A is B
-   

    therefore
-   

    No A is C,

which is a good syllogism in the second mood of the first figure. Again,
an argument in the first mood of the third figure must resemble the
following:

-   

    All B is C
-   

    All B is A
-   

    therefore
-   

    Some A is C,

where the minor premise, All B is A, conformably to what was laid down
in the last chapter respecting universal affirmatives, does not admit of
simple conversion, but may be converted per accidens, thus, Some A is B;
which, though it does not express the whole of what is asserted in the
proposition All B is A, expresses, as was formerly shown, part of it,
and must therefore be true if the whole is true. We have, then, as the
result of the reduction, the following syllogism in the third mood of
the first figure:

-   

    All B is C
-   

    Some A is B,

from which it obviously follows, that

-   

    Some A is C.

In the same manner, or in a manner on which after these examples it is
not necessary to enlarge, every mood of the second, third, and fourth
figures may be reduced to some one of the four moods of the first. In
other words, every conclusion which can be proved in any of the last
three figures, may be proved in the first figure from the same premises,
with a slight alteration in the mere manner of expressing them. Every
valid ratiocination, therefore, may be stated in the first figure, that
is, in one of the following forms:

Every B is C
No B is C
All A }
is B,
All A }
is B,
Some A }
Some A }
therefore
therefore
All A }
is C.
No A is }
C.
Some A }
Some A is not }

Or if more significant symbols are preferred:

Edition: current; Page: [169]
To prove an affirmative, the argument must admit of being stated in this
form:

All animals are mortal;
All men }
are animals;
Some men }
Socrates }
therefore
All men }
are mortal.
Some men }
Socrates }

To prove a negative, the argument must be capable of being expressed in
this form:

No one who is capable of self-control is necessarily vicious;
All negroes }
are capable of self-control;
Some negroes }
Mr. A’s negro }
therefore
No negroes are }
necessarily vicious.
Some negroes are not }
Mr. A’s negro is not }

Though all ratiocination admits of being thrown into one or the other of
these forms, and sometimes gains considerably by the transformation,
both in clearness and in the obviousness of its consequence; there are,
no doubt, cases in which the argument falls more naturally into one of
the other three figures, and in which its conclusiveness is more
apparent at the first glance in those figures, than when reduced jtoj
the first. Thus, if the proposition were that pagans may be virtuous,
and the evidence to prove it were the example of Aristides; a syllogism
in the third figure,

-   

    Aristides was virtuous,
-   

    Aristides was a pagan,
-   

    therefore
-   

    Some pagan was virtuous,

would be a more natural mode of stating the argument, and would carry
conviction more instantly home, than the same ratiocination strained
into the first figure, thus—

-   

    Aristides was virtuous,
-   

    Some pagan was Aristides,
-   

    therefore
-   

    Some pagan was virtuous.

Edition: current; Page: [170]
A German philosopher, Lambert, whose Neues Organon (published in the
year 1764) contains among other things kone of the most elaborate and
complete expositions lwhich had ever beenl made of the syllogistic
doctrinek, has expressly examined what msortm of arguments fall most
naturally and suitably into each of the four figures; and his
ninvestigationn is characterized by great ingenuity and clearness of
thought.* The argument, however, is one and the same, in whichever
figure it is expressed; since, as we have already seen, the premises of
a syllogism in the second, third, or fourth figure, and those of the
syllogism in the first figure to which it may be reduced, are the
Edition: current; Page: [171] same premises in everything except
language, or, at least, as much of them as contributes to the proof of
the conclusion is the same. We are therefore at liberty, in conformity
with the general opinion of logicians, to consider the two elementary
forms of the first figure as the universal types of all correct
ratiocination; the one, when the conclusion to be proved is affirmative,
the other, when it is negative; even though certain arguments may have a
tendency to clothe themselves in the forms of the second, third, and
fourth figures; which, however, cannot possibly happen with the only
class of arguments which are of first-rate scientific importance, those
in which the conclusion is an universal affirmative, such conclusions
being susceptible of proof in the first figure alone.*

Edition: current; Page: [172]
§ 2. [The dictum de omni not the foundation of reasoning, but a mere
identical proposition] On examining, then, these two general formulæ, we
Edition: current; Page: [173] find that in both of them, one premise,
the major, is an universal proposition; and according as this is
affirmative or negative, the conclusion is so too. All Edition: current;
Page: [174] ratiocination, therefore, starts from a general proposition,
principle, or assumption: a proposition in which a predicate is affirmed
or denied of an entire class; that is, in which some attribute, or the
negation of some attribute, is asserted of an indefinite number of
objects distinguished by a common characteristic, and designated in
consequence, by a common name.

The other premise is always affirmative, and asserts that something
(which may be either an individual, a class, or part of a class) belongs
to, or is included in, the class respecting which something was affirmed
or denied in the major premise. It follows that the attribute affirmed
or denied of the entire class may (if athat affirmation or denial was
correcta) be affirmed or denied of the object or objects alleged to be
included in the class: and this is precisely the assertion made in the
conclusion.

Whether or not the foregoing is an adequate account of the constituent
parts of the syllogism, will be presently considered; but as far as it
goes it is a true account. It has accordingly been generalized, and
erected into a logical maxim, on which all ratiocination is said to be
founded, insomuch that to reason, and to apply the maxim, are supposed
to be one and the same thing. The maxim is, That whatever can be
affirmed (or denied) of a class, may be affirmed (or denied) of
everything included in the class. This axiom, supposed to be the basis
of the syllogistic theory, is termed by logicians the dictum de omni et
nullo.

This maxim, however, when considered as a principle of reasoning,
appears suited to a system of metaphysics once indeed generally
received, but which for the last two centuries has been considered as
finally abandoned, though there have not been wanting in our own day
attempts at its revival. So long as what bareb termed Universals were
regarded as a peculiar kind of substances, having an objective existence
distinct from the individual objects classed under them, the dictum de
omni conveyed an important meaning; because it expressed the
intercommunity of nature, which it was necessary on that theory that we
should suppose to exist between those general substances and the
particular substances which were subordinated to them. That everything
predicable of the universal was predicable of the various individuals
contained under it, was then no identical proposition, but a statement
of what was conceived as a fundamental law of the universe. The
assertion that the entire nature and properties of the substantia
secunda formed part of the cnature andc properties of each of the
individual substances called by the same name; that the properties of
Man, for example, were properties of all men; was a proposition of real
significance when man did not mean all men, but something inherent in
men, and vastly superior to them in dignity. Now, Edition: current;
Page: [175] however, when it is known that a class, an universal, a
genus or species, is not an entity per se, but neither more nor less
than the individual substances themselves which are placed in the class,
and that there is nothing real in the matter except those objects, a
common name given to them, and common attributes indicated by the name;
what, I should be glad to know, do we learn by being told, that whatever
can be affirmed of a class, may be affirmed of every object contained in
the class? The class is nothing but the objects contained in it: and the
dictum de omni merely amounts to the identical proposition, that
whatever is true of certain objects, is true of each of those objects.
If all ratiocination were no more than the application of this maxim to
particular cases, the syllogism would indeed be, what it has so often
been declared to be, solemn trifling. The dictum de omni is on a par
with another truth, which in its time was also reckoned of great
importance, “Whatever is, dis.”d To give any real meaning to the dictum
de omni, we must consider it not as an axiom, but as a definition; we
must look upon it as intended to explain, in a circuitous and
paraphrastic manner, the meaning of the word class.

An error which seemed finally refuted and dislodged from ethoughte,
often needs only put on a new suit of phrases, to be welcomed back to
its old quarters, and allowed to repose unquestioned for another cycle
of ages. Modern philosophers have not been sparing in their contempt for
the scholastic dogma that genera and species are a peculiar kind of
substances, which general substances being the only permanent things,
while the individual substances comprehended under them are in a
perpetual flux, knowledge, which necessarily imports stability, can only
have relation to those general substances or universals, and not to the
facts or particulars included under them. Yet, though nominally
rejected, this very doctrine, whether disguised under the Abstract Ideas
of Locke (whose speculations, however, it has less vitiated than those
of perhaps any other writer who has been infected with it), under the
ultra-nominalism of Hobbes and Condillac, or the ontology of the later
fGerman schoolsf, has never ceased to poison philosophy. Once accustomed
to consider scientific investigation as essentially consisting in the
study of universals, men did not drop this habit of thought when they
ceased to regard universals as possessing an independent existence: and
even those who went the length of considering them as mere names, could
not free themselves from the notion that the investigation of Edition:
current; Page: [176] truth consisted entirely or partly in some kind of
conjuration or juggle with those names. When a philosopher adopted fully
the Nominalist view of the signification of general language, retaining
along with it the dictum de omni as the foundation of all reasoning, two
such premises fairly put together were likely, if he was a consistent
thinker, to land him in rather startling conclusions. Accordingly it has
been seriously held, by writers of deserved celebrity, that the process
of arriving at new truths by reasoning consists in the mere substitution
of one set of arbitrary signs for another; a doctrine which they
gsupposeg to derive irresistible confirmation from the example of
algebra. If there were any process in sorcery or necromancy more
preternatural than this, I should be much surprised. The culminating
point of this philosophy is the noted aphorism of Condillac, that a
science is nothing, or scarcely anything, but une langue bien faite;[*]
in other words that the one sufficient rule for discovering the nature
and properties of objects is to name them properly: as if the reverse
were not the truth, that it is impossible to name them properly except
in proportion as we are already acquainted with their nature and
properties. Can it be necessary to say, that none, not even the most
trivial knowledge with respect to Things, ever was or could be
originally got at by any conceivable manipulation of mere namesh, as
suchh; and that what can be learned from names, is only what somebody
who used the names knew before? Philosophical analysis confirms the
indication of common sense, that the function of names is but that of
enabling us to remember and to communicate our thoughts. That they also
strengthen, even to an incalculable extent, the power of thought itself,
is most true: but they do this by no intrinsic and peculiar virtue; they
do it by the power inherent in an artificial memory, an instrument of
which few have adequately considered the immense potency. As an
artificial memory, language truly is, what it has so often been called,
an instrument of thought; but it is one thing to be the instrument, and
another to be the exclusive subject upon which the instrument is
exercised. We think, indeed, to a considerable extent, by means of
names, but what we think of, are the things called by those names; and
there cannot be a greater error than to imagine that thought can be
carried on with nothing in our mind but names, or that we can make the
names think for us.

§ 3. [What is the really fundamental axiom of Ratiocination] Those who
considered the dictum de omni as the foundation of the syllogism, looked
upon arguments in a manner corresponding to the erroneous view which
Hobbes took of propositions. Because there are some propositions which
are Edition: current; Page: [177] merely verbal, Hobbes, in order
apparently that his definition might be rigorously universal, defined a
proposition as if no propositions declared anything except the meaning
of words.[*] If Hobbes was right; if no further account than this could
be given of the import of propositions; no theory could be given but the
commonly received one, of the combination of propositions in a
syllogism. If the minor premise asserted nothing more than that
something belongs to a class, and if athe major premise asserted nothing
of that class except that it is included in another class, the
conclusion would only be that what was included in the lower class is
included in the higher, and the result, therefore, nothing except that
the classification is consistent with itself. But we have seen that it
is no sufficient account of the meaning of a proposition, to say that it
refers something to, or excludes something from, a class. Every
proposition which conveys real information asserts a matter of fact,
dependent on the laws of nature, and not on bclassification. It asserts
that a given object does or does not possess a given attribute; or it
asserts that two attributes, or sets of attributes, do or do not
(constantly or occasionally) coexist. Since such is the purport of all
propositions which convey any real knowledge, and since ratiocination is
a mode of acquiring real knowledge, any theory of ratiocination which
does not recognise this import of propositions, cannot, we may be sure,
be the true one.

Applying this view of propositions to the two premises of a syllogism,
we obtain the following results. The major premise, which, as already
remarked, is always universal, asserts, that all things which have a
certain attribute (or attributes) have or have not along with it, a
certain other attribute (or attributes). The minor premise asserts that
the thing or set of things which are the subject of that premise, have
the first-mentioned attribute; and the conclusion is, that they have (or
that they have not), the second. Thus in our former example,

-   

    All men are mortal,
-   

    Socrates is a man,
-   

    therefore
-   

    Socrates is mortal,

the subject and predicate of the major premise are connotative terms,
denoting objects and connoting attributes. The assertion in the major
premise is, that along with one of the two sets of attributes, we always
find the other: that the attributes connoted by “man” never exist unless
conjoined with the attribute called mortality. The assertion in the
minor premise is that the Edition: current; Page: [178] individual named
Socrates possesses the former attributes; and it is concluded that he
possesses also the attribute mortality. Or if both the premises are
general propositions, as

-   

    All men are mortal,
-   

    All kings are men,
-   

    therefore
-   

    All kings are mortal,

the minor premise asserts that the attributes denoted by kingship only
exist in conjunction with those signified by the word man. The major
asserts as before, that the last-mentioned attributes are never found
without the attribute of mortality. The conclusion is, that wherever the
attributes of kingship are found, that of mortality cisc found also.

If the major premise were negative, as, No men are domnipotentd, it
would assert, not that the attributes connoted by “man” never exist
without, but that they never exist with, those connoted by
“eomnipotente:” from which, together with the minor premise, it is
concluded, that the same incompatibility exists between the fattribute
omnipotencef and those constituting a king. In a similar manner we might
analyse any other example of the syllogism.

If we generalize this process, and look out for the principle or law
involved in every such inference, and presupposed in every syllogism,
the propositions of which are anything more than merely verbal; we find,
not the unmeaning dictum de omni et nullo, but a fundamental principle,
or rather two principles, strikingly resembling the axioms of
mathematics. The first, which is the principle of affirmative
syllogisms, is, that things which coexist with the same thing, coexist
with one anotherg: or (still more precisely) a thing which coexists with
another thing, which other coexists with a third thing, also coexists
with that third thingg. The second is the principle of negative
syllogisms, and is to this effect: that a thing which coexists with
another thing, with which other a third thing does not coexist, is not
coexistent with that third thing. These axioms manifestly relate to
facts, and not to conventions; and one or other of them is the ground of
the legitimacy of every argument in which facts and not conventions are
the matter treated of.*

Edition: current; Page: [179]
§ 4. [The other form of the fundamental axiom] It aremains to translate
this exposition of the syllogism from the one into the other of the two
Edition: current; Page: [180] languages in which we formerly remarked*
that all propositions, and of course therefore all combinations of
propositions, might be expressed. We observed that a proposition might
be considered in two different lights; as a portion of our knowledge of
nature, or as a memorandum for our guidance. Under the former, or
speculative aspect, an affirmative general proposition is an assertion
of a speculative truth, viz. that whatever has a certain attribute has a
certain other attribute. Under the other aspect, it is to be regarded
not as a part of our knowledge, but as an aid for our practical
exigencies, by enabling us, when we see or learn that an object
possesses one of the two attributes, to infer that it possesses the
other; thus employing the first attribute as a mark or evidence of the
second. Thus regarded, every syllogism comes within the following
general formula:

-   

    Attribute A is a mark of attribute B,
-   

    bTheb given object has the mark A,
-   

    therefore
-   

    The given object has the attribute B.

cReferred to this type, the arguments which we have lately cited as
specimens of the syllogism, will express themselves in the following
manner:

-   

    The attributes of man are a mark of the attribute mortality,
-   

    Socrates has the attributes of man,
-   

    therefore
-   

    Socrates has the attribute mortality.

Edition: current; Page: [181]
dAnd again,

-   

    The attributes of man are a mark of the attribute mortality,
-   

    The attributes of a king are a mark of the attributes of man,
-   

    therefore
-   

    The attributes of a king are a mark of the attribute mortality.

eAnd, lastly,

-   

    The attributes of man are a mark of the absence of the
-   

    fattribute omnipotencef,
-   

    The attributes of a king are a mark of the attributes of man,
-   

    therefore
-   

    The attributes of a king are a mark of the absence of the
-   

    gattribute signified by the word omnipotentg
-   

    (or, are evidence of the absence of hthat attributeh).

To correspond with this alteration in the form of the syllogisms, the
axioms on which the syllogistic process is founded must undergo a
corresponding transformation. In this altered phraseology, both those
axioms may be brought under one general expression; namely, that
whatever ihas any mark, hasi that which it is a mark of. Or, when the
minor premise as well as the major is universal, we may state it thus:
Whatever is a mark of any mark, is a mark of that which this last is a
mark of. To trace the identity of these axioms with those previously
laid down, may be jleft to the intelligent reader. We shall find, as we
proceed, the great convenience of the phraseology into which we have
last thrown them, and which is better adapted than any I am acquainted
with, to express with precision and force what is aimed at, and actually
accomplished, in every case of the ascertainment of a truth by
ratiocination.*

Edition: current; Page: [182]

Edition: current; Page: [183]


CHAPTER III: Of the Functions and Logical Value of the Syllogism

§ 1. [Is the syllogism a petitio principii?] We have shown what is the
real nature of the truths with which the Syllogism is conversant, in
contradistinction to the more superficial manner in which their import
is conceived in the common theory; and what are the fundamental axioms
on which its probative force or conclusiveness depends. We have now to
inquire, whether the syllogistic process, that of reasoning from
generals to particulars, is, or is not, a process of inference; a
progress from the known to the unknown: a means of coming to a knowledge
of something which we did not know before.

Logicians have been remarkably unanimous in their mode of answering this
question. It is universally allowed that a syllogism is vicious if there
be anything more in the conclusion than was assumed in the premises. But
this is, in fact, to say, that nothing ever was, or can be, proved by
syllogism, which was not known, or aassumeda to be known, before. Is
ratiocination, then, not a process of inference? And is the syllogism,
to which the word reasoning has so often been represented to be
exclusively appropriate, not really entitled to be called reasoning at
all? This seems an inevitable consequence of the doctrine, admitted by
all writers on the subject, that a syllogism can prove no more than is
involved in the premises. Yet the acknowledgment so explicitly made, has
not prevented one set of writers from continuing to represent the
syllogism as the correct analysis of what the mind actually performs in
discovering and proving the larger half of the truths, whether of
science or of daily life, which we believe; while those who have avoided
this inconsistency, and followed out the general theorem respecting the
logical value of the syllogism to its legitimate corollary, have been
led to impute uselessness and frivolity to the syllogistic theory
itself, on the ground of the petitio principii which they allege to be
inherent in every syllogism. As I believe both these opinions to be
fundamentally erroneous, I must request the attention of the reader to
certain considerations, without which any just appreciation of the true
character of the syllogism, and the functions it performs Edition:
current; Page: [184] in philosophy, appears to me impossible; but which
seem to have been either overlooked, or insufficiently adverted to, both
by the defenders of the syllogistic theory and by its assailants.

§ 2. [Insufficiency of the common theory] It must be granted that in
every syllogism, considered as an argument to prove the conclusion,
there is a petitio principii. When we say,

-   

    All men are mortal,
-   

    Socrates is a man,
-   

    therefore
-   

    Socrates is mortal;

it is unanswerably urged by the adversaries of the syllogistic theory,
that the proposition, Socrates is mortal, is presupposed in the more
general assumption, All men are mortal: that we cannot be assured of the
mortality of all men, unless we aare alreadya certain of the mortality
of every individual man: that if it be still doubtful whether Socrates,
or any other individual bweb choose to name, be mortal or not, the same
degree of uncertainty must hang over the assertion, All men are mortal:
that the general principle, instead of being given as evidence of the
particular case, cannot itself be taken for true without exception,
until every shadow of doubt which could affect any case comprised with
it, is dispelled by evidence aliundè; and then what remains for the
syllogism to prove? That, in short, no reasoning from generals to
particulars can, as such, prove anything: since from a general principle
cwec cannot infer any particulars, but those which the principle itself
assumes as dknownd.

This doctrine eappears to mee irrefragable; and if logicians, though
unable to dispute it, have usually exhibited a strong disposition to
explain it away, this was not because they could discover any flaw in
the argument itself, but because the contrary opinion seemed to rest on
arguments equally indisputable. In the syllogism last referred to, for
example, or in any of those which we previously constructed, is it not
evident that the conclusion may, to the person to whom the syllogism is
presented, be actually and bonâ fide a new truth? Is it not matter of
daily experience that truths previously funthoughtf of, facts which have
not been, and cannot be, directly observed, are arrived at by way of
general reasoning? We believe that the Duke of Wellington is mortal. We
do not know this by direct observation, gso long as he is not yetg
Edition: current; Page: [185] dead. If we were asked how, this being the
case, we know the duke to be mortal, we should probably answer, Because
all men are so. Here, therefore, we arrive at the knowledge of a truth
not (as yet) susceptible of observation, by a reasoning which admits of
being exhibited in the following syllogism:

-   

    All men are mortal,
-   

    The Duke of Wellington is a man,
-   

    therefore
-   

    The Duke of Wellington is mortal.

And since a large portion of our knowledge is thus acquired, logicians
have persisted in representing the syllogism as a process of inference
or proof; though none of them has cleared up the difficulty which arises
from the inconsistency between that assertion, and the principle, that
if there be anything in the conclusion which was not already asserted in
the premises, the argument is vicious. For it is impossible to attach
any serious scientific value to such a mere salvo, as the distinction
drawn between being involved by implication in the premises, and being
directly asserted in them. When Archbishop Whately hsays* that the
object of reasoning iis “merelyi to expand and unfold the assertions
wrapt up, as it were, and implied in those with which we set out, and to
bring a person to perceive and acknowledge the full force of that which
he has admitted,” he does not, I think, meet the real difficulty
requiring to be explained, namely, how it happens that a science, like
geometry, can be all “wrapt up” in a few definitions and axioms. Nor
does this defence of the syllogism differ much from what its assailants
urge against it as an accusation, when they charge it with being of no
use except to those who seek to press the consequences of an admission
into which a jpersonj has been entrapped without having considered and
understood its full force. When you admitted the major premise, you
asserted the conclusion; but, says Archbishop Whately, you asserted it
by implication merely: this, however, can here only mean that you
asserted it unconsciously; that you did not know you were asserting it;
but, if so, the difficulty revives in this shape—Ought you not to have
known? Were you warranted in asserting the general proposition without
having satisfied yourself of the truth of everything which it fairly
includes? And if not, kis not the syllogistic art primâ facie what its
assailants affirm it to be,k a contrivance for catching you in a trap,
and holding you fast in it?†

Edition: current; Page: [186]
§ 3. [All inference is from particulars to particulars] From this
difficulty there appears to be but one issue. The proposition that the
Duke of Wellington is mortal, is evidently an inference; it is got at as
a conclusion from something else; but do we, in reality, conclude it
from the proposition, All men are mortal? I answer, no.

The error committed is, I conceive, that of overlooking the distinction
between atwo parts of the process of philosophizing, the inferring part,
and the registering part; and ascribing to the latter the functions of
the former. The mistake is that of referring a bperson to his own notes
for the origin of his knowledge. If a personb is asked a question, and
is at the moment unable to answer it, he may refresh his memory by
turning to a memorandum which he carries about with him. But if he were
asked, how the fact came to his knowledge, he would scarcely answer,
because it was set down in his notebook: unless the book was written,
like the Koran, with a quill from the wing of the angel Gabriel.

Assuming that the proposition, The Duke of Wellington is mortal, is
immediately an inference from the proposition, All men are mortal;
whence do we derive our knowledge of that general truth? cOf course
fromc observation. Now, all which man can observe are individual cases.
From these all general truths must be drawn, and into these they may be
again resolved; for a general truth is but an aggregate of particular
truths; a comprehensive expression, by which an indefinite number of
individual facts are affirmed or denied at once. But a general
proposition is not merely a compendious form for recording and
preserving in the memory a number of particular facts, all of which have
been observed. Generalization is not a process of mere naming, it is
also a process of inference. From instances which we have observed, we
feel warranted in concluding, that what we found true in those
instances, holds in all similar ones, past, present, and future, however
numerous they may be. We then, by that valuable contrivance of language
which enables us Edition: current; Page: [187] to speak of many as if
they were one, record all that we have observed, together with all that
we infer from our observations, in one concise expression; and have thus
only one proposition, instead of an endless number, to remember or to
communicate. The results of many observations and inferences, and
instructions for making innumerable inferences in unforeseen cases, are
compressed into one short sentence.

When, therefore, we conclude from the death of John and Thomas, and
every other person we ever heard of in whose case the experiment had
been fairly tried, that the Duke of Wellington is mortal like the rest;
we may, indeed, pass through the generalization, All men are mortal, as
an intermediate stage; but it is not in the latter half of the process,
the descent from all men to the Duke of Wellington, that the inference
resides. The inference is finished when we have asserted that all men
are mortal. What remains to be performed afterwards is merely
deciphering our own notes.

Archbishop Whately has contended that syllogizing, or reasoning from
generals to particulars, is not, agreeably to the vulgar idea, a
peculiar mode of reasoning, but the philosophical analysis of the mode
in which all men reason, and must do so if they reason at all.[*] With
the deference due to so high an authority, I cannot help thinking that
the vulgar notion is, in this case, the more correct. If, from our
experience of John, Thomas, &c., who once were living, but are now dead,
we are entitled to conclude that all human beings are mortal, we might
surely without any logical inconsequence have concluded at once from
those instances, that the Duke of Wellington is mortal. The mortality of
John, Thomas, and dothersd is, after all, the whole evidence we have for
the mortality of the Duke of Wellington. Not one iota is added to the
proof by interpolating a general proposition. Since the individual cases
are all the evidence we can possess, evidence which no logical form into
which we choose to throw it can make greater than it is; and since that
evidence is either sufficient in itself, or, if insufficient for ethee
one purpose, cannot be sufficient for the other; I am unable to see why
we should be forbidden to take the shortest cut from these sufficient
premises to the conclusion, and constrained to travel the “high priori
road,”[†] by the arbitrary fiat of logicians. I cannot perceive why it
should be impossible to journey from one place to another unless we
“march up a hill, and then march down again.” It may be the safest road,
and there may be a resting-place at the top of the hill, affording a
commanding view of the surrounding country; but for the mere purpose of
arriving at our journey’s end, our taking that road is perfectly
optional; it is a question of time, trouble, and danger.

Edition: current; Page: [188]
Not only may we reason from particulars to particulars without passing
through generals, but we perpetually do so reason. All our earliest
inferences are of this nature. From the first dawn of intelligence we
draw inferences, but years elapse before we learn the use of general
language. The child, who, having burnt his fingers, avoids to thrust
them again into the fire, has reasoned or inferred, though he has never
thought of the general maxim, Fire burns. He knows from memory that he
has been burnt, and on this evidence believes, when he sees a candle,
that if he puts his finger into the flame of it, he will be burnt again.
He believes this in every case which happens to arise; but without
looking, in each instance, beyond the present case. He is not
generalizing; he is inferring a particular from particulars. In the same
way, also, brutes reason. There is fno ground for attributing to any of
the lower animals the use of signs, of such a nature as to render
general propositions possiblef. But those animals profit by experience,
and avoid what they have found to cause them pain, in the same manner,
though not always with the same skill, as a human creature. Not only the
burnt child, but the burnt dog, dreads the fire.

I believe that, in point of fact, when drawing inferences from our
personal experience, and not from maxims handed down to us by books or
tradition, we much oftener conclude from particulars to particulars
directly, than through the intermediate agency of any general
proposition. We are constantly reasoning from ourselves to other people,
or from one person to another, without giving ourselves the trouble to
erect our observations into general maxims of human or external nature.
When we conclude that some person will, on some given occasion, feel or
act so and so, we sometimes judge from an enlarged consideration of the
manner in which ghuman beings in general, or personsg of some particular
character, are accustomed to feel and act; but much oftener from hmerely
recollectingh the feelings and conduct of the same ipersoni in some
previous instance, or from considering how we should feel or act
ourselves. It is not only the village matron, who, when called to a
consultation upon the case of a neighbour’s child, pronounces on the
evil and its remedy simply on the recollection and authority of what she
accounts the similar case of her Lucy. We all, where we have no definite
maxims to steer by, guide ourselves in the same way: and if we have an
extensive experience, and retain its impressions strongly, we may
acquire in this manner a very considerable power of accurate judgment,
which we may be utterly incapable of justifying or of communicating to
others. Among the higher order of practical intellects there have been
many of whom it was Edition: current; Page: [189] remarked how admirably
they suited their means to their ends, without being able to give any
sufficient reasons for what they did; and applied, or seemed to apply,
recondite principles which they were wholly unable to state. This is a
natural consequence of having a mind stored with appropriate
particulars, and having been long accustomed to reason at once from
these to fresh particulars, without practising the habit of stating to
oneself or jtoj others the corresponding general propositions. An old
warrior, on a rapid glance at the outlines of the ground, is able at
once to give the necessary orders for a skilful arrangement of his
troops; though if he has received little theoretical instruction, and
has seldom been called upon to answer to other people for his conduct,
he may never have had in his mind a single general theorem respecting
the relation between ground and array. But his experience of
encampments, kink circumstances more or less similar, has left a number
of vivid, unexpressed, ungeneralized analogies in his mind, the most
appropriate of which, instantly suggesting itself, determines him to a
judicious arrangement.

The skill of an uneducated person in the use of weapons, or of tools, is
of a precisely similar nature. The savage who executes unerringly the
exact throw which brings down his game, or his enemy, in the manner most
suited to his purpose, under the operation of all the conditions
necessarily involved, the weight and form of the weapon, the direction
and distance of the object, the action of the wind, &c., owes this power
to a long series of previous experiments, the results of which he
certainly never framed into any verbal theorems or rules. lThe same
thing may generally be said of any otherl extraordinary manual
dexterity. Not long ago a Scotch manufacturer procured from England, at
a high rate of wages, a working dyer, famous for producing very fine
colours, with the view of teaching to his other workmen the same skill.
The workman came; but his mode of proportioning the ingredients, in
which lay the secret of the effects he produced, was by taking them up
in handfuls, while the common method was to weigh them. The manufacturer
sought to make him turn his handling system into an equivalent weighing
system, that the general principle of his peculiar mode of proceeding
might be ascertained. This, however, the man found himself quite unable
to do, and therefore could impart his skill to nobody. He had, from the
individual cases of his own experience, established a connexion in his
mind between fine effects of colour, and tactual perceptions in handling
his dyeing materials; and from these perceptions he could, in any
particular mcasem, infer the means to be employed, and the effects which
would be produced, but could not put others in possession of the grounds
on which he proceeded, from having never generalized them in his own
mind, or expressed them in language.

Edition: current; Page: [190]
Almost every one knows Lord Mansfield’s advice to a man of practical
good sense, who, being appointed governor of a colony, had to preside in
its court of justice, without previous judicial practice or legal
education.[*] The advice was to give his decision boldly, for it would
probably be right; but never to venture on assigning reasons, for they
would almost infallibly be wrong. In cases like this, which are of no
uncommon occurrence, it would be absurd to suppose that the bad reason
was the source of the good decision. Lord Mansfield knew that if any
reason were assigned it would be necessarily an afterthought, the judge
being in fact guided by impressions from past experience, without the
circuitous process of framing general principles from them, and that if
he attempted to frame any such he would assuredly fail. Lord Mansfield,
however, would not have doubted that a man of equal experience who had
also a mind stored with general propositions derived by legitimate
induction from that experience, would have been greatly preferable as a
judge, to one, however sagacious, who could not be trusted with the
explanation and justification of his own judgments. The cases of nmen of
talentn performing wonderful things they know not how, are examples of
the orudesto and most spontaneous form of the operations of superior
minds. It is a defect in them, and often a source of errors, not to have
generalized as they went on; but generalizationp, thoughp a help, the
most important indeed of all helps, qisq not an essential.

Even rthe scientifically instructedr, who possess, in the form of
general propositions, a systematic record of the results of the
experience of mankind, need not always revert to those general
propositions in order to apply that experience to a new case. It is
justly remarked by Dugald Stewart,[†] that though sthes reasonings in
mathematics depend entirely on the axioms, it is by no means necessary
to our seeing the conclusiveness of the proof, that the axioms should be
expressly adverted to. When it is inferred that AB is equal to CD
because each of them is equal to EF, the most uncultivated
understanding, as soon as the propositions were understood, would assent
to the inference, without having ever heard of the general truth that
“things which are equal to the same thing are equal to one another.”
This remark of Stewart, consistently followed out, goes to the root, as
I conceive, of the philosophy of ratiocination; and it is to be
regretted that he himself stopt short at a much more limited application
of it. He saw that the general propositions on which a reasoning is said
to depend, may, in certain cases, be Edition: current; Page: [191]
altogether omitted, without impairing its probative force. But he
imagined this to be a peculiarity belonging to axioms; and argued from
it, that axioms are not the foundations or first principles of geometry,
from which all the other truths of the science are synthetically deduced
(as the laws of motion and of the composition of forces in tdynamicst,
the equal mobility of fluids in hydrostatics, the laws of reflection and
refraction in optics, are the first principles of those sciences); but
are merely necessary assumptions, self-evident indeed, and the denial of
which would annihilate all demonstration, but from which, as premises,
nothing can be demonstrated. uIn the present, asu in many other
instances, this thoughtful and elegant writer has perceived an important
truth, but only by halves. Finding, in the case of geometrical axioms,
that general names have not any talismanic virtue for conjuring new
truths out of the vwell where they lie hidv, and not seeing that this is
equally true in every other case of generalization, he contended that
axioms are in their nature barren of consequences, and that the really
fruitful truths, the real first principles of geometry, are the
definitions; that the definition, for example, of the circle is to the
properties of the circle, what the laws of equilibrium and of the
pressure of the atmosphere are to the rise of the mercury in the
Torricellian tube. Yet all that he had asserted respecting the function
to which the axioms are confined in the demonstrations of geometry,
holds equally true of the definitions. Every demonstration in Euclid
might be carried on without them. This is apparent from the ordinary
process of proving a proposition of geometry by means of a diagram. What
assumption, in fact, do we set out from, to demonstrate by a diagram any
of the properties of the circle? Not that in all circles the radii are
equal, but only that they are so in the circle ABC. As our warrant for
assuming this, we appeal, it is true, to the definition of a circle in
general; but it is only necessary that wthe assumption be grantedw in
the case of the particular circle supposed. From this, which is not a
general but a singular proposition, combined with other propositions of
a similar kind, some of which when generalized are called definitions,
and others axioms, we prove that a certain conclusion is true, not of
all circles, but of the particular circle ABC; or at least would be so,
if the facts precisely accorded with our assumptions. The enunciation,
as it is called, that is, the general theorem which stands at the head
of the demonstration, is not the proposition actually demonstrated. One
instance only is demonstrated: but the process by which this is done, is
a process which, when we consider its nature, we perceive might be
exactly copied in an indefinite number of other instances; in every
instance which conforms to certain conditions. The contrivance of
general language furnishing us with terms Edition: current; Page: [192]
which connote these conditions, we are able to assert this indefinite
multitude of truths in a single expression, and this expression is the
general theorem. By dropping the use of diagrams, and substituting, in
the demonstrations, general phrases for the letters of the alphabet, we
might prove the general theorem directly, that is, we might demonstrate
all the cases at once; and to do this we must, of course, employ as our
premises, the axioms and definitions in their general form. But this
only means, that if we can prove an individual conclusion by assuming an
individual fact, then in whatever case we are warranted in making an
exactly similar assumption, we may draw an exactly similar conclusion.
The definition is a sort of notice to ourselves and others, what
assumptions we think ourselves entitled to make. And so in all cases,
the general propositions, whether called definitions, axioms, or laws of
nature, which we lay down at the beginning of our reasonings, are merely
abridged statements, in a kind of short-hand, of the particular facts,
which, as occasion arises, we either think we may proceed on as proved,
or intend to assume. In any one demonstration it is enough if we assume
for a particular case suitably selected, what by the statement of the
definition or principle we announce that we intend to assume in all
cases which may arise. The definition of the circle, therefore, is to
one of Euclid’s demonstrations, exactly what, according to Stewart, the
axioms are; that is, the demonstration does not depend on it, but yet if
we deny it the demonstration fails. The proof does not rest on the
general assumption, but on a similar assumption confined to the
particular case: that case, however, being chosen as a specimen or
paradigm of the whole class of cases included in the theorem, there can
be no ground for making the assumption in that case which does not exist
in every other; and xto deny the assumption as a general truth, is tox
deny the right yof makingy it in the particular instance.

There are, undoubtedly, the most ample reasons for stating both the
principles and the theorems in their general form, and these will be
explained presently, so far as explanation is requisite. But, that
zunpractised learners, even in making use of one theorem to demonstrate
another, reasonz rather from particular to particular than from the
general proposition, is manifest from the difficulty athey finda in
applying a theorem to a case in which the configuration of the diagram
is extremely unlike that of the diagram by which the original theorem
was demonstrated. A difficulty which, except in cases of unusual mental
power, long practice can alone remove, and removes chiefly by rendering
us familiar with all the configurations consistent with the general
conditions of the theorem.

Edition: current; Page: [193]
§ 4. [General propositions are a record of such inferences from
particulars to particulars, and the rules of the syllogism are rules for
the interpretation of the record] From the considerations now adduced,
the following conclusions seem to be established. All inference is from
particulars to particulars: General propositions are merely registers of
such inferences already made, and short formulæ for making more: The
major premise of a syllogism, consequently, is a formula of this
description: and the conclusion is not an inference drawn from the
formula, but an inference drawn according to the formula: the real
logical antecedent, or apremisea, being the particular facts from which
the general proposition was collected by induction. Those facts, and the
individual instances which supplied them, may have been forgotten: but a
record remains, not indeed descriptive of the facts themselves, but
showing how those cases may be distinguished, respecting which, the
facts, when known, were considered to warrant a given inference.
According to the indications of this record we draw our conclusion:
which is, to all intents and purposes, a conclusion from the forgotten
facts. For this it is essential that we should read the record
correctly: and the rules of the syllogism are a set of precautions to
ensure our doing so.

This view of the functions of the syllogism is confirmed by the
consideration of precisely those cases which might be expected to be
least favourable to it, namely, those in which ratiocination is
independent of any previous induction. We have already observed that the
syllogism, in the ordinary course of our reasoning, is only the latter
half of the process of travelling from premises to a conclusion. There
are, however, some peculiar cases in which it is the whole process.
Particulars alone are capable of being subjected to observation; and all
knowledge which is derived from observation, begins, therefore, of
necessity, in particulars; but our knowledge may, in cases of bcertain
descriptionsb, be conceived as coming to us from other sources than
observation. It may present itself as coming from ctestimony, which, on
the occasion and for the purpose in hand, is accepted as of an
authoritative character: and the information thusc communicated, may be
conceived to comprise not only particular facts but general
propositions, das when a scientific doctrine is accepted without
examination on the authority of writerse, or a theological doctrine on
that of Scriptureed. Or the generalization may not be, in the ordinary
sense, an assertion at all, but a command; a law, not in the
philosophical, but in the moral and political sense of the term: an
expression of the desire of a superior, that we, or any number of other
persons, Edition: current; Page: [194] shall conform our conduct to
certain general instructions. So far as this asserts a fact, namely, a
volition of the legislator, that fact is an individual fact, and the
proposition, therefore, fisf not a general proposition. But the
description therein contained of the conduct which it is the will of the
legislator that his subjects should observe, is general. The proposition
asserts, not that all men are anything, but that all men shall do
something.g

In both these cases the generalities are hthe original datah, and the
particulars are elicited from them by a process which correctly resolves
itself into a series of syllogisms. The real nature, however, of the
supposed deductive process, is evident enough. iThe only point to be
determined is, whether the authority which declared the general
proposition, intended to include this case in it; and whether the
legislator intended his command to apply to the present case among
others, or not. jThis is ascertained by examining whether the case
possesses the marks by which, as those authorities have signified, the
cases which they meant to certify or to influence may be known. The
object of the inquiry is to make out the witness’s or the legislator’s
intention, through the indication given by their words.j This is a
question, as the Germans express it, of hermeneuticsk. The operation is
not a process of inference, but a process of interpretation.

In this last phrase we have obtained an expression which appears to me
to characterize, more aptly than any other, the functions of the
syllogism in all cases. When the premises are given by authority, the
function of Reasoning is to ascertain the testimony of a witness, or the
will of a legislator, by interpreting the signs in which the one has
intimated his assertion and the other his command. In like manner, when
the premises are derived from observation, the function of Reasoning is
to ascertain what we (or our predecessors) formerly thought might be
inferred from the observed facts, and to do this by interpreting a
memorandum of ours, or of theirs. The memorandum reminds us, that from
evidence, more or less carefully weighed, it formerly appeared that a
certain attribute might be inferred wherever we perceive a certain mark.
The proposition, All men are mortal (for instance) shows that we have
had experience from which we thought it followed that the attributes
Edition: current; Page: [195] connoted by the term man, are a mark of
mortality. But when we conclude that the Duke of Wellington is mortal,
we do not infer this from the memorandum, but from the former
experience. All that we infer from the memorandum is our own previous
belief, (or that of those who transmitted to us the proposition),
concerning the inferences which that former experience would warrant.

This view of the nature of the syllogism renders consistent and
intelligible what otherwise remains obscure and confused in the theory
of Archbishop Whately and other enlightened defenders of the syllogistic
doctrine, respecting the limits to which its functions are confined.
They laffirm in as explicit terms as can be used, that the sole office
of general reasoning is to prevent inconsistency in our opinions; to
prevent us from assenting to anything, the truth of which would
contradict something to which we had previously on good grounds given
our assent. And they tell us, that the sole ground which a syllogism
affords for assenting to the conclusion, is that the supposition of its
being false, combined with the supposition that the premises are true,
would lead to a contradiction in terms. Now this would be but a lame
account of the real grounds which we have for believing the facts which
we learn from reasoning, in contradistinction to observation. The true
reason why we believe that the Duke of Wellington will die, is that his
fathers, and our fathers, and all other persons who were mcotemporarym
with them, have died. Those facts are the real premises of the
reasoning. But we are not led to infer the conclusion from those
premises, by the necessity of avoiding any verbal inconsistency. There
is no contradiction in supposing that all those persons have died, and
that the Duke of Wellington may, notwithstanding, live for ever. But
there would be a contradiction if we first, on the ground of those same
premises, made a general assertion including and covering the case of
the Duke of Wellington, and then refused to stand to it in the
individual case. There is an inconsistency to be avoided between the
memorandum we make of the inferences which may be justly drawn in future
cases, and the inferences we actually draw in those cases when they
arise. With this view we interpret our own formula, precisely as a judge
interprets a law: in order that we may avoid drawing any inferences not
conformable to our former intention, as a judge avoids giving any
decision not conformable to the legislator’s intention. The rules for
this interpretation are the rules of the syllogism: and its sole purpose
is to maintain consistency between the conclusions we draw in every
particular case, and the previous general directions for drawing them;
whether those general directions were framed by ourselves as the result
of induction, or were received by us from an authority competent to give
them.

Edition: current; Page: [196]
§ 5. [The syllogism not the type of reasoning, but a test of it] In the
above observations it has, I think, been ashown, that, though there is
always a process of reasoning or inference where a syllogism is used,
the syllogism is not a correct analysis of that process of reasoning or
inference; which is, on the contrary, (when not a mere inference from
testimony) an inference from particulars to particulars; authorized by a
previous inference from particulars to generals, and substantially the
same with it; of the nature, therefore, of Induction. But while these
conclusions appear to me undeniable, I must yet enter a protest, as
strong as that of Archbishop Whately himself, against the doctrine that
the syllogistic art is useless for the purposes of reasoning. The
reasoning lies in the act of generalization, not in interpreting the
record of that act; but the syllogistic form is an indispensable
collateral security for the correctness of the generalization itself.

It has already been seen, that if we have a collection of particulars
sufficient for grounding an induction, we need not frame a general
proposition; we may reason at once from those particulars to other
particulars. But it is to be remarked withal, that whenever, from a set
of particular cases, we can legitimately draw any inference, we may
legitimately make our inference a general one. If, from observation and
experiment, we can conclude to one new case, so may we to an indefinite
number. If that which has held true in our past experience will
therefore hold in time to come, it will hold not merely in some
individual case, but in all cases of bsomeb given description. Every
induction, therefore, which suffices to prove one fact, proves an
indefinite multitude of facts: the experience which justifies a single
prediction must be such as will suffice to bear out a general theorem.
This theorem it is extremely important to ascertain and declare, in its
broadest form of generality; and thus to place before our minds, in its
full extent, the whole of what our evidence must prove if it proves
anything.

This throwing of the whole body of possible inferences from a given set
of particulars, into one general expression, operates as a security for
their being just inferences, in more ways than one. First, the general
principle presents a larger object to the imagination than any of the
singular propositions which it contains. A process of thought which
leads to a comprehensive generality, is felt as of greater importance
than one which terminates in an insulated fact; and the mind is, even
unconsciously, led to bestow greater attention upon the process, and to
weigh more carefully the sufficiency of the experience appealed to, for
supporting the inference grounded upon it. There is another, and a more
important, advantage. In reasoning from a course of individual
observations to some new and unobserved case, which we are but
imperfectly acquainted with (or we should not be inquiring into it), and
in Edition: current; Page: [197] which, since we are inquiring into it,
we probably feel a peculiar interest; there is very little to prevent us
from giving way to negligence, or to any bias which may affect our
wishes or our imagination, and, under that influence, accepting
insufficient evidence as sufficient. But if, instead of concluding
straight to the particular case, we place before ourselves an entire
class of facts—the whole contents of a general proposition, every tittle
of which is legitimately inferrible from our premises, if that one
particular conclusion is so; there is then a considerable likelihood
that if the premises are insufficient, and the general inference,
therefore, groundless, it will comprise within it some fact or facts the
reverse of which we already know to be true; and we shall thus discover
the error in our generalization by ca reductio ad impossibile.

Thus if, during the reign of Marcus Aurelius, a subject of the Roman
empire, under the bias naturally given to the imagination and
expectations by the lives and characters of the Antonines, had been
disposed to dexpectd that Commodus would be a just ruler; supposing him
to stop there, he might only have been undeceived by sad experience. But
if he reflected that this eexpectatione could not be justifiable unless
from the same evidence he was fwarranted in concluding some general
proposition, as, for instance, that all Roman emperors are just rulers;
he would immediately have thought of Nero, Domitian, and other
instances, which, showing the falsity of the general conclusion, and
therefore the insufficiency of the premises, would have warned him that
those premises could not prove in the instance of Commodus, what they
were inadequate to prove in any collection of cases in which his was
included.

The advantage, in judging whether any controverted inference is
legitimate, of referring to a parallel case, is universally
acknowledged. But by ascending to the general proposition, we bring
under our view not one parallel case only, but all possible parallel
cases at once; all cases to which the same set of evidentiary
considerations are applicable.

When, therefore, we argue from a number of known cases to another case
supposed to be analogous, it is always possible, and generally
advantageous, to divert our argument into the circuitous channel of an
induction from those known cases to a general proposition, and a
subsequent application of that general proposition to the unknown case.
This second part of the operation, which, as before observed, is
essentially a process of interpretation, will be resolvable into a
syllogism or a series of syllogisms, the majors of which will be general
propositions embracing whole classes of cases; every Edition: current;
Page: [198] one of which propositions must be true in all its extent, if
gtheg argument is maintainable. If, therefore, any fact fairly coming
within the range of one of these general propositions, and consequently
asserted by it, is known or suspected to be other than the proposition
asserts it to be, this mode of stating the argument causes us to know or
to suspect that the original observations, which are the real grounds of
our conclusion, are not sufficient to support it. And in proportion to
the greater chance of our detecting the inconclusiveness of our
evidence, will be the increased reliance we are entitled to place in it
if no such evidence of defect shall appear.

The value, therefore, of the syllogistic form, and of the rules for
using it correctly, does not consist in their being the form and the
rules according to which our reasonings are necessarily, or even
usually, made; but in their furnishing us with a mode in which those
reasonings may always be represented, and which is admirably calculated,
if they are inconclusive, to bring their inconclusiveness to light. An
induction from particulars to generals, followed by a syllogistic
process from those generals to other particulars, is a form in which we
may always state our hreasoningsh if we please. It is not a form in
which we must reason, but it is a form in which we may reason, and into
which it is indispensable to throw our reasoning, when there is any
doubt of its validity: though when the case is familiar and little
complicated, and there is no suspicion of error, we may, and do, reason
at once from the known particular cases to unknown ones.*

These are the uses of isyllogism, as a mode of verifying any given
argument. Its ulterior uses, as respects the general course of our
intellectual operations, hardly require illustration, being in fact the
acknowledged uses of general language. They amount substantially to
this, that the inductions may be made once for all: a single careful
interrogation of experience may suffice, and the result may be
registered in the form of a general proposition, which is committed to
memory or to writing, and from which afterwards we have only to
syllogize. The particulars of our experiments may then be dismissed from
the memory, in which it would be impossible to retain so great a
multitude of details; while the knowledge which those details afforded
for Edition: current; Page: [199] future use, and which would otherwise
be lost as soon as the observations were forgotten, or as their record
became too bulky for reference, is retained in a commodious and
immediately available shape by means of general language.

Against this advantage is to be set the countervailing inconvenience,
that inferences originally made on insufficient evidence, become
consecrated, and, as it were, hardened into general maxims; and the mind
cleaves to them from habit, after it has outgrown any liability to be
misled by similar fallacious appearances if they were now for the first
time presented; but having forgotten the particulars, it does not think
of revising its own former decision. An inevitable drawback, which,
however considerable in itself, forms evidently but a jsmall set-off
againstj the immense kbenefitsk of general language.

The use of the syllogism is in truth no other than the use of general
propositions in reasoning. We can reason without them; in simple and
obvious cases we habitually do so; minds of great sagacity can do it in
cases not simple and obvious, provided their experience supplies them
with instances essentially similar to every combination of circumstances
likely to arise. But other lminds, and the same minds where they have
notl the same pre-eminent advantages of personal experience, are quite
helpless without the aid of general propositions, wherever the case
presents the smallest complication; and if we made no general
propositions, few mpersonsm would get much beyond those simple
inferences which are drawn by the more intelligent of the brutes. Though
not necessary to reasoning, ngeneral propositionsn are necessary to any
considerable progress in reasoning. It is, therefore, natural and
indispensable to separate the process of investigation into two parts;
and obtain general formulæ for determining what inferences may be drawn,
before the occasion arises for drawing the inferences. The work of
drawing them is then that of applying the formulæ; and the rules of
osyllogism are a system of securities for the correctness of the
application.

§ 6. [The true type of reasoning, what] To complete the series of
considerations connected with the philosophical character of the
syllogism, it is requisite to consider, since the syllogism is not the
universal type of the reasoning process, what is the real type. This
resolves itself into the question, what is the nature of the minor
premise, and in what manner it contributes to establish the conclusion:
for as to the major, we now fully understand, Edition: current; Page:
[200] that the place which it nominally occupies in our reasonings,
properly belongs to the individual facts or observations of which it
expresses the general result; the major itself being no real part of the
argument, but an intermediate halting-place for the mind, interposed by
an artifice of language between the real premises and the conclusion, by
way of a security, which it is in a most material degree, for the
correctness of the process. The minor, however, being an indispensable
part of the syllogistic expression of an argument, without doubt either
is, or corresponds to, an equally indispensable part of the argument
itself, and we have only to inquire what part.

It is perhaps worth while to notice here a speculation of aa philosopher
to whom mental science is mucha indebted, but who, though a very
penetrating, was a very hasty thinker, and whose want of due
circumspection rendered him fully as remarkable for what he did not see,
as for what he saw. I allude to Dr. Thomas Brown, whose theory of
ratiocination is peculiar.[*] He saw the petitio principii which is
inherent in every syllogism, if we consider the major to be itself the
evidence by which the conclusion is proved, instead of being, what in
fact it is, an assertion of the existence of evidence sufficient to
prove any conclusion of a given description. Seeing this, Dr. Brown not
only failed to see the immense advantage, in point of security for
correctness, which is gained by interposing this step between the real
evidence and the conclusion; but he thought it incumbent on him to
strike out the major altogether from the reasoning process, without
substituting anything else, and maintained that our reasonings consist
only of the minor premise and the conclusion, Socrates is a man,
therefore Socrates is mortal: thus actually suppressing, as an
unnecessary step in the argument, the appeal to former experience. The
absurdity of this was disguised from him by the opinion he adopted, that
reasoning is merely analysing our own general notions, or abstract
ideas; and that the proposition, Socrates is mortal, is evolved from the
proposition, Socrates is a man, simply by recognising the notion of
mortality as already contained in the notion we form of a man.

After the explanations so fully entered into on the subject of
propositions, much further discussion cannot be necessary to make the
radical error of this view of ratiocination apparent. If the word man
connoted mortality; if the meaning of “mortal” were involved in the
meaning of “man;” we might, undoubtedly, evolve the conclusion from the
minor alone, because the minor would have balreadyb asserted it. But if,
as is in fact the case, the word man does not connote mortality, how
does it appear that in the mind of every person who admits Socrates to
be a man, the idea of man must include the idea of mortality? Dr. Brown
could not help seeing this difficulty, and in Edition: current; Page:
[201] order to avoid it, was led, contrary to his intention, to
re-establish, under another name, that step in the argument which
corresponds to the major, by affirming the necessity of previously
perceiving the relation between the idea of man and the idea of mortal.
If the reasoner has not previously perceived this relation, he will not,
says Dr. Brown, infer because Socrates is a man, that Socrates is
mortal. But even this admission, though amounting to a surrender of the
doctrine that an argument consists of the minor and the conclusion
alone, will not save the remainder of Dr. Brown’s theory. The failure of
assent to the argument does not take place merely because the reasoner,
for want of due analysis, does not perceive that his idea of man
includes the idea of mortality; it takes place, much more commonly,
because in his mind that relation between the two ideas has never
existed. And in truth it never does exist, except as the result of
experience. Consenting, for the sake of the argument, to discuss the
question on a supposition of which we have recognised the radical
incorrectness, namely, that the meaning of a proposition relates to the
ideas of the things spoken of, and not to the things themselves; cI must
yet observe, that the idea of man, as an universal idea, the common
property of all rational creatures, cannot involve anything but what is
strictly implied in the name. If any one includes in his own private
idea of man, as no doubt is dalways the case, some other attributes,
such for instance as mortality, he does so only as the consequence of
experience, after having satisfied himself that all men possess that
attribute: so that whatever the idea contains, in any person’s mind,
beyond what is included in the conventional signification of the word,
has been added to it as the result of assent to a proposition; while Dr.
Brown’s theory requires us to suppose, on the contrary, that assent to
the proposition is produced by evolving, through an analytic process,
this very element out of the idea. This theory, therefore, may be
considered as sufficiently refuted; and the minor premise must be
regarded as totally insufficient to prove the conclusion, except with
the assistance of the major, or of that which the major represents,
namely, the various singular propositions expressive of the series of
observations, of which the generalization called the major premise is
the result.

In the argument, then, which proves that Socrates is mortal, one
indispensable part of the premises will be as follows: “My father, and
my father’s father, A, B, C, and an indefinite number of other persons,
were mortal;” which is only an expression in different words of the
observed fact that they have died. This is the major premise divested of
the petitio principii, and cut down to as much as is really known by
direct evidence.

In order to connect this proposition with the conclusion Socrates is
mortal, the additional link necessary is such a proposition as the
following: “Socrates Edition: current; Page: [202] resembles my father,
and my father’s father, and the other individuals specified.” This
proposition we assert when we say that Socrates is a man. By saying so
we likewise assert in what respect he resembles them, namely, in the
attributes connoted by the word man. And ewe conclude that he further
resembles them in the attribute mortality.

§ 7. [Relation between Induction and Deduction] We have thus obtained
what we were seeking, an universal type of the reasoning process. We
find it resolvable in all cases into the following elements: Certain
individuals have a given attribute; an individual or individuals
resemble the former in certain other attributes; therefore they resemble
them also in the given attribute. This type of ratiocination does not
claim, like the syllogism, to be conclusive from the mere form of the
expression; nor can it possibly be so. That one proposition does or does
not assert the very fact which was already asserted in another, may
appear from the form of the expression, that is, from a comparison of
the language; but when the two propositions assert facts which are bonâ
fide different, whether the one fact proves the other or not can never
appear from the language, but must depend on other considerations.
Whether, from the attributes in which Socrates resembles those amena who
have heretofore died, it is allowable to infer that he resembles them
also in being mortal, is a question of Induction; and is to be decided
by the principles or canons which we shall hereafter recognise as tests
of the correct performance of that great mental operation.

Meanwhile, however, it is certain, as before remarked, that if this
inference can be drawn as to Socrates, it can be drawn as to all others
who resemble the observed individuals in the same attributes in which he
resembles them; that is (to express the thing concisely) of all
bmankindb. If, therefore, the argument be cadmissiblec in the case of
Socrates, we are at liberty, once for all, to treat the possession of
the attributes of man as a mark, or satisfactory evidence, of the
attribute of mortality. This we do by laying down the universal
proposition, All men are mortal, and interpreting this, as occasion
arises, in its application to Socrates and others. By this means we
establish a very convenient division of the entire logical operation
into two steps; first, that of ascertaining what attributes are marks of
mortality; and, secondly, whether any given individuals possess those
marks. And it will generally be advisable, in our speculations on the
reasoning process, to consider this double operation as in fact taking
place, and all reasoning as dcarried on in the form into which it must
necessarily be thrown to enable us to apply to it any test of its
correct performance.

Edition: current; Page: [203]
Although, therefore, all processes of thought in which the ultimate
premises are particulars, whether we conclude from particulars to a
general formula, or from particulars to other particulars according to
that formula, are equally Induction; we shall yet, conformably to usage,
consider the name Induction as more peculiarly belonging to the process
of establishing the general proposition, and the remaining operation,
which is substantially that of interpreting the general proposition, we
shall call by its usual name, Deduction. And we shall consider every
process by which anything is inferred respecting an unobserved case, as
consisting of an Induction followed by a Deduction; because, although
the process needs not necessarily be carried on in this form, it is
always susceptible of the form, and must be thrown into it when
assurance of scientific accuracy is needed and desired.e

a§ 8. [Objections answered] The theory of the syllogism laid down in the
preceding pages, has obtained, among other important adhesions, three of
peculiar value; those of Sir John Herschel,* Dr. Whewell,† and Mr.
Bailey;‡ Sir John Herschel considering the doctrine, though not strictly
“a discovery,” bhaving been anticipated by Berkeley,b§ to be “one of the
greatest steps which have yet been made in the philosophy of Logic.”
“When we consider” (to quote the further words of the same authority)
“the inveteracy of the habits and prejudices which it has cast to the
winds,” there is no cause for misgiving in the fact that other thinkers,
no less entitled to consideration, have formed a very different estimate
of it. Their principal objection cannot be better or more succinctly
stated than by borrowing a sentence from Archbishop Whately.∥ “In every
case where an inference is drawn from Induction (unless Edition:
current; Page: [204] that name is to be given to a mere random guess
without any grounds at all) we must form a judgment that the instance or
instances adduced are sufficient to authorize the conclusion; that it is
allowable to take these instances as a sample warranting an inference
respecting the whole class;” and the expression of this judgment in
words (it has been said by several of my critics) is the major premise.

I quite admit that the major is an affirmation of the sufficiency of the
evidence on which the conclusion rests. That it is so, is the very
essence of my own theory. And whoever admits that the major premise is
only this, adopts the theory in its essentials.

But I cannot concede that this recognition of the sufficiency of the
evidence—that is, of the correctness of the induction—is a part of the
induction itself; unless we ought to say that it is a part of everything
we do, to satisfy ourselves that it has been done rightly. We conclude
from known instances to unknown by the impulse of the generalizing
propensity; and (until after a considerable amount of practice and
mental discipline) the question of the sufficiency of the evidence is
only raised by a retrospective act, turning back upon our own footsteps,
and examining whether we were warranted in doing what we have
dprovisionallyd done. To speak of this reflex operation as part of the
original one, requiring to be expressed in words in order that the
verbal formula may correctly represent the psychological process,
appears to me false psychology.* We review our syllogistic as well as
our inductive processes, and recognise that they have been correctly
performed; but logicians do not add a third premise to the syllogism, to
express this act of recognition. A careful copyist verifies his
transcript by collating it with the original; and if no error appears,
he recognises that the transcript has been correctly made. But we do not
call the examination of the copy a part of the act of copying.

The conclusion in an induction is inferred from the evidence itself, and
not from a recognition of the sufficiency of the evidence; as I infer
that my friend is walking towards me because I see him, and not because
I recognise that my eyes are open, and that eyesight is a means of
knowledge. In all operations which require care, it is good to assure
ourselves that the process has been performed accurately; but the
testing of the process is not the process itself; and, besides, may have
been omitted altogether, and yet the process be correct. It is precisely
because that operation is omitted in ordinary unscientific reasoning,
that there is anything gained in certainty by throwing reasoning into
the syllogistic form. To make sure, as far as possible, that it Edition:
current; Page: [205] shall not be omitted, we make the testing operation
a part of the reasoning process itself. We insist that the inference
from particulars to particulars shall pass through a general
proposition. But this is a security for good reasoning, not a condition
of all reasoning; and in some cases not even a security. Our most
familiar inferences are all made before we learn the use of general
propositions; and a person of untutored sagacity will skilfully apply
his acquired experience to adjacent cases, though he would bungle
grievously in fixing the limits of the appropriate general theorem. But
though he may conclude rightly, he never, properly speaking, knows
whether he has done so or not; he has not tested his reasoning. Now,
this is precisely what forms of reasoning do for us. We do not need them
to enable us to reason, but to enable us to know whether we reason
correctly.

In still further answer to the objection, it may be added that—even when
the test has been applied, and the sufficiency of the evidence
recognised—if it is sufficient to support the general proposition, it is
sufficient also to support an inference from particulars to particulars
without passing through the general proposition. The inquirer who has
logically satisfied himself that the conditions of legitimate induction
were realized in the cases A, B, C, would be as much justified in
concluding directly to the Duke of Wellington as in concluding to all
men. The general conclusion is never legitimate, unless the particular
one would be so too; and in no sense, intelligible to me, can the
particular conclusion be said to be drawn from the general one. Whenever
there is ground for drawing any conclusion at all from particular
instances, there is ground for a general conclusion; but that this
general conclusion should be actually drawn, however useful, cannot be
an indispensable condition of the validity of the inference in the
particular case. A man gives away sixpence by the same power by which he
disposes of his whole fortune; but it is not necessary to the legality
of the smaller act, that he should make a formal assertion of his right
to fthe greater one.

Some additional remarks, in reply to minor objections, are appended.*ga

Edition: current; Page: [206]
a§ 9. [Of Formal Logic, and its relation to the Logic of Truth] The
preceding considerations enable us to understand the true nature of what
is termed, by recent writers, Formal Logic, and the relation between it
and Logic in the widest sense. Logic, as I conceive it, is the entire
theory of the ascertainment of reasoned or inferred truth. Formal Logic,
therefore, which Sir William Hamilton from his own point of view, and
Archbishop Whately from his, have represented as the whole of Logic
properly so called, is really a very subordinate part of it, not being
directly concerned with the process of Reasoning or Inference in the
sense in which that process is a part of the Investigation of Truth.
What, then, is Formal Logic? The name seems to be Edition: current;
Page: [207] properly applied to all that portion of doctrine which
relates to the equivalence of different modes of expression; the rules
for determining when assertions in a given form imply or suppose the
truth or falsity of other assertions. This includes the theory of the
Import of Propositions, and of their Conversion, Æquipollence, and
Opposition; of those falsely called Inductions Edition: current; Page:
[208] (to be hereafter spoken of*), in which the apparent generalization
is a mere abridged statement of cases known individually; and finally,
of the syllogism: while the theory of Naming, and bof (what is
inseparably connected with it)b Definition, though belonging still more
to the other and larger kind of logic than to this, is a necessary
preliminary to this. The end aimed at by Formal Logic, and attained by
the observance of its precepts, is not truth, but consistency. It has
been seen that this is the only direct purpose of the rules of the
syllogism; the intention and effect of which is simply to keep our
inferences or conclusions in complete consistency with our general
formulæ or directions for drawing them. The Logic of Consistency is a
necessary auxiliary to the logic of truth, not only because what is
inconsistent with itself or with other truths cannot be true, but also
because truth can only be successfully pursued by drawing inferences
from experience, which, if warrantable at all, admit of being
generalized, and, to test their warrantableness, require to be exhibited
in a generalized form; after which the correctness of their application
to particular cases is a question which specially concerns the Logic of
Consistency. This Logic, not requiring any preliminary knowledge of the
processes or conclusions of the various sciences, may be studied with
benefit in a much earlier stage of education than the Logic of Truth:
and the practice which has empirically obtained of teaching it apart,
through elementary treatises which do not attempt to include anything
else, though the reasons assigned for the practice are in general very
far from philosophical, admits of cphilosophical justification.a

Edition: current; Page: [209]


CHAPTER IV: Of Trains of Reasoning, and Deductive Sciences

§ 1. [For what purpose trains of reasoning exist] In our analysis of the
syllogism, it appeared that the minor premise always affirms a
resemblance between a new case and some cases previously known; while
the major premise asserts something which, having been found true of
those known cases, we consider ourselves warranted in holding true of
any other case resembling the former in certain given particulars.

If all ratiocinations resembled, as to the minor premise, the examples
which awerea exclusively employed in the preceding chapter; if the
resemblance, which that premise asserts, were obvious to the senses, as
in the proposition “Socrates is a man,” or were at once ascertainable by
direct observation; there would be no necessity for trains of reasoning,
and Deductive or Ratiocinative Sciences would not exist. Trains of
reasoning exist only for the sake of extending an induction founded, as
all inductions must be, on observed cases, to other cases in which we
not only cannot directly observe bthe fact whichb is to be proved, but
cannot directly observe even the mark which is to prove it.

§ 2. [A train of reasoning is a series of inductive inferences] Suppose
the syllogism to be, All cows ruminate, the animal which is before me is
a cow, therefore it ruminates. The minor, if true at all, is obviously
so: the only premise the establishment of which requires any anterior
process of inquiry, is the major; and provided the induction of which
that premise is the expression was correctly performed, the conclusion
respecting the animal now present will be instantly drawn; because, as
soon as she is compared with the formula, she will be identified as
being included in it. But suppose the syllogism to be the following:—All
arsenic is poisonous, the substance which is before me is arsenic,
therefore it is poisonous. The truth of the minor may not here be
obvious at first sight; it may not be intuitively evident, but may
itself be known only by inference. It may be the conclusion of another
argument, Edition: current; Page: [210] which, thrown into the
syllogistic form, would stand thus:—Whatever awhen lighted produces a
dark spot on a piece of white porcelain held in the flame, which spot is
soluble in bhypochlorideb of calciuma, is arsenic; the substance before
me conforms to this condition; therefore it is arsenic. To establish,
therefore, the ultimate conclusion, The substance before me is
poisonous, requires a process, which, in order to be syllogistically
expressed, stands in need of two syllogisms; and we have a Train of
Reasoning.

When, however, we thus add syllogism to syllogism, we are really adding
induction to induction. Two separate inductions must have taken place to
render this chain of inference possible; inductions founded, probably,
on different sets of individual instances, but which converge in their
results, so that the instance which is the subject of inquiry comes
within the range of them both. The record of these inductions is
contained in the majors of the two syllogisms. First, we, or others
cforc us, have examined various objects which yielded under the given
circumstances da dark spot with the given propertyd, and found that they
possessed the properties connoted by the word arsenic; they were
metallic, volatile, their vapour had a smell of garlic, and so forth.
Next, we, or others efore us, have examined various specimens which
possessed this metallic and volatile character, whose vapour had this
smell, &c., and have invariably found that they were poisonous. The
first observation we judge that we may extend to all substances whatever
which yield fthat particular kind of dark spotf; the second, to all
metallic and volatile substances resembling those we examined; and
consequently, not to those only which are seen to be such, but to those
which are concluded to be such by the prior induction. The substance
before us is only seen to come within one of these inductions; but by
means of this one, it is brought within the other. We are still, as
before, concluding from particulars to particulars; but we are now
concluding from particulars observed, to other particulars which are
not, as in the gsimpleg case, seen to resemble them in hmaterial points,
but inferred to do so, because resembling them in something else, which
we have been led by quite a different set of instances to consider as a
mark of the former resemblance.

This first example of a train of reasoning is still extremely simple,
the series consisting of only two syllogisms. The following is somewhat
more complicated:—No Edition: current; Page: [211] government, which
earnestly seeks the good of its subjects, is ilikely to be overthrown;
some particular government earnestly seeks the good of its subjects,
therefore it is not likely to be overthrowni. The major premise in this
argument we shall suppose not to be derived from considerations à
priori, but to be a generalization from history, which, whether correct
or erroneous, must have been founded on observation of governments
concerning whose desire of the good of their subjects there was no
doubt. It has been found, or thought to be found, that these were not
jeasily overthrownj, and it has been deemed that those instances
warranted an extension of the same predicate to any and every government
which resembles them in the attribute of desiring earnestly the good of
its subjects. But does the kgovernment in questionk thus resemble them?
This may be debated pro and con by many arguments, and must, in any
case, be proved by another induction; for we cannot directly observe the
sentiments and desires of the persons who lcarry on the governmentl. To
prove the minor, therefore, we require an argument in this form: Every
government which acts in a certain manner, desires the good of its
subjects; the msupposedm government acts in that particular manner,
therefore it desires the good of its subjects. But is it true that the
ngovernment acts in the manner supposed? This minor also may require
proof; still another induction, as thus:—What is asserted by
ointelligent and disinterested witnesses, mayo be believed to be true;
that the pgovernment acts in this manner, is asserted by qsuch
witnesses, therefore it mayq be believed to be true. The argument hence
consists of three steps. Having the evidence of our senses that the case
of the rgovernment under considerationr resembles a number of former
cases, in the circumstance of having something asserted respecting it by
sintelligent ands disinterested witnesses, we infer, first, that, as in
those former instances, so in this instance, the assertion is true.
Secondly, what was asserted of the tgovernment being that it acts in a
particular manner, and other governments or persons having been observed
to act in the same manner, the ugovernment in questionu is brought into
Edition: current; Page: [212] known resemblance with those other
governments or persons; and since they were known to desire the good of
the people, vit is thereupon, by a second induction, inferred that the
particular government spoken of,v desires the good of the people. This
brings that government into known resemblance with the other governments
which were wthought likelyw to escape revolution, and thence, by a third
induction, xit is yconcludedy that this particular government is also
likely tox escape. zThis isz still reasoning from particulars to
particulars, but we now reason to the new instance from three distinct
sets of former instances: to one only of those sets of instances do we
directly perceive the new one to be similar; but from that similarity we
inductively infer that it has the attribute by which it is assimilated
to the next set, and brought within the corresponding induction; aafter
whicha by a repetition of the same operation we infer it to be similar
to the third set, and bhenceb a third induction conducts us to the
ultimate conclusion.

§ 3. [A train of reasoning is a series of inductive inferences from
particulars to particulars through marks of marks] Notwithstanding the
superior complication of these examples, compared with those by which in
the preceding chapter we illustrated the general theory of reasoning,
every doctrine which we then laid down holds equally true in these more
intricate cases. The successive general propositions are not steps in
the reasoning, are not intermediate links in the chain of inference,
between the particulars observed and those to which we apply the
observation. If we had sufficiently capacious memories, and a sufficient
power of maintaining order among a huge mass of details, the reasoning
could go on without any general propositions; they are mere formulæ for
inferring particulars from particulars. The principle of general
reasoning is (as before explained), that if, from observation of certain
known particulars, what was seen to be true of them can be inferred to
be true of any others, it may be inferred of all others which are of a
certain description. And in order that we may never fail to draw this
conclusion in a new case when it can be drawn correctly, and may avoid
drawing it when it Edition: current; Page: [213] cannot, we determine
once for all what are the distinguishing marks by which such cases may
be recognised. The subsequent process is merely that of identifying an
object, and ascertaining it to have those marks; whether we identify it
by the very marks themselves, or by others which we have ascertained
(through another and a similar process) to be marks of those marks. The
real inference is always from particulars to particulars, from the
observed instances to an unobserved one: but in drawing this inference,
we conform to a formula which we have adopted for our guidance in such
operations, and which is a record of the criteria by which we thought we
had ascertained that we might distinguish when the inference could, and
when it could not, be drawn. The real premises are the individual
observations, even though they may have been forgotten, or, being the
observations of others and not of ourselves, may, to us, never have been
known: but we have before us proof that we or others once thought them
sufficient for an induction, and we have marks to show whether any new
case is one of those to which, if then known, the induction would have
been deemed to extend. These marks we either recognise at once, or by
the aid of other marks, which by another previous induction we collected
to be marks of athe firsta. Even these marks of marks may only be
recognised through a third set of marks; and we may have a train of
reasoning, of any length, to bring a new case within the scope of an
induction grounded on particulars its similarity to which is only
ascertained in this indirect manner.

Thus, in the bpreceding exampleb, the ultimate inductive inference was,
that ca certain government was not likely to be overthrownc; this
inference was drawn according to a formula in which desire of the public
good was set down as a mark of not being dlikely to be overthrownd, a
mark of this mark was, acting in a particular manner; and a mark of
acting in that manner was, being asserted to do so by eintelligent ande
disinterested witnesses: this mark, the fgovernment under discussionf
was recognised by the senses as possessing. Hence that government fell
within the last induction, and by it was brought within all the others.
The perceived resemblance of the case to one set of observed particular
cases, brought it into known resemblance with another set, and that with
a third.

In the more complex branches of knowledge, the deductions seldom
consist, as in the examples hitherto exhibited, of a single chain, a a
mark of b, b of c, c of d, therefore a a mark of d. They consist (to
carry on the same metaphor) of several chains united at the extremity,
as thus: a a mark of d, Edition: current; Page: [214] b of e, c of f, d
e f of n, therefore a b c a mark of n. Suppose, for example, the
following combination of circumstances; 1st, rays of light impinging on
a reflecting surface; 2nd, that surface parabolic; 3rd, those rays
parallel to each other and to the axis of the surface. It is to be
proved that the concourse of these three circumstances is a mark that
the reflected rays will pass through the focus of the parabolic surface.
Now, each of the three circumstances is singly a mark of something
material to the case. Rays of light impinging on a reflecting surface
are a mark that those rays will be reflected at an angle equal to the
angle of incidence. The parabolic form of the surface, is a mark that,
from any point of it, a line drawn to the focus and a line parallel to
the axis will make equal angles with the surface. And finally, the
parallelism of the rays to the axis is a mark that their angle of
incidence coincides with one of these equal angles. The three marks
taken together are therefore a mark of all these three things united.
But the three united are evidently a mark that the angle of reflection
must coincide with the other of the two equal angles, that formed by a
line drawn to the focus; and this again, by the fundamental axiom
concerning straight lines, is a mark that the reflected rays pass
through the focus. Most chains of physical deduction are of this more
complicated type; and even in mathematics such are abundant, as in all
propositions where the hypothesis includes numerous conditions: “If a
circle be taken, and if within that circle a point be taken, not the
centre, and if straight lines be drawn from that point to the
circumference, then,” &c.

§ 4. [Why there are deductive sciences] The considerations now stated
remove a serious difficulty from the view we have taken of reasoning;
which aviewa might otherwise have seemed not easily reconcilable with
the fact that there are Deductive or Ratiocinative Sciences. It might
seem to follow, if all reasoning be induction, that the difficulties of
philosophical investigation must lie in the inductions exclusively, and
that when these were easy, and susceptible of no doubt or hesitation,
there could be no science, or, at least, no difficulties in science. The
existence, for example, of an extensive Science of Mathematics,
requiring the highest scientific genius in those who contributed to its
creation, and calling for a most continued and vigorous exertion of
intellect in order to appropriate it when created, may seem hard to be
accounted for on the foregoing theory. But the considerations more
recently adduced remove the mystery, by showing, that even when the
inductions themselves are obvious, there may be much difficulty in
finding whether the particular case which is the subject of inquiry
comes within them; and ample room for scientific ingenuity in so
combining various inductions, as, by means of one within which the case
evidently falls, to bring it within others in which it cannot be
directly seen to be included.

Edition: current; Page: [215]
When the more obvious of the inductions which can be made in any science
from direct bobservationsb, have been made, and general formulas have
been framed, determining the limits within which these inductions are
applicable; as often as a new case can be at once seen to come within
one of the formulas, the induction is applied to the new case, and the
business is ended. But new cases are continually arising, which do not
obviously come within any formula whereby the cquestionc we want solved
in respect dofd them could be answered. Let us take an instance from
geometry: and as it is taken only for illustration, let the reader
concede to us for the present, what we shall endeavour to prove in the
next chapter, that the first principles of geometry are results of
induction. Our example shall be the fifth proposition of the first book
of Euclid. The inquiry is, Are the angles at the base of an isosceles
triangle equal or unequal? The first thing to be considered is, what
inductions we have, from which we can infer equality or inequality. For
inferring equality we have the following formulæ:—Things which being
applied to each other coincide, are equals. Things which are equal to
the same thing are equals. A whole and the sum of its parts are equals.
The sums of equal things are equals. The differences of equal things are
equals. There are no other eoriginale formulæ to prove equality. For
inferring inequality we have the following: A whole and its fpartsf are
unequals. The sums of equal things and unequal things are unequals. The
differences of equal things and unequal things are unequals. In all,
eight formulæ. The angles at the base of an isosceles triangle do not
obviously come within any of these. The formulæ specify certain marks of
equality and of inequality, but the angles cannot be perceived
intuitively to have any of those marks. gOn examination it appears that
they have; and we ultimately succeed in bringing them within htheh
formula, “The differences of equal things are equal.” Whence icomesi the
difficulty jofj recognising these angles as the differences of equal
things? Because each of them is the difference not of one pair only, but
of innumerable pairs of angles; and out of these we had to imagine and
select two, which could either be intuitively perceived to be equals, or
possessed some of the marks of equality set down in the various formulæ.
By an exercise of ingenuity, which, on the part of the first inventor,
deserves to be regarded as considerable, two pairs of angles were hit
upon, which united these requisites. First, it could be perceived
intuitively that their differences were the angles at the base; and,
secondly, they possessed one of the marks of equality, Edition: current;
Page: [216] namely, coincidence when applied to one another. This
coincidence, however, was not perceived intuitively, but inferred, in
conformity to another formula.

kFor greater clearness, Ik subjoin an analysis of the demonstration.
Euclid, it will be remembered, demonstrates his fifth proposition by
means of the fourth.[*] This it is not allowable for us to do, because
we are undertaking to trace deductive truths not to prior deductions,
but to their original inductive foundation. We must therefore use the
premises of the fourth proposition instead of its conclusion, and prove
the fifth directly from first principles. To do so requires six
formulas. (We must begin, as in Euclid, by prolonging the equal sides
AB, AC, to equal distances, and joining the extremities BE, DC.)

[lf0223-07_figure_004.jpg]
First Formula. The sums of equals are equal.

AD and AE are sums of equals by the supposition. Having that mark of
equality, they are concluded by this formula to be equal.

Second Formula. Equal straight lines lor angles,l being applied to one
another, coincide.

AC, AB, are within this formula by supposition; AD, AE, have been
brought within it by the preceding step. mThe angle at A considered as
an angle of the triangle ABE, and the same angle considered as an angle
of the triangle ACD, are of course within the formula. All these pairs
therefore possess the property which, according to the second formula,
is a mark that when applied to one another they will coincide. Conceive
them, then, applied to one another, by turning over the triangle ABE,
and laying it on the triangle ACD in such a manner that AB of the one
shall lie upon AC of the other. Edition: current; Page: [217] Then, by
the equality of the angles, AE will lie on AD. But AB and AC, AE and AD
are equals; therefore they will will coincide altogetherm, and of course
at their extremities, D, E, and B, C.

Third Formula. Straight lines, having their extremities coincident,
coincide.

BE and nCDn have been brought within this formula by the preceding
induction; they will, therefore, coincide.

Fourth Formula. Angles, having their sides coincident, coincide.

oThe third induction having shown that BE and CD coincide, and the
second that AB, ACo, coincide, the angles ABE and ACD are thereby
brought within the fourth formula, and accordingly coincide.

Fifth Formula. Things which coincide are equal.

The angles ABE and ACD are brought within this formula by the induction
immediately preceding. This train of reasoning being also applicable,
mutatis mutandis, to the angles EBC, DCB, these also are brought within
the fifth formula. And, finally,

Sixth Formula. The differences of equals are equal.

The angle ABC being the difference of ABE, CBE, and the angle ACB being
the difference of ACD, DCB; which have been proved to be equals; ABC and
ACB are brought within the last formula by the whole of the previous
process.

The difficulty here encountered is chiefly that of figuring to ourselves
the two angles at the base of the triangle ABC as remainders made by
cutting one pair of angles out of another, while each pair shall be
corresponding angles of triangles which have two sides and the
intervening angle equal. It is by this happy contrivance that so many
different inductions are brought to bear upon the same particular case.
And this not being at all an obvious pthoughtp, it may be seen from an
example so near the threshold of mathematics, how much scope there may
well be for scientific dexterity in the higher branches of that and
other sciences, in order so to combine a few simple inductions, as to
bring within each of them innumerable cases which are not obviously
included in it; and how long, and numerous, and complicated Edition:
current; Page: [218] may be the processes necessary for bringing the
inductions together, even when each induction may itself be very easy
and simple. All the inductions involved in all geometry are comprised in
those simple ones, the formulæ of which are the Axioms, and a few of the
so-called Definitions. The remainder of the science is made up of the
processes employed for bringing unforeseen cases within these
inductions; or (in syllogistic language) for proving the minors
necessary to complete the syllogisms; the majors being the definitions
and axioms. In those definitions and axioms are laid down the whole of
the marks, by an artful combination of which qit has been found
possibleq to discover and prove all that is proved in geometry. The
marks being so few, and the inductions which furnish them being so
obvious and familiar; the connecting of several of them together, which
constitutes Deductions, or Trains of Reasoning, forms the whole
difficulty of the science, and with a trifling exception, its whole
bulk; and hence Geometry is a Deductive Science.

§ 5. [aWhya other sciences still remain experimental] It will be seen
hereafter* that there are weighty scientific reasons for giving to every
science as much of the character of a Deductive Science as possible; for
endeavouring to construct the science from the fewest and the simplest
possible inductions, and to make these, by any combinations however
complicated, suffice for proving even such truths, relating to complex
cases, as could be proved, if we chose, by inductions from specific
experience. Every branch of natural philosophy was originally
experimental; each generalization rested on a special induction, and was
derived from its own distinct set of observations and experiments. From
being sciences of pure experiment, as the phrase is, or, to speak more
correctly, sciences in which the reasonings bmostlyb consist of no more
than one step, and are expressed by single syllogisms, all these
sciences have become to some extent, and some of them in nearly the
whole of their extent, sciences of pure reasoning; whereby multitudes of
truths, already known by induction from as many different sets of
experiments, have come to be exhibited as deductions or corollaries from
inductive propositions of a simpler and more universal character. Thus
mechanics, hydrostatics, optics, acoustics, cthermology, have
successively been rendered mathematical; and astronomy was brought by
Newton within the laws of general mechanics. Why it is that the
substitution of this circuitous mode of proceeding for a process
apparently much easier and more natural, is held, and justly, to be the
greatest triumph of the investigation of nature, we are not, in this
stage of our inquiry, prepared to examine. But it is necessary to
remark, that although, Edition: current; Page: [219] by this progressive
transformation, all sciences tend to become more and more Deductive,
they are not, therefore, the less Inductive; every step in the Deduction
is still an Induction. The opposition is not between the terms Deductive
and Inductive, but between Deductive and Experimental. A science is
experimental, in proportion as every new case, which presents any
peculiar features, stands in need of a new set of observations and
experiments—a fresh induction. It is deductive, in proportion as it can
draw conclusions, respecting cases of a new kind, by processes which
bring those cases under old inductions; by ascertaining that cases which
cannot be observed to have the requisite marks, have, however, marks of
those marks.

We can now, therefore, perceive what is the generic distinction between
sciences which can be made Deductive, and those which must as yet remain
Experimental. The difference consists in our having been able, or not
yet able, to discover marks of marks. If by our various inductions we
have been able to proceed no further than to such propositions as these,
a a mark of b, or a and b marks of one another, c a mark of d, or c and
d marks of one another, without anything to connect a or b with c or d;
we have a science of detached and mutually independent generalizations,
such as these, that acids redden vegetable blues, and that alkalies
colour them green; from neither of which propositions could we, directly
or indirectly, infer the other: and a science, so far as it is composed
of such propositions, is purely experimental. Chemistry, in the present
state of our knowledge, has not yet thrown off this character. There are
other sciences, however, of which the propositions are of this kind: a a
mark of b, b a mark of c, c of d, d of e, &c. In these sciences we can
mount the ladder from a to e by a process of ratiocination; we can
conclude that a is a mark of e, and that every object which has the mark
a has the property e, although, perhaps, we never were able to observe a
and e together, and although even d, our only direct mark of e, may dnot
bed perceptible in those objects, but only inferrible. Or, varying the
first metaphor, we may be said to get from a to e underground: the marks
b, c, d, which indicate the route, must all be possessed somewhere by
the objects concerning which we are inquiring; but they are below the
surface: a is the only mark that is visible, and by it we are able to
trace in succession all the rest.

§ 6. [Experimental sciences may become deductive by the progress of
experiment] We can now understand how an experimental amay transforma
itself into a deductive science by the mere progress of experiment. In
an experimental science, the inductions, as we have said, lie detached,
as, a a mark of b, c a mark of d, e a mark of f, and so on: now, a new
set of instances, and a consequent new induction, may at any time bridge
over the Edition: current; Page: [220] interval between two of these
unconnected arches; b, for example, may be ascertained to be a mark of
c, which enables us thenceforth to prove deductively that a is a mark of
c. Or, as sometimes happens, some bcomprehensive induction may raise an
arch high in the air, which bridges over hosts of them at once: b, d, f,
and all the rest, turning out to be marks of some one thing, or of
things between which a connexion has already been traced. As when Newton
discovered that the motions, whether regular or apparently anomalous, of
all the bodies of the solar system, (each of which motions had been
inferred by a separate logical operation, from separate marks,) were all
marks of moving round a common centre, with a centripetal force varying
directly as the mass, and inversely as the square of the distance from
that centre.[*] This is the greatest example which has yet occurred of
the transformation, at one stroke, of a science which was still to a
great degree merely experimental, into a deductive science.

Transformations of the same nature, but on a smaller scale, continually
take place in the less advanced branches of physical knowledge, without
enabling them to throw off the character of experimental sciences. Thus
with regard to the two unconnected propositions before cited, namely,
Acids redden vegetable blues, Alkalies make them green; it is remarked
by Liebig, that all blue colouring matters which are reddened by acids
(as well as, reciprocally, all red colouring matters which are rendered
blue by alkalies) contain nitrogen:[†] and it is quite possible cthat
this circumstance may one day furnish a bond of connexion between the
two propositions in question, by showing that the dantagonisticd action
of acids and alkalies in producing or destroying the colour blue, is the
result of some one, more general, law. Although this connecting of
detached generalizations is so much gain, it tends but little to give a
deductive character to any science as a whole; because the new courses
of observation and experiment, which thus enable us to connect together
a few general truths, usually make known to us a still greater number of
unconnected new ones. Hence chemistry, though similar extensions and
simplifications of its generalizations are continually taking place, is
still in the main an experimental science; and is likely so to continue
unless some comprehensive induction should be hereafter arrived at,
which, like Newton’s, shall connect a vast number of the smaller known
inductions Edition: current; Page: [221] together, and change the whole
method of the science at once. Chemistry has already one great
generalization, which, though relating to one of the subordinate aspects
of chemical phenomena, possesses within its limited sphere this
comprehensive character; the principle of Dalton, called the atomic
theory, or the doctrine of chemical equivalents: which by enabling us to
a certain extent to foresee the proportions in which two substances will
combine, before the experiment has been tried, constitutes undoubtedly a
source of new chemical truths obtainable by deduction, as well as a
connecting principle for all truths of the same description previously
obtained by experiment.

§ 7. [In what manner this change from experimental to deductive usually
takes place] The discoveries which change the method of a science from
experimental to deductive, mostly consist in establishing, either by
deduction or by direct experiment, that the varieties of a particular
phenomenon uniformly accompany the varieties of some other phenomenon
better known. Thus the science of sound, which previously stood in the
lowest rank of merely experimental science, became deductive when it was
proved by experiment that every variety of sound was consequent on, and
therefore a mark of, a distinct and definable variety of oscillatory
motion among the particles of the transmitting medium. When this was
ascertained, it followed that every relation of succession or
coexistence which obtained between phenomena of the more known class,
obtained also between the phenomena which acorresponda to them in the
other class. Every sound, being a mark of a particular oscillatory
motion, became a mark of everything which, by the laws of dynamics, was
known to be inferrible from that motion; and everything which by those
same laws was a mark of any oscillatory motion bamong the particles of
an elastic mediumb, became a mark of the corresponding sound. And thus
many truths, not before suspected, concerning sound, cbecomec deducible
from the known laws of the propagation of motion through an elastic
medium; while facts already empirically known respecting sound, dbecomed
an indication of corresponding properties of vibrating bodies,
previously undiscovered.

But the grand agent for transforming experimental into deductive
sciences, is the science of number. The properties of enumbere, alone
among all known phenomena, are, in the most rigorous sense, properties
of all things whatever. All things are not coloured, or ponderable, or
even extended; but all things are numerable. And if we consider this
science in its whole extent, from Edition: current; Page: [222] common
arithmetic up to the calculus of variations, the truths already
ascertained seem all but infinite, and admit of indefinite extension.

fThese truths, though affirmable of all things whatever, of course apply
to them only in respect of their quantity. But if it comes to be
discovered that variations of quality in any class of phenomena,
correspond regularly to variations of quantity either in those same or
in some other phenomena; every formula of mathematics applicable to
quantities which vary in that particular manner, becomes a mark of a
corresponding general truth respecting the variations in quality which
accompany them: and the science of quantity being (as far as any science
can be) altogether deductive, the theory of that particular kind of
qualities becomes, to this extent, deductive likewise.

The most striking instance in point which history affords (though not an
example of an experimental science rendered deductive, but of an
unparalleled extension given to the deductive process in a science which
was deductive already), is the revolution in geometry which originated
with gDescartes, and was completed by Clairaut. These hgreat
mathematicians pointed out the importance of the facth, that to every
variety of position in points, direction in lines, or form in curves or
surfaces (all of which are Qualities), there corresponds a peculiar
relation of quantity between either two or three rectilineal
co-ordinates; insomuch that if the law were known according to which
those co-ordinates vary relatively to one another, every other
geometrical property of the line or surface in question, whether
relating to quantity or iqualityi, would be capable of being inferred.
Hence it followed that every geometrical question could be solved, if
the corresponding algebraical one could; and geometry received an
accession (actual or potential) of new truths, corresponding to every
property of numbers which the progress of the calculus had brought, or
might in future bring, to light. In the same general manner, mechanics,
astronomy, and in a less degree, every branch of natural philosophy
commonly so called, have been made algebraical. The varieties of
physical phenomena with which those sciences are conversant, have been
found to answer to determinable varieties in the quantity of some
circumstance or other; or at least to varieties of form or position, for
which corresponding equations of quantity had already been, or were
susceptible of being, discovered by geometers.

In these various transformations, the propositions of the science of
number do but fulfil the function proper to all propositions forming a
train of reasoning, viz. that of enabling us to arrive in an indirect
method, by marks of marks, at such of the properties of objects as we
cannot directly ascertain Edition: current; Page: [223] (or not so
conveniently) by experiment. We travel from a given visible or tangible
fact, through the truths of numbers, to the jfactsj sought. The given
fact is a mark that a certain relation subsists between the quantities
of some of the elements concerned; while the fact sought presupposes a
certain relation between the quantities of some other elements: now, if
these last quantities are dependent in some known manner upon the
former, or vice versâ, we can argue from the numerical relation between
the one set of quantities, to determine that which subsists between the
other set; the theorems of the calculus affording the intermediate
links. And thus kone of the two physical facts becomes a mark of the
other, by being a mark of a mark of a mark of it.

Edition: current; Page: [224]


CHAPTER V: Of Demonstration, and Necessary Truths

§ 1. [The Theorems of geometry are anecessary truths onlya in the sense
of necessarily following from hypotheses] If, as laid down in the two
preceding chapters, the foundation of all sciences, even deductive or
demonstrative sciences, is Induction; if every step in the
ratiocinations even of geometry is an act of induction; and if a train
of reasoning is but bringing many inductions to bear upon the same
subject of inquiry, and drawing a case within one induction by means of
another; wherein lies the peculiar certainty always ascribed to the
sciences which are entirely, or almost entirely, deductive? Why are they
called the Exact Sciences? Why are mathematical certainty, and the
evidence of demonstration, common phrases to express the very highest
degree of assurance attainable by reason? Why are mathematics by almost
all philosophers, and (by bsomeb) even those branches of natural
philosophy which, through the medium of mathematics, have been converted
into deductive sciences, considered to be independent of the evidence of
experience and observation, and characterized as systems of Necessary
Truth?

The answer I conceive to be, that this character of necessity, ascribed
to the truths of mathematics, and even (with some reservations to be
hereafter made) the peculiar certainty attributed to them, is an
illusion; in order to sustain which, it is necessary to suppose that
those truths relate to, and express the properties of, purely imaginary
objects. It is acknowledged that the conclusions of geometry are
deduced, partly at least, from the so-called Definitions, and that those
definitions are assumed to be correct crepresentationsc, as far as they
go, of the objects with which geometry is conversant. Now we have
pointed out that, from a definition as such, no proposition, unless it
be one concerning the meaning of a word, can ever follow; and that what
apparently follows from a definition, follows in reality from an implied
assumption that there exists a real thing conformable thereto. This
assumption, Edition: current; Page: [225] in the case of the definitions
of geometry, is dnot strictly trued: there exist no real things exactly
conformable to the definitions. There exist no points without magnitude;
no lines without breadth, nor perfectly straight; no circles with all
their radii exactly equal, nor squares with all their angles perfectly
right. It will perhaps be said that the assumption does not extend to
the actual, but only to the possible, existence of such things. I answer
that, according to any test we have of possibility, they are not even
possible. Their existence, so far as we can form any judgment, would
seem to be inconsistent with the physical constitution of our planet at
least, if not of the universe. To get rid of this difficulty, and at the
same time to save the credit of the supposed esysteme of necessary
truth, it is customary to say that the points, lines, circles, and
squares which are the subject of geometry, exist in our conceptions
merely, and are part of our minds; which minds, by working on their own
materials, construct an à priori science, the evidence of which is
purely mental, and has nothing whatever to do with outward experience.
By howsoever high authorities this doctrine may have been sanctioned, it
appears to me psychologically incorrect. The points, lines, circles, and
squares which any one has in his mind, are (I apprehend) simply copies
of the points, lines, circles, and squares which he has known in his
experience. fOur idea of a point, I apprehend to be simply our idea of
the minimum visible, the smallest portion of surface which we can see.f
A line, as defined by geometers, is wholly inconceivable. We can reason
about a line as if it had no breadth; because we have a power, which is
the foundation of all the control we can exercise over the operations of
our minds; the power, when a perception is present to our senses, or a
conception to our intellects, of attending to a part only of that
perception or conception, instead of the whole. But we cannot conceive a
line without breadth; we can form no mental picture of such a line: all
the lines which we have in our minds are lines possessing breadth. If
any one doubts this, we may refer him to his own experience. I much
question if any one who fancies that he can conceive what is called a
mathematical line, thinks so from the evidence of his consciousness: I
suspect it is rather because he supposes that unless such a conception
were possible, mathematics could not exist as a science: a supposition
which there will be no difficulty in showing to be entirely groundless.

Since, then, neither in nature, nor in the human mind, do there exist
any objects exactly corresponding to the definitions of geometry, while
yet that science cannot be supposed to be conversant about non-entities;
nothing remains but to consider geometry as conversant with such lines,
angles, and figures, as really exist; and the definitions, as they are
called, must be regarded Edition: current; Page: [226] as some of our
first and most obvious generalizations concerning those natural objects.
The correctness of gthoseg generalizations, as generalizations, is
without a flaw: the equality of all the radii of a circle is true of all
circles, so far as it is true of any one: but it is not exactly true of
any circle; it is only nearly true; so nearly that no error of any
importance in practice will be incurred by feigning it to be exactly
true. When we have occasion to extend these inductions, or their
consequences, to cases in which the error would be appreciable—to lines
of perceptible breadth or thickness, parallels which deviate sensibly
from equidistance, and the like—we correct our conclusions, by combining
with them a fresh set of propositions relating to the aberration; just
as we also take in propositions relating to the physical or chemical
properties of the material, if those properties happen to introduce any
modification into the result; which they easily may, even with respect
to figure and magnitude, as in the case, for instance, of expansion by
heat. So long, however, as there exists no practical necessity for
attending to any of the properties of the object except its geometrical
properties, or to any of the natural irregularities in those, it is
convenient to neglect the consideration of the other properties and of
the irregularities, and to reason as if these did not exist:
accordingly, we formally announce in the definitions, that we intend to
proceed on this plan. But it is an error to suppose, because we resolve
to confine our attention to a certain number of the properties of an
object, that we therefore conceive, or have an idea of, the object,
denuded of its other properties. We are thinking, all the time, of
precisely such objects as we have seen and touched, and with all the
properties which naturally belong to them; but, for scientific
convenience, we feign them to be divested of all properties, except
those hwhich are material to our purpose, andh in regard to which we
design to consider them.

The peculiar accuracy, supposed to be characteristic of the first
principles of geometry, thus appears to be fictitious. The assertions on
which the reasonings of the science are founded, do not, any more than
in other sciences, exactly correspond with the fact; but we suppose that
they do so, for the sake of tracing the consequences which follow from
the supposition. The opinion of Dugald Stewart[*] respecting the
foundations of geometry, is, I conceive, substantially correct; that it
is built on hypotheses; that it owes to this alone the peculiar
certainty supposed to distinguish it; and that in any science whatever,
by reasoning from a set of hypotheses, we may obtain a body of
conclusions as certain as those of geometry, that is, as strictly in
Edition: current; Page: [227] accordance with the hypotheses, and as
irresistibly compelling assent, on condition that those hypotheses are
true.*

When, therefore, it is affirmed that the conclusions of geometry are
necessary truths, the necessity consists in reality only in this, that
they icorrectlyi follow from the suppositions from which they are
deduced. Those suppositions are so far from being necessary, that they
are not even true; they purposely depart, more or less widely, from the
truth. The only sense in which necessity can be ascribed to the
conclusions of any scientific investigation, is that of jlegitimatelyj
following from some assumption, which, by the conditions of the inquiry,
is not to be questioned. In this relation, of course, the derivative
truths of keveryk deductive science must stand to the inductions, or
assumptions, on which the science is founded, and which, whether true or
untrue, certain or doubtful in themselves, are always supposed certain
for the purposes of the particular science. And therefore the
conclusions of all deductive sciences were said by the ancients to be
necessary propositions. We have observed already that to be predicated
necessarily was characteristic of the predicable Proprium, and that a
proprium was any property of a thing which could be deduced from its
essence, that is, from the properties included in its definition.

§ 2. [Those hypotheses are real facts with some of their circumstances
aexaggerated ora omitted] The important doctrine of Dugald Stewart,
which I have endeavoured to enforce, has been contested by bDr.b
Whewell, both in Edition: current; Page: [228] the dissertation appended
to his excellent Mechanical Euclid,[*] and in his celaborate work on the
Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences; in which last he also replies to
an article in the Edinburgh Review, (ascribed to a writer of great
scientific eminence),[†] in which Stewart’s opinion was defended against
his former strictures. dThe supposed refutation of Stewart consists in
provingd against him (as has also been done in this work) that the
premises of geometry are not definitions, but assumptions of the real
existence of things corresponding to those definitions. This, however,
is doing little for Dr. Whewell’s purpose; for it is these very
assumptions which eare asserted to bee hypotheses, and which he, if he
denies that geometry is founded on hypotheses, must show to be absolute
truths. All he does, however, is to observe, that they at any rate, are
not arbitrary hypotheses; that we should not be at liberty to substitute
other hypotheses for them; that not only “a definition, to be
admissible, must necessarily refer to and agree with some conception
which we can distinctly frame in our thoughts,” but that the straight
lines, for instance, which we define, must be “those by which angles are
contained, those by which triangles are bounded, those of which
parallelism may be predicated, and the like.”* And this is true; but
this has never been contradicted. Those who say that the premises of
geometry are hypotheses, are not bound to maintain them to be hypotheses
which have no relation whatever to fact. Since an hypothesis framed for
the purpose of scientific inquiry must relate to something which has
real existence, (for there can be no science respecting non-entities,)
it follows that any hypothesis we make respecting an object, to
facilitate our study of it, must not involve anything which is
distinctly false, and repugnant to its real nature: we must not ascribe
to the thing any property which it has not; our liberty extends only to
fslightly exaggerating some of those which it has, g(by assuming it to
be completely what it really is very nearly,)g and suppressing othersf,
under the indispensable obligation of restoring them whenever, and in as
far as, their presence or absence would make any material difference in
the truth of our conclusions. Of this nature, accordingly, are the first
principles involved in the Edition: current; Page: [229] definitions of
geometry. hThat the hypotheses should be of this particular character,
is however no further necessary, than inasmuch as no others could enable
us to deduce conclusions which, with due corrections, would be true of
real objects: and in fact, when our aim is only to illustrate truths,
and not to investigate them, we are not under any such restriction. We
might suppose an imaginary animal, and work out by deduction, from the
known laws of physiology, its natural history; or an imaginary
commonwealth, and from the elements composing it, might argue what would
be its fate. And the conclusions which we might thus draw from purely
arbitrary hypotheses, might form a highly useful intellectual exercise:
but as they could only teach us what would be the properties of objects
which do not really exist, they would not constitute any addition to our
knowledge iof naturei: while on the contrary, if the hypothesis merely
divests a real object of some portion of its properties, without
clothing it in false ones, the conclusions will always express, under
known liability to correction, actual truth.

§ 3. [Some of the first principles of geometry are axioms, and these are
not hypothetical] But though Dr. Whewell has not shaken Stewart’s
doctrine as to the hypothetical character of that portion of the first
principles of geometry which are involved in the so-called definitions,
he has, I conceive, greatly the advantage of Stewart on another
important point in the theory of geometrical reasoning; the necessity of
admitting, among those first principles, axioms as well as definitions.
Some of the axioms of Euclid might, no doubt, be exhibited in the form
of definitions, or might be deduced, by reasoning, from propositions
similar to what are so called. Thus, if instead of the axiom, Magnitudes
which can be made to coincide are equal,[*] we introduce a definition,
“Equal magnitudes are those which may be so applied to one another as to
coincide;” the three axioms which follow (Magnitudes which are equal to
the same are equal to one another—If equals are added to equals the sums
are equal—If equals are taken from equals the remainders are equal,) may
be proved by an imaginary superposition, resembling that by which the
fourth proposition of the first book of Euclid is demonstrated. But
though these and several others may be struck out of the list of first
principles, because, though not requiring demonstration, they are
susceptible of it; there will be found in the list of axioms two or
three fundamental truths, not capable of being demonstrated: among which
amust be reckoneda the proposition that two straight lines cannot
inclose a space, (or its equivalent, Edition: current; Page: [230]
Straight lines which coincide in two points coincide altogether,)[*] and
some property of parallel lines, other than that which constitutes their
definition: bone of the most suitable for the purposeb being that
selected by Professor Playfair:[†] “Two straight lines which intersect
each other cannot both of them be parallel to a third straight line.”*

The axioms, as well those which are indemonstrable as those which admit
of being demonstrated, differ from that other class of fundamental
principles which are involved in the definitions, in this, that they are
true without any mixture of hypothesis. That things which are equal to
the same thing are equal to one another, is as true of the lines and
figures in nature, as it would be of the imaginary ones assumed in the
definitions. In this respect, however, mathematics are only on a par
with most other sciences. In almost all sciences there are some general
propositions which are exactly true, while the greater part are only
more or less distant approximations to the truth. Thus in mechanics, the
first law of motion (the continuance of a movement once impressed, until
stopped or slackened by some resisting force) is true without
equalification or errore. The rotation of the earth in twenty-four
hours, of the same length as in our time, has gone on since the first
accurate observations, without the increase or diminution of one second
in all that period. These are inductions which require no fiction to
make them be received as accurately true: but along with them there are
others, as for instance the propositions respecting the figure of the
earth, which are but approximations to the truth; and in order to use
them for the further advancement of our knowledge, we must feign that
they are exactly true, though they really want something of being so.

Edition: current; Page: [231]
§ 4. [Those first principles of geometry that are axioms are
experimental truths] It remains to inquire, what is the ground of our
belief in axioms—what is the evidence on which they rest? I answer, they
are experimental truths; generalizations from observation. The
proposition, Two straight lines cannot inclose a space—or in other
words, Two straight lines which have once met, do not meet again, but
continue to diverge—is an induction from the evidence of our senses.

This opinion runs counter to a ascientifica prejudice of long standing
and great strength, and there is probably no bproposition enunciated in
this work for which ca more unfavourablec reception is to be expected.
It is, however, no new opinion; and even if it were so, would be
entitled to be judged, not by its novelty, but by the strength of the
arguments by which it can be supported. I consider it very fortunate
that so eminent a champion of the contrary opinion as Dr. Whewell, has
dfound occasion for a most elaborate treatment of the whole theory of
axioms, in attempting to construct the philosophy of the mathematical
and physical sciences on the basis of the doctrine against which I now
contend. Whoever is anxious that a discussion should go to the bottom of
the subject, must rejoice to see the opposite side of the question
worthily represented. If what is said by eDr.e Whewell, in support of an
opinion which he has made the foundation of a systematic work, can be
shown not to be conclusive, enough will have been done, without going
felsewhere in quest off stronger arguments and a more powerful
adversary.

It is not necessary to show that the truths which we call axioms are
originally suggested by observation, and that we should never have known
that two straight lines cannot inclose a space if we had never seen a
straight line: thus much being admitted by Dr. Whewell, and by all, in
recent times, who have gtakeng his view of the subject. But they
contend, that it is not experience which proves the axiom; but that its
truth is perceived à priori, by the constitution of the mind itself,
from the first moment when the meaning of the proposition is
apprehended; and without any necessity for verifying it by repeated
trials, as is requisite in the case of truths really ascertained by
observation.

They cannot, however, but allow that the truth of the axiom, Two
straight lines cannot inclose a space, even if evident independently of
experience, is also evident from experience. Whether the axiom needs
confirmation or not, it receives confirmation in almost every instant of
our lives; since we cannot Edition: current; Page: [232] look at any two
straight lines which intersect one another, without seeing that from
that point they continue to diverge more and more. Experimental proof
crowds in upon us in such endless profusion, and without one instance in
which there can be even a suspicion of an exception to the rule, that we
should soon have hstronger ground for believing the axiom, even as an
experimental truth, than we have for almost any of the general truths
which we confessedly learn from the evidence of our senses.
Independently of à priori evidence, we should certainly believe it with
an intensity of conviction far greater than we accord to any ordinary
physical truth: and this too at a time of life much earlier than that
from which we date almost any part of our acquired knowledge, and much
too early to admit of our retaining any recollection of the history of
our intellectual operations at that period. Where then is the necessity
for assuming that our recognition of these truths has a different origin
from the rest of our knowledge, when its existence is perfectly
accounted for by supposing its origin to be the same? when the causes
which produce belief in all other instances, exist in this instance, and
in a degree of strength as much superior to what exists in other cases,
as the intensity of the belief itself is superior? The burden of proof
lies on the advocates of the contrary opinion: it is for them to point
out some fact, inconsistent with the supposition that this part of our
knowledge of nature is derived from the same sources as every other
part.*

Edition: current; Page: [233]
This, for instance, they would be able to do, if they could prove
chronologically that we ihadi the conviction (at least practically) so
early in infancy as to be anterior to those impressions on the senses,
upon which, on the other theory, the conviction is founded. This,
however, cannot be proved: the point being too far back to be within the
reach of memory, and too obscure for external observation. The advocates
of the à priori theory are obliged to have recourse to other arguments.
These are reducible to two, which I shall endeavour to state as clearly
and as forcibly as possible.

§ 5. [An objection answered] In the first place it is said, that if our
assent to the proposition that two straight lines cannot inclose a
space, were derived from the senses, we could only be convinced of its
truth by actual trial, that is, by seeing or feeling the straight lines;
whereas in fact it is seen to be true by merely thinking of them. That a
stone thrown into water goes to the bottom, may be perceived by our
senses, but mere thinking of a stone thrown into the water awould never
have leda us to that conclusion: not so, however, with the axioms
relating to straight lines: if I could be made to conceive what a
straight line is, bwithout having seen one, I should at once recognise
that two such lines cannot inclose a space. Intuition is “imaginary
looking;”* but experience must be real looking: if we see a property of
straight lines to be true by merely fancying ourselves to be looking at
them, the ground of our belief cannot be the senses, or experience; it
must be something mental.

To this argument it might be added in the case of this particular axiom,
(for the assertion would not be true of all axioms,) that the evidence
of it from actual ocular inspection is not only unnecessary, but
unattainable. What says the axiom? That two straight lines cannot
inclose a space; that after having once intersected, if they are
prolonged to infinity they do not meet, but continue to diverge from one
another. How can this, in any single case, be proved by actual
observation? We may follow the lines to any distance we please; but we
cannot follow them to infinity: for aught our senses can testify, they
may, immediately beyond the farthest point to which we have traced them,
begin to approach, and at last meet. Unless, therefore, we had some
other proof of the impossibility than observation affords us, we should
have no ground for believing the axiom at all.

Edition: current; Page: [234]
To these arguments, which I trust I cannot be accused of understating, a
satisfactory answer will, I conceive, be found, if we advert to one of
the characteristic properties of geometrical forms—their capacity of
being painted in the imagination with a distinctness equal to reality:
in other words, the exact resemblance of our ideas of form to the
sensations which suggest them. This, in the first place, enables us to
make (at least with a little practice) mental pictures of all possible
combinations of lines and angles, which resemble the realities quite as
well as any which we could make on paper; and in the next place, cmakec
those pictures just as fit subjects of geometrical experimentation as
the realities themselves; inasmuch as pictures, if sufficiently
accurate, exhibit of course all the properties which would be manifested
by the realities at one given instant, and on simple inspection: and in
geometry we are concerned only with such properties, and not with that
which pictures could not exhibit, the mutual action of bodies one upon
another. The foundations of geometry would therefore be laid in direct
experience, even if the experiments (which in this case consist merely
in attentive contemplation) were practised solely upon what we call our
ideas, that is, upon the diagrams in our minds, and not upon outward
objects. For in all systems of experimentation we take some objects to
serve as representatives of all which resemble them; and in the present
case the conditions which qualify a real object to be the representative
of its class, are completely fulfilled by an object existing only in our
fancy. Without denying, therefore, the possibility of satisfying
ourselves that two straight lines cannot inclose a space, by merely
thinking of straight lines without actually looking at them; I contend,
that we do not believe this truth on the ground of the imaginary
intuition simply, but because we know that the imaginary lines exactly
resemble real ones, and that we may conclude from them to real ones with
quite as much certainty as we could conclude from one real line to
another. The conclusion, therefore, is still an induction from
observation. And we should not be authorized to substitute observation
of the image in our mind, for observation of the reality, if we had not
learnt by long-continued experience that dthe properties of the reality
are faithfully represented in the image; just as we should be
scientifically warranted in describing ean animal which we fhavef never
seen, from a gpicture made of it with a daguerreotype; but not until we
had learnt by ample experience, that observation of such a picture is
precisely equivalent to observation of the original.

These considerations also remove the objection arising from the
impossibility of ocularly following the lines in their prolongation to
infinity. For though, in order actually to see that two given lines
never meet, it would be Edition: current; Page: [235] necessary to
follow them to infinity; yet without doing so we may know that if they
ever do meet, or hif, after diverging from one another, they begin again
to approach, this must take place not at an infinite, but at a finite
distance. Supposing, therefore, such to be the case, we can transport
ourselves thither in imagination, and can frame a mental image of the
appearance which one or both of the lines must present at that point,
which we may rely on as being precisely similar to the reality. Now,
whether we fix our contemplation upon this imaginary picture, or call to
mind the generalizations we have had occasion to make from former ocular
observation, we ilearn by the evidence of experiencei, that a line
which, after diverging from another straight line, begins to approach to
it, produces the impression on our senses which we describe by the
expression, “a bent line,” not by the expression, “a straight line.”*

Edition: current; Page: [236]
mThe preceding argument, which is, to my mind unanswerable, merges,
however, in a still more comprehensive one, which is stated most clearly
and conclusively by Professor Bain. The psychological reason why axioms,
and indeed many propositions not ordinarily classed as such, may be
learnt from the idea only without referring to the fact, is that in the
process of acquiring the idea we have learnt the fact. The proposition
is assented to as soon as the terms are understood, because in learning
to understand the terms we have acquired the experience which proves the
proposition to be true. “We required,” says Mr. Bain,* “concrete
experience in the first instance, to attain to the notion of whole and
part; but the notion, once arrived at, implies that the whole is
greater. In fact, we could not have the notion without an experience
tantamount to this conclusion. . . . When we have mastered the notion of
straightness, we have also mastered that aspect of it expressed by the
affirmation that two straight lines cannot inclose a space. No intuitive
or innate powers or perceptions are needed in such cases. . . . We
cannot have the full meaning of Straightness, without going through a
comparison of straight objects among themselves, and with their
opposites, bent or crooked objects. The result of this comparison is,
inter alia, that straightness in two lines is seen to be incompatible
with inclosing a space; the inclosure of space involves crookedness in
at least one of the lines.” And similarly, in the case of every first
principle,† “the same knowledge that makes it understood, suffices to
verify it.” The more this observation is considered the more (I am
convinced) it will be felt to go to the very root of the controversy.m

§ 6. [Dr. Whewell’s opinions on axioms examined] The first of the two
aarguments in support of the theory that axioms are à priori truths,
having, I think, been sufficiently answered; I proceed to the second,
bwhich is usually the most relied onb. Axioms (it is asserted) are
conceived by us not only as Edition: current; Page: [237] true, but as
universally and necessarily true. Now, experience cannot possibly give
to any proposition this character. I may have seen snow a hundred times,
and may have seen that it was white, but this cannot give me entire
assurance even that all snow is white; much less that snow must be
white.

However many instances we may have observed of the truth of a
proposition, there is nothing to assure us that the next case shall not
be an exception to the rule. If it be strictly true that every ruminant
animal yet known has cloven hoofs, we still cannot be sure that some
creature will not hereafter be discovered which has the first of these
attributes, without having the other. . . . Experience must always
consist of a limited number of observations; and, however numerous these
may be, they can show nothing with regard to the infinite number of
cases in which the experiment has not been made.

cBesidesc, Axioms are not only universal, they are also necessary. Now

experience cannot offer the smallest ground for the necessity of a
proposition. She can observe and record what has happened; but she
cannot find, in any case, or in any accumulation of cases, any reason
for what must happen. She may see objects side by side; but she cannot
see a reason why they must ever be side by side. She finds certain
events to occur in succession; but the succession supplies, in its
occurrence, no reason for its recurrence. She contemplates external
objects; but she cannot detect any internal bond, which indissolubly
connects the future with the past, the possible with the real. To learn
a proposition by experience, and to see it to be necessarily true, are
two altogether different processes of thought.*

And Dr. Whewell adds, “If any one does not clearly comprehend this
distinction of necessary and contingent truths, he will not be able to
go along with us in our researches into the foundations of human
knowledge; nor, indeed, to pursue with success any speculation on the
subject.”†

dIn the following passage, we are toldd what the distinction is, the
nonrecognition of which incurs this denunciatione.

Necessary truths are those in which we not only learn that the
proposition is true, but see that it must be true; in which the negation
of the truth is not only false, but impossible; in which we cannot, even
by an effort of imagination, or in a supposition, conceive the reverse
of that which is asserted. That there are such truths cannot be doubted.
We may take, for example, all relations of number. Three and Two added
together make Five. We cannot conceive it to be otherwise. We cannot, by
any freak of thought, imagine Three and Two to make Seven.‡

Although Dr. Whewell has naturally and properly employed a variety of
phrases to bring his meaning more forcibly home, he fwouldf, I presume,
Edition: current; Page: [238] allow that they are all equivalent; and
that what he means by a necessary truth, would be sufficiently defined,
ga proposition the negation of which is not only false but
inconceivable. I am unable to find in any of hhish expressions, turn
them what way you will, a meaning beyond this, and I do not believe he
would contend that they mean anything more.

This, therefore, is the principle asserted: that propositions, the
negation of which is inconceivable, or in other words, which we cannot
figure to ourselves as being false, must rest on evidence of a higher
and more cogent description than any which experience can afford.i

Now I cannot but wonder that so much stress should be laid on jthej
circumstance of inconceivableness, when there is such ample experience
to show, that our capacity or incapacity of conceiving a thing has very
little to do with the possibility of the thing in itself; but is in
truth very much an affair of accident, and depends on the past history
and habits of our own minds. There is no more generally acknowledged
fact in human nature, than the extreme difficulty at first felt in
conceiving anything as possible, which is in contradiction to long
established and familiar experience; or even to old kfamiliar habits of
thought. And this difficulty is a necessary result of the fundamental
laws of the human mind. When we have often seen and thought of two
things together, and have never in any one instance either seen or
thought of them separately, there is by the primary law of association
an increasing difficulty, which lmay in the end becomel insuperable, of
conceiving the two things apart. This is most of all conspicuous in
uneducated persons, who are in general utterly unable to separate any
two ideas which have once become firmly associated in their minds; and
if persons of cultivated intellect have any advantage on the point, it
is only because, having seen and heard and read more, and being more
accustomed to exercise their imagination, they have experienced their
sensations and thoughts in more varied combinations, and have been
prevented from forming many of these inseparable associations. But this
advantage has necessarily its limits. The mmost practised intellect is
not exempt from the universal laws of our conceptive faculty. If daily
habit presents to nany onen for a long period two facts in combination,
and oifo he is not led during that period either by accident or pby his
voluntary mental operationsp to think of them apart, he will qprobablyq
in time become incapable of doing so even by the strongest effort;
Edition: current; Page: [239] and the supposition that the two facts can
be separated in nature, will at last present itself to his mind with all
the characters of an inconceivable phenomenon.* There are remarkable
instances of this in the history of science: instances in which the
rmost instructedr men rejected as impossible, because inconceivable,
things which their posterity, by earlier practice and longer
perseverance in the attempt, found it quite easy to conceive, and which
everybody now knows to be true. There was a time when men of the most
cultivated intellects, and the most emancipated from the dominion of
early prejudice, could not credit the existence of antipodes; were
unable to conceive, in opposition to old association, the force of
gravity acting upwards instead of downwards. The Cartesians long
rejected the Newtonian doctrine of the gravitation of all bodies towards
one another, on the faith of a general proposition, the reverse of which
seemed to them to be inconceivable—the proposition that a body cannot
act where it is not. All the cumbrous machinery of imaginary vortices,
assumed without the smallest particle of evidence, appeared to these
philosophers a more rational mode of explaining the heavenly motions,
than one which involved what seemed to them so great an absurdity.† And
they no doubt found it as impossible to conceive that a body should act
upon the earth vfromv the distance of the sun or moon, as we find it to
conceive an end to space or time, or two straight lines inclosing a
space. Newton himself had not been able to realize the conception, or we
should not have had his hypothesis of a subtle ether, the occult cause
of Edition: current; Page: [240] gravitation; and his writings prove,
that though he deemed the particular nature of the intermediate agency a
matter of conjecture, the necessity of some such agency appeared to him
indubitable.w

If, then, it be so natural to the human mind, even in xa highx state of
culture, to be incapable of conceiving, and on that ground to believe
impossible, what is afterwards not only found to be conceivable but
proved to be true; what wonder if in cases where the association is
still older, more confirmed, and more familiar, and in which nothing
ever occurs to shake our conviction, or even suggest to us any
conception at variance with the association, the acquired incapacity
should continue, and be mistaken for a natural incapacity? It is true,
our experience of the varieties in nature enables us, within certain
limits, to conceive other varieties analogous to them. We can conceive
the sun or moon falling; for though we never saw them fall, nor ever
perhaps imagined them falling, we have seen so many other things fall,
that we have innumerable familiar analogies to assist the conception;
which, after all, we should probably have some difficulty in framing,
were we not well accustomed to see the sun and moon move (or appear to
move,) so that we are only called upon to conceive a slight change in
the direction of motion, a circumstance familiar to our experience. But
when experience affords no model on which to shape the new conception,
how is it possible for us to form it? How, for example, can we imagine
an end to space or time? We never saw any object without something
beyond it, nor experienced any feeling without something following it.
When, therefore, we attempt to conceive the last point of space, we have
the idea irresistibly raised of other points beyond it. When we try to
imagine the last instant of time, we cannot help conceiving another
instant after it. Nor is there any necessity to assume, as is done by ya
modern school of metaphysiciansy, a peculiar fundamental law of the mind
to account for the feeling of infinity inherent in our conceptions of
space and time; that apparent infinity is sufficiently accounted for by
simpler and universally acknowledged laws.

Now, in the case of a geometrical axiom, such, for example, as that two
straight lines cannot inclose a space,—a truth which is testified to us
by our very earliest impressions of the external world,—how is it
possible (whether those external impressions be or be not the ground of
our belief) that the reverse of the proposition zcouldz be otherwise
than inconceivable to us? What analogy have we, what similar order of
facts in any other branch of Edition: current; Page: [241] our
experience, to facilitate to us the conception of two straight lines
inclosing a space? Nor is even this all. I have already called attention
to the peculiar property of our impressions of form, that the ideas or
mental images exactly resemble their prototypes, and adequately
represent them for the purposes of scientific observation. From this,
and from the intuitive character of the observation, which in this case
reduces itself to simple inspection, we cannot so much as call up in our
imagination two straight lines, in order to attempt to conceive them
inclosing a space, without by that very act repeating the ascientifica
experiment which establishes the contrary. Will it really be contended
that the inconceivableness of the thing, binb such circumstances, proves
anything against the experimental origin of the conviction? Is it not
clear that in whichever mode our belief in the proposition may have
originated, the impossibility of our conceiving the negative of it must,
conc either hypothesis, be the same? As, then, Dr. Whewell exhorts those
who have any difficulty in recognising the distinction held by him
between necessary and contingent truths, to study geometry,—a condition
which I can assure him I have conscientiously fulfilled,—I, in return,
with equal confidence, exhort those who agree with dhimd, to study the
egenerale laws of association; being convinced that nothing more is
requisite than a moderate familiarity with those laws, to dispel the
illusion which ascribes a peculiar necessity to our earliest inductions
from experience, and measures the possibility of things in themselves,
by the human capacity of conceiving them.

I hope to be pardoned for adding, that Dr. Whewell himself has both
confirmed by his testimony the effect of habitual association in giving
to an experimental truth the appearance of a necessary one, and afforded
a striking instance of that remarkable law in his own person. In his
Novum Organon Renovatum[*] he continually asserts, that propositions
which not only are not self-evident, but which we know to have been
discovered gradually, and by great efforts of genius and patience, have,
when once established, appeared so self-evident that, but for historical
fprooff, it would have been impossible to conceive that they had not
been recognised from the first by all persons in a sound state of their
faculties.

We now despise those who, in the Copernican controversy, could not
conceive the apparent motion of the sun on the heliocentric hypothesis;
or those who, in opposition to Galileo, thought that a uniform force
might be that which generated a velocity proportional to the space; or
those who held there was something absurd in Newton’s doctrine of the
different refrangibility of differently coloured rays; or those who
imagined that when elements combine, their sensible qualities Edition:
current; Page: [242] must be manifest in the compound; or those who were
reluctant to give up the distinction of vegetables into herbs, shrubs,
and trees. We cannot help thinking that men must have been singularly
dull of comprehension, to find a difficulty in admitting what is to us
so plain and simple. We have a latent persuasion that we in their place
should have been wiser and more clear-sighted; that we should have taken
the right side, and given our assent at once to the truth. Yet in
reality such a persuasion is a mere delusion. The persons who, in such
instances as the above, were on the losing side, were very far, in most
cases, from being persons more prejudiced, or stupid, or narrow-minded,
than the greater part of mankind now are; and the cause for which they
fought was far from being a manifestly bad one, till it had been so
decided by the result of the war. . . . So complete has been the victory
of truth in most of these instances, that at present we can hardly
imagine the struggle to have been necessary. The very essence of these
triumphs is, that they lead us to regard the views we reject as not only
false but inconceivable.*

This last proposition is precisely what I contend for; and I ask no
more, in order to overthrow the whole theory of gits authorg on the
nature of the evidence of axioms. For what is that theory? That the
truth of axioms cannot have been learnt from experience, because their
falsity is inconceivable. But Dr. Whewell himself says, that we are
continually led, by the natural progress of thought, to regard as
inconceivable what our forefathers not only conceived but believed, nay
even (he might have added) were unable to conceive the hreverseh of.
iHei cannot intend to justify this mode of thought: he cannot mean to
say, that we can be right in regarding as inconceivable what others have
conceived, and as self-evident what to others did not appear evident at
all. After so complete an admission that inconceivableness is an
accidental thing, not inherent in the phenomenon itself, but dependent
on the mental history of the person who tries to conceive it, how can he
ever call upon us to reject a proposition as impossible on no other
ground than its inconceivableness? Yet he not only does so, but has
unintentionally afforded some of the most remarkable examples which can
be cited of the very illusion which he has himself so clearly pointed
out. jIj select as specimens, his remarks on the evidence of the three
laws of motion, and of the atomic theory.

With respect to the laws of motion, Dr. Whewell says: “No one can doubt
that, in historical fact, these laws were collected from experience.
That such is the case, is no matter of conjecture. We know the time, the
persons, the circumstances, belonging to each step of each discovery.”†
After kthisk testimony, to adduce evidence of the fact would be
superfluous. And not only Edition: current; Page: [243] were these laws
by no means intuitively evident, but some of them were originally
paradoxes. The first law was especially so. That a body, once in motion,
would continue for ever to move in the same direction with undiminished
velocity unless acted upon by some new force, was a proposition which
mankind found for a long time the greatest difficulty in crediting. It
stood opposed to apparent experience of the most familiar kind, which
taught that it was the nature of motion to abate gradually, and at last
terminate of itself. Yet when once the contrary doctrine was firmly
established, mathematicians, as Dr. Whewell observes, speedily began to
believe that laws, thus contradictory to first appearances, and which,
even after full proof had been obtained, it had required generations to
render familiar to the minds of the scientific world, were under “a
demonstrable necessity, compelling them to be such as they are and no
other;” and lhe himself, though not venturing “absolutelyl to pronounce”
that all these laws “can be rigorously traced to an absolute necessity
in the nature of things,”* does actually mso thinkm of the law just
mentioned; of which he says: “Though the discovery of the first law of
motion was made, historically speaking, by means of experiment, we have
now attained a point of view in which we see that it might have been
certainly known to be true, independently of experience.”† Can there be
a more striking exemplification than is here afforded, of the effect of
association which we have described? Philosophers, for generations, have
the most extraordinary difficulty in putting certain ideas together;
they at last succeed in doing so; and after a sufficient repetition of
the process, they first fancy a natural bond between the ideas, then
experience a growing difficulty, which at last, by the continuation of
the same progress, becomes an impossibility, of severing them from one
another. If such be the progress of an experimental conviction of which
the date is of yesterday, and which is in opposition to first
appearances, how must it fare with those which are conformable to
appearances familiar from the first dawn of intelligence, and of the
conclusiveness of which, from the earliest records of human thought, no
sceptic has suggested even a momentary doubt?

The other instance which nIn shall quote is a truly astonishing one, and
may be called the reductio ad absurdum of the theory of
inconceivableness. Speaking of the laws of chemical composition, Dr.
Whewell says:‡

That they could never have been clearly understood, and therefore never
firmly established, without laborious and exact experiments, is certain;
but yet we may Edition: current; Page: [244] venture to say, that being
once known, they possess an evidence beyond that of mere experiment. For
how in fact can we conceive combinations, otherwise than as definite in
kind and quantity? If we were to suppose each element ready to combine
with any other indifferently, and indifferently in any quantity, we
should have a world in which all would be confusion and indefiniteness.
There would be no fixed kinds of bodies. Salts, and stones, and ores,
would approach to and graduate into each other by insensible degrees.
Instead of this, we know that the world consists of bodies
distinguishable from each other by definite differences, capable of
being classified and named, and of having general propositions asserted
concerning them. And as we cannot conceive a world in which this should
not be the case, it would appear that we cannot conceive a state of
things in which the laws of the combination of elements should not be of
that definite and measured kind which we have above asserted.o

That a philosopher of Dr. Whewell’s eminence should gravely assert that
we cannot conceive a world in which the simple elements pshouldp combine
in other than definite proportions; that by dint of meditating on a
scientific truth, the original discoverer of which qwasq still living,
he should have rendered the association in his own mind between the idea
of combination and that of constant proportions so familiar and intimate
as to be unable to conceive the one fact without the other; is so signal
an instance of the rmental lawr for which I am contending, that one word
more in illustration must be ssuperfluous.s

tIn the latest and most complete elaboration of his metaphysical system
Edition: current; Page: [245] (the Philosophy of Discovery), as well as
in the earlier discourse on the Fundamental Antithesis of Philosophy,
reprinted as an appendix to that work,[*] Dr. Whewell, while very
candidly admitting that his language was open to misconception,
disclaims having intended to say that mankind in general can now
perceive the law of definite proportions in chemical combination to be a
necessary truth. All he meant was that philosophical chemists in a
future generation may possibly see this. “Some truths may be seen by
intuition, but yet the intuition of them may be a rare and uau difficult
attainment.”* And he explains that the inconceivableness which,
accordingly to his theory, is the test of axioms,

depends entirely upon the clearness of the Ideas which the axioms
involve. So long as those ideas are vague and indistinct, the contrary
of an axiom may be assented to, though it cannot be distinctly
conceived. It may be assented to, not because it is possible, but
because we do not see clearly what is possible. To a person who is only
beginning to think geometrically, there may appear nothing absurd in the
assertion, that two straight lines may inclose a space. And in the same
manner, to a person who is only beginning to think of mechanical truths,
it may not appear to be absurd, that in mechanical processes, Reaction
should be greater or less than Action; and so, again, to a person who
has not thought steadily about Substance, it may not appear
inconceivable, that by chemical operations, we should generate new
matter, or destroy matter which already exists.†

Necessary truths, therefore, are not those of which we cannot conceive,
but “those of which we cannot distinctly conceive, the contrary.”‡ So
long as our ideas are indistinct altogether, we do not know what is or
is not capable of being distinctly conceived; but, by the ever
increasing distinctness with which scientific men apprehend the general
conceptions of science, they in time come to perceive that there are
certain laws of nature, which, though historically and as a matter of
fact they were learnt from experience, we cannot, now that we know them,
distinctly conceive to be other than they are.

The account which I should give of this progress of the scientific mind
is somewhat different. After a general law of nature has been
ascertained, men’s minds do not at first acquire a complete facility of
familiarly representing to themselves the phenomena of nature in the
character which that law assigns to them. The habit which constitutes
the scientific cast of mind, that of conceiving facts of all
descriptions conformably to the laws which regulate Edition: current;
Page: [246] them—phenomena of all descriptions according to the
relations which have been ascertained really to exist between them; this
habit, in the case of newly discovered relations, comes only by degrees.
So long as it is not thoroughly formed, no necessary character is
ascribed to the new truth. But in time, the philosopher attains a state
of mind in which his mental picture of nature spontaneously represents
to him all the phenomena with which the new theory is concerned, in the
exact light in which the theory regards them: all images or conceptions
derived from any other theory, or from the confused view of the facts
which is anterior to any theory, having entirely disappeared from his
mind. The mode of representing facts which results from the theory, has
now become, to his faculties, the only natural mode of conceiving them.
It is a known truth, that a prolonged habit of arranging phenomena in
certain groups, and explaining them by means of certain principles,
makes any other arrangement or explanation of these facts be felt as
unnatural: and it may at last become as difficult to him to represent
the facts to himself in any other mode, as it often was, originally, to
represent them in that mode.

But, further, (if the theory is true, as we are supposing it to be,) any
other mode in which he tries, or in which he was formerly accustomed, to
represent the phenomena, will be seen by him to be inconsistent with the
facts that suggested the new theory—facts which now form a part of his
mental picture of nature. And since a contradiction is always
inconceivable, his imagination rejects these false theories, and
declares itself incapable of conceiving them. Their inconceivableness to
him does not, however, result from anything in the theories themselves,
intrinsically and à priori repugnant to the human faculties; it results
from the repugnance between them and a portion of the facts; which facts
as long as he did not know, or did not distinctly realize in his mental
representations, the false theory did not appear other than conceivable;
it becomes inconceivable, merely from the fact that contradictory
elements cannot be combined in the same conception. Although, then, his
real reason for rejecting theories at variance with the true one, is no
other than that they clash with his experience, he easily falls into the
belief, that he rejects them because they are inconceivable, and vthat
hev adopts the true theory because it is self-evident, and does not need
the evidence of experience at all.

This I take to be the real and sufficient explanation of the paradoxical
truth, on which so much stress is laid by Dr. Whewell, that a
scientifically cultivated mind is actually, in virtue of that
cultivation, unable to conceive suppositions which a common man
conceives without the smallest difficulty. For there is nothing
inconceivable in the suppositions themselves; the impossibility is in
combining them with facts inconsistent with them, as part of the same
mental picture; an obstacle of course only felt by those who know
Edition: current; Page: [247] the facts, and are able to perceive the
inconsistency. As far as the suppositions themselves are concerned, in
the case of many of Dr. Whewell’s necessary truths the negative of the
axiom is, and probably will be as long as the human race lasts, as
easily conceivable as the affirmative. There is no axiom (for example)
to which Dr. Whewell ascribes a more thorough character of necessity and
self-evidence, than that of the indestructibility of matter.[*] That
this is a true law of nature I fully admit; but I imagine there is no
human being to whom the opposite supposition is inconceivable—who has
any difficulty in imagining a portion of matter annihilated: inasmuch as
its apparent annihilation, in no respect distinguishable from real by
our unassisted senses, takes place every time that water dries up, or
fuel is consumed. Again, the law that bodies combine chemically in
definite proportions is undeniably true; but few besides Dr. Whewell
have reached the point which he seems personally to have arrived at,
(though he only dares prophesy similar success to the multitude after
the lapse of generations,) that of being unable to conceive a world in
which the elements are ready to combine with one another “indifferently
in any quantity;”[†] nor is it likely that we shall ever rise to this
sublime height of inability, so long as all the mechanical mixtures in
our planet, whether solid, liquid, or aëriform, exhibit to our daily
observation the very phenomenon declared to be inconceivable.

According to Dr. Whewell, these and similar laws of nature cannot be
drawn from experience, inasmuch as they are, on the contrary, assumed in
the interpretation of experience. Our inability to “add to or diminish
the quantity of matter in the world,” is a truth which “neither is nor
can be derived from experience; for the experiments which we make to
verify it presuppose its truth. . . . When men began to use the balance
in chemical analysis, they did not prove by trial, but took for granted,
as self-evident, that the weight of the whole must be found in the
aggregate weight of the elements.”* True, it is assumed; but, I
apprehend, no otherwise than as all experimental inquiry assumes
provisionally some theory or hypothesis, which is to be finally held
true or not, according as the experiments decide. The hypothesis chosen
for this purpose will naturally be one which groups together some
considerable number of facts already known. The proposition that the
material of the world, as estimated by weight, is neither increased nor
diminished by any of the processes of nature or art, had many
appearances in its favour to begin with. It expressed truly a great
number of familiar facts. There were other facts which it had the
appearance of conflicting with, and which made its truth, as an
universal law of nature, at first doubtful. Because it was doubtful,
experiments were devised to verify it. Men assumed Edition: current;
Page: [248] its truth hypothetically, and proceeded to try whether, on
more careful examination, the phenomena which apparently pointed to a
different conclusion, would not be found to be consistent with it. This
turned out to be the case; and from that time the doctrine took its
place as an universal truth, but as one proved to be such by experience.
That the theory itself preceded the proof of its truth—that it had to be
conceived before it could be proved, and in order that it might be
proved—does not imply that it was self-evident, and did not need proof.
Otherwise all the true theories in the sciences are necessary and
self-evident; for no one knows better than Dr. Whewell that they all
began by being assumed, for the purpose of connecting them by deductions
with those facts of experience on which, as evidence, they now
confessedly rest.t*

Edition: current; Page: [249] Edition: current; Page: [251]
gAnother eminent mathematician had previously sanctioned by his
authority the doctrine of the origin of geometrical axioms in
experience. “Geometry is thus founded likewise on observation; but of a
kind so familiar and obvious, that the primary notions which it
furnishes might seem intuitive.” Sir John Leslie [Rudiments of Plane
Geometry. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd, 1828, p. 18], quoted by Sir
William Hamilton, Discussions, p. 272.g

Edition: current; Page: [252]


CHAPTER VI: The Same Subject Continued

§ 1. [All deductive sciences are inductive] In the examination which
formed the subject of the last chapter, into the nature of the evidence
of those deductive sciences which are commonly represented to be systems
of necessary truth, we have been led to the following conclusions. aThea
results of those sciences are indeed necessary, in the sense of
necessarily following from certain first principles, commonly called
axioms and definitions; bthat is,b of being certainly true if those
axioms and definitions are soc; for the word necessity, even in this
acceptation of it, means no more than certaintyc. But their claim to the
character of necessity in any sense beyond this, as implying an evidence
independent of and superior to observation and experience, must depend
on the previous establishment of such a claim in favour of the
definitions and axioms themselves. With regard to axioms, we found that,
considered as experimental truths, they rest on superabundant and
obvious evidence. We inquired, whether, since this is the case, it be
dimperatived to suppose any other evidence of those truths than
experimental evidence, any other origin for our belief of them than an
experimental origin. We decided, that the burden of proof lies with
those who maintain the affirmative, and we examined, at considerable
length, such arguments as they have produced. The examination having led
to the rejection of those arguments, we have thought ourselves warranted
in concluding that axioms are but a class, the emost universale class,
of inductions from experience; the simplest and easiest cases of
generalization from the facts furnished to us by our senses or by our
internal consciousness.

While the axioms of demonstrative sciences thus appeared to be
experimental truths, the definitions, as they are incorrectly called,
finf those sciences, were found by us to be generalizations from
experience which are not even, accurately speaking, truths; being
propositions in which, while we assert of some kind of object, some
property or properties which observation shows to belong to it, we at
the same time deny that it possesses any other properties, though in
truth other properties do in every individual instance Edition: current;
Page: [253] accompany, and in galmostg all instances modify, the
property thus exclusively predicated. The denial, therefore, is a mere
fiction, or supposition, made for the purpose of excluding the
consideration of those modifying circumstances, when their influence is
of too trifling amount to be worth considering, or adjourning it, when
important, to a more convenient moment.

From these considerations it would appear that Deductive or
Demonstrative Sciences are all, without exception, Inductive Sciences;
that their evidence is that of experience; but that they are also, in
virtue of the peculiar character of one indispensable portion of the
general formulæ according to which their inductions are made,
Hypothetical Sciences. Their conclusions are only true on certain
suppositions, which are, or ought to be, approximations to the truth,
but are seldom, if ever, exactly true; and to this hypothetical
character is to be ascribed the peculiar certainty, which is supposed to
be inherent in demonstration.

What we have now asserted, however, cannot be received as universally
true of Deductive or Demonstrative Sciences, until verified by being
applied to the most remarkable of all those sciences, that of Numbers;
the theory of the Calculus; Arithmetic and Algebra. It is harder to
believe of the doctrines of this science than of any other, either that
they are not truths à priori, but experimental truths, or that their
peculiar certainty is owing to their being not absolute but only
conditional truths. This, therefore, is a case which merits examination
apart; and the more so, because on this subject we have a double set of
doctrines to contend with; that of hthe à priori philosophers on one
side; and on the other, a itheory the most opposite to theirs, which was
at one time very generally received, and is still far from being
altogether exploded, among metaphysicians.

§ 2. [The propositions of the science of number are not verbal, but
generalizations from experience] This theory attempts to solve the
difficulty apparently inherent in the case, by representing the
propositions of the science of numbers as merely verbal, and its
processes as simple transformations of language, substitutions of one
expression for another. The proposition, Two and one aisa equal to
three, according to these bwritersb, is not a truth, is not the
assertion of a really existing fact, but a definition of the word three;
a statement that mankind have agreed to use the name three as a sign
exactly equivalent to two and one; to call by the former name whatever
is called by the other more clumsy phrase. According to this doctrine,
the longest process in algebra is but a succession of changes in
terminology, by which equivalent expressions are substituted one for
another; a series of Edition: current; Page: [254] translations of the
same fact, from one into another language; though how, after such a
series of translations, the fact itself comes out changed (as when we
demonstrate a new geometrical theorem by algebra,) they have not
explained; and it is a difficulty which is fatal to their theory.

It must be acknowledged that there are peculiarities in the processes of
arithmetic and algebra which render the ctheory in questionc very
plausible, and have not unnaturally made those sciences the stronghold
of Nominalism. The doctrine that we can discover facts, detect the
hidden processes of nature, by an artful manipulation of language, is so
contrary to common sense, that a person must have made some advances in
philosophy to believe it: men fly to so paradoxical a belief to avoid,
as they think, some even greater difficulty, which the vulgar do not
see. What has led dmany to believe that reasoning is a mere verbal
process, is, that no other theory seemed reconcileable with the nature
of the Science of Numbers. For we do not carry any ideas along with us
when we use the symbols of arithmetic or of algebra. In a geometrical
demonstration we have a mental diagram, if not one on paper; AB, AC, are
present to our imagination as lines, intersecting other lines, forming
an angle with one another, and the like; but not so a and b. These may
represent lines or any other magnitudes, but those magnitudes are never
thought of; nothing is realized in our imagination but a and b. The
ideas which, on the particular occasion, they happen to represent, are
banished from the mind during every intermediate part of the process,
between the beginning, when the premises are translated from things into
signs, and the end, when the conclusion is translated back from signs
into things. Nothing, then, being in the reasoner’s mind but the
symbols, what can seem more inadmissible than to econtende that the
reasoning process has to do with anything more? We seem to have come to
one of fBacon’s Prerogative Instances;[*] an experimentum crucis[†] on
the nature of reasoning itself.

Nevertheless, it will appear on consideration, that this apparently so
decisive instance is no instance at all; that there is in every step of
an arithmetical or algebraical calculation a real induction, a real
inference of facts from facts; and that what disguises the induction is
simply its comprehensive nature, and the consequent extreme generality
of the language. All numbers must be numbers of something: there are no
such things as numbers in the abstract. Ten must mean ten bodies, or ten
sounds, or ten beatings of the pulse. But though numbers must be numbers
of something, they may be Edition: current; Page: [255] numbers of
anything. Propositions, therefore, concerning numbers, have the
remarkable peculiarity that they are propositions concerning all things
whatever; all objects, all existences of every kind, known to our
experience. All things possess quantity; consist of parts which can be
numbered; and in that character possess all the properties which are
called properties of numbers. That half of four is two, must be true
whatever the word four represents, whether four ghoursg, four miles, or
four pounds weight. We need only conceive a thing divided into four
equal parts, (and all things may be conceived as so divided,) to be able
to predicate of it every property of the number four, that is, every
arithmetical proposition in which the number four stands on one side of
the equation. Algebra extends the generalization still farther: every
number represents that particular number of all things without
distinction, but every algebraical symbol does more, it represents all
numbers without distinction. As soon as we conceive a thing divided into
equal parts, without knowing into what number of parts, we may call it a
or x, and apply to it, without danger of error, every algebraical
formula in the books. The proposition, 2 (a + b) = 2 a + 2 b, is a truth
co-extensive with hall natureh. Since then algebraical truths are true
of all things whatever, and not, like those of geometry, true of lines
only or iofi angles only, it is no wonder that the symbols should not
excite in our minds ideas of any things in particular. When we
demonstrate the forty-seventh proposition of Euclid,[*] it is not
necessary that the words should raise in us an image of all right-angled
triangles, but only of some one right-angled triangle: so in algebra we
need not, under the symbol a, picture to ourselves all things whatever,
but only some one thing; why not, then, the letter itself? The mere
written characters, a, b, x, y, z, serve as well for representatives of
Things in general, as any more complex and apparently more concrete
conception. That we are conscious of them however in their character of
things, and not of mere signs, is evident from the fact that our whole
process of reasoning is carried on by predicating of them the properties
of things. In resolving an algebraic equation, by what rules do we
proceed? By applying at each step to a, b, and x, the proposition that
equals added to equals make equals; that equals taken from equals leave
equals; and other propositions founded on these two. These are not
properties of language, or of signs as such, but of magnitudes, which is
as much as to say, of all things. The inferences, therefore, which are
successively drawn, are inferences concerning things, not symbols;
though as any Things whatever will serve the turn, there is no necessity
for keeping the idea of the Thing at all distinct, and consequently the
process of thought may, in this case, be allowed without danger to do
what all processes of thought, Edition: current; Page: [256] when they
have been performed often, will do if permitted, namely, to become
entirely mechanical. Hence the general language of algebra comes to be
used familiarly without exciting ideas, as all other general language is
prone to do from mere habit, though in no other case than this can it be
done with complete safety. But when we look back to see from whence the
probative force of the process is derived, we find that at every single
step, unless we suppose ourselves to be thinking and talking of the
things, and not the mere symbols, the evidence fails.

There is another circumstance, which, still more than that which we have
now mentioned, gives plausibility to the notion that the propositions of
arithmetic and algebra are merely verbal. jThatj is, that when
considered as propositions respecting Things, they kall have the
appearance of beingk identical propositions. The assertion, Two and one
lisl equal to three, considered as an assertion respecting objects, masm
for instance “Two pebbles and one pebble are equal to three pebbles,”
does not affirm equality between two collections of pebbles, but
absolute identity. It affirms that if we put one pebble to two pebbles,
those very pebbles are three. The objects, therefore, being the very
same, and the mere assertion that “objects are themselves” being
insignificant, it seems but natural to consider the proposition, Two and
one nisn equal to three, as asserting mere identity of signification
between the two names.

This, however, though it looks so plausible, will not obearo
examination. The expression “two pebbles and one pebble,” and the
expression, “three pebbles,” stand indeed for the same aggregation of
objects, but they by no means stand for the same physical fact. They are
names of the same objects, but of those objects in two different states:
though they denote the same things, their connotation is different.
Three pebbles in two separate parcels, and three pebbles in one parcel,
do not make the same impression on our senses; and the assertion that
the very same pebbles may by an alteration of place and arrangement be
made to produce either the one set of sensations or the other, though pa
very familiar proposition, is not an identical one. It is a truth known
to us by early and constant experience: an inductive truth; and such
truths are the foundation of the science of Number. The fundamental
truths of that science all rest on the evidence of sense; they are
proved by showing to our eyes and our fingers that any given number of
objects, ten balls for example, may by separation and re-arrangement
exhibit to our senses all the different sets of numbers the sum of which
is equal to ten. All the improved methods of teaching arithmetic to
children proceed on a knowledge of this fact. All who wish to carry the
child’s mind along with them in Edition: current; Page: [257] learning
arithmetic; all who qwish to teach numbers, and not mere ciphers—now
teach it through the evidence of the senses, in the manner we have
described.r

We may, if we please, call the proposition, “Three is two and one,” a
definition of the number three, and assert that arithmetic, as it has
been asserted that geometry, is a science founded on definitions. But
they are definitions in the geometrical sense, not the logical;
asserting not the meaning of a term only, but along with it an observed
matter of fact. The proposition, “A circle is a figure bounded by a line
which has all its points equally distant from a point within it,” is
called the definition of a circle; but the proposition from which so
many consequences follow, and which is really a first principle sins
geometry, is, that figures answering to this description exist. And thus
we may call “Three is two and one” a definition of three; but the
calculations which depend on that proposition do not follow from the
definition itself, but from an arithmetical theorem presupposed in it,
namely, that collections of objects exist, which while they impress the
senses thus, [lf0223-07_eq01.png], may be separated into two parts,
thus, [lf0223-07_eq02.png]. This proposition being granted, we term all
such parcels Threes, after which the enunciation of the above mentioned
physical fact will serve also for a definition of the word Three.

The Science of Number is thus no exception to the conclusion we
previously arrived at, that the processes even of deductive sciences are
altogether inductive, and that their first principles are
generalizations from experience. It remains to be examined whether this
science resembles geometry in the further circumstance, that some of its
inductions are not exactly true; and that the peculiar certainty
ascribed to it, on account of which its propositions are called
Necessary Truths, is fictitious and hypothetical, being true in no other
sense than that those propositions tlegitimatelyt follow from the
hypothesis of the truth of premises which are avowedly mere
approximations to truth.

Edition: current; Page: [258]
§ 3. [In what sense the propositions of the science of number are
hypothetical] The inductions of arithmetic are of two sorts: first,
those which we have just expounded, such as One and one are two, Two and
one are three, &c., which may be called the definitions of the various
numbers, in the improper or geometrical sense of the word Definition;
and secondly, the two following axioms: The sums of equals are equal,
aThe differences of equals are equal. These two are sufficient; for the
corresponding propositions respecting unequals may be proved from these,
by bab reductio ad absurdum.

These axioms, and likewise the so-called definitions, are, as chas
already been saidc, results of induction; true of all objects whatever,
and, as it may seem, exactly true, without dthed hypothetical assumption
of unqualified truth where an approximation to it is all that exists.
The conclusions, therefore, it will naturally be inferred, are exactly
true, and the science of number is an exception to other demonstrative
sciences in this, that the ecategoricale certainty which is predicable
of its demonstrations is independent of all hypothesis.

On more accurate investigation, however, it will be found that, even in
this case, there is one hypothetical element in the ratiocination. In
all propositions concerning numbers, a condition is implied, without
which none of them would be true; and that condition is an assumption
which may be false. The condition, is that 1 = 1; that all the numbers
are numbers of the same or of equal units. Let this be doubtful, and not
one of the propositions of arithmetic will hold true. How can we know
that one pound and one pound make two pounds, if one of the pounds may
be troy, and the other avoirdupois? They may not make two pounds of
either, or of any weight. How can we know that a forty-horse power is
always equal to itself, unless we assume that all horses are of equal
strength? It is certain that 1 is always equal in number to 1; and where
the mere number of objects, or of the parts of an object, without
supposing them to be equivalent in any other respect, is all that is
material, the conclusions of arithmetic, so far as they go to that
alone, are true without mixture of hypothesis. There are fsuch cases in
statisticsf; as, for instance, an inquiry into the amount of gtheg
population of any country. It is indifferent to that inquiry whether
they are grown people or children, strong or weak, tall or short; the
only thing we want to ascertain is their number. But whenever, from
equality or inequality of number, equality or inequality in any other
respect is to be inferred, arithmetic carried into Edition: current;
Page: [259] such inquiries becomes as hypothetical a science as
geometry. All units must be assumed to be equal in that other respect;
and this is never haccuratelyh true, for one iactuali pound weight is
not exactly equal to another, nor one jmeasuredj mile’s length to
another; a nicer balance, or more accurate measuring instruments, would
always detect some difference.

What is commonly called mathematical certainty, therefore, which
comprises the twofold conception of unconditional truth and perfect
accuracy, is not an attribute of all mathematical truths, but of those
only which relate to pure Number, as distinguished from Quantity in the
more enlarged sense; and only so long as we abstain from supposing that
the numbers are a precise index to actual quantities. The certainty
usually ascribed to the conclusions of geometry, and even to those of
mechanics, is nothing whatever but certainty of inference. We can have
full assurance of particular results under particular suppositions, but
we cannot have the same assurance that these suppositions are accurately
true, nor that they include all the data which may exercise an influence
over the result in any given instance.

§ 4. [The characteristic property of demonstrative science is to be
hypothetical] It appears, therefore, that the method of all Deductive
Sciences is hypothetical. They proceed by tracing the consequences of
certain assumptions; leaving for separate consideration whether the
assumptions are true or not, and if not exactly true, whether they are a
sufficiently near approximation to the truth. The reason is obvious.
Since it is only in questions of pure number that the assumptions are
exactly true, and even there, only so long as no conclusions except
purely numerical ones are to be founded on them; it must, in all other
cases of deductive investigation, form a part of the inquiry, to
determine how much the assumptions want of being exactly true in the
case in hand. This is generally a matter of observation, to be repeated
in every fresh case; or if it has to be settled by argument instead of
observation, may require in every different case different evidence, and
present every degree of difficulty, from the lowest to the highest. But
the other part of the process—namely, to determine what else may be
concluded if we find, and in proportion as we find, the assumptions to
be true—may be performed once for all, and the results held ready to be
employed as the occasions turn up for use. We thus do all beforehand
that can be so done, and leave the least possible work to be performed
when cases arise and press for a decision. This inquiry into the
inferences which can be drawn from assumptions, is what properly
constitutes Demonstrative Science.

It is of course quite as practicable to arrive at new conclusions from
facts Edition: current; Page: [260] assumed, as from facts observed;
from fictitious, as from real, inductions. Deduction, as we have seen,
consists of a series of inferences in this form—a is a mark of b, b of
c, c of d, therefore a is a mark of d, which last may be a truth
inaccessible to direct observation. In like manner it is allowable to
say, suppose that a were a mark of b, b of c, and c of d, a would be a
mark of d, which last conclusion was not thought of by those who laid
down the premises. A system of propositions as complicated as geometry
might be deduced from assumptions which are false; as was done by
Ptolemy, Descartes, and others, in their attempts to explain
synthetically the phenomena of the solar system on the supposition that
the apparent motions of the heavenly bodies were the real motions, or
were produced in some way more or less different from the true one.
Sometimes the same thing is knowingly done, for the purpose of showing
the falsity of the assumption; which is called a reductio ad absurdum.
In such cases, the reasoning is as follows: a is a mark of b, and b of
c; now if c were also a mark of d, a would be a mark of d; but d is
known to be a mark of the absence of a; consequently a would be a mark
of its own absence, which is a contradiction; therefore c is not a mark
of d.

§ 5. [Definition of demonstrative evidencea] It has even been held by
some bwritersb, that all ratiocination rests in the last resort on a
reductio ad absurdum; since the way to enforce assent to it, in case of
obscurity, would be to show that if the conclusion be denied we must
deny some one at least of the premises, which, as they are all supposed
true, would be a contradiction. And in accordance with this, many have
thought that the peculiar nature of the evidence of ratiocination
consisted in the impossibility of admitting the premises and rejecting
the conclusion without a contradiction in terms. This theory, however,
is cinadmissible as an explanation of the grounds on which ratiocination
itself rests. If any one denies the conclusion notwithstanding his
admission of the premises, he is not involved in any direct and express
contradiction until he is compelled to deny some premise; and he can
only be forced to do this by a reductio ad absurdum, that is, by another
ratiocination: now, if he denies the validity of the reasoning process
itself, he can no more be forced to assent to the second syllogism than
to the first. In truth, therefore, no one is ever forced to a
contradiction in terms: he can only be forced to a contradiction (or
rather an infringement) of the fundamental maxim of ratiocination,
namely, that whatever has a mark, has what it is a mark of; or, (in the
case of universal propositions,) that whatever is a mark of danythingd,
is a mark of whatever else that thing is a mark of. Edition: current;
Page: [261] For in the case of every correct argument, as soon as thrown
into the syllogistic form, it is evident without the aid of any other
syllogism, that he who, admitting the premises, fails to draw the
conclusion, does not conform to the above axiom.e

fWe have now proceeded as far in the theory of Deduction as we can
advance in the present stage of our inquiry. Any further insight into
the subject requires that the foundation shall have been laid of the
philosophic theory of Induction itself; in which theory that of
Deduction, as a mode of Induction, which we have now shown it to be,
will assume spontaneously the place which belongs to it, and will
receive its share of whatever light may be thrown upon the great
intellectual operation of which it forms so important a part.g

Edition: current; Page: [262]


aCHAPTER VII: Examination of Some Opinions Opposed to the Preceding Doctrines

§ 1. [Doctrine of the Universal Postulate] Polemical discussion is
foreign to the plan of this work. But an opinion which stands in need of
much illustration, can often receive it most effectually, and least
tediously, in the form of a defence against objections. And on subjects
concerning which speculative minds are still divided, a writer does but
half his duty by stating his own doctrine, if he does not also examine,
and to the best of his ability judge, those of other thinkers.

In btheb dissertation which Mr. Herbert Spencer has prefixed to his, in
many respects, highly philosophical treatise con the Mindc,* he
criticises some of the doctrines of the two preceding chapters, and
propounds a theory of his own on the subject of first principles. Mr.
Spencer agrees with me in considering axioms to be “simply our earliest
inductions from experience.” But he differs from me “widely as to the
worth of the test of inconceivableness.”[*] He thinks that it is the
ultimate test of all beliefs. He arrives at this conclusion by two
steps. First, we never can have any stronger ground for believing
anything, than that the belief of it “invariably exists.”[†] Whenever
any fact or proposition is invariably believed; that is, if I understand
Mr. Spencer rightly, believed by all persons, and by oneself at all
times; it is entitled to be received as one of the primitive truths, or
original premises of our knowledge. Secondly, the criterion by which we
decide whether anything is invariably believed to be true, is our
inability to conceive it as false. “The inconceivability of its negation
is the test by which we ascertain whether a given belief invariably
exists or not.”[‡] “For our primary beliefs, the fact of invariable
existence, tested by an abortive effort to cause their non-existence, is
the only reason assignable.”[§] He thinks this the sole ground of our
belief Edition: current; Page: [263] in our own sensations. If I believe
that I feel cold, I only receive this as true because I cannot conceive
that I am not feeling cold. “While the proposition remains true, the
negation of it remains inconceivable.”[*] There are numerous other
beliefs which Mr. Spencer considers to rest on the same basis; being
chiefly those, or a part of those, which the metaphysicians of the Reid
and Stewart school consider as truths of immediate intuition. That there
exists a material world; that this is the very world which we directly
and immediately perceive, and not merely the hidden cause of our
perceptions; that Space, Time, Force, Extension, Figure, are not modes
of our consciousness, but objective realities; are regarded by Mr.
Spencer as truths known by the inconceivableness of their negatives. We
cannot, he says, by any effort, conceive these objects of thought as
mere states of our mind; as not having an existence external to us.
Their real existence is, therefore, as certain as our sensations
themselves. The truths which are the subject of direct knowledge, being,
according to this doctrine, known to be truths only by the
inconceivability of their negation; and the truths which are not the
dobjectd of direct knowledge, being known as inferences from those which
are; and those inferences being believed to follow from the premises,
only because we cannot conceive them not to follow; inconceivability is
thus the ultimate ground of all assured beliefs.

Thus far, there is no very wide difference between Mr. Spencer’s
doctrine and the ordinary one of philosophers of the intuitive school,
from Descartes to Dr. Whewell; but at this point Mr. Spencer diverges
from them. For he does not, like them, set up the test of
inconceivability as infallible. On the contrary, he holds that it may be
fallacious, not from any fault in the test itself, but because “men have
mistaken for inconceivable things, some things which were not
inconceivable.”[†] And he himself, in this very book, denies not a few
propositions usually regarded as among the most marked examples of
truths whose negations are inconceivable. But occasional failure, he
says, is incident to all tests. If such failure vitiates “the test of
inconceivableness,” it

must similarly vitiate all tests whatever. We consider an inference
logically drawn from established premises to be true. Yet in millions of
cases men have been wrong in the inferences they have thought thus
drawn. Do we therefore argue that it is absurd to consider an inference
true on no other ground than that it is logically drawn from established
premises? No: we say that though men may have taken for logical
inferences, inferences that were not logical, there nevertheless are
logical inferences, and that we are justified in assuming the truth of
what seem to us such, until better instructed. Similarly, though men may
have thought some things inconceivable which were not so, there may
still be inconceivable things; and the inability to conceive the
negation of a thing, may still be our best warrant for believing it. . .
. Though occasionally it may prove an imperfect test, yet, as our most
certain beliefs are capable of no better, to doubt Edition: current;
Page: [264] any one belief because we have no higher guarantee for it,
is really to doubt all beliefs.[*]

Mr. Spencer’s doctrine, therefore, does not erect the curable, but only
the incurable limitations of the human conceptive faculty, into laws of
the outward universe.

§ 2. [The test of inconceivability does not represent the aggregate of
past experience] The doctrine, that “a belief which is proved by the
inconceivableness of its negation to invariably exist, is true,”[†] Mr.
Spencer enforces by two arguments, one of which may be distinguished as
positive, and the other as negative.

The positive argument is, that every such belief represents the
aggregate of all past experience. “Conceding the entire truth of” the

position, that during any phase of human progress, the ability or
inability to form a specific conception wholly depends on the
experiences men have had; and that, by a widening of their experiences,
they may, by and by, be enabled to conceive things before inconceivable
to them, it may still be argued that as, at any time, the best warrant
men can have for a belief is the perfect agreement of all pre-existing
experience in support of it, it follows that, at any time, the
inconceivableness of its negation is the deepest test any belief admits
of. . . . Objective facts are ever impressing themselves upon us; our
experience is a register of these objective facts; and the
inconceivableness of a thing implies that it is wholly at variance with
the register. Even were this all, it is not clear how, if every truth is
primarily inductive, any better test of truth could exist. But it must
be remembered that whilst many of these facts, impressing themselves
upon us, are occasional; whilst others again are very general; some are
universal and unchanging. These universal and unchanging facts are, by
the hypothesis, certain to establish beliefs of which the negations are
inconceivable; whilst the others are not certain to do this; and if they
do, subsequent facts will reverse their action. Hence if, after an
immense accumulation of experiences, there remain beliefs of which the
negations are still inconceivable, most, if not all of them, must
correspond to universal objective facts. If there be . . . certain
absolute uniformities in nature; if these uniformities produce, as they
must, absolute uniformities in our experience; and if . . . these
absolute uniformities in our experience disable us from conceiving the
negations of them; then answering to each absolute uniformity in nature
which we can cognize, there must exist in us a belief of which the
negation is inconceivable, and which is absolutely true. In this wide
range of cases subjective inconceivableness must correspond to objective
impossibility. Further experience will produce correspondence where it
may not yet exist; and we may expect the correspondence to become
ultimately complete. In nearly all cases this test of inconceivableness
must be valid now; [I wish I could think we were so nearly arrived at
omniscience] and where it is not, it still expresses the net result of
our experience up to the present time; which is the most that any test
can do.[‡]

Edition: current; Page: [265]
aTo this I answer, first, that it is by no means true that the
inconceivability, by us, of the negative of a proposition proves all, or
even any, “pre-existing experience” to be in favour of the affirmative.
There may have been no such pre-existing experiences, but only a
mistaken supposition of experience. How did the inconceivability of
antipodes prove that experience had given any testimony against their
possibility? How did the incapacity men felt of conceiving sunset
otherwise than as a motion of the sun, represent any “net result” of
experience in support of its being the sun and not the earth that moves?
It is not experience that is represented, it is only a superficial
semblance of experience. The only thing proved with regard to real
experience, is the negative fact, that men have not had it of the kind
which would have made the inconceivable proposition conceivable.

Next:a bEven if it were true that inconceivableness represents the net
result of all past experience, why should we stop at the representative
when we can get at the thing represented? If our incapacity to conceive
the negation of a given supposition is proof of its truth, because
proving that our experience has hitherto been uniform in its favour, the
real evidence for the supposition is not the inconceivableness, but the
uniformity of experience. Now this, which is the substantial and only
proof, is directly accessible. We are not obliged to presume it from an
incidental consequence. If all past experience is in favour of a belief,
let this be stated, and the belief openly rested on that ground: after
which the question arises, what that fact may be worth as evidence of
its truth? For uniformity of experience is evidence in very different
degrees: in some cases it is strong evidence, in others weak, in others
it scarcely amounts to evidence at all. That all metals sink in water,
was an uniform experience, from the origin of the human race to the
discovery of potassium in the present century by Sir Humphry Davy. That
all swans are white, was an uniform experience down to the discovery of
Australia. In the few cases in which uniformity of experience does
amount to the strongest possible proof, as with such propositions as
these, Two straight lines cannot inclose a space, Every event has a
cause, it is not because their negations are inconceivable, which is not
always the fact; but because the experience, which has been thus
uniform, pervades all nature. It will be shown in the following Book
that none of the conclusions either of induction or of deduction can be
considered certain, except casc far as their truth is shown to be
inseparably bound up with truths of this class.

I maintain then, first, that uniformity of past experience is very far
from being universally a criterion of truth. But secondly,
inconceivableness is still farther from being a test even of that test.
Uniformity of contrary experience is only one of many causes of
inconceivability. Tradition handed down from Edition: current; Page:
[266] a period of more limited knowledge, is one of the commonest. The
mere familiarity of one mode of production of a phenomenon, often
suffices to make every other mode appear inconceivable. Whatever
connects two ideas by a strong association may, and continually does,
render their separation in thought impossible; as Mr. Spencer, in other
parts of his speculations, frequently recognises. It was not for want of
experience that the Cartesians were unable to conceive that one body
could produce motion in another without contact. They had as much
experience of other modes of producing motion, as they had of that mode.
The planets had revolved, and heavy bodies had fallen, every hour of
their lives. But they fancied these phenomena to be produced by a hidden
machinery which they did not see, because without it they were unable to
conceive what they did see. The inconceivableness, instead of
representing their experience, dominated and overrode their experience.
dWithout dwelling farther on what I have termed the positive argument of
Mr. Spencer in support of his criterion of truth,d I pass to his
negative argument, on which he lays more stress.

§ 3. [Nor is the test of inconceivability implied in every process of
thought] The negative argument is, that, whether inconceivability be
good evidence or bad, no stronger evidence is to be obtained. That what
is inconceivable cannot be true, is postulated in every act of thought.
It is the foundation of all our original premises. Still more ait isa
assumed in all conclusions from those premises. The invariability of
belief, tested by the inconceivableness of its negation, “is our sole
warrant for every demonstration. Logic is simply a systematization of
the process by which we indirectly obtain this warrant for beliefs that
do not directly possess it. To gain the strongest conviction possible
respecting any complex fact, we either analytically descend from it by
successive steps, each of which we unconsciously test by the
unconceivableness of its negation, until we reach some axiom or truth
which we have similarly tested; or we synthetically ascend from such
axiom or truth by such steps. In either case we connect some isolated
belief, with a belief which invariably exists, by a series of
intermediate beliefs which invariably exist.”[*] The following passage
sums up the btheory:

When we perceive that the negation of the belief is inconceivable, we
have all possible warrant for asserting the invariability of its
existence: and in asserting this, we express alike our logical
justification of it, and the inexorable necessity we are under of
holding it. . . . We have seen that this is the assumption on which
every conclusion whatever ultimately rests. We have no other guarantee
for the Edition: current; Page: [267] reality of consciousness, of
sensations, of personal existence; we have no other guarantee for any
axiom; we have no other guarantee for any step in a demonstration.
Hence, as being taken for granted in every act of the understanding, it
must be regarded as the Universal Postulate.[*]

But as this postulate which we are under an “inexorable necessity” of
holding true, is sometimes false; as “beliefs that once were shown by
the inconceivableness of their negations to invariably exist, have since
been found untrue,” and as “beliefs that now possess this character may
some day share the same fate;”[†] the canon of belief laid down by Mr.
Spencer is, that “the most certain conclusion” is that “which involves
the postulate the fewest times.”[‡] Reasoning, therefore, never ought to
prevail against one of the immediate beliefs (the belief in Matter, in
the outward reality of Extension, Space, and the like), because each of
these involves the postulate only once; while an argument, besides
involving it in the premises, involves it again in every step of the
ratiocination, no one of the successive acts of inference being
recognised as valid except because we cannot conceive the conclusion not
to follow from the premises.

It will be convenient to take the last part of this argument first. In
every reasoning, according to Mr. Spencer, the assumption of the
postulate is renewed at every step. At each inference we judge that the
conclusion follows from the premises, our sole warrant for that judgment
being that we cannot conceive it not to follow. Consequently if the
postulate is fallible, the conclusions of reasoning are more vitiated by
that uncertainty than direct intuitions; and the disproportion is
greater, the more numerous the steps of the argument.

To test this doctrine, let us first suppose an argument consisting only
of a single step, which would be represented by one syllogism. This
argument does rest on an assumption, and we have seen in the preceding
chapters what the assumption is. It is, that whatever has a mark, has
what it is a mark of. The evidence of this axiom I shall not consider at
present;* let us suppose it (with Mr. Spencer) to be the
inconceivableness of its reverse.

Let us now add a second step to the argument: we require, what? Another
assumption? No: the same assumption a second time; and so on to a third,
and a fourth. I confess I do not see how, on Mr. Spencer’s own
principles, the repetition of the assumption at all weakens the force of
the argument. If it were necessary the second time to assume some other
axiom, the argument Edition: current; Page: [268] would no doubt be
weakened, since it would be necessary to its validity that both axioms
should be true, and it might happen that one was true and not the other:
making two chances of error instead of one. But since it is the same
axiom, if it is true once it is true every time; and if the argument,
being of a hundred links, assumed the axiom a hundred times, these
hundred assumptions would make but one chance of error among them all.
It is satisfactory that we are not obliged to suppose the deductions of
pure mathematics to be among the most uncertain of argumentative
processes, which on Mr. Spencer’s theory they could hardly fail to be,
since they are the longest. But the number of steps in an argument does
not subtract from its reliableness, if no new premises, of an uncertain
character, are taken up by the way.*

Edition: current; Page: [269]
To speak next of the premises. Our assurance of their truth, whether
they be generalities or individual facts, is grounded, in Mr. Spencer’s
opinion, on the inconceivableness of their being false. It is necessary
to advert to a double meaning of the word inconceivable, which Mr.
Spencer is aware of, and would sincerely disclaim founding an argument
upon, but from which his case derives no little advantage
notwithstanding. By inconceivableness is sometimes meant, inability to
form or get rid of an idea; sometimes, inability to form or get rid of a
belief. The former meaning is the most conformable to the analogy of
language; for a conception always means an idea, and never a belief. The
wrong meaning of “inconceivable” is, however, fully as frequent in
philosophical discussion as the right meaning, and the intuitive school
of metaphysicians could not well do without either. To illustrate the
difference, we will take two contrasted examples. The early physical
speculators considered antipodes incredible, because inconceivable. But
antipodes were not inconceivable in the primitive sense of the word. An
idea of them could be formed without difficulty: they could be
completely pictured to the mental eye. What was difficult, and as it
then seemed, impossible, was to apprehend them as believable. The idea
could be put together, of men sticking on by their feet to the under
side of the earth; but the belief would follow, that they must fall off.
Antipodes were not unimaginable, but they were unbelievable.

On the other hand, when I endeavour to conceive an end to extension, the
two ideas refuse to come together. When I attempt to form a conception
of the last point of space, I cannot help figuring to myself a vast
space beyond that last point. The combination is, under the conditions
of our experience, unimaginable. This double meaning of inconceivable it
is very important to bear in mind, for the argument from
inconceivableness almost always turns on the alternate substitution of
ceachc of those meanings for the other.

dIn which of these two senses does Mr. Spencer employ the term, when he
makes it a test of the truth of a proposition that its negation is
inconceivable? Until Mr. Spencer expressly stated the contrary, I
inferred from the course of his argument, that he meant unbelievable. He
has, however, in a paper published in the fifth number of the
Fortnightly Review, disclaimed this meaning, and declared that by an
inconceivable proposition he means, now and always, “one of which the
terms cannot, by any effort, be brought before Edition: current; Page:
[270] consciousness in that relation which the proposition asserts
between them—a proposition of which the subject and predicate offer an
insurmountable resistance to union in thought.”[*] We now, therefore,
know positively that Mr. Spencer always endeavours to use the word
inconceivable in this, its proper, sense: but it may yet be questioned
whether his endeavour is always successful; whether the other, and
popular use of the word does not sometimes creep in with its
associations, and prevent him from maintaining a clear separation
between the two. When, for example, he says, that when I feel cold, I
cannot conceive that I am not feeling cold,[†] this expression cannot be
translated into “I cannot conceive myself not feeling cold,” for it is
evident that I can: the word conceive, therefore, is here used to
express the recognition of a matter of fact—the perception of truth or
falsehood; which I apprehend to be exactly the meaning of an act of
belief, as distinguished from simple conception. Again, Mr. Spencer
calls the attempt to conceive something which is inconceivable, “an
abortive effort to cause the non-existence”[‡] not of a conception or
mental representation, but of a belief. There is need, therefore, to
revise a considerable part of Mr. Spencer’s language, if it is to be
kept always consistent with his definition of inconceivability. But in
truth the point is of little importance; since inconceivability, in Mr.
Spencer’s theory, is only a test of truth, inasmuch as it is a test of
believability. The inconceivableness of a supposition is the extreme
case of its unbelievability.d This is the very foundation of eMr.
Spencer’se doctrine. The invariability of the belief is with him the
real guarantee. The attempt to conceive the negative, is made in order
to test the inevitableness of the belief. It should be called, an
attempt to believe the negative. When Mr. Spencer says that while
looking at the sun a man cannot conceive that he is looking into
darkness,[§] he fshould have said thatf a man cannot believe that he is
doing so. For git is surelyg possible, in broad daylight, to imagine
oneself looking into darkness.* As hMr. Spencer himselfh says, speaking
of the belief of our own existence: “That he might not exist, he can
conceive well enough; but that he does not Edition: current; Page: [271]
exist, he finds it impossible to conceive,”[*] i.e. to believe. So that
the statement resolves itself into this: That I exist, and that I have
sensations, I believe, because I cannot believe otherwise. And in this
case every one will admit that the iimpossibilityi is real. Any one’s
present sensations, or other states of subjective consciousness, that
one person inevitably believes. They are facts known per se: it is
impossible to ascend beyond them. Their negative is really unbelievable,
and therefore there is never any question about believing it. Mr.
Spencer’s theory is not needed for these truths.

But according to Mr. Spencer there are other beliefs, relating to other
things than our own subjective feelings, for which we have the same
guarantee—which are, in a similar manner, invariable and necessary. With
regard to these other beliefs, they cannot be necessary, since they do
not always exist. There have been, and are, many persons who do not
believe the reality of an external world, still less the reality of
extension and figure as the forms of that external world; who do not
believe that space and time have an existence independent of the
mind—nor any other of Mr. Spencer’s objective intuitions. The negations
of these alleged invariable beliefs are not unbelievable, for they are
believedj. It may be maintained, without obviousj error, that we cannot
imagine tangible objects as mere states of our own and other people’s
consciousness; that the perception of them irresistibly suggests to us
the idea of something external to ourselves: and I am not in a condition
to say that this is not the fact (though I do not think any one is
entitled to affirm it of any person besides himself). But many thinkers
have believed, whether they could conceive it or not, that what we
represent to ourselves as material objects, are mere modifications of
consciousness; complex feelings of touch and of muscular action. Mr.
Spencer may think the inference correct from the unimaginable to the
unbelievable, because he holds that belief itself is but the persistence
of an idea, and that what we can succeed in imagining we cannot at the
moment help apprehending as believable. But of what consequence is it
what we apprehend at the moment, if the moment is in contradiction to
the permanent state of our mind? A person who has been frightened when
an infant by stories of ghosts, though he disbelieves them in after
years (and perhaps knever believed themk), may be unable all his life to
be in a dark place, in circumstances stimulating to the imagination,
without mental discomposure. The idea of ghosts, with all its attendant
terrors, is irresistibly called up in his mind by the outward
circumstances. Mr. Edition: current; Page: [272] Spencer may say, that
while he is under the influence of this terror he does not disbelieve in
ghosts, but has a temporary and uncontrollable belief in them. Be it so;
but allowing it to be so, which would it be truest to say of this man on
the whole—that he believes in ghosts, or that he does not believe in
them? Assuredly that he does not believe in them. The case is similar
with those who disbelieve a material world. Though they cannot get rid
of the idea; though while looking at a solid object they cannot help
having the conception, and therefore, according to Mr. Spencer’s
metaphysics, the momentary belief, of its externality; even at that
moment they would sincerely deny holding that belief: and it would be
lincorrectl to call them other than disbelievers of the doctrine. The
belief therefore is not invariable; and the test of inconceivableness
fails in the only cases to which there could ever be any occasion to
apply it.

That a thing may be perfectly believable, and yet may not have become
conceivable, and that we may habitually believe one side of an
alternative, and conceive only in the other, is familiarly exemplified
in the state of mind of educated persons respecting sunrise and sunset.
All educated persons either know by investigation, or believe on the
authority of science, that it is the earth and not the sun which moves:
but there are probably few who habitually conceive the phenomenon
otherwise than as the ascent or descent of the sun. Assuredly no one can
do so without a prolonged trial; and it is probably not easier now than
in the first generation after Copernicus. Mr. Spencer does not say, “In
looking at sunrise it is impossible not to conceive that it is the sun
which moves, therefore this is what everybody believes, and we have all
the evidence for it that we can have for any truth.” Yet this would be
an exact parallel to his doctrine about the belief in matter.

The existence of matter, and other Noumena, as distinguished from the
phenomenal world, remains a question of argument, as it was before; and
the very general, but neither necessary nor universal, belief in them,
stands as a psychological phenomenon to be explained, either on the
hypothesis of its truth, or on some other. The belief is not a
conclusive proof of its own truth, unless there are no such things as
idola tribûs;[*] but, being a fact, it calls on antagonists to show,
from what except the real existence of the thing believed, so general
and apparently spontaneous a belief can have originated. And its
opponents have never hesitated to accept this challenge.* The amount of
their success in meeting it will probably determine the ultimate verdict
of philosophers on the question.

Edition: current; Page: [273]
a§ 4. [Objections answered] In a revision, or rather reconstruction, of
his Principles of Psychology, as one of the stages or platforms in the
imposing structure of his System of Philosophy, Mr. Spencer has resumed
what he justly terms* the “amicable controversy that has been long
pending between us;” expressing at the same time a regret, which I
cordially share, that “this lengthened exposition of a single point of
difference, unaccompanied by an exposition of the numerous points of
concurrence, unavoidably produces an appearance of dissent very far
greater than that which exists.” I believe, with Mr. Spencer, that the
difference between us, if measured by our conclusions, is “superficial
rather than substantial;” and the value I attach to so great an amount
of agreement, in the field of analytic psychology, with a thinker of his
force and depth, is such as I can hardly overstate. But I also agree
with him that the difference which exists in our premises is one of
“profound importance, philosophically considered;” and not to be
dismissed while any part of the case of either of us has not been fully
examined and discussed.

In his present statement of the Universal Postulate, Mr. Spencer has
exchanged his former expression, “beliefs which invariably exist,”[*]
for the following: “cognitions of which the predicates invariably exist
along with their subjects.” And he says that “an abortive effort to
conceive the negation of a proposition, shows that the cognition
expressed is one of which the predicate invariably exists along with its
subject; and the discovery that the predicate invariably exists along
with its subject, is the discovery that this cognition is one we are
compelled to accept.”[†] Both these premises of Mr. Spencer’s syllogism
I am able to assent to, but in different senses of the middle term. If
the invariable existence of the predicate along with its subject, is to
be understood in the most obvious meaning, as an existence in actual
Nature, or in other words, in our objective, or sensational, experience,
I of course admit that this, once ascertained, compels us to accept the
proposition: but then I do not admit that the failure of an attempt to
conceive the negative, proves the predicate to be always coexistent with
the subject in actual Nature. If, on the other hand (which I believe to
be Mr. Spencer’s meaning) the invariable existence of the predicate
along with the subject is to be understood only of our conceptive
faculty, i.e. that the one is inseparable from the other in our
thoughts; then, indeed, the inability to separate the two ideas proves
their inseparable conjunction, here and now, in the mind which has
failed in the attempt; but this inseparability in thought does Edition:
current; Page: [274] not prove a corresponding inseparability in fact;
nor even in the thoughts of other people, or of the same person in a
possible future.

“That some propositions have been wrongly accepted as true, because
their negations were supposed inconceivable when they were not,” does
not, in Mr. Spencer’s opinion, “disprove the validity of the test;” not
only because any test whatever “is liable to yield untrue results,
either from incapacity or from carelessness in those who use it,” but
because the propositions in question “were complex propositions, not to
be established by a test applicable to propositions no further
decomposable.”[*] “A test legitimately applicable to a simple
proposition, the subject and predicate of which are in direct relation,
cannot be legitimately applied to a complex proposition, the subject and
predicate of which are indirectly related through the many simple
propositions implied.”[†] “That things which are equal to the same thing
are equal to one another, is a fact which can be known by direct
comparison of actual or ideal relations. . . . But that the square of
the hypothenuse of a right angled triangle equals the sum of the squares
of the other two sides, cannot be known immediately by comparison of two
states of consciousness: here the truth can be reached only mediately,
through a series of simple judgments respecting the likenesses or
unlikenesses of certain relations.”[‡] Moreover, even when the
proposition admits of being tested by immediate consciousness, people
often neglect to do it. A schoolboy, in adding up a column of figures,
will say “35 and 9 are 46,” though this is contrary to the verdict which
consciousness gives when 35 and 9 are really called up before it; but
this is not done. And not only schoolboys, but men and thinkers, do not
always “distinctly translate into their equivalent states of
consciousness the words they use.”[§]

It is but just to give Mr. Spencer’s doctrine the benefit of the
limitation he claims—viz. that it is only applicable to propositions
which are assented to on simple inspection, without any intervening
media of proof. But this limitation does not exclude some of the most
marked instances of propositions now known to be false or groundless,
but whose negative was once found inconceivable: such as, that in
sunrise and sunset it is the sun which moves; that gravitation may exist
without an intervening medium; and even the case of antipodes. The
distinction drawn by Mr. Spencer is real; but, in the case of the
propositions classed by him as complex, consciousness, until the media
of proof are supplied, gives no verdict at all: it neither declares the
equality of the square of the hypothenuse with the sum of the squares of
the sides to be inconceivable, nor their inequality to be inconceivable.
But in all the three Edition: current; Page: [275] cases which I have
just cited, the inconceivability seems to be apprehended directly; no
train of argument was needed, as in the case of the square of the
hypothenuse, to obtain the verdict of consciousness on the point.
Neither is any of the three a case like that of the schoolboy’s mistake,
in which the mind was never really brought into contact with the
proposition. They are cases in which one of two opposite predicates,
mero adspectu, seemed to be incompatible with the subject, and the
other, therefore, to be proved always to exist with it.*

As now limited by Mr. Spencer, the ultimate cognitions fit to be
submitted to his test are only those of so universal and elementary a
character as to be represented in the earliest and most unvarying
experience, or apparent experience, of all mankind. In such cases the
inconceivability of the negative, if real, is accounted for by the
experience: and why (I have asked) should the truth be tested by the
inconceivability, when we can go further back for proof—namely, to the
experience itself? To this Mr. Spencer answers, that the experiences
cannot be all recalled to mind, and if recalled, would be of
unmanageable multitude. To test a proposition by experience seems to him
to mean that “before accepting as certain the proposition that any
rectilineal figure must have as many angles as it has sides,” I have “to
think of every triangle, square, pentagon, hexagon, &c., which I have
ever seen, and to verify the asserted relation in each case.”[*] I can
only say, with surprise, that I do not understand this to be the meaning
of an appeal to experience. It is enough to know that one has been
seeing the fact all one’s life, and has never remarked any instance to
the contrary, and that other people, with every opportunity of
observation, unanimously declare the same thing. It is Edition: current;
Page: [276] true, even this experience may be insufficient, and so it
might be even if I could recal to mind every instance of it; but its
insufficiency, instead of being brought to light, is disguised, if
instead of sifting the experience itself, I appeal to a test which bears
no relation to the sufficiency of the experience, but, at the most, only
to its familiarity. These remarks do not lose their force even if we
believe, with Mr. Spencer, that mental tendencies originally derived
from experience impress themselves permanently on the cerebral structure
and are transmitted by inheritance, so that modes of thinking which are
acquired by the race become innate and à priori in the individual, thus
representing, in Mr. Spencer’s opinion, the experience of his
progenitors, in addition to his own. All that would follow from this is,
that a conviction might be really innate, i.e. prior to individual
experience, and yet not be true, since the inherited tendency to accept
it may have been originally the result of other causes than its truth.

Mr. Spencer would have a much stronger case, if he could really show
that the evidence of Reasoning rests on the Postulate, or, in other
words, that we believe that a conclusion follows from premises only
because we cannot conceive it not to follow. But this statement seems to
me to be of the same kind as one I have previously commented on, viz.
that I believe I see light, because I cannot, while the sensation
remains, conceive that I am looking into darkness. Both these statements
seem to me incompatible with the meaning (as very rightly limited by Mr.
Spencer) of the verb to conceive. To say that when I apprehend that A is
B and that B is C, I cannot conceive that A is not C, is to my mind
merely to say that I am compelled to believe that A is C. If to conceive
be taken in its proper meaning, viz. to form a mental representation, I
may be able to conceive A as not being C. After assenting, with full
understanding, to the Copernican proof that it is the earth and not the
sun that moves, I not only can conceive, or represent to myself, sunset
as a motion of the sun, but almost every one finds this conception of
sunset easier to form, than that which they nevertheless know to be the
true one.a

a§ 5.a [Hamilton’s opinion on the Principles of Contradiction and
Excluded Middle] Sir William Hamilton holds as I do, that
inconceivability is no criterion of impossibility. “There is no ground
for inferring a certain fact to be impossible, merely from our inability
to conceive its possibility.” “Things there are which may, nay must, be
true, of which the understanding is wholly unable to construe to itself
the possibility.”* Sir William Hamilton is however a firm believer in
the à priori character of many axioms, and of the sciences deduced from
them; and is so far from considering those axioms to rest on the
evidence of experience, that he declares certain of them to be Edition:
current; Page: [277] true even of Noumena—of the Unconditioned—of which
it is one of the principal aims of his philosophy to prove that the
nature of our faculties debars us from having any knowledge. The axioms
to which he attributes this exceptional emancipation from the limits
which confine all our other possibilities of knowledge; the chinks
through which, as he represents, one ray of light finds its way to us
from behind the curtain which veils from us the mysterious world of
Things in themselves,—are the two principles, which he terms, after the
schoolmen, the Principle of Contradiction, and the Principle of Excluded
Middle: the first, that two contradictory propositions cannot both be
true; the second, that they cannot both be false. Armed with these
logical weapons, we may boldly face Things in themselves, and tender to
them the double alternative, sure that they must absolutely elect one or
the other side, though we bmay beb for ever precluded from discovering
which. To take his favourite example, we cannot conceive the infinite
divisibility of matter, and we cannot conceive a minimum, or end to
divisibility: yet one or the other must be true.

As I have hitherto said nothing of the two axioms in question, those of
Contradiction and of Excluded Middle, it is not unseasonable to consider
them here. The former asserts that an affirmative proposition and the
corresponding negative proposition cannot both be true; which has
generally been held to be intuitively evident. Sir William Hamilton and
the Germans consider it to be the statement in words of a form or law of
our thinking faculty. Other philosophers, not less deserving of
consideration, deem it to be an identical proposition; an assertion
involved in the meaning of terms; a mode of defining Negation, and the
word Not.

I am able to go one step with these last. An affirmative assertion and
its negative are not two independent assertions, connected with each
other only as mutually incompatible. That if the negative be true, the
affirmative must be false, really is a mere identical proposition; for
the negative proposition asserts nothing but the falsity of the
affirmative, and has no other sense or meaning whatever. The Principium
Contradictionis should therefore put off the ambitious phraseology which
gives it the air of a fundamental antithesis pervading nature, and
should be enunciated in the simpler form, that the same proposition
cannot at the same time be false and true. But I can go no farther with
the Nominalists; for I cannot look upon this last as a merely verbal
proposition. I consider it to be, like other axioms, one of our first
and most familiar generalizations from experience. The coriginal
foundationc of it I take to be, that Belief and Disbelief are two
different mental states, excluding one another. This we know by the
simplest observation of our own minds. And if we carry our observation
outwards, we also find that light and darkness, sound and silence,
motion and quiescence, equality and inequality, Edition: current; Page:
[278] preceding and following, succession and simultaneousness, any
positive phenomenon whatever and its negative, are distinct phenomena,
pointedly contrasted, and the one always absent where the other is
present. I consider the maxim in question to be a generalization from
all these facts.

In like manner as the Principle of Contradiction (that one of two
contradictories must be false) means that an assertion cannot be both
true and false, so the Principle of Excluded Middle, or that one of two
contradictories must be true, means that an assertion must be either
true or false: either the affirmative is true, or otherwise the negative
is true, which means that the affirmative is false. I cannot help
thinking this principle a surprising specimen of a so-called necessity
of Thought, since it is not even true, unless with a large
qualification. A proposition must be either true or false, provided that
the predicate be one which can in any intelligible sense be attributed
to the subject; (and as this is always assumed to be the case in
treatises on logic, the axiom is always laid down there as of absolute
truth). “Abracadabra is a second intention” is neither true nor false.
Between the true and the false there is a third possibility, the
Unmeaning: and this alternative is fatal to Sir William Hamilton’s
extension of the maxim to Noumena. That Matter must either have a
minimum of divisibility or be infinitely divisible, is more than we can
ever know. For in the first place, Matter, in any other than the
phenomenal sense of the term, may not exist: and it will scarcely be
said that a non-entity must be either infinitely or finitely divisible.
dIn the second place, though matter, considered as the occult cause of
our sensations, do really exist, yet what we call divisibility may be an
attribute only of our sensations of sight and touch, and not of their
uncognizable cause. Divisibility may not be predicable at all, in any
intelligible sense, of Things in themselves, nor therefore of Matter in
itself; and the assumed necessity of being either infinitely or finitely
divisible, may be an inapplicable alternative.

eOn this question I am happy to have the full concurrence of Mr. Herbert
Spencer, from whose paper in the Fortnightly Review I extract the
following passage.[*] The germ of an idea identical with that of Mr.
Spencer may be found in the present chapter, about a page back, but in
Mr. Spencer it is not an undeveloped thought, but a philosophical
theory.

When remembering a certain thing as in a certain place, the place and
the thing are mentally represented together; while to think of the
non-existence of the thing in that place implies a consciousness in
which the place is represented, but Edition: current; Page: [279] not
the thing. Similarly, if instead of thinking of an object as colourless,
we think of its having colour, the change consists in the addition to
the concept of an element that was before absent from it—the object
cannot be thought of first as red and then as not red, without one
component of the thought being totally expelled from the mind by
another. The law of the Excluded Middle, then, is simply a
generalization of the universal experience that some mental states are
directly destructive of other states. It formulates a certain absolutely
constant law, that the appearance of any positive mode of consciousness
cannot occur without excluding a correlative negative mode; and that the
negative mode cannot occur without excluding the correlative positive
mode: the antithesis of positive and negative being, indeed, merely an
expression of this experience. Hence it follows that if consciousness is
not in one of the two modes it must be in the other.e*

I must here close this supplementary chapter, and with it the Second
Book. The theory of Induction, in the most comprehensive sense of the
term, will form the subject of the Third.a

Edition: current; Page: [280] Edition: current; Page: [281]


BOOK III: OF INDUCTION

Edition: current; Page: [282]
“According to the doctrine now stated, the highest, or rather the only
proper object of physics, is to ascertain those established conjunctions
of successive events, which constitute the order of the universe; to
record the phenomena which it exhibits to our observations, or which it
discloses to our experiments; and to refer these phenomena to their
general laws.” D. Stewart, Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind,
Vol. II, [p. 321,] Chap. iv, sect. 1.

Edition: current; Page: [283]


CHAPTER I: Preliminary Observations on Induction in General

§ 1. [Importance of an inductive logic] The portion of athe presenta
inquiry upon which we are now about to enter, may be considered as the
principal, both from its surpassing in intricacy all the other branches,
and because it relates to a process which has been shown in the
preceding Book to be that in which the investigation of nature
essentially consists. We have found that all Inference, consequently all
Proof, and all discovery of truths not self-evident, consists of
inductions, and the interpretation of inductions: that all our
knowledge, not intuitive, comes to us exclusively from that source. What
Induction is, therefore, and what conditions render it legitimate,
cannot but be deemed the main question of the science of logic—the
question which includes all others. It is, however, one which professed
writers on logic have almost entirely passed over. The generalities of
the subject have not been altogether neglected by metaphysicians; but,
for want of sufficient acquaintance with the processes by which science
has actually succeeded in establishing general truths, their analysis of
the inductive operation, even when unexceptionable as to correctness,
has not been specific enough to be made the foundation of practical
rules, which might be for induction itself what the rules of the
syllogism are for the interpretation of induction: while those by whom
physical science has been carried to its present bstate of
improvement—and who, to arrive at a complete theory of the process,
needed only to generalize, and adapt to all varieties of problems, the
methods which they themselves employed in their habitual pursuits—never
until very lately made any serious attempt to philosophize on the
subject, nor regarded the mode in which they arrived at their
conclusions as deserving of study, independently of the conclusions
themselves.c

Edition: current; Page: [284]
§ 2. [The logic of science is also that of business and life] For the
purposes of the present inquiry, Induction may be defined, the operation
of discovering and proving general propositions. It is true that (as
already shown) the process of indirectly ascertaining individual facts,
is as truly inductive as that by which we establish general truths. But
it is not a different kind of induction; it is aaa form of the bveryb
same process: since, on the one hand, generals are but collections of
particulars, definite in kind but indefinite in number; and on the other
hand, whenever the evidence cwhich we derivec from observation of known
cases justifies us in drawing an inference respecting even one unknown
case, we should on the same evidence be justified in drawing a similar
inference with respect to a whole class of cases. The inference either
does not hold at all, or it holds in all cases of a certain description;
in all cases which, in certain definable respects, resemble those we
have observed.

If these remarks are just; if the principles and rules of inference are
the same whether we infer general propositions or individual facts; it
follows that a complete logic of the sciences would be also a complete
logic of practical business and common life. Since there is no case of
legitimate inference from experience, in which the conclusion may not
legitimately be a general proposition; an analysis of the process by
which general truths are arrived at, is virtually an analysis of all
induction whatever. Whether we are inquiring into a scientific principle
or into an individual fact, and whether we proceed by experiment or by
ratiocination, every step in the train of inferences is essentially
inductive, and the legitimacy of the induction depends in both cases on
the same conditions.

Edition: current; Page: [285]
True it is that in the case of the practical inquirer, who is
endeavouring to ascertain facts not for the purposes of science but for
those of business, such for instance as the advocate or the judge, the
chief difficulty is one in which the principles of induction will afford
him no assistance. It lies not in making his inductions, but in the
selection of them; in choosing from among all general propositions
ascertained to be true, those which furnish dmarks by which he may trace
whether the given subject possesses or not the predicate in question. In
arguing a doubtful question of fact before a jury, the general
propositions or principles to which the advocate appeals are mostly, in
themselves, sufficiently trite, and assented to as soon as stated: his
skill lies in bringing his case under those propositions or principles;
in calling to mind such of the known or ereceivede maxims of probability
as admit of application to the case in hand, and selecting from among
them those best adapted to his object. Success is here dependent on
natural or acquired sagacity, aided by knowledge of the particular
subject, and of subjects allied with it. Invention, though it can be
cultivated, cannot be reduced to rule; there is no science which will
enable a man to bethink himself of that which will suit his purpose.

But when he has thought of something, science can tell him whether that
which he has thought of will suit his purpose or not. The inquirer or
arguer must be guided by his own knowledge and sagacity in fthef choice
of the inductions out of which he will construct his argument. But the
validity of the argument when constructed, depends on principles and
must be tried by tests which are the same for all descriptions of
inquiries, whether the result be to give A an estate, or to enrich
science with a new general truth. In the one case and in the other, the
senses, or testimony, must decide on the individual facts; the rules of
the syllogism will determine whether, those facts being supposed
correct, the case really falls within the formulæ of the different
inductions under which it has been successively brought; and finally,
the legitimacy of the inductions themselves must be decided by other
rules, and these it is now our purpose to investigate. If this third
part of the operation be, in many of the questions of practical life,
not the most, but the least arduous portion of it, we have seen that
this is also the case in some great departments of the field of science;
in all those which are principally deductive, and most of all in
mathematics; where the inductions themselves are few in number, and so
obvious and elementary that they seem to stand in no need of the
evidence of experienceg, whileg to combine them so as to prove a given
theorem or solve a problem, may call for the hutmosth powers of
invention and contrivance with which our species is gifted.

Edition: current; Page: [286]
If the identity of the logical processes which prove particular facts
and those which establish general scientific truths, required any
additional confirmation, it would be sufficient to consider that in many
branches of science, single facts have to be proved, as well as
principles; facts as completely individual as any that are debated in a
court of justice; but which are proved in the same manner as the other
truths of the science, and without disturbing in any degree the
homogeneity of its method. A remarkable example of this is afforded by
astronomy. The individual facts on which that science grounds its imost
important deductionsi, such facts as the magnitudes of the bodies of the
solar system, their distances from one another, the figure of the earth,
and its rotation, are scarcely any of them accessible to our means of
direct observation: they are proved indirectly, by the aid of inductions
founded on other facts which we can more easily reach. For example, the
distance of the moon from the earth was determined by a very circuitous
process. The share which direct observation had in the work consisted in
ascertaining, at one and the same instant, the zenith distances of the
moon, as seen from two points very remote from one another on the
earth’s surface. The ascertainment of these angular distances
ascertained their supplements; and since the angle at the earth’s centre
subtended by the distance between the two places of observation was
deducible by spherical trigonometry from the latitude and longitude of
those places, the angle at the moon subtended by the same line became
the fourth angle of a quadrilateral of which the other three angles were
known. The four angles being thus ascertained, and two sides of the
quadrilateral being radii of the earth; the two remaining sides and the
diagonal, or in other words, the moon’s distance from the two places of
observation and from the centre of the earth, could be ascertained, at
least in terms of the earth’s radius, from elementary theorems of
geometry. At each step in this demonstration ja new induction is taken
inj, represented in the aggregate of its results by a general
proposition.

Not only is the process by which an individual astronomical fact was
thus ascertained, exactly similar to those by which the same science
establishes its general truths, but kalsok (as we have shown to be the
case in all legitimate reasoning) a general proposition might have been
concluded instead of a single fact. In strictness, indeed, the result of
the reasoning is a general proposition; a theorem respecting the
distance, not of the moon in particular, but of any inaccessible object;
showing in what relation that distance stands to certain other
quantities. And although the moon is almost the only heavenly body the
distance of which from the earth can really be thus ascertained, this is
merely owing to the accidental circumstances of the other Edition:
current; Page: [287] heavenly bodies, which render them incapable of
affording such data as the application of the theorem requires; for the
theorem itself is as true of them as it is of the moon.*

We shall fall into no error, then, if in treating of Induction, we limit
our attention to the establishment of general propositions. The
principles and rules of Induction as directed to this end, are the
principles and rules of all Induction; and the logic of Science is the
universal Logic, applicable to all inquiries in which man can engagel.

Edition: current; Page: [288]


CHAPTER II: Of Inductions Improperly So Called

§ 1. [Inductions distinguished from verbal transformations] Induction,
then, is that operation of the mind, by which we infer that what we know
to be true in a particular case or cases, will be true in all cases
which resemble the former in certain assignable respects. In other
words, Induction is the process by which we conclude that what is true
of certain individuals of a class is true of the whole class, or that
what is true at certain times will be true aina similar circumstances at
all times.

This definition excludes from the meaning of the term Induction, various
logical operations, to which it is not unusual to apply that name.

Induction, as above defined, is a process of inference; it proceeds from
the known to the unknown; and any operation involving no inference, any
process in which what seems the conclusion is no wider than the premises
from which it is drawn, does not fall within the meaning of the term.
Yet in the common books of Logic we find this laid down as the most
perfect, indeed the only quite perfect, form of induction. In those
books, every process which sets out from a less general and terminates
in a more general expression,—which admits of being stated in the form,
“This and that A are B, therefore every A is B,”—is called an induction,
whether anything be really concluded or not: and the induction is
asserted bnot to beb perfect, unless every single individual of the
class A is included in the antecedent, or premise: that is, unless what
we affirm of the class has already been ascertained to be true of every
individual in it, so that the nominal conclusion is not really a
conclusion, but a mere reassertion of the premises. If we were to say,
All the planets shine by the sun’s light, from observation of each
separate planet, or All the Apostles were Jews, because this is true of
Peter, Paul, John, and every other apostle,—these, and such as these,
would, in the phraseology in question, be called perfect, and the only
perfect, Inductions. This, however, is a totally different kind of
induction from ours; it is cnot anc inference from facts known to facts
unknown, but a mere short-hand registration of facts known. The two
simulated arguments which we have quoted, are not generalizations;
Edition: current; Page: [289] the propositions purporting to be
conclusions from them, are not really general propositions. A general
proposition is one in which the predicate is affirmed or denied of an
unlimited number of individuals; namely, all, whether few or many,
existing or capable of existing, which possess the properties connoted
by the subject of the proposition. “All men are mortal” does not mean
all now living, but all men past, present, and to come. When the
signification of the term is limited so as to render it a name not for
any and every individual falling under a certain general description,
but only for each of a number of individuals designated as such, and as
it were counted off individually, the proposition, though it may be
general in its language, is no general proposition, but merely that
number of singular propositions, written in an abridged character. The
operation may be very useful, as most forms of abridged notation are;
but it is no part of the investigation of truth, though often bearing an
important part in the preparation of the materials for that
investigation.

dAs we may sum up a definite number of singular propositions in one
proposition, which will be apparently, but not really, general, so we
may sum up a definite number of general propositions in one proposition,
which will be apparently, but not really, more general. If by a separate
induction applied to every distinct species of animals, it has been
established that each possesses a nervous system, and we affirm
thereupon that all animals have a nervous system; this looks like a
generalization, though as the conclusion merely affirms of all what has
already been affirmed of each, it seems to tell us nothing but what we
knew before. A distinction however must be made. If in concluding that
all animals have a nervous system, we mean the same thing and no more as
if we had said “all known animals,” the proposition is not general, and
the process by which it is arrived at is not induction. But if our
meaning is that the observations made of the various species of animals
have discovered to us a law of animal nature, and that we are in a
condition to say that a nervous system will be found even in animals yet
undiscovered, this indeed is an induction; but in this case the general
proposition contains more than the sum of the special propositions from
which it is inferred. The distinction is still more forcibly brought out
when we consider, that if this real generalization be legitimate at all,
its legitimacy probably does not require that we should have examined
without exception every known species. It is the number and nature of
the instances, and not their being the whole of those which happen to be
known, that makes them sufficient evidence to prove a general law: while
the more limited assertion, which stops at all known animals, cannot be
made unless we have rigorously verified it in every species. In like
manner (to return to a former example) we might have inferred, not that
all the planets, but that all planets, shine by reflected light:
Edition: current; Page: [290] the former is no induction; the latter is
an induction, and a bad one, being disproved by the case of double
stars—self-luminous bodies which are properly planets, since they
revolve round a centre.d

§ 2. [Inductions distinguished from inductions, falsely so called, in
mathemathics] aThere are several processes used in mathematics which
require to be distinguished from Induction, being not unfrequently
called by that name, and being so far similar to Induction properly so
called, that the propositions they leada to are really general
propositions. For example, when we have proved with respect to the
circle, that a straight line cannot meet it in more than two points, and
when the same thing has been successively proved of the ellipse, the
parabola, and the hyperbola, it may be laid down as an universal
property of the sections of the cone. bThe distinction drawn in the two
previous examples can have no place here, there being no difference
between all known sections of the cone and all sections, since a cone
demonstrably cannot be intersected by a plane except in one of these
four lines. It would be difficult, therefore, to refuse to the
proposition arrived at, the name of a generalization, since there is no
room for any generalization beyond it. Butb there is no induction,
because there is no inference: the conclusion is a mere summing up of
what cwasc asserted in the various propositions from which it is drawn.
A case somewhat, though not altogether, similar, is the proof of a
geometrical theorem by means of a diagram. Whether the diagram be on
paper or only in the imagination, the demonstration (as dformerly
observed*) does not prove directly the general theorem; it proves only
that the conclusion, which the theorem asserts generally, is true of the
particular triangle or circle exhibited in the diagram; but since we
perceive that in the same way in which we have proved it of that circle,
it might also be proved of any other circle, we gather up into one
general expression all the singular propositions susceptible of being
thus proved, and embody them in an universal proposition. Having shown
that the three angles of the triangle ABC are together equal to two
right angles, we conclude that this is true of every other triangle, not
because it is true of ABC, but for the same reason which proved it to be
true of ABC. If this were to be called Induction, an appropriate name
for it would be, induction by parity of reasoning. But the term cannot
properly belong to it; the characteristic quality of Induction is
wanting, Edition: current; Page: [291] since the truth obtained, though
really general, is not believed on the evidence of particular instances.
We do not conclude that all triangles have the property because some
triangles have, but from the ulterior demonstrative evidence which was
the ground of our conviction in the particular instances.

There are nevertheless, in mathematics, some examples of so-called
Induction, in which the conclusion does bear the appearance of a
generalization grounded on some of the particular cases included in it.
A mathematician, when he has calculated a sufficient number of the terms
of an algebraical or arithmetical series to have ascertained what is
called the law of the series, does not hesitate to fill up any number of
the succeeding terms without repeating the calculations. But I apprehend
he only does so when it is apparent from à priori considerations (which
might be exhibited in the form of demonstration) that the mode of
formation of the subsequent terms, each from that which preceded it,
must be similar to the formation of the terms which have been already
calculated. And when the attempt has been hazarded without the sanction
of such general considerations, there are instances on record in which
it has led to false results.

It is said that Newton discovered the binomial theorem by induction; by
raising a binomial successively to a certain number of powers, and
comparing those powers with one another until he detected the relation
in which the algebraic formula of each power stands to the exponent of
that power, and to the two terms of the binomial. The fact is not
improbable; but a emathematician like Newton, whoe seemed to arrive per
saltum at principles and conclusions that ordinary mathematicians only
reached by a succession of steps, certainly could not have performed the
comparison in question without being led by it to the à priori ground of
the law; since any one who understands sufficiently the nature of
multiplication to venture upon multiplying several lines of fsymbols at
one operation, cannot but perceive that in raising a binomial to a
power, the coefficients must depend on the laws of permutation and
combination: and as soon as this is recognised, the theorem is
demonstrated. Indeed, when once it was seen that the law prevailed in a
few of the lower powers, its identity with the law of permutation would
at once suggest the considerations which prove it to obtain universally.
Even, therefore, such cases as these, are but examples of what I have
called Induction by parity of reasoning, that is, not really Induction,
because not involving ginference of a general proposition from
particular instances.h

Edition: current; Page: [292]
§ 3. [Inductions distinguished from descriptions] There remains a third
improper use of the term Induction, which it is of real importance to
clear up, because the theory of Induction has been, aina no ordinary
degree, confused by it, and because the confusion is exemplified in the
most recent and belaborate treatise on cthec inductive philosophy which
exists in our language. The error in question is that of confounding a
mere descriptiond, by general terms,d of a set of observed phenomena,
with an induction from them.

Suppose that a phenomenon consists of parts, and that these parts are
only capable of being observed separately, and as it were piecemeal.
When the observations have been made, there is a convenience (amounting
for many purposes to a necessity) in obtaining a representation of the
phenomenon as a whole, by combining, or as we may say, piecing these
detached fragments together. A navigator sailing in the midst of the
ocean discovers land: he cannot at first, or by any one observation,
determine whether it is a continent or an island; but he coasts along
it, and after a few days finds himself to have sailed completely round
it: he then pronounces it an island. Now there was no particular time or
place of observation at which he could perceive that this land was
entirely surrounded by water: he ascertained the fact by a succession of
partial observations, and then selected a general expression which
summed up in two or three words the whole of what he so observed. But is
there anything of the nature of an induction in this process? Did he
infer anything that had not been observed, from something else which
had? Certainly not. eHe had observed the whole of what the proposition
asserts.e That the land in question is an island, is not an inference
from the partial facts which the navigator saw in the course of his
circumnavigation; it is the facts themselves; it is a summary of those
facts; the description of a complex fact, to which those simpler ones
are as the parts of a whole.

Now there isf, I conceive,f no difference in kind between this simple
operation, and that by which Kepler ascertained the nature of the
planetary orbits: and Kepler’s operation, all at least that was
characteristic in it, was not more an inductive act than that of our
supposed navigator.

The object of Kepler was to determine the real path described by each of
the planets, or let us say gbyg the planet Mars (hsince it was of that
body that he first established the two of his three laws which did not
require a comparison of planetsh). To do this there was no other mode
than that of direct Edition: current; Page: [293] observation: and all
which observation could do was to ascertain a great number of the
successive places of the planet; or rather, of its apparent places. That
the planet occupied successively all these positions, or at all events,
positions which produced the same impressions on the eye, and that it
passed from one of these to another insensibly, and without any apparent
breach of continuity; thus much the senses, with the aid of the proper
instruments, could ascertain. What Kepler did more than this, was to
find what sort of a curve these different points would make, supposing
them to be all joined together. He expressed the whole series of the
observed places of Mars by what Dr. Whewell calls the general conception
of an ellipse.[*] This operation was far from being as easy as that of
the navigator who expressed the series of his observations on successive
points of the coast by the general conception of an island. But it is
the very same sort of operation; and if the one is not an induction but
a description, this must also be true of the other.

iThe only real induction concerned in the case, consisted in inferringi
that because the observed places of Mars were correctly represented by
points in an imaginary ellipse, therefore Mars would continue to revolve
in that same ellipse; and jin concluding (before the gap had been filled
up by further observations) that the positionsj of the planet during the
time which intervened between two observations, must have coincided with
the intermediate points of the curve. kFor these were facts which had
not been directly observed. They were inferences from the observations;
facts inferred, as distinguished from facts seen. But these inferences
were so far from being a part of Kepler’s philosophical operation, that
they had been drawn long before he was born. Astronomers had long known
that the planets periodically returned to the same places. When this had
been ascertained, there was no induction left for Kepler to make, nor
did he make any further induction. He merely applied his new conception
to the facts inferred, as he did to the facts observed. Knowing already
that the planets continued to move in the same paths; when he found that
an ellipse correctly represented the past Edition: current; Page: [294]
path, he knew that it would represent the future path. In finding a
compendious expression for the one set of facts, he found one for the
other: but he found the expression only, not the inference; nor did he
(which is the true test of a general truth) add anything to the power of
prediction already possessed.k

§ 4. [Examination of Whewell’s theory of Induction] The descriptive
operation which enables a number of details to be summed up in a single
proposition, Dr. Whewell, by an aptly chosen expression, has termed the
Colligation of Facts. aIn most of his observations concerning that
mental process I fully agree, and would gladly transfer all that portion
of his book into my own pages. I only think him mistaken in setting up
this kind of operation, which according to the old and received meaning
of the term, is not induction at all, as the type of induction
generally; and laying down, throughout his work, as principles of
induction, the principles of mere colligation.

Dr. Whewell bmaintainsb that the general proposition which binds
together the particular facts, and makes them, as it were, one fact, is
not the mere sum of those facts, but something more, since there is
introduced a conception of the mind, which did not exist in the facts
themselves.

The particular facts, [says he,*] are not merely brought together, but
there is a new element added to the combination by the very act of
thought by which they are combined. . . . When the Greeks, after long
observing the motions of the planets, saw that these motions might be
rightly considered as produced by the motion of one wheel revolving in
the inside of another wheel, these wheels were creations of their minds,
added to the facts which they perceived by sense. And even if the wheels
were no longer supposed to be material, but were reduced to mere
geometrical spheres or circles, they were not the less products of the
mind alone,—something additional to the facts observed. The same is the
case in all other discoveries. The facts are known, but they are
insulated and unconnected, till the discoverer supplies from his own
cstorec a principle of connexion. The pearls are there, but they will
not hang together till some one provides the string.

dLet me first remark that Dr. Whewell, in this passage, blends together,
indiscriminately, examples of both the processes which I am endeavouring
to Edition: current; Page: [295] distinguish from one another. When the
Greeks abandoned the supposition that the planetary motions were
produced by the revolution of material wheels, and fell back upon the
idea of “mere geometrical spheres or circles,” there was more in this
change of opinion than the mere substitution of an ideal curve for a
physical one. There was the abandonment of a theory, and the replacement
of it by a mere description. No one would think of calling the doctrine
of material wheels a mere description. That doctrine was an attempt to
point out the force by which the planets were acted upon, and compelled
to move in their orbits. But when, by a great step in philosophy, the
materiality of the wheels was discarded, and the geometrical forms alone
retained, the attempt to account for the motions was given up, and what
was left of the theory was a mere description of the orbits. The
assertion that the planets were carried round by wheels revolving in the
inside of other wheels, gave place to the proposition, that they moved
in the same lines which would be traced by bodies so carried: which was
a mere mode of representing the sum of the observed facts; as Kepler’s
was another and a better mode of representing the same observations.

It is true that for these simply descriptive operations, as well as for
the erroneous inductive one, a conception of the mind was required. The
conception of an ellipse must have presented itself to Kepler’s mind,
before he could identify the planetary orbits with it. According to Dr.
Whewell, the conception was something added to the facts. He expresses
himself as if Kepler had put something into the facts by his mode of
conceiving them. But Kepler did no such thing. The ellipse was in the
facts before Kepler recognised it; just as the island was an island
before it had been sailed round. Kepler did not put what he had
conceived into the facts, but saw it in them. Ad conception implies, and
corresponds to, something conceived: and though the conception itself is
not in the facts, but in our mind, eyet if it is to convey any knowledge
relating to them,e it must be a conception of something which really is
in the facts, some property which they actually possess, and which they
would manifest to our senses, if our senses were able to take cognizance
of fitf. If, for instance, the planet left behind it in space a visible
track, and if the observer were in a fixed position at such a distance
gfromg the plane of the orbit as would enable him to see the whole of it
at once, he would see it to be an ellipse; and if gifted with
appropriate instruments and powers of locomotion, he could prove it to
be such by measuring its different dimensions. hNay, further: if the
track were visible, and he were so placed that he could see all parts of
it in succession, but not all of them at once, he might be able,
Edition: current; Page: [296] by piecing together his successive
observations, to discover both that it was an ellipse and that the
planet moved in it. The case would then exactly resemble that of the
navigator who discovers the land to be an island by sailing round it. If
the path was visible, no one I think would dispute that to identify it
with an ellipse is to describe it: and I cannot see why any difference
should be made by its not being directly an object of sense, when every
point in it is as exactly ascertained as if it were so.h

Subject to the indispensable condition which has just been stated, I ido
not conceivei that the part which conceptions have in the operation of
studying facts, has ever been overlooked or undervaluedj. No one ever
disputed that in order to reason about anything we must have a
conception of it; or that when we include a multitude of things under a
general expression, there is implied in the expression a conception of
something common to those things. But it by no means follows that the
conception is necessarily pre-existent, or constructed by the mind out
of its own materials. If the facts are rightly classed under the
conception, it is because there is in the facts themselves something of
which the conception is itself a copy; and which if we cannot directly
perceive, it is because of the limited power of our organs, and not
because the thing itself is not there. The conception itself is often
obtained by abstraction from the very facts which, in Dr. Whewell’s
language, it is afterwards called in to connect. This khek himself
admits, when he observes, (which he does on several occasions,) how
great a service would be rendered to the science of physiology by the
philosopher “who should establish a precise, tenable, and consistent
conception of life.”* Such a conception can only be abstracted from the
phenomena of life itself; from the very facts which it is put in
requisition to connect. In other cases, no doubt, instead of collecting
the conception from the very phenomena which we are attempting to
colligate, we select it from among those which have been previously
collected by abstraction from other facts. In the instance of Kepler’s
laws, the latter was the case. The facts being out of the reach of being
observed, in any such manner as would have enabled the senses to
identify directly the path of the planet, the conception requisite for
framing a general description of that path could not be collected by
abstraction from the observations themselves; the mind had to supply
hypothetically, from among the conceptions it had obtained from other
portions of its experience, some one which would correctly represent the
series of the observed facts. It had to frame a supposition respecting
the general course of the phenomenon, and ask itself, If this be the
general description, what will the details be? and then compare Edition:
current; Page: [297] these with the details actually observed. If they
agreed, the hypothesis would serve for a description of the phenomenon:
if not, it was necessarily abandoned, and another tried. It is such a
case as this which gives lrisel to the doctrine that the mind, in
framing the description, adds something of its own which it does not
find in the facts.

Yet it is a fact surely, that the planet does describe an ellipse; and a
fact which we could see, if we had adequate visual organs and a suitable
position. Not having these advantages, but possessing the conception of
an ellipse, or (to express the meaning in less technical language)
knowing what an ellipse was, Kepler tried whether the observed places of
the planet were consistent with such a path. He found they were so; and
he, consequently, asserted as a fact that the planet moved in an
ellipse. But this fact, which Kepler did not add to, but found in, the
motions of the planet, namely, that it occupied in succession the
various points in the circumference of a given ellipse, was the very
fact, the separate parts of which had been separately observed; it was
the sum of the different observations.m

Having stated this fundamental difference between my nopinion and that
of Dr.n Whewell, I must add, that his account of the manner in which a
conception is selected, suitable to express the facts, appears to me
perfectly just. The experience of all thinkers will, I believe, testify
that the process is tentative; that it consists of a succession of
guesses; many being rejected, until one at last occurs fit to be chosen.
We know from Kepler himself that before hitting upon the “conception” of
an ellipse, he tried nineteen other imaginary paths, which, finding them
inconsistent with the observations, he was obliged to reject. But as Dr.
Whewell truly says, the successful hypothesis, though a guess, ought
ogenerally to be called, noto a lucky, but a skilful guess.[*] The
guesses which serve to give mental unity and wholeness to a chaos of
scattered particulars, are accidents which prarely occur to anyp minds
but those abounding in knowledge and disciplined in qintellectualq
combinations.

How far this tentative method, so indispensable as a means to the
colligation of facts for purposes of description, admits of application
to Induction itself, and what functions belong to it in that department,
will be considered Edition: current; Page: [298] in the chapter of the
present Book which relates to Hypotheses. On the present occasion we
have chiefly to distinguish this process of Colligation from Induction
properly so called; and that the distinction may be made clearer, it is
well to advert to a curious and interesting remarkr, which is as
strikingly true of the former operation, as it sappears to mes
unequivocally false of the latter.

In different stages of the progress of knowledge, philosophers have
employed, for the colligation of the same order of facts, different
conceptions. The early trude observations of the heavenly bodies, in
which minute precision was neither attained nor sought, presented
nothing inconsistent with the representation of the path of a planet as
an exact circle, having the earth for its centre. As observations
increased in accuracy, ufacts were disclosed which were not
reconcileable with this simple supposition: for the colligation of those
additional facts, the supposition was varied; and varied again and again
as facts became more numerous and precise. The earth was removed from
the centre to some other point within the circle; the planet was
supposed to revolve in a smaller circle called an epicycle, round an
imaginary point which revolved in a circle round the earth: in
proportion as observation elicited fresh facts contradictory to these
representations, other epicycles and other excentrics were added,
producing additional complication; until at last Kepler swept all these
circles away, and substituted the conception of an exact ellipse. Even
this is found not to represent with complete correctness the accurate
observations of the present day, which disclose many slight deviations
from an orbit exactly elliptical. Now Dr. Whewell has remarked that
these successive general expressions, though apparently so conflicting,
were all correct: they all answered the purpose of colligation; they all
enabled the mind to represent to itself with facility, and by a
simultaneous glance, the whole body of facts at vthev time ascertained:
each in its turn served as a correct description of the phenomena, so
far as the senses had up to that time taken cognizance of them.[*] If a
necessity afterwards arose for discarding one of these general
descriptions of the planet’s orbit, and framing a different imaginary
line, by which to express the series of observed positions, it was
because a number of new facts had now been added, which it was necessary
to combine with the old facts into one general description. But this did
not affect the correctness of the former expression, considered as a
general statement of the only facts which it was intended to represent.
And so true is this, that, as is well remarked by M. Comte, these
ancient generalizations, even the rudest and most imperfect of them,
that of uniform movement Edition: current; Page: [299] in a circle, are
so far from being entirely false, that they are even now habitually
employed by astronomers when only a rough approximation to correctness
is required.

L’astronomie moderne, en détruisant sans retour les hypothèses
primitives, envisagées comme lois réelles du monde, a soigneusement
maintenu leur valeur positive et permanente, la propriété de représenter
commodément les phénomènes quand il s’agit d’une première ébauche. Nos
ressources à cet égard sont même bien plus étendues, précisément à cause
que nous ne nous faisons aucune illusion sur la réalité des hypothèses;
ce qui nous permet d’employer sans scrupule, en chaque cas, celle que
nous jugeons la plus avantageuse.*

Dr. Whewell’s remark, therefore, is wphilosophically correctw.
Successive expressions for the colligation of observed facts, or in
other words, successive descriptions of a phenomenon as a whole, which
has been observed only in parts, may, though conflicting, be all correct
as far as they go. But it would surely be absurd to assert this of
conflicting inductions.

The xscientificx study of facts may be undertaken for three different
purposes: the simple description of the facts; their explanation; or
their prediction: meaning by prediction, the determination of the
conditions under which similar facts may be expected again to occur. To
the first of these three operations the name of Induction does not
properly belong: to the other two it does. Now, Dr. Whewell’s
observation is true of the first alone. Considered as a mere
description, the circular theory of the heavenly motions represents
perfectly well their general features: and by adding epicycles without
limit, those motions, even as now known to us, might be expressed with
any degree of accuracy that might be required. The yelliptical theory,
as a mere description, would have a great advantage in point of
simplicity, and in the consequent facility of conceiving it and
reasoning about it; buty it would not really be more true than the
other. Different descriptions, therefore, may be all true: but not,
surely, different explanations. The doctrine that the heavenly bodies
moved by a virtue inherent in their celestial nature; the doctrine that
they were moved by impact, (which led to the hypothesis of vortices as
the only impelling force capable of whirling bodies in circles,) and the
Newtonian doctrine, that they are moved by the composition of a
centripetal with an original projectile force; all these are
explanations, collected by real induction from supposed parallel cases;
and they were all successively received by philosophers, as scientific
truths on the subject of the heavenly bodies. Can it be said of these,
as zwasz said of the different Edition: current; Page: [300]
descriptions, that they are all true as far as they go? Is it not clear
that aonly onea can be true in any degree, and the other two must be
altogether false? So much for explanations: let us now compare different
predictions: the first, that eclipses will occur bwhenb one planet or
satellite is so situated as to cast its shadow upon another; the second,
that they will occur cwhenc some great calamity is impending over
mankind. Do these two doctrines only differ in the degree of their
truth, as expressing real facts with unequal degrees of accuracy?
Assuredly the one is true, and the other absolutely false.*

Edition: current; Page: [301]
In every way, therefore, it is evident that ito explain induction as the
colligation of facts by means of appropriate conceptions, that is,
conceptions which will really express them, is to confound mere
description of the observed facts with inference from those facts, and
ascribei to the latter what is a characteristic property of the former.

Edition: current; Page: [302]
There is, however, between Colligation and Induction, a real
correlation, which it is important to conceive correctly. Colligation is
not always induction; but induction is always colligation. The assertion
that the planets move in ellipses, was but a mode of representing
observed facts; it was but a colligation; while the assertion that they
are drawn, or tend, towards the sun, was the statement of a new fact,
inferred by induction. But the induction, once made, accomplishes the
purposes of colligation likewise. It brings the same facts, which Kepler
had connected by his conception of an ellipse, under the additional
conception of bodies acted upon by a central force, and serves therefore
as a new bond of connexion for those facts; a new principle for their
classification.

jFurther, the descriptions which are improperly confounded with
induction, arej nevertheless a necessary preparation for induction; no
less necessary than correct observation of the facts themselves. Without
the previous colligation of detached observations by means of one
general conception, we could never have obtained any basis for an
induction, except in the case of phenomena of kvery limited compass. We
should not be able to affirm any predicates at all, of a subject
incapable of being observed otherwise than piecemeal: much less could we
extend those predicates by induction to other similar subjects.
Induction, therefore, always presupposes, not only that the necessary
observations are made with the necessary accuracy, but also that the
results of these observations are, so far as practicable, connected
together by general descriptions, enabling the mind to represent to
itself as lwholesl whatever phenomena are capable of being so
represented.m

Edition: current; Page: [303]
a§ 5. [Furhter illustration of the preceding remarks] Dr. Whewell has
replied at some length to the preceding observations, re-stating his
opinions, but without (as far as I can perceive) adding anything
bmaterialb to his former arguments.[*] Since, however, mine have not had
the good fortune to make any impression upon him, I will subjoin a few
remarks, tending to show more clearly in what our difference of opinion
consists, as well as, in some measure, to account for it.

cNearly allc the definitions of induction, by writers of authority, make
it consist in drawing inferences from known cases to unknown; affirming
of a class, a predicate which has been found true of some cases
belonging to the class; concluding because some things have a certain
property, that other things which resemble them have the same
property—or because a thing has manifested a property at a certain time,
that it has and will have that property at other times.

It will scarcely be contended that Kepler’s operation was an Induction
in this sense of the term. The statement, that Mars moves in an
elliptical orbit, was no generalization from individual cases to a class
of cases. Neither was it an extension to all time, of what had been
found true at some particular time. The whole amount of generalization
which the case admitted of, was already completed, or might have been
so. Long before the elliptic theory was thought of, it had been
ascertained that the planets returned periodically to the same apparent
places; the series of these places was, or might have been, completely
determined, and the apparent course of each planet marked out on the
celestial globe in an uninterrupted line. Kepler did not extend an
observed truth to other cases than those in which it had been observed:
he did not widen the subject of the proposition which expressed the
observed facts. dThed alteration he made was in the predicate. Instead
of saying, the successive places of Mars are so and so, he summed them
up in the statement, that the successive places of Mars are points in an
ellipse. It is true, this statement, as Dr. Whewell says, was not the
sum of the observations Edition: current; Page: [304] merely; it was the
sum of the observations seen under a new point of view.* But it was not
the sum of more than the observations, as a real induction is. It took
in no cases but those which had been actually observed, or which could
have been inferred from the observations before the new point of view
presented itself. There was not that transition from known cases to
unknown, which constitutes Induction in the original and acknowledged
meaning of the term.

Old definitions, it is true, cannot prevail against new knowledge: and
if the Keplerian operation, as a logical process, ebee really identical
with what takes place in acknowledged induction, the definition of
induction ought to be so widened as to take it in; since scientific
language ought to adapt itself to the true relations which subsist
between the things it is employed to designate. Here then it is that I
fam atf issue with Dr. Whewell. He does think the operations identical.
He allows of no logical process in any case of induction, other than
what there was in Kepler’s case, namely, guessing until a guess is found
which tallies with the facts; and accordingly, as we shall see
hereafter, he rejects all canons of induction, because it is not by
means of them that we guess. Dr. Whewell’s theory of the logic of
science would be very perfect if it did not pass over altogether the
question of Proof. But in my apprehension there is such a thing as
proof, and inductions differ altogether from descriptions in their
relation to that element. Induction is proof; it is inferring something
unobserved from something observed: it requires, therefore, an
appropriate test of proof; and to provide that test, is the special
purpose of inductive logic. When, on the contrary, we merely collate
known observations, and, in Dr. Whewell’s phraseology, connect them by
means of a new conception; if the conception does gserve to connect the
observations, we have all we want. As the proposition in which it is
embodied pretends to no other truth than what it may share with many
other modes of representing the same facts, to be consistent with the
facts is all it requires: it neither needs nor admits of proof; though
it may serve to prove other things, inasmuch as, by placing the facts in
mental connexion with other facts, not previously seen to resemble them,
it assimilates the case to another class of phenomena, concerning which
real Inductions have already been made. Thus Kepler’s so-called law
brought the orbit of Mars into the class ellipse, and by doing so,
proved all the properties of an ellipse to be true of the orbit: but in
this proof Kepler’s law supplied the minor premise, and not (as is the
case with real Inductions) the major.

hDr. Whewell calls nothing Induction where there is not a new mental
Edition: current; Page: [305] conception introduced, and everything
induction where there is.[*] But this is to confound two very different
things, Invention and Proof. The introduction of a new conception
belongs to Invention: and invention may be required in any operation,
but is the essence of none. A new conception may be introduced for
descriptive purposes, and so it may for inductive purposes. But it is so
far from constituting induction, that induction does not necessarily
stand in need of it. Most inductions require no conception but what was
present in every one of the particular instances on which the induction
is grounded. That all men are mortal is surely an inductive conclusion;
yet no new conception is introduced by it. Whoever knows that any man
has died, has all the conceptions involved in the inductive
generalization. But Dr. Whewell considers the process of invention which
consists in framing a new conception consistent with the facts, to be
not merely a necessary part of all induction, but the whole of it.h

The mental operation which extracts from a number of detached
observations certain general characters in which the observed phenomena
resemble one another, or resemble other known facts, is what Bacon,
Locke, and most subsequent metaphysicians, have understood by the word
Abstraction. A general expression obtained by abstraction, connecting
known facts by means of common characters, but without concluding from
them to unknown, may, I think, with strict logical correctness, be
termed a Description; nor do I know in what other way things can ever be
described. My position, however, does not depend on the employment of
that particular word; I am quite content to use Dr. Whewell’s term
Colligation, ior the more general phrases, “mode of representing, or of
expressing, phenomena:”i provided it be clearly seen that the process is
not Induction, but something radically different.

jWhat more may kusefully bek said on the subject of Colligation, or of
the correlative expression invented by Dr. Whewell, the Explication of
Conceptions,[†] and generally on the subject of ideas and mental
representations as connected with the study of facts, will find a more
appropriate place in the Fourth Book, on the Operations Subsidiary to
Induction: to which lI must refer the readerl for the removal of any
difficulty which the present discussion may have left.ja

Edition: current; Page: [306]


CHAPTER III: Of the Ground of Induction

§ 1. [Axiom of the uniformity of the course of nature] Induction
properly so called, as distinguished from those mental operations,
sometimes though improperly designated by the name, which I have
attempted in the preceding chapter to characterize, may, then, be
summarily defined as Generalization from Experience. It consists in
inferring from some individual instances in which a phenomenon is
observed to occur, that it occurs in all instances of a certain class;
namely, in all which resemble the former, in what are regarded as the
material circumstances.

In what way the material circumstances are to be distinguished from
those which are immaterial, or why some of the circumstances are
material and others not so, we are not yet ready to point out. We must
first observe, that there is a principle implied in the very statement
of what Induction is; an assumption with regard to the course of nature
and the order of the universe; namely, that there are such things in
nature as parallel cases; that what happens once, will, under a
sufficient degree of similarity of circumstances, happen again, and not
only again, but aas often as the same circumstances recura. This, I say,
is an assumption, involved in every case of induction. And, if we
consult the actual course of nature, we find that the assumption is
warrantedb. The universe, cso far as known to usc, is so constituted,
that whatever is true in any one case, is true in all cases of a certain
description; the only difficulty is, to find what description.

This universal fact, which is our warrant for all dinferencesd from
experience, has been described by different philosophers in different
forms of language: that the course of nature is uniform; that the
universe is governed by general laws; and the like. One of the most
usual of these modes of expression, but also one of the most inadequate,
is that which has been brought into familiar use by the metaphysicians
of the school of Reid and Stewart. The disposition of the human mind to
generalize from experience,—a propensity considered by these
philosophers as an instinct of our nature,—they usually describe under
esome such name ase “our intuitive conviction that the Edition: current;
Page: [307] future will resemble the past.” Now it has been well pointed
out fby Mr. Bailey* thatf (whether the tendency be or not an original
and ultimate element of our nature), Time, in its modifications of past,
present, and future, has no concern either with the belief itself, or
with the grounds of it. We believe that fire will burn to-morrow,
because it burned to-day and yesterday; but we believe, on precisely the
same grounds, that it burned before we were born, and that it burns this
very day in Cochin-China. It is not from the past to the future, as past
and future, that we infer, but from the known to the unknown; from facts
observed to facts unobserved; from what we have perceived, or been
directly conscious of, to what has not come within our experience. In
this last predicament is the whole region of the future; but also the
vastly greater portion of the present and of the past.

Whatever be the most proper mode of expressing it, the proposition that
the course of nature is uniform, is the fundamental principle, or
general axiom, of Induction. It would yet be a great error to offer this
large generalization as any explanation of the inductive process. On the
contrary, I hold it to be itself an instance of induction, and induction
by no means of the most obvious kind. Far from being the first induction
we make, it is one of the last, or at all events one of those which are
latest in attaining strict philosophical accuracy. As a general maxim,
indeed, it has scarcely entered into the minds of any but philosophers;
nor even by them, as we shall have many opportunities of remarking, have
its extent and limits been always very justly conceived. gThe truth is,
that this great generalization is itself founded on prior
generalizations. The obscurer laws of nature were discovered by means of
it, but the more obvious ones must have been understood and assented to
as general truths before it was ever heard of. We should never have
thought of affirming that all phenomena take place according to general
laws, if we had not first arrived, in the case of a great multitude of
phenomena, at some knowledge of the laws themselves; which could be done
no otherwise than by induction. In what sense, then, can a principle,
which is so far from being our earliest induction, be regarded as our
warrant for all the others? In the only sense, in which (as we have
already seen)g the general propositions which we place at the head of
our reasonings when we throw them into syllogisms, ever really
contribute to their validity. hAs Archbishop Whately Edition: current;
Page: [308] remarks,h[*] every induction is a syllogism with the major
premise suppressed; or (as I prefer expressing it) ievery induction may
be thrown into the form of a syllogism, by supplying a major premise. If
this be actually done, the principle which we are now considering, that
of the uniformity of the course of nature, will appear as the ultimate
major premise of all inductions, and will, therefore, stand to all
inductions in the relation in which, as has been shown at so much
length, the major proposition of a syllogism always stands to the
conclusion; not contributing at all to prove it, but being a necessary
condition of its being proved; since no conclusion is proved, for which
there cannot be found a true major premise.*

Edition: current; Page: [309]
lThe statement, that the uniformity of the course of nature is the
ultimate major premise in all cases of induction, may be thought to
require some explanation. The immediate major premise in every inductive
argument, it certainly is not. Of that, Archbishop Whately’s must be
held to be the correct Edition: current; Page: [310] account. mThe
induction, “John, Peter, n&c. are mortal, therefore all mankind are
mortal,” may, as he justly says, be thrown into a syllogism by prefixing
as a major premise (what is at any rate a necessary condition of the
validity of the argument) namely, that owhat is true of John, Peter,o
&c. is true of all mankind.m But pqhow came we by thisq major premise?
It is not self-evident; nay, in all cases of unwarranted generalization,
it is not true. How, then, is it arrived at? Necessarily either by
induction or ratiocination; and if by induction,p the process, like all
other inductive arguments, may be thrown into the form of a syllogism.
rThis previous syllogism it is, therefore, necessary to construct. There
is, in the long run, only one possible construction. The real proof that
swhats is true of John, Peter, &c. is true of all mankind, can only be,
that a different supposition would be inconsistent with the uniformity
which we know to exist in the course of nature. Whether there would be
this inconsistency or not, may be a matter of long and delicate inquiry;
but unless there would, we have no sufficient ground for the major of
the inductive syllogism. It hence appears, that if we throw the whole
course of any inductive argument into a series of syllogisms, we shall
arrive by more or fewer steps at an ultimate syllogism, which will have
for its major premise the principle, or axiom, of the uniformity of the
course of nature.rl*

Edition: current; Page: [311]
It was not to be expected that in the case of this axiom, any more than
of other axioms, there should be unanimity among uthinkersu with respect
to the grounds on which it is to be received as true. I have already
stated that I regard it as itself a generalization from experience.
Others hold it to be a principle which, antecedently to any verification
by experience, we are compelled by the constitution of our thinking
faculty to assume as true. Having so recently, and at so much length,
combated a similar doctrine as applied to the axioms of mathematics, by
arguments which are in a great measure applicable to the present case, I
shall defer the more particular discussion of this controverted point in
regard to the fundamental axiom of induction, until a more advanced
period of our inquiry.* At present it is of more importance to
understand thoroughly the import of the axiom itself. For the
proposition, that the course of nature is uniform, possesses rather the
brevity suitable to popular, than the precision requisite in
philosophical language: its terms require to be explained, and a
stricter than their ordinary signification given to them, before the
truth of the assertion can be admitted.

§ 2. [Axiom of the uniformity of nature not true in every sense.
Induction per enumerationem simplicem] Every person’s consciousness
assures him that he does not always expect uniformity in the course of
events; he does not always believe that the unknown will be similar to
the known, that the future will resemble the past. Nobody believes that
the succession of rain and fine weather will be the same in every future
year as in the present. Nobody expects to have the same dreams repeated
every night. On the contrary, everybody mentions it as something
extraordinary, if the course of nature is constant, and resembles
itself, in these particulars. To look for constancy where constancy is
not to be expected, as for instance that a day which has once brought
good fortune will always be a fortunate day, is justly accounted
superstition.

The course of nature, in truth, is not only uniform, it is also
infinitely various. Some phenomena are always seen to recur in the very
same combinations in which we met with them at first; others seem
altogether capricious; while some, which we had been accustomed to
regard as bound down exclusively to a particular set of combinations, we
unexpectedly find detached from some of the elements with which we had
hitherto found them conjoined, and united to others of quite a contrary
description. To an inhabitant of Central Africa, fifty years ago, no
fact probably appeared to rest on more uniform experience than this,
that all human beings are black. To Europeans, not many years ago, the
proposition, All swans are white, appeared an equally unequivocal
instance of uniformity in the course of nature. Further experience has
proved to both that they were mistaken; but they had Edition: current;
Page: [312] to wait fifty centuries for this experience. During that
long time, mankind believed in an uniformity of the course of nature
where no such uniformity really existed.

According to the notion which the ancients entertained of induction, the
foregoing were cases of as legitimate inference as any inductions
whatever. In these two instances, in which, the conclusion being false,
the ground of inference must have been insufficient, there was,
nevertheless, as much ground for it as this conception of induction
admitted of. The induction of the ancients has been well described by
Bacon, under the name of “Inductio per enumerationem simplicem, ubi non
reperitur instantia contradictoria.”[*] It consists in ascribing the
character of general truths to all propositions which are true in every
instance that we happen to know of. This is the kind of induction awhich
is natural to the mind when unaccustomed to scientific methods. The
tendency, which some call an instinct, and which others account for by
association, to infer the future from the past, the known from the
unknown, is simply a habit of expecting that what has been found true
once or several times, and never yet found false, will be found true
again. Whether the instances are few or many, conclusive or
inconclusive, does not much affect the matter: these are considerations
which occur only on reflection; the unprompted tendency of the mind is
to generalize its experience, provided this points all in one direction;
provided no other experience of a conflicting character comes unsought.
The notion of seeking it, of experimenting for it, of interrogating
nature (to use Bacon’s expression)[†] is of much later growth. The
observation of nature, by uncultivated intellects, is purely passive:
they bacceptb the facts which present themselves, without taking the
trouble of searching for more: it is a superior mind only which asks
itself what facts are needed to enable it to come to a csafec
conclusion, and then looks out for these.

But though we have always a propensity to generalize from unvarying
experience, we are not always warranted in doing so. Before we can be at
liberty to conclude that something is universally true because we have
never known an instance to the contrary, dwe must have reason to
believed that if there were in nature any instances to the contrary, we
should have known of them. This assurance, in the great majority of
cases, we cannot have, or can have only in a very moderate degree. The
possibility of having it, is the foundation on which we shall see
hereafter that induction by simple enumeration may in some remarkable
cases amount epractically toe proof.* No such Edition: current; Page:
[313] assurance, however, can be had, on any of the ordinary subjects of
scientific inquiry. Popular notions are usually founded on induction by
simple enumeration; in science it carries us but a little way. We are
forced to begin with it; we must often rely on it provisionally, in the
absence of means of more searching investigation. But, for the accurate
study of nature, we require a surer and a more potent instrument.

It was, above all, by pointing out the insufficiency of this rude and
loose conception of Induction, that Bacon merited the title so generally
awarded to him, of Founder of the Inductive Philosophy. The value of his
own contributions to a more philosophical theory of the subject has
certainly been exaggerated. Although (along with some fundamental
errors) his writings contain, more or less fully developed, several of
the most important principles of the Inductive Method, physical
investigation has now far outgrown the Baconian conception of Induction.
Moral and political inquiry, indeed, are as yet far behind that
conception. The current and approved modes of reasoning on these
subjects are still of the same vicious description against which Bacon
protested; the method almost exclusively employed by those professing to
treat such matters inductively, is the very inductio per enumerationem
simplicem which he condemns; and the experience which we hear so
confidently appealed to by all sects, parties, and interests, is still,
in his own emphatic words, mera palpatio.[*]

§ 3. [The question of Inductive Logic stated] In order to a better
understanding of the problem which the logician must solve if he would
establish a scientific theory of Induction, let us compare a few cases
of incorrect inductions with others which are acknowledged to be
legitimate. Some, we know, which were believed for centuries to be
correct, were nevertheless incorrect. That all swans are white, cannot
have been a good induction, since the conclusion has turned out
erroneous. The experience, however, on which the conclusion rested, was
genuine. From the earliest records, the testimony of athe inhabitants of
the known world was unanimous on the point. The uniform experience,
therefore, of the inhabitants of the known world, agreeing in a common
result, without one known instance of deviation from that result, is not
always sufficient to establish a general conclusion.

But let us now turn to an instance apparently not very dissimilar to
this. Mankind were wrong, it seems, in concluding that all swans were
white: are we also wrong, when we conclude that all men’s heads grow
above their shoulders, and never below, in spite of the conflicting
testimony of the naturalist Pliny?[†] As there were black swans, though
civilized bpeopleb had Edition: current; Page: [314] existed for three
thousand years on the earth without meeting with them, may there not
also be “men whose heads do grow beneath their shoulders,”[*]
notwithstanding a rather less perfect unanimity of negative testimony
from cobservers? Most persons would answer No; it was more credible that
a bird should vary in its colour, than that dmen should vary in the
relative position of theird principal organs. And there is no doubt that
in so saying they would be right: but to say why they are right, would
be impossible, without entering more deeply than is usually done, into
the true theory of Induction.

Again, there are cases in which we reckon with the most unfailing
confidence upon uniformity, and other cases in which we do not count
upon it at all. In some we feel complete assurance that the future will
resemble the past, the unknown be precisely similar to the known. In
others, however invariable may be the result obtained from the instances
which ehave beene observed, we draw from them no more than a very feeble
presumption that the like result will hold in all other cases. That a
straight line is the shortest distance between two points, we do not
doubt to be true even in the region of the fixed stars.* When a chemist
announces the existence and properties of a newly-discovered substance,
if we confide in his accuracy, we feel assured that the conclusions he
has arrived at will hold universally, though the induction be founded
but on a single instance. We do not withhold our assent, waiting for a
repetition of the experiment; or if we do, it is from a doubt whether
the one experiment was properly made, not whether if properly made it
would be conclusive. Here, then, is a general law of nature, inferred
without hesitation from a single instance; an universal proposition from
a singular one. Now mark another case, and contrast it with this. Not
all the instances which have been observed since the beginning of the
world, in support of the general proposition that all crows are black,
would be deemed a sufficient presumption of the truth of the
proposition, to outweigh the testimony of one unexceptionable witness
who should affirm that in some region of the earth not fully explored,
he had caught and examined a crow, and had found it to be grey.

Why is a single instance, in some cases, sufficient for a complete
induction, while in others, myriads of concurring instances, without a
single exception known or presumed, go such a very little way towards
establishing an universal proposition? Whoever can answer this question
knows more of the philosophy of logic than the wisest of the ancients,
and has solved the fproblem of induction.

Edition: current; Page: [315]


CHAPTER IV: Of Laws of Nature

§ 1. [The general regularity in nature is a tissue of partial
regularities, called laws] In the contemplation of that uniformity in
the course of nature, which is assumed in every inference from
experience, one of the first observations that present themselves is,
that the uniformity in question is not properly uniformity, but
uniformities. The general regularity results from the co-existence of
partial regularities. The course of nature in general is constant,
because the course of each of the various phenomena that compose it is
so. A certain fact invariably occurs whenever certain circumstances are
present, and does not occur when they are absent; the like is true of
another fact; and so on. From these separate threads of connexion
between parts of the great whole which we term nature, a general tissue
of connexion unavoidably weaves itself, by which the whole is held
together. If A is always accompanied by D, B by E, and C by F, it
follows that A B is accompanied by D E, A C by D F, B C by E F, and
finally A B C by D E F; and thus the general character of regularity is
produced, which, along with and in the midst of infinite diversity,
pervades all nature.

The first point, therefore, to be noted in regard to what is called the
uniformity of the course of nature, is, that it is itself a complex
fact, compounded of all the separate uniformities which exist in respect
to single phenomena. These various uniformities, when ascertained by
what is regarded as a sufficient induction, we call in common parlance,
Laws of Nature. Scientifically speaking, that title is employed in a
more restricted sense, to designate the uniformities when reduced to
their most simple expression. Thus in the illustration already employed,
there were seven uniformities; all of which, if considered sufficiently
certain, would, in the more lax application of the term, be called laws
of nature. But of the seven, three alone are properly distinct and
independent: these being pre-supposed, the others follow of course. The
three first, therefore, according to the stricter acceptation, are
called laws of nature; the remainder not; because they are in truth mere
cases of the three first; virtually included in them; said, therefore,
to result from them: whoever affirms those three has already affirmed
all the rest.

Edition: current; Page: [316]
To substitute real examples for symbolical ones, the following are three
uniformities, or call them laws of nature: the law that air has weight,
the law that pressure on a fluid is propagated equally in all
directions, and the law that pressure in one direction, not opposed by
aequal pressure in the contrary direction, produces motion, which does
not cease until equilibrium is restored. From these three uniformities
we should be able to predict another uniformity, namely, the rise of the
mercury in the Torricellian tube. This, in the stricter use of the
phrase, is not a law of nature. It is btheb result of laws of nature. It
is a case of each and every one of the three laws: and is the only
occurrence by which they could all be fulfilled. If the mercury were not
sustained in the cbarometerc, and sustained at such a height that the
column of mercury were equal in weight to a column of the atmosphere of
the same diameter; here would be a case, either of the air not pressing
upon the surface of the mercury with the force which is called its
weight, or of the downward pressure on the mercury not being propagated
equally in an upward direction, or of a body pressed in one direction
and not in the direction opposite, either not moving in the direction in
which it is pressed, or stopping before it had attained equilibrium. If
we knew, therefore, the three simple laws, but had never tried the
Torricellian experiment, we might deduce its result from those laws. The
known weight of the air, combined with the position of the apparatus,
would bring the mercury within the first of the three inductions; the
first induction would bring it within the second, and the second within
the third, in the manner which we dcharacterizedd in treating of
Ratiocination. We should thus come to know the more complex uniformity,
independently of specific experience, through our knowledge of the
simpler ones from which it results; though, for reasons which will
appear hereafter, verification by specific experience would still be
desirable, and might possibly be indispensable.

Complex uniformities which, like this, are mere cases of simpler ones,
and have, therefore, been virtually eaffirmede in affirming those, may
with propriety be called laws, but can scarcely, in the strictness of
scientific speech, be termed Laws of Nature. It is the custom fin
science, wherever regularity of any kind can be tracedf, to call the
general proposition which expresses the nature of that regularity, a
law; as when, in mathematics, we speak of the law of decrease of the
successive terms of a converging series. But the expression law of
nature ghas generally been employedg with a sort of tacit reference to
Edition: current; Page: [317] the original sense of the word law,
namely, the expression of the will of a superiorh. When, therefore, it
appeared that any of the uniformities which were observed in nature,
would result spontaneously from certain other uniformities, ino separate
act of creative will being supposed necessary for the production of the
derivative uniformities, thesei have not usually been spoken of as laws
of nature. According to jone mode of expressionj, the question, What are
the laws of nature? may be stated thus:—What are the fewest and simplest
kassumptions, which being granted, the whole existing order of nature
would resultk? Another mode of stating it would be thus: What are the
fewest general propositions from which all the uniformities which exist
in the universe might be deductively inferred?

lEveryl great advance which marks an epoch in the progress of science,
has consisted in a step made towards the solution of this problem. Even
a simple colligation of inductions already made, without any fresh
extension of the inductive inference, is already an advance in that
direction. When Kepler expressed the regularity which exists in the
observed motions of the heavenly bodies, by the three general
mpropositionsm called his laws, he, in so doing, pointed out three
simple nsuppositionsn which, instead of a much greater number, owould
suffice to construct the whole scheme of the heavenly motions, so far as
it was known up to that timeo. A similar and still greater step was made
when these laws, which at first did not seem to be included in any more
general truths, were discovered to be cases of the three laws of motion,
as obtaining among bodies which mutually tend towards one another with a
certain force, and have had a certain instantaneous impulse originally
impressed upon them. After this great discovery, Kepler’s three
propositions, though still called laws, would phardlyp, by any person
accustomed to use language with precision, be termed laws of nature:
that phrase would be reserved for the simpler qand more generalq laws
into which Newton ris said to haver resolved them.

Edition: current; Page: [318]
According to this language, every well-grounded inductive generalization
is either a law of nature, or a result of laws of nature, capable, if
those laws are known, of being predicted from them. And the problem of
Inductive Logic may be summed up in two questions: how to ascertain the
laws of nature; and how, after having ascertained them, to follow them
into their results. On the other hand, we must not suffer ourselves to
imagine that this mode of statement amounts to a real analysis, or to
anything but a mere verbal transformation of the problem; for the
expression, Laws of Nature, means nothing but the uniformities which
exist among natural phenomena (or, in other words, the results of
induction), when reduced to their simplest expression. It is, however,
something to have advanced so far, as to see that the study of nature is
the study of laws, not a law; of uniformities, in the plural number:
that the different natural phenomena have their separate rules or modes
of taking place, which, though much intermixed and entangled with one
another, may, to a certain extent, be studied apart: that (to resume our
former metaphor) the regularity which exists in nature is a web composed
of distinct threads, and only to be understood by tracing each of the
threads separately; for which purpose it is often necessary to unravel
some portion of the web, and exhibit the fibres apart. The rules of
experimental inquiry are the contrivances for unravelling the web.

§ 2. [Scientific induction must be grounded on previous spontaneous
inductions] In thus attempting to ascertain the general order of nature
by ascertaining the particular order of the occurrence of each one of
the phenomena of nature, the most scientific proceeding can be no more
than an improved form of that which was primitively pursued by the human
understanding, awhilea undirected by science. When bmankindb first
formed the idea of studying phenomena according to a stricter and surer
method than that which they had in the first instance spontaneously
adopted, they did not, conformably to the well-meant but impracticable
precept of Descartes, set out from the supposition that nothing had been
already ascertained. Many of the uniformities existing among phenomena
are so constant, and so open to observation, as to force themselves upon
cinvoluntary recognition. Some facts are so perpetually and familiarly
accompanied by certain others, that mankind learnt, as children dlearn,
to expect the one where they found the other, long before they knew how
to put their expectation into words by asserting, in a proposition, the
existence of a connexion between those phenomena. No science was needed
to teach ethat food nourishes, that water drowns, or quenches thirst,
that the sun gives light and heat, that bodies fall to the ground. The
first scientific inquirers assumed these and the like as Edition:
current; Page: [319] known truths, and set out from them to discover
others which were unknown: nor were they wrong in so doing, subject,
however, as they afterwards began to see, to an ulterior revision of
these spontaneous generalizations themselves, when the progress of
knowledge pointed out limits to them, or showed their truth to be
contingent on some fcircumstance not originally attended to. It will
appear, I think, from the subsequent part of our inquiry, that there is
no logical fallacy in this mode of proceeding; but we may see already
that any other mode is rigorously impracticable: since it is impossible
to frame any scientific method of induction, or test of the correctness
of inductions, unless on the hypothesis that some inductions gdeserving
of relianceg have been already made.

Let us revert, for instance, to one of our former illustrations, and
consider why it is that, with exactly the same amount of evidence, both
negative and positive, we did not reject the assertion that there are
black swans, while we should refuse credence to any testimony which
asserted that there were men wearing their heads underneath their
shoulders. The first assertion was more credible than the latter. But
why more credible? So long as neither phenomenon had been actually
witnessed, what reason was there for finding the one harder to be
believed than the other? Apparently because there is less constancy in
the colours of animals, than in the general structure of their hanatomy.
But how do we know this? Doubtless, from experience. It appears, then,
that we need experience to inform us, in what idegree, and in what
cases, ori jsortsj of cases, experience is to be relied on. Experience
must be consulted in order to learn from it under what circumstances
arguments from it will be valid. We have no ulterior test to which we
subject experience in general; but we make experience its own test.
Experience testifies, that among the uniformities which it exhibits or
seems to exhibit, some are more to be relied on than others; and
uniformity, therefore, may be presumed, from any given number of
instances, with a greater degree of assurance, in proportion as the case
belongs to a class in which the uniformities have hitherto been found
more uniform.

This mode of correcting one generalization by means of another, a
narrower generalization by a wider, which common sense suggests and
adopts in practice, is the real type of scientific Induction. All that
art can do is but to give accuracy and precision to this process, and
adapt it to all varieties of cases, without any essential alteration in
its principle.

There are of course no means of applying such a test as that above
described, unless we already possess a general knowledge of the
prevalent Edition: current; Page: [320] character of the uniformities
existing throughout nature. The indispensable foundation, therefore, of
a scientific formula of induction, must be a survey of the inductions to
which mankind have been conducted in unscientific practice; with the
special purpose of ascertaining what kinds of uniformities have been
found perfectly invariable, pervading all nature, and what are those
which have been found to vary with difference of time, place, or other
changeable circumstances.

a§ 3.a [Are there any inductions fitted to be a test of all others?] The
necessity of such a survey is confirmed by the consideration, that the
stronger inductions are the touchstone to which we always endeavour to
bring the weaker. If we find any means of deducing one of the less
strong inductions from stronger ones, it acquires, at once, all the
strength of those from which it is deduced; and even adds to that
strength; since the independent experience on which the weaker induction
previously rested, becomes additional evidence of the truth of the
better established law in which it is now found to be included. We may
have inferred, from historical evidence, that the uncontrolled bpower of
a monarchb, of an aristocracy, or of the majority, will coften be
abusedc: but we are entitled to rely on this generalization with much
greater assurance when it is shown to be a corollary from still better
established dfacts; the very low degree of elevation of character ever
yet attained by the average of mankind, and the little efficacy, for the
most part, of the modes of education hitherto practised, in maintaining
the predominance of reason and conscience over the selfish
propensitiesd. It is at the same time obvious that even these emore
general factse derive an accession of evidence from the testimony which
history bears to the effects of despotism. The strong induction becomes
still stronger when a weaker one has been bound up with it.

On the other hand, if an induction conflicts with stronger inductions,
or with conclusions capable of being correctly deduced from them, then,
unless on reconsideration it should appear that some of the stronger
inductions have been fexpressed with greater universality than their
evidence warrantsf, the weaker one must give way. The opinion so long
prevalent that a comet, or any other unusual appearance in the heavenly
regions, was the precursor of Edition: current; Page: [321] calamities
to mankind, or to those gat leastg who witnessed it; the belief in the
veracity of the oracles of Delphi or Dodona; the reliance on astrology,
or on the weather-prophecies in almanacks, were doubtless inductions
supposed to be grounded on experience:* and faith in such delusions
seems quite capable of holding out against a great multitude of
failures, provided it be nourished by a reasonable number of casual
coincidences between the prediction and the event. What has really put
an end to these insufficient inductions, is their inconsistency with the
stronger inductions subsequently obtained by scientific inquiry,
respecting the causes on which terrestrial events really depend; and
where those scientific truths have not yet penetrated, the same or
similar delusions still prevail.

It may be affirmed as a general principle, that all inductions, whether
strong or weak, which can be connected kbyk ratiocination, are
confirmatory of one another; while any which lead deductively to
consequences that are incompatible, become mutually each other’s test,
showing that one or other Edition: current; Page: [322] must be given
up, or at least more guardedly expressed. In the case of inductions
which confirm each other, the one which becomes a conclusion from
ratiocination rises to at least the level of certainty of the weakest of
those from which it is deduced; while in general all are more or less
increased in certainty. Thus the Torricellian experiment, though a mere
case of three more general laws, not only strengthened greatly the
evidence on which those laws rested, but converted one of them (the
weight of the atmosphere) from a lstilll doubtful generalization into ma
completely established doctrinem.

If, then, a survey of the uniformities which have been ascertained to
exist in nature, should point out some which, as far as any human
purpose requires certainty, may be considered nquite certain and quiten
universal; then by means of these uniformities we may be able to raise
multitudes of other inductions to the same point in the scale. For if we
can show, with respect to any oinductive inferenceo, that either it must
be true, or one of these certain and universal inductions must admit of
an exception; the former generalization will attain the same pcertainty,
and indefeasibleness within the bounds assigned to it, which are the
attributes of the latter. It will be proved to be a law; and if not a
result of other and simpler laws, it will be a law of nature.

There are such certain and universal inductions; and it is because there
are such, that a Logic of Induction is possible.

Edition: current; Page: [323]


CHAPTER V: Of the Law of Universal Causation

§ 1. [The universal law of successive phenomena is the Law of Causation]
The phenomena of nature exist in two distinct relations to one another;
that of simultaneity, and that of succession. Every phenomenon is
arelated, in an uniform manner, to some phenomena that coexist with it,
and toa some that have preceded bandb will follow it.

Of the uniformities which exist among synchronous phenomena, the most
important, on every account, are the laws of number; and next to them
those of space, or, in other words, of extension and figure. The laws of
number are common to synchronous and successive phenomena. That two and
two make four, is equally true whether the second two follow the first
two or accompany them. It is as true of days and years as of feet and
inches. The laws of extension and figure (in other words, the theorems
of geometry, from its lowest to its highest branches) are, on the
contrary, laws of simultaneous phenomena only. The various parts of
space, and of the objects which are said to fill space, coexist; and the
unvarying laws which are the subject of the science of geometry, are an
expression of the mode of their coexistence.

cThis is a class of laws, or in other words, of uniformities, for the
comprehension and proof of which it is not necessary to suppose any
lapse of time, any variety of facts or events succeeding one another.
dThe propositions of geometry are independent of the succession of
events.d All things which possess extension, or, in other words, which
fill space, are subject to geometrical laws. Possessing extension, they
possess figure; possessing figure, they must possess some figure in
particular, and have all the properties which geometry assigns to that
figure. If one body be a sphere and eanothere a cylinder, of equal
height and diameter, the one will be exactly two-thirds of the other,
let the nature and quality of the material be what it will. Again,
Edition: current; Page: [324] each body, and each point of a body, must
occupy some place or position among other bodies; and the position of
two bodies relatively to each other, of whatever nature the bodies be,
may be unerringly inferred from the position of each of them relatively
to any third body.

In the laws of number, then, and in those of space, we recognise in the
most unqualified manner, the rigorous universality of which we are in
quest. Those laws have been in all ages the type of certainty, the
standard of comparison for all inferior degrees of evidence. Their
invariability is so perfect, that fit renders usf unable even to
conceive any exception to them; and philosophers have been led, though
(as I have endeavoured to show) erroneously, to consider their evidence
as lying not in experience, but in the original constitution of the
gintellect. If, therefore, from the laws of space and number, we were
able to deduce uniformities of any other description, this would be
conclusive evidence to us that those other uniformities possessed the
same hrigorous certainty. But this we cannot do. From laws of space and
number alone, nothing can be deduced but laws of space and number.

Of all truths relating to phenomena, the most valuable to us are those
which relate to the order of their succession. On a knowledge of these
is founded every reasonable anticipation of future facts, and whatever
power we possess of influencing ithose factsi to our advantage. Even the
laws of geometry are chiefly of practical importance to us as being a
portion of the premises from which the order of the succession of
phenomena may be inferred. jInasmuch as the kmotionk of bodies, the
action of forces, and the propagation of influences of all sorts, take
place in certain lines and over definite spaces, the properties of those
lines and spaces are an important part of the laws to which those
phenomena are themselves subject. lAgainl, motions, forces, or other
influences, and times, are numerable quantities; and the properties of
number are applicable to them as to all other things. mBut though the
laws of number and space are important elements in the ascertainment of
uniformities of succession, they can do nothing towards it when taken by
themselves. They can only be made instrumental to that purpose when we
combine with them additional premises, expressive of uniformities of
succession already known. By taking, for instance, as premises these
propositions, that bodies acted upon by an instantaneous force move with
uniform velocity in straight lines; that bodies acted upon by a
continuous force move with accelerated velocity in straight lines; and
that bodies acted upon by two forces in different directions move in the
diagonal of a parallelogram, Edition: current; Page: [325] whose sides
represent the direction and quantity of those forces; we may by
combining these truths with propositions relating to the properties of
straight lines and of parallelograms, (as that a triangle is half na
parallelogram of the same base and altitude,) deduce another important
uniformity of succession, viz., that a body moving round a centre of
force describes areas proportional to the times. But unless there had
been laws of succession in our premises, there could have been no truths
of succession in our conclusions. A similar remark might be extended to
every other class of phenomena really peculiar; and, had it been
attended to, would have prevented many chimerical attempts at
demonstrations of the indemonstrable, and explanations owhich do not
explaino.

It is not, therefore, enough for us that the laws of space, which are
only laws of simultaneous phenomena, and the laws of number, which
though true of successive phenomena do not relate to their succession,
possess pthep rigorous certainty and universality of which we are in
search. We must endeavour to find some law of succession which has those
same attributes, and is therefore fit to be made the foundation of
processes for discovering, and of a test for verifying, all other
uniformities of succession. This fundamental law must resemble the
truths of geometry in their most remarkable peculiarity, that of never
being, in any instance whatever, defeated or suspended by any change of
circumstances.

qNow among all those uniformities in the succession of phenomena, which
common observation is sufficient to bring to light, there are very few
which have any, even apparent, pretension to this rigorous
indefeasibility: and of those few, one only has been found capable of
completely sustaining it. In that one, however, we recognise a law which
is universal also in another sense; it is coextensive with the entire
field of successive phenomena, all instances whatever of succession
being examples of it. This law is the Law of Causation. rThe truth that
every fact which has a beginning has a cause, is coextensive with human
experience.r

This generalization may appear to some minds not to amount to much,
since after all it asserts only this: “it is a law, that every event
depends on some slaw:” “it is a law, that there is a law for
everything.”s We must not, however, conclude that the generality of the
principle is merely verbal; it will be found on inspection to be no
vague or unmeaning assertion, but a most important and really
fundamental truth.

Edition: current; Page: [326]
a§ 2.a [That is, the universal law of successive phenomena is the law
that every consequent has an invariable antecedent] The notion of Cause
being the root of the whole theory of Induction, it is indispensable
that this idea should, at the very outset of our inquiry, be, with the
utmost practicable degree of precision, fixed and determined. If,
indeed, it were necessary for the bpurposeb of inductive logic that the
strife should be quelled, which has so long raged among the different
schools of metaphysicians, respecting the origin and analysis of our
idea of causation; the promulgation, or at least the general reception,
of a true theory of induction, might be considered desperate for a long
time to come. But cthe science of the Investigation of Truth by means of
Evidence, dis happily independent of many of the controversies which
perplex the science of the ultimate constitution of the human mind, and
is under no necessity of pushing the analysis of mental phenomena to
that extreme limit which alone ought to satisfy a metaphysiciand.

I premise, then, that when in the course of this inquiry I speak of the
cause of any phenomenon, I do not mean a cause which is not itself a
phenomenon; I make no research into the ultimate or ontological cause of
anything. To adopt a distinction familiar in the writings of the Scotch
metaphysicians, and especially of Reid, the causes with which I concern
myself are not efficient, but physical causes. They are causes in that
sense alone, in which one physical fact eise said to be the cause of
another. Of the efficient causes of phenomena, or whether any such
causes exist at all, I am not called upon to give an opinion. The notion
of causation is deemed, by the schools of metaphysics most in vogue at
the present moment, to imply a mysterious and most powerful tie, such as
cannot, or at least does not, exist between any physical fact and that
other physical fact on which it is invariably consequent, and which is
popularly termed its cause: and thence is deduced the supposed necessity
of ascending higher, into the essences and inherent constitution of
things, to find the true cause, fthe causef which is not only followed
by, but actually produces, the effect. No such necessity exists for the
purposes of the present inquiry, nor will any such doctrine be found in
the following pages. gThe only notion of a cause, which the theory of
induction requires, is such a notion as can be gained from experience.
The Law of Causation, the recognition Edition: current; Page: [327] of
which is the main pillar of inductive hscienceh, is but the familiar
truth, that invariability of succession is found by observation to
obtain between every fact in nature and some other fact which has
preceded it; independently of all iconsiderationsi respecting the
ultimate mode of production of phenomena, and of every other question
regarding the nature of “Things in themselves.”

Between the phenomena, then, which exist at any instant, and the
phenomena which exist at the succeeding instant, there is an invariable
order of succession; and, as we said in speaking of the general
uniformity of the course of nature, this web is composed of separate
fibres; this collective order is made up of particular sequences,
obtaining invariably among the separate parts. To certain facts, certain
jfacts always do, and, as we believe, kwill continue tok, succeed. The
invariable antecedent is termed the cause; the invariable consequent,
the effect. And the universality of the law of causation consists in
this, that every consequent is connected in this manner with some
particular antecedent, or set of antecedents. Let the fact be what it
may, if it has begun to exist, it was preceded by some fact or facts,
with which it is invariably connected. For every event there exists some
combination of objects or events, some given concurrence of
circumstances, positive and negative, the occurrence of which lis
alwaysl followed by that phenomenon. We may not have found out what this
concurrence of circumstances may be; but we never doubt that there is
such a one, and that it never occurs without having the phenomenon in
question as its effect or consequence. On the universality of this truth
depends the possibility of reducing the inductive process to rules. The
undoubted assurance we have that there is a law to be found if we only
knew how to find it, will be seen presently to be the source from which
the canons of the Inductive Logic derive their validity.

§ 3. [The cause of a phenomenon is the assemblage of its conditions] It
is seldom, if ever, between a consequent and aaa single antecedent, that
this invariable sequence subsists. It is usually between a consequent
and the sum of several antecedents; the concurrence of ball of themb
being requisite to produce, that is, to be certain of being followed by,
the consequent. In such cases it is very common to single out one only
of the antecedents under the denomination of Cause, calling the others
merely Conditions. Thus, if a cpersonc eats of a particular dish, and
dies in consequence, that is, would not have died if he had not eaten of
it, people would be apt to say that eating of that dish was the cause of
his death. There needs not, however, be any invariable Edition: current;
Page: [328] connexion between eating of the dish and death; but there
certainly is, among the circumstances which took place, some combination
or other on which death is invariably consequent: as, for instance, the
act of eating of the dish, combined with a particular bodily
constitution, a particular state of present health, and perhaps even a
certain state of the atmosphere; the whole of which circumstances
perhaps constituted in this particular case the conditions of the
phenomenon, or, in other words, the set of antecedents which determined
it, and but for which it would not have happened. The real Cause, is the
whole of these antecedents; and we have, philosophically speaking, no
right to give the name of cause to one of them, exclusively of the
others. What, in the case we have supposed, disguises the incorrectness
of the expression, is this: that the various conditions, except the
single one of eating the food, were not events (that is, instantaneous
changes, or successions of instantaneous changes) but states, possessing
more or less of permanency; and might therefore have preceded the effect
by an indefinite length of duration, for want of the event which was
requisite to complete the required concurrence of conditions: while as
soon as that event, eating the food, occurs, no other cause is waited
for, but the effect begins immediately to take place: and hence the
appearance is presented of a more immediate and dclosed connexion
between the effect and that one antecedent, than between the effect and
the remaining conditions. But though we may think proper to give the
name of cause to that one condition, the fulfilment of which completes
the tale, and brings about the effect without further delay; this
condition has really no closer relation to the effect than any of the
other conditions has. eAll the conditions were equally indispensable to
the production of the consequent; and thee statement of the cause is
incomplete, unless in some shape or other we introduce fthem allf. A man
takes mercury, goes out of doors, and catches cold. We say, perhaps,
that the cause of his taking cold was exposure to the air. It is clear,
however, that his having taken mercury may have been a necessary
condition gof hisg catching cold; and though it might consist with usage
to say that the cause of his attack was exposure to the air, to be
accurate we ought to say that the cause was exposure to the air while
under the effect of mercury.

hIf we do not, when aiming at accuracy, enumerate all the conditions, it
is only because some of them will in most cases be understood without
being expressed, or because for the purpose in view they may without
detriment be Edition: current; Page: [329] overlooked. For example, when
we say, the cause of a man’s death was that his foot slipped in climbing
a ladder, we omit as a thing unnecessary to be stated the circumstance
of his weight, though quite as indispensable a condition of the effect
which took place. When we say that the assent of the crown to a bill
makes it law, we mean that the assent, being never given until all the
other conditions are fulfilled, makes up the sum of the conditions,
though no one now regards it as the principal one. When the decision of
a legislative assembly has been determined by the casting vote of the
chairman, we isometimesi say that this one person was the cause of all
the effects which resulted from the enactment. Yet we do not really
suppose that his single vote contributed more to the result than that of
any other person who voted in the affirmative; but, for the purpose we
have in view, which is jto insist on his individual responsibility, the
part which any other person hadj in the transaction is not material.

In all these instances the fact which was dignified kwithk the name of
cause, was the one condition which came last into existence. But it must
not be supposed that in the employment of the term this or any other
rule is always adhered to. Nothing can better show the absence of any
scientific ground for the distinction between the cause of a phenomenon
and its conditions, than the capricious manner in which we select from
among the conditions that which we choose to denominate the cause.
However numerous the conditions may be, there is hardly any of them
which may not, according to the purpose of our immediate discourse,
obtain that nominal pre-eminence. This will be seen by analysing the
conditions of some one familiar phenomenon. For example, a stone thrown
into water falls to the bottom. What are the conditions of this event?
In the first place there must be a stone, and water, and the stone must
be thrown into the water; but these suppositions forming part of the
enunciation of the phenomenon itself, to include them lalso among the
conditionsl would be a vicious tautology; and this class of conditions,
therefore, have never received the name of cause from any but mthe
Aristoteliansm, by whom they were called the material cause, causa
materialis. The next condition is, there must be an earth: and
accordingly it is often said, that the fall of a stone is caused by the
earth; or by a power or property of the earth, or a force exerted by the
earth, all of which are merely roundabout ways of saying that it is
caused by the earth; or, lastly, the earth’s attraction; which also is
only a technical mode of saying that the earth causes the motion,
Edition: current; Page: [330] with the additional particularity that the
motion is towards the earth, which is not a character of the cause, but
of the effect. Let us now pass to another condition. It is not enough
that the earth should exist; the body must be within that distance from
it, in which the earth’s attraction preponderates over that of any other
body. Accordingly we may say, and the expression would be confessedly
correct, that the cause of the stone’s falling is its being within the
sphere of the earth’s attraction. We proceed to a further condition. The
stone is immersed in water: it is therefore a condition of its reaching
the ground, that its specific gravity exceed that of the surrounding
fluid, or in other words that it surpass in weight an equal volume of
water. Accordingly any one would be acknowledged to speak correctly who
said, that the cause of the stone’s going to the bottom is its exceeding
in specific gravity the fluid in which it is immersed.

nThus we see that each and every condition of the phenomenon may be
taken in its turn, and, with equal propriety in common parlance, but
with equal impropriety in scientific discourse, may be spoken of as if
it were the entire cause. And in practice, that particular condition is
usually styled the cause, whose share in the matter is superficially the
most conspicuous, or whose requisiteness to the production of the effect
we happen to be insisting on at the moment. So great is the force of
this last consideration, that it osometimeso induces us to give the name
of cause even to one of the negative conditions. We say, for example,
The parmy was surprised because the sentinel wasp off his post. But
since the sentinel’s absence was not what created the enemy, or qput the
soldiersq asleep, how did it cause them to be surprised? All that is
really meant is, that rthe event would not have happened if he had been
at his dutyr. His being off his post was no producing cause, but the
mere absence of a preventing cause: it was simply equivalent to his
non-existence. From nothing, from a mere negation, no consequences can
proceed. All effects are connected, by the law of causation, with some
set of positive conditions; negative ones, it is true, being almost
always required in addition. In other words, every fact or phenomenon
which has a beginning, invariably arises when some certain combination
of positive facts exists, provided certain other positive facts do not
sexists.

tThere is, no doubt, a tendency (which our first example, that of death
Edition: current; Page: [331] from taking a particular food,
usufficiently illustratesu) to associate the idea of causation with the
proximate antecedent event, rather than with any of the antecedent
states, or permanent facts, which may happen also to be conditions of
the phenomenon; the reason being that the event not only exists, but
begins to exist immediately previous; while the other conditions may
have pre-existed for an indefinite time. And this tendency shows itself
very visibly in the different logical fictions which are resorted to,
even by vmen of sciencev, to avoid the necessity of giving the name of
cause to anything which had existed for an indeterminate length of time
before the effect. Thus, rather than say that the earth causes the fall
of bodies, they wascribe it to a force exerted by the earth, or an
attraction by the earth, abstractions which they can represent to
themselves as exhausted by each effort, and therefore constituting at
each successive instant a fresh fact, simultaneous with, or only
immediately preceding, the effect. Inasmuch as the coming of the
circumstance which completes the assemblage of conditions, is a change
or event, it thence happens that an event is always the antecedent in
closest apparent proximity to the consequent: and this may account for
the illusion which disposes us to look upon the proximate event as
standing more peculiarly in the position of a cause than any of the
antecedent states. But even this peculiarity, of being in closer
proximity to the effect than any other of its conditions, is, as we have
already seen, far from being necessary to the common notion of a cause;
with which notion, on the contrary, any one of the conditions, either
positive or negative, is found, on occasion, completely to accord.*

Edition: current; Page: [332]
The cause, then, philosophically speaking, is the sum total of the
conditions, positive and negative taken together; the whole of the
contingencies of every description, which being realized, the consequent
invariably follows. The negative conditions, however, of any phenomenon,
a special enumeration of which would generally be very prolix, may be
all summed up under one head, namely, the absence of preventing or
counteracting causes. The Edition: current; Page: [333] convenience of
this mode of expression is amainly groundeda on the fact, that the
effects of any cause in counteracting another cause may in most cases
be, with strict scientific exactness, regarded as a mere extension of
its own proper and separate effects. If gravity retards the upward
motion of a projectile, and deflects it into a parabolic trajectory, it
produces, in so doing, the very same kind of effect, and even (as
mathematicians know) the same quantity Edition: current; Page: [334] of
effect, as it does in its ordinary operation of causing the fall of
bodies when simply deprived of their support. If an alkaline solution
mixed with an acid destroys its sourness, and prevents it from reddening
vegetable blues, it is because the specific effect of the alkali is to
combine with the acid, and form a compound with totally different
qualities. This property, which causes of all descriptions possess, of
preventing the effects of other causes by virtue (for the most part) of
the same laws according to which they produce their own,* enables us, by
establishing the general axiom that all causes are liable to be
counteracted in their effects by one another, to dispense with the
consideration of negative conditions entirely, and limit the notion of
cause to the assemblage of the positive conditions of the phenomenon:
one negative condition invariably understood, and the same in all
instances (namely, the absence of dcounteracting causes) being
sufficient, along with the sum of the positive conditions, to make up
the whole set of circumstances on which the phenomenon is dependent.

§ 4. [The distinction of agent and patient illusory] Among the positive
conditions, as we have seen that there are some to which, in common
parlance, the term cause is more readily and frequently awarded, so
there are others to which it is, in ordinary circumstances, refused. In
most cases of causation a distinction is commonly drawn between
something which acts, and some other thing which is acted upon; between
an agent and a patient. Both of these, it would be universally allowed,
are conditions of the phenomenon; but it would be thought absurd to call
the latter the cause, that title being reserved for the former. The
distinction, however, vanishes on examination, or rather is found to be
only verbal; arising from an incident of Edition: current; Page: [335]
mere expression, namely, that the object said to be acted upon, and
which is considered as the scene in which the effect takes place, is
commonly included in the phrase by which the effect is spoken of, so
that if it were also reckoned as part of the cause, the seeming
incongruity would arise of its being supposed to cause itself. In the
instance which we have already had, of falling bodies, the question was
thus put: What is the cause which makes a stone fall? and if the answer
had been “the stone itself,” the expression would have been in apparent
contradiction to the meaning of the word cause. The stone, therefore, is
conceived as the patient, and the earth (or, according to the common and
most unphilosophical practice, aana occult quality of the earth) is
represented as the agent or cause. But that there is nothing fundamental
in the distinction may be seen from this, that bit is quite possible to
conceive the stone as causing its own fall, provided the language
employed be such as to save the mere verbal incongruity. We might say
that the stone moves towards the earth by the properties of the matter
composing it; and according to this mode of presenting the phenomenon,
the stone itself might without impropriety be called the agentb; though,
to save the established doctrine of the inactivity of matter, men
usually prefer here also to ascribe the effect to an occult quality, and
say that the cause is not the stone itself, but the weight or
gravitation of the stone.

Those who have contended for a radical distinction between agent and
patient, have generally conceived the agent as that which causes some
state of, or some change in the state of, another object which is called
the patient. But a little reflection will show that the licence we
assume of speaking of phenomena as states of the various objects which
take part in them, (an artifice of which so much use has been made by
some philosophers, Brown in particular, for the apparent explanation of
phenomena,) is simply a sort of logical fiction, useful sometimes as one
among several modes of expression, but which should never be supposed to
be the cenunciationc of a dscientific truth. Even thosed attributes of
an object which might seem with greatest propriety to be called states
of the object itself, its sensible qualities, its colour, hardness,
shape, and the like, are in reality (as no one has pointed out more
clearly than Brown himself) phenomena of causation, in which the
substance is distinctly the agent, or producing cause, the patient being
our own organs, and those of other sentient beings. What we call estates
of Edition: current; Page: [336] objects, are always sequences into
which fthef objects enter, generally as antecedents or causes; and
things are never more active than in the production of those phenomena
in which they are said to be acted upon. Thus, in the gexample of a
stone falling to the earth, according to the theory of gravitation the
stone is as much an agent as the earth, which not only attracts, but is
itself attracted by, the stone. In the case of a sensation produced in
our organs, the laws of our organization, and even those of our minds,
are as directly operative in determining the effect produced, as the
laws of the outward object.g Though we call prussic acid the agent of a
hperson’s death, the whole of the vital and organic properties of the
patient are as actively instrumental as the poison, in the chain of
effects which so rapidly terminates his sentient existence.h In the
process of education, we may call the teacher the agent, and the scholar
only the material acted upon; yet in truth all the facts which
pre-existed in the scholar’s mind exert either co-operating or
counteracting agencies in relation to the teacher’s efforts. It is not
light alone which is the agent in vision, but light coupled with the
active properties of the eye and brain, and with those of the visible
object. The distinction between agent and patient is merely verbal:
patients are always agents; in a great proportion, indeed, of all
natural phenomena, they are so to such a degree as to react iforcibly on
the causes which acted upon them: and even when this is not the case,
they contribute, in the same manner as any of the other conditions, to
the production of the effect of which they are vulgarly treated as the
mere theatre. All the positive conditions of a phenomenon are alike
agents, alike active; and in any expression of the cause which professes
to be jcompletej, none of them can with reason be excluded, except such
as have already been implied in the words used for describing the
effect; nor by including even these would there be incurred any but a
merely verbal kimproprietyk.

a§ 5. [Case in which the effect consists in giving a property to an
object] There is a case of causation which calls for separate notice, as
it possesses a peculiar feature, and presents a greater degree of
complexity than the common case. It often happens that the effect, or
one of the effects, of a cause, is, not to produce of itself a certain
phenomenon, but to fit something else for producing it. In other words,
there is a case of causation in which the effect Edition: current; Page:
[337] is to invest an object with a certain property. When sulphur,
charcoal, and nitre are put together in certain proportions and in a
certain manner, the effect is, not an explosion, but that the mixture
acquires a property by which, in given circumstances, it will explode.
The various causes, natural and artificial, which educate the human body
or the human mind, have for their principal effect, not to make the body
or mind immediately do anything, but to endow it with certain
properties—in other words, to give assurance that in given circumstances
certain results will take place in it, or as consequences of it.
Physiological agencies often have for the chief part of their operation
to predispose the constitution to some mode of action. To take a simpler
instance than all these: putting a coat of white paint upon a wall does
not merely produce in those who see it done, the sensation of white; it
confers on the wall the permanent property of giving that kind of
sensation. Regarded in reference to the sensation, the putting on of the
paint is a condition of a condition; it is a condition of the wall’s
causing that particular fact. The wall may have been painted years ago,
but it has acquired a property which has lasted till now and will last
longer; the antecedent condition necessary to enable the wall to become
in its turn a condition, has been fulfilled once for all. In a case like
this, where the immediate consequent in the sequence is a property
produced in an object, no one now supposes the property to be a
substantive entity “inherent” in the object. What has been produced is
what, in other language, may be called a state of preparation in an
object for producing an effect. The ingredients of the gunpowder have
been brought into a state of preparation for exploding as soon as the
other conditions of an explosion shall have occurred. In the case of the
gunpowder, this state of preparation consists in a certain collocation
of its particles relatively to one another. In the example of the wall,
it consists in a new collocation of two things relatively to each
other—the wall and the paint. In the example of the moulding influences
on the human mind, its being a collocation at all is only conjectural:
for, even on the materialistic hypothesis, it would remain to be proved
that the increased facility with which the brain sums up a column of
figures when it has been long trained to calculation, is the result of a
permanent new arrangement of some of its material particles. We must,
therefore, content ourselves with what we know, and must include among
the effects of causes, the capacities given to objects of being causes
of other effects. This capacity is not a real thing existing in the
objects; it is but a name for our conviction that they will act in a
particular manner when certain new circumstances arise. We may invest
this assurance of future events with a fictitious objective existence,
by calling it a state of the object. But unless the state consists, as
in the case of the gunpowder it does, in a collocation of particles, it
expresses no present fact; it is but the contingent future fact brought
back under another name.

Edition: current; Page: [338]
It may be thought that this form of causation requires us to admit an
exception to the doctrine that the conditions of a phenomenon—the
antecedents required for calling it into existence—must all be found
among the facts immediately, not remotely, preceding its commencement.
But what we have arrived at is not a correction, it is only an
explanation, of that doctrine. In the enumeration of the conditions
required for the occurrence of any phenomenon, it always has to be
included that objects must be present, possessed of given properties. It
is a condition of the phenomenon explosion that an object should be
present, of one or other of certain kinds, which for that reason are
called explosive. The presence of one of these objects is a condition
immediately precedent to the explosion. The condition which is not
immediately precedent is the cause which produced, not the explosion,
but the explosive property. The conditions of the explosion itself were
all present immediately before it took place, and the general law,
therefore, remains intact.a

a§ 6.a [The cause is not the invariable antecedent, but the
unconditional invariable antecedent] It now remains to advert to a
distinction which is of first-rate importance both for clearing up the
notion of cause, and for obviating a very specious objection often made
against the view which we have taken of the subject.

When we define the cause of anything (in the only sense in which the
present inquiry has any concern with causes) to be “the antecedent which
it invariably follows,” we do not use this phrase as exactly synonymous
with “the antecedent which it invariably has followed in our past
experience.” Such a mode of bconceivingb causation would be liable to
the objection very plausibly urged by Dr. Reid, namely, that according
to this doctrine night must be the cause of day, and day the cause of
night; since these phenomena have invariably succeeded one another from
the beginning of the world.[*] But it is necessary to our using the word
cause, that we should believe not only that the antecedent always has
been followed by the consequent, but that, as long as the present
constitution of things* endures, it always will be so. And this would
not be true of day and night. We do not believe that night Edition:
current; Page: [339] will be followed by day under callc imaginable
circumstances, but only that it will be so provided the sun rises above
the horizon. If the sun ceased to rise, which, for aught we know, may be
perfectly compatible with the general laws of matter, night would be, or
might be, eternal. On the other hand, if the sun is above the horizon,
his light not extinct, and no opaque body between us and him, we believe
firmly that unless a change takes place in the properties of matter,
this combination of antecedents will be followed by the consequent, day;
that if the combination of antecedents could be indefinitely prolonged,
it would be always day; and dthatd if the same combination had always
existed, it would always have been day, quite independently of night as
a previous condition. Therefore is it that we do not call night the
cause, nor even a condition, of day. The existence of the sun (or some
such luminous body), and there being no opaque medium in a straight
line* between that body and the part of the earth where we are situated,
are the sole conditions; and the union of these, without the addition of
any superfluous circumstance, constitutes the cause. This is what
writers mean when they say that the notion of cause involves the idea of
necessity. If there be any meaning which confessedly belongs to the term
necessity, it is unconditionalness. That which is necessary, that which
must be, means that which will be, whatever supposition we may make in
regard to all other things. The succession of day and night evidently is
not necessary in this sense. It is conditional on the occurrence of
other antecedents. That which fwill bef followed by a given consequent
when, and only when, some third circumstance also exists, is not the
cause, even though no case should gever haveg occurred in which the
phenomenon took place without it.

Invariable sequence, therefore, is not synonymous with causation, unless
the sequence, besides being invariable, is unconditional. There are
sequences, as uniform in past experience as any others whatever, which
yet we do not regard as cases of causation, but as conjunctions in some
sort accidental. Such, to han accurate thinkerh, is that of day and
night. The one might have existed for any length of time, and the other
not have followed the sooner for its existence; it follows only if
certain other antecedents exist; and where those antecedents existed, it
would follow in any case. No one, probably, ever called night the cause
of day; mankind must so soon have arrived at the very Edition: current;
Page: [340] obvious generalization, that the state of general
illumination which we call day would follow ifromi the presence of a
sufficiently luminous body, whether darkness had preceded or not.

We may define, therefore, the cause of a phenomenon, to be the
antecedent, or jthej concurrence of antecedents, on which it is
invariably and unconditionally consequent. Or if we adopt the convenient
modification of the meaning of the word cause, which confines it to the
assemblage of positive conditions without the negative, then instead of
“unconditionally,” we must say, “subject to no other than negative
conditions.”

kTo some it may appear, that the sequence between night and day being
invariable in our experience, we have as much ground in this case as
experience can give in any case, for recognising the two phenomena as
cause and effect; and that to say that more is necessary—to require a
belief that the succession is unconditional, or in other words that it
would be invariable under all changes of circumstances, is to
acknowledge in causation an element of belief not derived from
experience. The answer to this is, that it is experience itself which
teaches us that one uniformity of sequence is conditional and another
unconditional. When we judge that the succession of night and day is a
derivative sequence, depending on something else, we proceed on grounds
of experience. It is the evidence of experience which convinces us that
day could equally exist without being followed by night, and that night
could equally exist without being followed by day. To say that these
beliefs are “not generated by our mere observation of sequence,”* is to
forget that twice in every twenty-four hours, when the sky is clear, we
have an experimentum crucis that the cause of day is the sun. We have an
experimental knowledge of the sun which justifies us on experimental
grounds in concluding, that if the sun were always above the horizon
there would be day, though there had been no night, and that if the sun
were always below the horizon there would be night, though there had
been no day. We thus know from experience that the succession of night
and day is not unconditional. Let me add, that the antecedent which is
only conditionally invariable, is not the invariable antecedent. Though
a fact may, in experience, have always been followed by another fact,
yet if the remainder of our experience teaches us that it might not
always be so followed, or if the experience itself is such as leaves
room for a possibility that the known cases may not correctly represent
all possible cases, the hitherto invariable antecedent is not accounted
the cause; but why? Because we are not sure that it is the invariable
antecedent.

Edition: current; Page: [341]
Such cases of sequence as that of day and night not only do not
contradict the doctrine which resolves causation into invariable
sequence, but are necessarily implied in that doctrine.k mIt is evident,
that from a limited number of unconditional sequences, there will result
a much greater number of conditional ones. Certain causes being given,
that is, certain antecedents which are unconditionally followed by
certain consequents; the mere coexistence of these causes will give rise
to an unlimited number of additional uniformities. If two causes exist
together, the effects of both will exist together; and if many causes
coexist, these causes (by what we shall term hereafter the intermixture
of their laws) will give rise to new effects, accompanying or succeeding
one another in some particular order, which order will be invariable
while the causes continue to coexist, but no longer. The motion of the
earth in a given orbit round the sun, is a series of changes which
follow one another as antecedents and consequents, and will continue to
do so while the sun’s attraction, and the force with which the earth
tends to advance in a direct line through space, continue to coexist in
the same quantities as at present. But vary either of these causes, and
nthis particularn succession of motions would cease to take place. The
series of the earth’s motions, therefore, though a case of sequence
invariable within the limits of human experience, is not a case of
causation. It is not unconditional.

oThis distinction between the relations of succession which so far as we
know are unconditional, and those relations, whether of succession or of
coexistence, which, like the earth’s motions, or the succession of day
and night, depend on the existence or on the coexistence of other
antecedent facts—corresponds to the great division which Dr. Whewell and
other writers have made of the field of science, into the investigation
of what they term the Laws of Phenomena, and the investigation of
causes; a phraseology, as I conceive, not philosophically sustainable,
inasmuch as the ascertainment of causes, such causes as the human
faculties can ascertain, namely, causes which are themselves phenomena,
is, therefore, merely the ascertainment of other and more universal Laws
of Phenomena. pAnd let me here observe, that Dr. Whewell, and in some
degree even Sir John Herschel, seem to have misunderstood the meaning of
those writers who, like M. Comte, limit the Edition: current; Page:
[342] sphere of scientific investigation to Laws of Phenomena, and speak
of the inquiry into causes as vain and futile. The causes which M. Comte
designates as inaccessible, are efficient causes. The investigation of
physical, as opposed to efficient, causes (including the study of all
the active forces in Nature, considered as facts of observation) is as
important a part of M. Comte’s conception of science as of Dr.
Whewell’s. His objection to the word cause is a mere matter of
nomenclature, in which, as a matter of nomenclature, I consider him to
be entirely wrong. “Those,” it is justly remarked by Mr. Bailey,* “who,
like M. Comte, object to designate events as causes, are objecting
without any real ground to a mere but extremely convenient
generalization, to a very useful common name, the employment of which
involves, or needs involve, no particular theory.” To which it may be
added, that by rejecting this form of expression, M. Comte leaves
himself without any term for marking a distinction whichp, however
incorrectly expressed, is not only real, but is one of the fundamental
distinctions in science; indeed it is on this alone, as we shall
hereafter find, that the possibility rests of framing a rigorous Canon
of Induction. qAnd as things left without a name are apt to be
forgotten, a Canon of that description is not one of the many benefits
which the philosophy of Induction has received from M. Comte’s great
powers.qo

a§ 7.a [Can a cause be simultaneous with its effect?] Does a cause
always stand with its effect in the relation of antecedent and
consequent? Do we not often say of two simultaneous facts that they are
cause and effect—as when we say that fire is the cause of warmth, the
sun and moisture the cause of vegetation, and the like? bSinceb a cause
does not necessarily perish because its effect has been produced, the
two cthingsc do very generally coexist; and there are some appearances,
and some common expressions, seeming to imply not only that causes may,
but that they must, be contemporaneous with their effects. Cessante
causâ cessat et effectus, has been a dogma of the schools: the necessity
for the continued existence of the cause in order to the continuance of
the effect, seems to have been once a dgenerally received doctrined.
eKepler’s numerous attempts to account for the fmotionsf of the heavenly
bodies on mechanical principles, were rendered abortive by his Edition:
current; Page: [343] always supposing that the gagencyg which set those
bodies in motion must continue to operate in order to keep up the motion
which it at first produced. Yet there were at all times many familiar
instances hof the continuance of effects, long after their causes had
ceasedh. A coup de soleil gives a ipersoni brain fever: will the fever
go off as soon as he is moved out of the sunshine? A sword is run
through his body: must the sword remain in his body in order that he may
continue dead? A ploughshare once made, remains a ploughshare, without
any continuance of heating and hammering, and even after the man who
heated and hammered it has been gathered to his fathers. On the other
hand, the pressure which forces up the mercury in an exhausted tube must
be continued in order to sustain it in the tube. This (it may be
jrepliedj) is because another force is acting without intermission, the
force of gravity, which would restore it to its level, unless
counterpoised by a force equally constant. But again: a tight bandage
causes pain, which pain will sometimes go off as soon as the bandage is
removed. The illumination which the sun diffuses over the earth ceases
when the sun goes down.

kThere is, therefore, a distinction to be drawn.k The conditions which
are necessary for the first production of a phenomenon, are occasionally
also necessary for its continuance; lthoughl more commonly its
continuance requires no condition except negative ones. Most things,
once produced, continue as they are, until something changes or destroys
them; but some require the permanent presence of the agencies which
produced them at first. These maym, if we please,m be considered as
instantaneous phenomena, requiring to be renewed at each instant by the
cause by which they were at first generated. Accordingly, the
illumination of any given point of space has always been looked upon as
an instantaneous fact, which perishes and is perpetually renewed as long
as the necessary conditions subsist. If we adopt this language we navoid
the necessity ofn admitting that the continuance of the cause is ever
required to maintain the effect. We may say, it is not required to
maintain, but to reproduce, the effect, or else to counteract some force
tending to destroy it. And this may be a convenient phraseology. But it
is only a phraseology. The fact remains, that in some cases (though
othoseo are a minority) the continuance of the conditions which produced
an effect is necessary to the continuance of the effect.

Edition: current; Page: [344]
As to the ulterior question, whether it is strictly necessary that the
cause, or assemblage of conditions, should precede, by ever so short an
instant, the production of the effect, (a question raised and argued
with much ingenuity by pSir John Herschel in an Essay already quoted,*)
the inquiry is of no consequence for our present purposep. There
certainly are cases in which the effect follows without any interval
perceptible rbyr our faculties; and when there is an interval, we cannot
tell by how many intermediate links imperceptible to us that interval
may really be filled up. But even granting that an effect may commence
simultaneously with its cause, sthe view I have takens of causation is
in no way practically affected. Whether the cause and its effect be
necessarily successive or not, tthe beginning of a phenomenon is what
implies a cause, and causation ist the law of the succession of
phenomena. uIf these axiomsu be grantedv, we can afford, though wIw see
no necessity for doing so, to drop the words antecedent and consequent
as applied to cause and effect. xIx have no objection to define a cause,
the assemblage of phenomena, which occurring, some other phenomenon
invariably commences, or has its origin. Whether the effect coincides in
point of time with, or immediately follows, the hindmost of its
conditions, is immaterial. At all events it does not precede it; and
when we are in doubt, between two co-existent phenomena, which is cause
and which effect, we rightly deem the question solved if we can
ascertain which of them preceded the other.

a§ 8.a [Idea of a Permanent Cause, or original natural agent] It
continually happens that several different phenomena, which are not in
the slightest degree dependent or conditional on one another, are found
all to depend, as the phrase is, on one and the same agent; in other
words, one and the same phenomenon is seen to be followed by several
sorts of effects quite heterogeneous, but which go on simultaneously one
with another; provided, of course, that all other conditions requisite
for each of them also exist. Thus, Edition: current; Page: [345] the sun
produces the celestial motions, it produces daylight, and it produces
heat. The earth causes the fall of heavy bodies, and it also, in its
capacity of ba greatb magnet, causes the phenomena of the magnetic
needle. A crystal of galena causes the sensations of hardness, of
weight, of cubical form, of grey colour, and many others between which
we can trace no interdependence. The purpose to which the phraseology of
Properties and Powers is specially adapted, is the expression of this
sort of cases. When the same phenomenon is followed (either subject or
not to the presence of other conditions) by effects of different and
dissimilar orders, it is usual to say that each different sort of effect
is produced by a different property of the cause. Thus we distinguish
the attractive or gravitative property of the earth, and its magnetic
property: the gravitative, luminiferous, and calorific properties of the
sun: the colour, shape, weight, and hardness of cac crystal. These are
mere phrases, which explain nothing, and add nothing to our knowledge of
the subject; but, considered as abstract names denoting the connexion
between the different effects produced and the object which produces
them, they are a very powerful instrument of abridgment, and of that
acceleration of the process of thought which abridgment accomplishes.

This class of considerations leads dto a conception which we shall find
eto be of great importancee, that of a Permanent Cause, or original
natural agent. There exist in nature a number of permanent causes, which
have subsisted ever since the human race has been in existence, and for
an indefinite and probably fanf enormous length of time previous. The
sun, the earth, and planets, with their various constituents, air,
water, and gother distinguishable substances, whether simple or
compound, of which nature is made up, are such Permanent Causes. These
have existed, and the effects or consequences which they were fitted to
produce have taken place (as often as the other conditions of the
production met,) from the very beginning of our experience. But we can
give hno account of the origin of the Permanent Causes themselves. Why
these particular natural agents existed originally and no others, or why
they are commingled in such and such proportions, and distributed in
such and such a manner throughout space, is a question we cannot answer.
More than this: we can discover nothing regular in the distribution
itself; we can reduce it to no uniformity, to no law. There are no means
by which, from the distribution of these causes or agents in one part of
space, we could conjecture whether a similar distribution prevails in
another. The Edition: current; Page: [346] coexistence, therefore, of
Primeval Causes, ranks, to us, among merely casual concurrences: and all
those sequences or coexistences among the effects of several such
causes, which, though invariable while those causes coexist, would, if
the coexistence terminated, terminate along with it, we do not class as
cases of causation, or laws of nature: we can only calculate on finding
ithese sequences or coexistencesi where we know by direct evidence, that
the natural agents on the properties of which they ultimately depend,
are distributed in the requisite manner. These Permanent Causes are not
always objects; they are sometimes events, that is to say, periodical
cycles of events, that being the only mode in which events can possess
the property of permanence. Not only, for instance, is the earth itself
a permanent cause, or primitive natural agent, but the earth’s rotation
is so too: it is a cause which has produced, from the earliest period,
(by the aid of other necessary conditions,) the succession of day and
night, the ebb and flow of the sea, and many other effects, while, as we
can assign no cause (except conjecturally) for the rotation itself, it
is entitled to be ranked as a primeval cause. It is, however, only the
origin of the rotation which is mysterious to us: once begun, its
continuance is accounted for by the first law of motion (that of the
permanence of jrectilinearj motion once impressed) combined with the
gravitation of the parts of the earth towards one another.

All phenomena without exception which begin to exist, that is, all
except the primeval causes, are effects either immediate or remote of
those primitive facts, or of some combination of them. There is no Thing
produced, no event happening, in the kknownk universe, which is not
connected by an uniformity, or invariable sequence, with some one or
more of the phenomena which preceded it; insomuch that it will happen
again as often as those phenomena occur again, and as no other
phenomenon lhaving the characterl of a counteracting cause shall
coexist. These antecedent phenomena, again, were connected in a similar
manner with some that preceded them; and so on, until we reach, as the
ultimate step mattainable by usm, either the properties of some one
primeval cause, or the conjunction of several. The whole of the
phenomena of nature were therefore the necessary, or in other words, the
unconditional, consequences of nsome formern collocation of the
Permanent Causes.

The state of the whole universe at any instant, we believe to be the
consequence of its state at the previous instant; insomuch that oone
whoo knew all the agents which exist at the present moment, their
collocation in space, and pallp their properties, in other words, the
laws of their agency, qcould predict Edition: current; Page: [347] the
whole subsequent history of the universe, at least runlessr some new
volition of a power capable of controlling the universe should
supervene.* And if any particular state of the entire universe wcould
ever recur a second time,w all subsequent states would return too, and
history would, like a circulating decimal of many figures, periodically
repeat itself:

-   

    Jam redit et virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna. . . .
-   

    Alter erit tum Tiphys, et altera quæ vehat Argo
-   

    Delectos heroas; erunt quoque altera bella,
-   

    Atque iterum ad Trojam magnus mittetur Achilles.[*]

And though things do not really revolve in this eternal round, the whole
series of events in the history of the universe, past and future, is not
the less capable, in its own nature, of being constructed à priori by
any one whom we can suppose acquainted with the original distribution of
all natural agents, and with the whole of their properties, that is, the
laws of succession existing between them and their effects: saving xthe
farx more than human powers of Edition: current; Page: [348] combination
and calculation which would be required, even in one possessing the
data, for the actual performance of the task.

a§ 9.a [Uniformities of co-existence between effects of different
permanent causes, are not laws] Since everything which occurs bis
determined by laws of causation and collocations of the original causes,
it follows that the coexistences which are observable among effects
cannot be themselves the subject of any csimilarc set of laws, distinct
from laws of causation. Uniformities there are, as well of coexistence
as of succession, among deffects; but these must in all cases be a mere
result either of the identity or of the coexistence of their causes: if
the causes did not coexist, neither could the effects. And these causes
being also effects of prior causes, and these of others, until we reach
the primeval causes, it follows that (except in the case of effects
which can be traced immediately or remotely to one and the same cause)
the coexistences of phenomena can in no case be universal, unless the
coexistences of the primeval causes to which the effects are ultimately
traceable, can be reduced to an universal law: but we have seen that
they cannot. There are, accordingly, no original and independent, in
other words no unconditional, uniformities of coexistence, between
effects of different causes; if they coexist, it is only because the
causes have casually coexisted. The only independent and unconditional
coexistences which are sufficiently invariable to have any claim to the
character of laws, are between different and mutually independent
effects of the same cause; in other words, between different properties
of the same natural agent. This portion of the Laws of Nature will be
treated of in the latter part of the present Book, under the name of the
Specific Properties of Kinds.e

a§ 10. [Theory of the Conservation of Force] Since the first publication
of the present treatise, the sciences of physical nature have made a
great advance in generalization, through the doctrine known as the
Conservation or Persistence of Force. This imposing edifice of theory,
the building and laying out of which has for some time been the
principal occupation of the most systematic minds among physical
enquirers, consists of two stages: one, of ascertained fact, the other
containing a large element of hypothesis.

To begin with the first. It is proved by numerous facts, both natural
and of artificial production, that agencies which had been regarded as
distinct and independent sources of force—heat, electricity, chemical
action, nervous and muscular action, momentum of moving bodies—are
interchangeable, in definite and fixed quantities, with one another. It
had long been known that Edition: current; Page: [349] these dissimilar
phenomena had the power, under certain conditions, of producing one
another: what is new in the theory is a more accurate estimation of what
this production consists in. What happens is, that the whole or part of
the one kind of phenomena disappears, and is replaced by phenomena of
one of the other descriptions, and that there is an equivalence in
quantity between the phenomena that have disappeared and those which
have been produced, insomuch that if the process be reversed, the very
same quantity which had disappeared will reappear, without increase or
diminution. Thus, the amount of heat which will raise the temperature of
a pound of water one degree of the thermometer, will, if expended, say
in the expansion of steam, lift a weight of 772 pounds one foot, or a
weight of one pound 772 feet: and the same exact quantity of heat can,
by certain means, be recovered, through the expenditure of exactly that
amount of mechanical motion.

The establishment of this comprehensive law has led to a change in the
language in which the scientific world had been accustomed to speak of
what are called the Forces of nature. Before this correlation between
phenomena most unlike one another had been ascertained, their unlikeness
had caused them to be referred to so many distinct forces. Now that they
are known to be convertible into one another without loss, they are
spoken of as all of them results of one and the same force, manifesting
itself in different modes. This force (it is said) can only produce a
limited and definite quantity of effect, but always does produce that
definite quantity; and produces it, according to circumstances, in one
or another of the forms, or divides it among several, but so as
(according to a scale of numerical equivalents established by
experiment) always to make up the same sum: and no one of the
manifestations can be produced, save by the disappearance of the
equivalent quantity of another, which in its turn, in appropriate
circumstances, will reappear undiminished. This mutual
interchangeability of the forces of nature, according to fixed numerical
equivalents, is the part of the new doctrine which rests on irrefragable
fact.

To make the statement true, however, it is necessary to add, that an
indefinite and perhaps immense interval of time may elapse between the
disappearance of the force in one form and its reappearance in another.
A stone thrown up into the air with a given force, and falling back
immediately, will, by the time it reaches the earth, recover the exact
amount of mechanical momentum which was expended in throwing it up,
deduction being made of a small portion of motion which has been
communicated to the air. But if the stone has lodged on a height, it may
not fall back for years, or perhaps ages, and until it does, the force
expended in raising it is temporarily lost, being represented only by
what, in the language of the new theory, is called potential energy. The
coal imbedded in the earth is considered by the theory as a vast
reservoir of force, which has remained dormant for many geological
Edition: current; Page: [350] periods, and will so remain until, by
being burnt, it gives out the stored-up force in the form of heat. Yet
it is not supposed that this force is a material thing which can be
confined by bounds, as used to be thought of latent heat when that
important phenomenon was first discovered. What is meant is that when
the coal does at last, by combustion, generate a quantity of heat
(transformable like all other heat into mechanical momentum, and the
other forms of force), this extrication of heat is the reappearance of a
force derived from the sun’s rays, expended myriads of ages ago in the
vegetation of the organic substances which were the material of the
coal.

Let us now pass to the higher stage of the theory of Conservation of
Force; the part which is no longer a generalization of proved fact, but
a combination of fact and hypothesis. Stated in few words, it is as
follows: That the Conservation of Force is really the Conservation of
Motion; that in the various interchanges between the forms of force, it
is always motion that is transformed into motion. To establish this, it
is necessary to assume motions which are hypothetical. The supposition
is, that there are motions which manifest themselves to our senses only
as heat, electricity, &c., being molecular motions; oscillations,
invisible to us, among the minute particles of bodies; and that these
molecular motions are transmutable into molar motions (motions of
masses), and molar motions into molecular. Now there is a real basis of
fact for this supposition: we have positive evidence of the existence of
molecular motion in these manifestations of force. In the case of
chemical action, for instance, the particles separate and form new
combinations, often with a great visible disturbance of the mass. In the
case of heat, the evidence is equally conclusive, since heat expands
bodies (that is, causes their particles to move from one another); and
if of sufficient amount, changes their mode of aggregation from solid to
liquid, or from liquid to gaseous. Again, the mechanical actions which
produce heat—friction, and the collision of bodies—must from the nature
of the case produce a shock, that is, an internal motion of particles,
which indeed, we find, is often so violent as to break them permanently
asunder. Such facts are thought to warrant the inference, that it is
not, as was supposed, heat that causes the motion of particles, but the
motion of particles that causes heat; the original cause of both being
the previous motion (whether molar or molecular—collision of bodies or
combustion of fuel) which formed the heating agency. This inference
already contains hypothesis: but at least the supposed cause, the
intestine motion of molecules, is a vera causa. But in order to reduce
the Conservation of Force to Conservation of Motion, it was necessary to
attribute to motion the heat propagated, through apparently empty space,
from the sun. This required the supposition (already made for the
explanation of the laws of light) of a subtle ether pervading space,
which, though impalpable to us, must have the property which constitutes
matter, that of resistance, Edition: current; Page: [351] since waves
are propagated through it by an impulse from a given point. The ether
must be supposed (a supposition not required by the theory of light) to
penetrate into the minute interstices of all bodies. The vibratory
motion supposed to be taking place in the heated mass of the sun, is
considered as imparted from that mass to the particles of the
surrounding ether, and through them to the particles of the same ether
in the interstices of terrestrial bodies; and this, too, with a
sufficient mechanical force to throw the particles of those bodies into
a state of similar vibration, producing the expansion of their mass, and
the sensation of heat in sentient creatures. All this is hypothesis,
though, of its legitimacy as hypothesis, I do not mean to express any
doubt. It would seem to follow as a consequence from this theory, that
Force may and should be defined, matter in motion. This definition,
however, will not stand, for, as has already been seen, the matter needs
not be in actual motion. It is not necessary to suppose that the motion
afterwards manifested, is actually taking place among the molecules of
the coal during its sojourn in the earth;* certainly not in the stone
which is at rest on the eminence to which it has been raised. The true
definition of Force must be, not motion, but Potentiality of Motion; and
what the doctrine, if established, amounts to, is, not that there is at
all times the same quantity of actual motion in the universe; but that
the possibilities of motion are limited to a definite quantity, which
cannot be added to, but which cannot be exhausted; and that all actual
motion which takes place in Nature is a draft upon this limited stock.
It needs not all of it have ever existed as actual motion. There is a
vast amount of potential motion in the universe in the form of
gravitation, which it would be a great abuse of hypothesis to suppose to
have been stored up by the expenditure of an equal amount of actual
motion in some former state of the universe. Nor does the motion
produced by gravity take place, so far as we know, at the expense of any
other motion, either molar or molecular.

It is proper to consider whether the adoption of this theory as a
scientific truth, involving as it does a change in the conception
hitherto entertained of the most general physical agencies, requires any
modification in the view I have taken of Causation as a law of nature.
As it appears to me, none whatever. The manifestations which the theory
regards as modes of motion, are as much distinct and separate phenomena
when referred to a single force, as when attributed to several. Whether
the phenomenon is called a transformation of force or the generation of
one, it has its own set or sets of antecedents, Edition: current; Page:
[352] with which it is connected by invariable and unconditional
sequence; and that set, or those sets, of antecedents, are its cause.
The relation of the Conservation theory to the principle of Causation is
discussed in much detail, and very instructively, by Professor Bain, in
the second volume of his Logic.[*] The chief practical conclusion drawn
by him, bearing on Causation, is, that we must distinguish in the
assemblage of conditions which constitutes the Cause of a phenomenon,
two elements: one, the presence of a force; the other, the collocation
or position of objects which is required in order that the force may
undergo the particular transmutation which constitutes the phenomenon.
Now, it might always have been said with acknowledged correctness, that
a force and a collocation were both of them necessary to produce any
phenomenon. The law of causation is, that change can only be produced by
change. Along with any number of stationary antecedents, which are
collocations, there must be at least one changing antecedent, which is a
force. To produce a bonfire, there must not only be fuel, and air, and a
spark, which are collocations, but chemical action between the air and
the materials, which is a force. To grind corn, there must be a certain
collocation of the parts composing a mill, relatively to one another and
to the corn; but there must also be the gravitation of water, or the
motion of wind, to supply a force. But as the force in these cases was
regarded as a property of the objects in which it is embodied, it seemed
tautology to say that there must be the collocation and the force. As
the collocation must be a collocation of objects possessing the
force-giving property, the collocation, so understood, included the
force.

How, then, shall we have to express these facts, if the theory be
finally substantiated that all Force is reducible to a previous Motion?
We shall have to say, that one of the conditions of every phenomenon is
an antecedent Motion. But it will have to be explained that this needs
not be actual motion. The coal which supplies the force exerted in
combustion is not shown to have been exerting that force in the form of
molecular motion in the pit; it was not even exerting pressure. The
stone on the eminence is exerting a pressure, but only equivalent to its
weight, not to the additional momentum it would acquire by falling. The
antecedent, therefore, is not a force in action; and we can still only
call it a property of the objects, by which they would exert a force on
the occurrence of a fresh collocation. The collocation, therefore still
includes the force. The force said to be stored up, is simply a
particular property which the object has acquired. The cause we are in
search of, is a collocation of objects possessing that particular
property. When indeed we inquire further into the cause from which they
derive that property, the new conception introduced by the Conservation
theory comes in: the property is itself an effect, and its cause,
according to the theory, is a former motion of exactly equivalent
amount, which has been impressed on the Edition: current; Page: [353]
particles of the body, perhaps at some very distant period. But the case
is simply one of those we have already considered, in which the efficacy
of a cause consists in its investing an object with a property. The
force said to be laid up, and merely potential, is no more a really
existing thing than any other properties of objects are really existing
things. The expression is a mere artifice of language, convenient for
describing the phenomena: it is unnecessary to suppose that any thing
has been in continuous existence except an abstract potentiality. A
force suspended in its operation, neither manifesting itself by motion
nor by pressure, is not an existing fact, but a name for our conviction
that in appropriate circumstances a fact would take place. We know that
a pound weight, were it to fall from the earth into the sun, would
acquire in falling a momentum equal to millions of pounds; but we do not
credit the pound weight with more of actually existing force than is
equal to the pressure it is now exerting on the earth, and that is
exactly a pound. We might as well say that a force of millions of pounds
exists in a pound, as that the force which will manifest itself when the
coal is burnt is a real thing existing in the coal. What is fixed in the
coal is only a certain property: it has become fit to be the antecedent
of an effect called combustion, which partly consists in giving out,
under certain conditions, a given definite quantity of heat.

We thus see that no new general conception of Causation is introduced by
the Conservation theory. The indestructibility of Force no more
interferes with the theory of Causation than the indestructibility of
Matter, meaning by matter, the element of resistance in the sensible
world. It only enables us to understand better than before the nature
and laws of some of the sequences.

This better understanding, however, enables us, with Mr. Bain,[*] to
admit, as one of the tests for distinguishing causation from mere
concomitance, the expenditure or transfer of energy. If the effect, or
any part of the effect, to be accounted for, consists in putting matter
in motion, then any of the objects present which has lost motion has
contributed to the effect; and this is the true meaning of the
proposition that the cause is that one of the antecedents which exerts
active force.a

ab§ 11.b [Doctrine that volition is an efficient cause, examined] It is
proper in this place to advert to a crather ancient doctrine respecting
causation,c which has been revived during the last few years in dmanyd
quarters, Edition: current; Page: [354] and at present gives more signs
of life than any other theory of causation at variance with that set
forth in the preceding pages.

According to the theory in question, Mind, or to speak more precisely,
Will, is the only cause of phenomena. The type of Causation, as well as
the exclusive source from which we derive the idea, is our own voluntary
agency. Here, and here only (it is said) we have direct evidence of
causation. We know that we can move our bodies. Respecting the phenomena
of inanimate nature, we have no other direct knowledge than that of
antecedence and sequence. But in the case of our voluntary actions, it
is affirmed that we are conscious of power before we have experience of
results. An act of volition, whether followed by an effect or not, is
accompanied by a consciousness of effort, “of force exerted, of power in
action, which is necessarily causal, or causative.”[*] This feeling of
energy or force, inherent in an act of will, is knowledge à priori;
assurance, prior to experience, that we have the power of causing
effects. Volition, therefore, it is asserted, is something more than an
unconditional antecedent; it is a cause, in a different sense from that
in which physical phenomena are said to cause one another: it is an
Efficient Cause. From this the transition is easy to the further
doctrine, that Volition is the sole Efficient Cause of all phenomena.
“It is inconceivable that dead force could continue unsupported for a
moment beyond its creation. We cannot even conceive of change or
phenomena without the energy of a mind.”[†] “The word action” itself,
says another writer of the same school, “has no real significance except
when applied to the doings of an intelligent agent. Let any one
conceive, if he can, of any power, energy, or force, inherent in a lump
of matter.”[‡] Phenomena may have the semblance of being produced by
physical causes, but they are in reality produced, say these writers, by
the immediate agency of mind. All things which do not proceed from a
human (or, I suppose, an animal) will, proceed, they say, directly from
divine will. The earth is not moved by the combination of a centripetal
and a projectile force; this is but a mode of speaking, which serves to
facilitate our conceptions. It is moved by the direct volition of an
omnipotent Being, in a path coinciding with that which we deduce from
the hypothesis of these two forces.

As I have so often observed, the general question of the existence of
Efficient Causes does not fall within the limits of our subject: but a
theory which represents them as capable of being subjects of human
knowledge, and Edition: current; Page: [355] which passes off as
efficient causes what are only physical or phenomenal causes, belongs as
much to Logic as to Metaphysics, and is a fit subject for discussion
here.

To my apprehension, a volition is not an efficient, but simply a
physical cause. Our will causes our bodily actions in the same sense,
and in no other, in which cold causes ice, or a spark causes an
explosion of gunpowder. The volition, a state of our mind, is the
antecedent; the motion of our limbs in conformity to the volition, is
the consequent. This sequence I conceive to be not a subject of direct
consciousness, in the sense intended by the theory. The antecedent,
indeed, and the consequent, are subjects of consciousness. But the
connexion between them is a subject of experience. I cannot admit that
our consciousness of the volition contains in itself any à priori
knowledge that the muscular motion will follow. If our nerves of motion
were paralysed, or our muscles stiff and inflexible, and had been so all
our lives, I do not see the slightest ground for supposing that we
should ever (unless by information from other people) have known
anything of volition as a physical power, or been conscious of any
tendency in feelings of our mind to produce motions of our body, or of
other bodies. I will not undertake to say whether we should in that case
have had the physical feeling which I suppose is meant when these
writers speak of “consciousness of effort:” I see no reason why we
should not; since that physical feeling is probably a state of nervous
sensation beginning and ending in the brain, without involving the
motory apparatus: but we certainly should not have designated it by any
term equivalent to effort, since effort implies consciously aiming at an
end, which we should not only in that case have had no reason to do, but
could not even have had the idea of doing. If conscious at all of this
peculiar sensation, we should have been conscious of it, I conceive,
only as a kind of uneasiness, accompanying our feelings of desire.

eIt is well argued by Sir William Hamilton against the theory in
question, that it

is refuted by the consideration that between the overt fact of corporeal
movement of which we are cognisant, and the internal act of mental
determination of which we are also cognisant, there intervenes a
numerous series of intermediate agencies of which we have no knowledge;
and, consequently, that we can have no consciousness of any causal
connexion between the extreme links of this chain, the volition to move
and the limb moving, as this hypothesis asserts. No one is immediately
conscious, for example, of moving his arm through his volition.
Previously to this ultimate movement, muscles, nerves, a multitude of
solid and fluid parts, must be set in motion by the will, but of this
motion we know, from consciousness, absolutely nothing. A person struck
with paralysis is conscious of no inability in his limb to fulfil the
determinations of his will; and it is only after having willed, and
finding that his limbs do not obey his volition, that he Edition:
current; Page: [356] learns by this experience, that the external
movement does not follow the internal act. But as the paralytic learns
after the volition that his limbs do not obey his mind; so it is only
after volition that the man in health learns, that his limbs do obey the
mandates of his will.*e

Those against whom I am contending have never produced, and do not
pretend to produce, any positive evidence† that the power of our will to
move our bodies would be known to us independently of experience. What
they have to say on the subject is, that the production of physical
events by a will seems to carry its own explanation with it, while the
action of matter upon matter seems to require something else to explain
it; and is even, according to them, “inconceivable” on any other
supposition than that some will intervenes between the apparent cause
and its apparent effect. They thus rest their case on an appeal to the
inherent laws of our conceptive faculty; mistaking, as I apprehend, for
the laws of that faculty its acquired habits, grounded on the
spontaneous tendencies of its uncultured state. The succession Edition:
current; Page: [357] between the will to move a limb and the actual
motion is one of the most direct and instantaneous of all sequences
which come under our observation, and is familiar to every moment’s
experience from our earliest infancy; more familiar than any succession
of events exterior to our bodies, and especially more so than any other
case of the apparent origination (as distinguished from the mere
communication) of motion. Now, it is the natural tendency of the mind to
be always attempting to facilitate its conception of unfamiliar facts by
assimilating them to others which are familiar. Accordingly, our
voluntary acts, being the most familiar to us of all cases of causation,
are, in the infancy and early youth of the human race, spontaneously
taken as the type of causation in general, and all phenomena are
supposed to be directly produced by the will of some sentient being.
This original Fetichism I shall not characterize in the words of Hume,
or of any follower of Hume, but in those of a religious metaphysician,
Dr. Reid, in order more effectually to show the unanimity which exists
on the subject among all competent thinkers.

When we turn our attention to external objects, and begin to exercise
our rational faculties about them, we find that there are some motions
and changes in them which we have power to produce, and that there are
many which must have some other cause. Either the objects must have life
and active power, as we have, or they must be moved or changed by
something that has life and active power, as external objects are moved
by us.

Our first thoughts seem to be, that the objects in which we perceive
such motion have understanding and active power as we have. ‘Savages,’
says the Abbé Raynal, ‘wherever they see motion which they cannot
account for, there they suppose a soul.’[*] All men may be considered as
savages in this respect, until they are capable of instruction, and of
using their faculties in a more perfect manner than savages do.

The Abbé Raynal’s observation is sufficiently confirmed, both from fact,
and from the structure of all languages.

Rude nations do really believe sun, moon, and stars, earth, sea, and
air, fountains, and lakes, to have understanding and active power. To
pay homage to them, and implore their favour, is a kind of idolatry
natural to savages.

All languages carry in their structure the marks of their being formed
when this belief prevailed. The distinction of verbs and participles
into active and passive, which is found in all languages, must have been
originally intended to distinguish what is really active from what is
merely passive; and in all languages, we find active verbs applied to
those objects, in which, according to the Abbé Raynal’s observation,
savages suppose a soul.

Thus we say the sun rises and sets, and comes to the meridian, the moon
changes, the sea ebbs and flows, the winds blow. Languages were formed
by men who believed these objects to have life and active power in
themselves. It was Edition: current; Page: [358] therefore proper and
natural to express their motions and changes by active verbs.

There is no surer way of tracing the sentiments of nations before they
have records, than by the structure of their language, which,
notwithstanding the changes produced in it by time, will always retain
some signatures of the thoughts of those by whom it was invented. When
we find the same sentiments indicated in the structure of all languages,
those sentiments must have been common to the human species when
languages were invented.

When a few, of superior intellectual abilities, find leisure for
speculation, they begin to philosophize, and soon discover, that many of
those objects which at first they believed to be intelligent and active
are really lifeless and passive. This is a very important discovery. It
elevates the mind, emancipates from many vulgar superstitions, and
invites to further discoveries of the same kind.

As philosophy advances, life and activity in natural objects retires,
and leaves them dead and inactive. Instead of moving voluntarily, we
find them to be moved necessarily; instead of acting, we find them to be
acted upon; and Nature appears as one great machine, where one wheel is
turned by another, that by a third; and how far this necessary
succession may reach, the philosopher does not know.*

There is, then, a spontaneous tendency of the intellect to account to
itself for all cases of causation by assimilating them to the
intentional acts of voluntary agents like itself. This is the
instinctive philosophy of the human mind in its earliest stage, before
it has become familiar with any other invariable sequences than those
between its own volitions gor those of other human beings and theirg
voluntary acts. As the notion of fixed laws of succession among external
phenomena gradually establishes itself, the propensity to refer all
phenomena to voluntary agency slowly gives way before it. The
suggestions, however, of daily life continuing to be more powerful than
those of scientific thought, the original instinctive philosophy
maintains its ground in the mind, underneath the growths obtained by
cultivation, and keeps up a constant resistance to their throwing their
roots deep into the soil. The theory against which I am contending
derives its nourishment from that substratum. Its strength does not lie
in argument, but in its affinity to an obstinate tendency of the infancy
of the human mind.

That this tendency, however, is not the result of an inherent mental
law, is proved by superabundant evidence. The history of science, from
its earliest dawn, shows that mankind have not been unanimous in
thinking either that the action of matter upon matter was not
conceivable, or that the action of mind upon matter was. To some
thinkers, and some schools of thinkers, both in ancient and in modern
times, this last has appeared much more inconceivable than the former.
Sequences entirely physical and material, as soon as they had become
sufficiently familiar to the human mind, came to be Edition: current;
Page: [359] thought perfectly natural, and were regarded not only as
needing no explanation themselves, but as being capable of affording it
to others, and even of serving as the ultimate explanation of things in
general.

One of the hablesth recent supporters of the Volitional theory has
furnished an explanation, at once historically true and philosophically
acute, of the failure of the Greek philosophers in physical inquiry, in
which, as I conceive, he unconsciously depicts his own state of mind.

Their stumbling-block was one as to the nature of the evidence they had
to expect for their conviction. . . . They had not seized the idea that
they must not expect to understand the processes of outward causes, but
only their results: and consequently, the whole physical philosophy of
the Greeks was an attempt to identify mentally the effect with its
cause, to feel after some not only necessary but natural connexion,
where they meant by natural that which would per se carry some
presumption to their own mind. . . . They wanted to see some reason why
the physical antecedent should produce this particular consequent, and
their only attempts were in directions where they could find such
reasons.*

In other words, they were not content merely to know that one phenomenon
was always followed by another; they thought that they had not attained
the true aim of science, unless they could perceive something in the
nature of the one phenomenon from which it might have been known or
presumed previous to trial that it would be followed by the other: just
what the writer, who has so clearly pointed out their error, thinks that
he perceives in the nature of the phenomenon Volition. And to complete
the statement of the case, he should have added that these early
speculators not only made this their aim, but were quite satisfied with
their success in it; not only sought for causes which should carry in
their mere statement evidence of their efficiency, but fully believed
that they had found such causes. The reviewer can see plainly that this
was an error, because he does not believe that there exist any relations
between material phenomena which can account for their producing one
another: but the very fact of the persistency of the Greeks in this
error, shows that their minds were in a very different state: they were
able to derive from the assimilation of physical facts to other physical
facts, the kind of mental satisfaction which we connect with the word
explanation, and which the reviewer would have us think can only be
found in referring phenomena to a will. When Thales and Hippo held that
moisture was the universal cause, and iexternali element, of which all
other things were but the infinitely various sensible manifestations;
when Anaximenes predicated the same thing of air, Pythagoras of numbers,
and the like, they all thought that they had found a Edition: current;
Page: [360] real explanation; and were content to rest in this
explanation as ultimate. The ordinary sequences of the external universe
appeared to them, no less than to their critic, to be inconceivable
without the supposition of some universal agency to connect the
antecedents with the consequents; but they did not think that Volition,
exerted by minds, was the only agency which fulfilled this requirement.
Moisture, or air, or numbers, carried to their minds a precisely similar
impression of making jintelligible whatj was otherwise inconceivable,
and gave the same full satisfaction to the demands of their conceptive
faculty.

It was not the Greeks alone, who “wanted to see some reason why the
physical antecedent should produce this particular consequent,” some
connexion “which would per se carry some presumption to their own mind.”
Among modern philosophers, Leibnitz laid it down as a self-evident
principle that all physical causes without exception must contain in
their own nature something which makes it intelligible that they should
be able to produce the effects which they do produce. Far from admitting
Volition as the only kind of cause which carried internal evidence of
its own power, and as the real bond of connexion between physical
antecedents and their consequents, he demanded some naturally and per se
efficient physical antecedent as the bond of connexion between Volition
itself and its effects. He distinctly refused to admit the will of kGod
as a sufficient explanation of anything except miracles; and insisted
upon finding something that would account better for the phenomena of
nature than a mere reference to divine volition.*

Again, and conversely, the action of mind upon matter (which, we are now
told, not only needs no explanation itself, but is the explanation of
all other effects), has appeared to some thinkers to be itself the grand
inconceivability. It was to get over this very difficulty that the
Cartesians invented the system of Occasional Causes. They could not
conceive that thoughts in a mind could produce movements in a body, or
that bodily movements could produce thoughts. They could see no
necessary connexion, no relation à priori, between a motion and a
thought. And as the Cartesians, more than any other school of
philosophical speculation before or since, made their own minds the
measure of all things, and refused, on principle, to believe that Nature
had done what they were unable to see any reason why she must do, they
affirmed it to be impossible that a material and a mental fact could be
causes one of another. They regarded them as mere Occasions on which the
real agent, God, thought fit to exert his power as a Cause. When a man
wills to move his foot, it is not his will that moves it, but God (they
said) moves it on the occasion of his will. God, according to this
system, is the only Edition: current; Page: [361] efficient cause, not
quâ mind, or quâ endowed with volition, but quâ omnipotent. This
hypothesis was, as I said, originally suggested by the supposed
inconceivability of any real mutual action between Mind and Matter: but
it was afterwards extended to the action of Matter upon Matter, for on a
nicer examination they found this inconceivable too, and therefore,
according to their logic, impossible. The deus ex machinâ was ultimately
called in to produce a spark on the occasion of a flint and steel coming
together, or to break an egg on the occasion of its falling on the
ground.

All this, undoubtedly, shows that it is the disposition of mankind in
general, not to be satisfied with knowing that one fact is invariably
antecedent and another consequent, but to look out for something which
may seem to explain their being sol. But we also see that this demand
may be completely satisfied by an agency purely physical, provided it be
much more familiar than that which it is invoked to explain. To Thales
and Anaximenes, it appeared inconceivable that the antecedents which we
see in nature, should produce the consequents; but perfectly natural
that water, or air, should produce them. The writers whom I oppose
declare this inconceivable, but can conceive that mind, or volition, is
per se an efficient cause: while the Cartesians could not conceive even
that, but peremptorily declared that no mode of production of any fact
whatever was conceivable, except the direct agency of an omnipotent
being. Thus giving additional proof of what finds new confirmation in
every stage of the history of science: that both what persons can, and
what they cannot, conceive, is very much an affair of accident, and
depends altogether on their experience, and their habits of thought;
that by cultivating the requisite associations of ideas, people may make
themselves unable to conceive any given thing; and may make themselves
able to conceive most things, however inconceivable these may at first
appear: and the same facts in each person’s mental history which
determine what is or is not conceivable to him, determine also which
among the various sequences in nature will appear to him so natural and
plausible, as to need no other proof of their existence; to be evident
by their own light, independent equally of experience and of
explanation.

By what rule is any one to decide between one theory of this description
and another? The theorists do not direct us to any external evidence;
they appeal each to his own subjective feelings. One says, the
succession C, B, appears to me more natural, conceivable, and credible
per se, than the succession A, B; you are therefore mistaken in thinking
that B depends upon A; I am certain, though I can give no other evidence
of it, that C comes in between A and B, and is the real and only cause
of B. The other answers—the successions C, B, and A, B, appear to me
equally natural and conceivable, Edition: current; Page: [362] or the
latter more so than the former: A is quite capable of producing B
without any other intervention. A third agrees with the first in being
unable to conceive that A can produce B, but finds the sequence D, B,
still more natural than C, B, or of nearer kin to the subject matter,
and prefers his D theory to the C theory. It is plain that there is no
universal law operating here, except the law that each person’s
conceptions are governed and limited by his individual mexperiencesm and
habits of thought. We are warranted in saying of all three, what each of
them already believes of the other two, namely, that they exalt into an
original law of the human intellect and of outward nature, one
particular sequence of phenomena, which appears to them more natural and
more conceivable than other sequences, only because it is more familiar.
And from this judgment I am unable to except the theory, that Volition
is an Efficient Cause.

I am unwilling to leave the subject without adverting to the additional
fallacy contained in the corollary from this theory; in the inference
that because Volition is an efficient cause, therefore it is the only
cause, and the direct agent in producing even what is apparently
produced by something else. Volitions are not known to produce anything
directly except nervous action, for the will influences even the muscles
only through the nerves. Though it were granted, then, that every
phenomenon has an efficient, and not merely a phenomenal cause, and that
volition, in the case of the peculiar phenomena which are known to be
produced by it, is that efficient cause; are we therefore to say, with
these writers, that since we know of no other efficient cause, and ought
not to assume one without evidence, there is no other, and volition is
the direct cause of all phenomena? A more outrageous stretch of
inference could hardly be made. Because among the infinite variety of
the phenomena of nature there is one, namely, a particular mode of
action of certain nerves, which has for its cause, and as we are now
supposing for its efficient cause, a state of our mind; and because this
is the only efficient cause of which we are conscious, being the only
one of which in the nature of the case we can be conscious, since it is
the only one which exists within ourselves; does this justify us in
concluding that all other phenomena must have the same kind of efficient
cause with that one eminently special, narrow, and peculiarly human or
animal, phenomenon? nThe nearest parallel to this specimen of
generalization ois suggested byo the recently revived controversy on the
old subject of Plurality of Worlds, in which the contending parties have
been so conspicuously successful in overthrowing one another. Here also
we have experience only of a single case, that of the world in which we
live, but that this is inhabited we know absolutely, and without
ppossibility Edition: current; Page: [363] of doubt. Now if on this
evidence any one were to infer that every heavenly body without
exception, sun, planet, satellite, comet, fixed star or nebula, is
inhabited, and must be so from the inherent constitution of things, his
inference would exactly resemble that of the writers who conclude that
because volition is the efficient cause of our own bodily motions, it
must be the efficient cause of everything else in the universe.n It is
true there are cases in which, with acknowledged propriety, we
generalize from a single instance to a multitude of instances. But they
must be instances which resemble the one known instance, and not such as
have no circumstance in common with it except that of being instances. I
have, for example, no direct evidence that any creature is alive except
myself: yet I attribute, with full assurance, life and sensation to
other human beings and animals. But I do not conclude that all other
things are alive merely because I am. I ascribe to certain other
creatures a life like my own, because they manifest it by the same sort
of indications by which mine is manifested. I find that their phenomena
and mine conform to the same laws, and it is for this reason that I
believe both to arise from a similar cause. Accordingly I do not extend
the conclusion beyond the grounds for it. Earth, fire, mountains, trees,
are remarkable agencies, but their phenomena do not conform to the same
laws as my actions do, and I therefore do not believe earth or fire,
mountains or trees, to possess animal life. But the supporters of the
Volition Theory ask us to infer that volition causes everything, for no
reason except that it causes one particular thing; although that one
phenomenon, far from being a type of all natural phenomena, is eminently
peculiar; its laws bearing scarcely any resemblance to those of any
other phenomenon, whether of inorganic or of organic nature.qa

anote supplementary to the preceding chapter

The author of the Second Burnett Prize Essay [Theism] (Dr. Tulloch), who
has employed a considerable number of pages in controverting the
doctrines of the preceding chapter, has somewhat surprised me by denying
a fact, which I imagined too well known to require proof—that there have
been philosophers who found in physical explanations of phenomena the
Edition: current; Page: [364] same complete mental satisfaction which we
are told is only given by volitional explanation, and others who denied
the Volitional Theory on the same ground of inconceivability on which it
is defended. The assertion of the Essayist is countersigned still more
positively by an able reviewer of the Essay:* “Two illustrations,” says
the reviewer, “are advanced by Mr. Mill: the case of Thales and
Anaximenes, stated by him to have maintained, the one Moisture and the
other Air to be the origin of all things; and that of Descartes and
Leibnitz, whom he asserts to have found the action of Mind upon Matter
the grand inconceivability. In counterstatement as to the first of these
cases the author shows—what we believe now hardly admits of doubt—that
the Greek philosophers distinctly recognised as beyond and above their
primal material source, the νου̑ς , or Divine Intelligence, as the
efficient and originating Source of all: and as to the second, by proof
that it was the mode, not the fact, of that action on matter, which was
represented as inconceivable.”

A greater quantity of historical error has seldom been comprised in a
single sentence. With regard to Thales, the assertion that he considered
water as a mere material in the hands of νου̑ς rests on a passage of
Cicero de Naturâ Deorum: and whoever will refer to any of the accurate
historians of philosophy, will find that they treat this as a mere fancy
of Cicero, resting on no authority, opposed to all the evidence; and
make surmises as to the manner in which Cicero may have been led into
the error. (See [Heinrich] Ritter [Geschichte der Philosophie alter
Zeit. Hamburg: Perthes, 1836], Vol. I, p. 211n., 2nd ed.; [Christian]
Brandis, [Handbuch der Geschichte der Griechisch-Römischen Philosophie.
Berlin: Reimer, 1835,] Vol. I, pp. 118-19, 1st ed.; [Ludwig] Preller,
Historia Philosophiæ Græco-Romanæ [Hamburg, Perthes, 1838], p. 10.
“Schiefe Ansicht, durchaus zu verwerfen;” “augenscheinlich folgernd
statt zu berichten;” “quibus vera sententia Thaletis plane detorquetur;”
are the expressions of these writers.) As for Anaximenes, he even
according to Cicero, maintained, not that air was the material out of
which God made the world, but that the air was a god: “Anaximenes aëra
deum statuit:” [De natura deorum. Ed. H. Rackham. London: Heinemann,
1933, p. 28 (Bk. I, Chap. x)] or according to St. Augustine [De civitate
Dei, Bk. VIII, Chap. ii], that it was the material out of which the gods
were made; “non tamen ab ipsis [Diis] aërem factum, sed ipsos ex aëre
ortos credidit.” Those who are not familiar with the metaphysical
terminology of antiquity, must not be misled bby finding it stated that
Anaximenes attributed ψυχὴ (translated soul, or life) to his universal
element, the air. The Greek philosophers acknowledged several kinds of
ψυχὴ, the nutritive, the sensitive, Edition: current; Page: [365] and
the intellective.* Even the moderns, with admitted correctness,
attribute life to plants. As far as we can make out the meaning of
Anaximenes, he made choice of Air as the universal agent, on the ground
that it is perpetually in motion, without any apparent cause external to
itself: so that he conceived it as exercising spontaneous force, and as
the principle of life and activity in all things, men and gods
inclusive. If this be not representing it as the Efficient Cause, the
dispute altogether has no meaning.

If either Anaximenes, or Thales, or any of their ccotemporariesc, had
held the doctrine that νου̑ς was the Efficient Cause, that doctrine could
not have been reputed, as it was throughout antiquity, to have
originated with Anaxagoras. The testimony of Aristotle, in the first
book of his Metaphysics,[*] is perfectly decisive with respect to these
early speculations. After enumerating four kinds of causes, or rather
four different meanings of the word Cause, viz. the Essence of a thing,
the Matter of it, the Origin of Motion (Efficient Cause), and the End or
Final Cause, he proceeds to say, that most of the early philosophers
recognised only the second kind of Cause, the Matter of a thing, τὰς ἐν
ὕλης εἴδει μόνας ᾠήθησαν ἀρχὰς εἰ̑ναι πάντων [983b 7-8]. As his first
example he specifies Thales, whom he describes as taking the lead in
this view of the subject, ὁ τη̑ς τοιαύτης ἀρχηγὸς ϕιλοσοϕίας [983b 20-1],
and goes on to Hippon, Anaximenes, Diogenes (of Apollonia), Hippasus of
Metapontum, Heraclitus, and Empedocles. Anaxagoras, however, (he
proceeds to say,) taught a different doctrine, as we know, and it is
alleged that Hermotimus of Clazomenæ taught it before him. Anaxagoras
represented, that even if these various theories of the universal
material were true, there would be need of some other cause to account
for the transformations of the material, since the material cannot
originate its own changes: οὐ γὰρ δὴ τό γε ὑποκείμενον αὐτὸ ποιει̑
μεταβάλλειν ἑαυ̑το· λέγω δ’ οἱ̑ον οὔτε τὸ ξύλον οὔτε ὁ χαλκὸς αἴτιος του̑
μεταβάλλειν ἑκάτερον αὐτω̑ν, οὐδὲ ποιει̑ τὸ μὲν ξύλον κλίνην ὁ δέ χαλκὸς
ἀνδριάντα, ἀλλ’ ἑτερόν τι τη̑ς μεταβολη̑ς αἴτιον [984a 21-5], viz., the
other kind of cause, ὅθεν ἡ ἀρχὴ τη̑ς κινήσεως—an Efficient Cause [983a
30]. Aristotle expresses great approbation of this doctrine (which he
says made its author appear the only sober man among persons raving,
οἵον νήϕων ἐϕάνη παρ’ εἰκη̑ λέγοντας τοὺς πρότερον) [984b 17-18]; but
while describing the influence which it exercised over subsequent
speculation, he remarks that the philosophers against whom this, as he
thinks, insuperable difficulty was urged, had not felt it to be any
difficulty: οὐδὲν ἐδυσχεράναν ἐν ἑαυτοι̑ς [984a Edition: current; Page:
[366] 29]. It is surely unnecessary to say more in proof of the matter
of fact which Dr. Tulloch and his reviewer ddisbelieved.

Having pointed out what he thinks the error of these early speculators
in not recognising the need of an efficient cause, Aristotle goes on to
mention two other efficient causes to which they might have had
recourse, instead of intelligence: τύχη, chance, and τὸ αὐτομάτον,
spontaneity. He indeed puts these aside as not sufficiently worthy
causes for the order in the universe, οὐδ’ αὐ̑ τῳ̑ αὐτομάτῳ καὶ τῃ̑ τύχῃ
τοσου̑τον ἐπιτρέψαι πρα̑γμα καλω̑ς εἰ̑χεν [984b 14-15]: but he does not
reject them as incapable of producing any effect, but only as incapable
of producing that effect. He himself recognises τύχη and τὸ αὐτομάτον as
coordinate agents with Mind in producing the phenomena of the universe;
the department allotted to them being composed of all the classes of
phenomena which are not supposed to follow any uniform law. By thus
including Chance among efficient causes, Aristotle fell into an error
which philosophy has now outgrown, but which is by no means so alien to
the spirit even of modern speculation as it may at first sight appear.
Up to equite ae recent period philosophers went on ascribing, and many
of them have not yet ceased to ascribe, a real existence to the results
of abstraction. Chance could make out as good a title to that dignity as
many other of the mind’s abstract creations: it had had a name given to
it, and why should it not be a reality? As for τὸ αὐτομάτον, it is
recognised even yet as one of the modes of origination of phenomena, by
all those thinkers who maintain what is called the Freedom of the Will.
The same self-determining power which that doctrine attributes to
volitions, was supposed by the ancients to be possessed also by some
other natural phenomena: a circumstance which throws considerable light
on more than one of the supposed invincible necessities of belief. I
have introduced it here, because this belief of Aristotle, or rather of
the Greek philosophers generally, is as fatal as the doctrines of Thales
and the Ionic school, to the theory that the human mind is compelled by
its constitution to conceive volition as the origin of all force, and
the efficient cause of all phenomena.*

Edition: current; Page: [367]
With regard to the modern philosophers (Leibnitz and the Cartesians)
whom I had cited as having maintained that the action of mind upon
matter, so far from being the only conceivable origin of material
phenomena, is itself inconceivable; the attempt to rebut this argument
by asserting that the mode, not the fact, of the action of mind on
matter was represented as inconceivable, is an abuse of the privilege of
writing confidently about authors without reading them: for any
knowledge whatever of Leibnitz would have taught those who thus speak of
him, that the inconceivability of the mode, and the impossibility of the
thing, were in his mind convertible expressions. What was his famous
Principle of the Sufficient Reason, the very corner stone of his
Philosophy, from which the Preestablished Harmony, the doctrine of
Monads, and all the opinions most characteristic of Leibnitz, were
corollaries? It was, that nothing exists, the existence of which is not
capable of being proved and explained à priori; the proof and
explanation in the case of contingent facts being derived from the
nature of their causes; which could not be the causes unless there was
something in their nature showing them to be capable of producing those
particular effects. And this “something” which accounts for the
production of physical effects, he was able to find in many physical
causes, but could not find it in any finite minds, which therefore he
unhesitatingly asserted to be incapable of producing any physical
Edition: current; Page: [368] effects whatever. “On ne saurait
concevoir,” he says, “une action réciproque de la matière et de
l’intelligence l’une sur l’autre,” and there is therefore (he contends)
no choice but between the Occasional Causes of the Cartesians, and his
own Preestablished Harmony, according to which there is no more
connexion between our volitions and our muscular actions than there is
between two clocks which are wound up to strike at the same instant. But
he felt no similar difficulty as to physical causes: and throughout his
speculations, as in the passage I have already cited respecting
gravitation, he distinctly refuses to consider as part of the order of
nature any fact which is not explicable from the nature of its physical
cause.

With regard to the Cartesians (not Descartes; I did not make that
mistake, though the reviewer of Dr. Tulloch’s Essay attributes it to
me)[*] I take a passage almost at random from Malebranche, who is the
best known of the Cartesians, and, though not the inventor of the system
of Occasional Causes, is its principal expositor. In Part 2, chap. 3, of
his Sixth Book [of Recherche de la vérité, Oeuvres. Paris: Charpentier,
1842, Vol. II, pp. 503-4], having first said that matter cannot have the
power of moving itself, he proceeds to argue that neither can mind have
the power of moving it. “Quand on examine l’idée que l’on a de tous les
esprits finis, on ne voit point de liaison nécessaire entre leur volonté
et le mouvement de quelque corps que ce soit, on voit au contraire qu’il
n’y en a point, et qu’il n’y en peut avoir;” (there is nothing in the
idea of finite mind which can account for its causing the motion of a
body;) “on doit aussi conclure, si on veut raisonner selon ses lumières,
qu’il n’y a aucun esprit créé qui puisse remuer quelque corps que ce
soit comme cause véritable ou principale, de même que l’on a dit
qu’aucun corps ne se pouvait remuer soi-même:” thus the idea of Mind is
according to him as incompatible as the idea of Matter with the exercise
of active force. But when, he continues, we consider not a created but a
Divine Mind, the case is altered; for the idea of a Divine Mind includes
omnipotence; and the idea of omnipotence does contain the idea of being
able to move bodies. Thus it is the nature of omnipotence which renders
the motion of bodies even by the divine mind credible or conceivable,
while, so far as depended on the mere nature of mind, it would have been
inconceivable and incredible. If Malebranche had not believed in an
omnipotent being, he would have held all action of mind on body to be a
demonstrated impossibility.*

Edition: current; Page: [369]
A doctrine more precisely the reverse of the Volitional theory of
causation cannot well be imagined. The Volitional theory is, that we
know by intuition or by direct experience the action of our own mental
volitions on matter; that we may hence infer all other action upon
matter to be that of volition, and might thus know, without any other
evidence, that matter is under the government of a divine mind. Leibnitz
and the Cartesians, on the contrary, maintain that our volitions do not
and cannot act upon matter, and that it is only the existence of an
all-governing Being, and that Being omnipotent, which can account for
the sequence between our volitions and our bodily actions. When we
consider that each of these two theories, which, as theories of
causation, stand at the opposite extremes of possible divergence from
one another, invokes not only as its evidence, but as its sole evidence,
the absolute inconceivability of any theory but itself, we are enabled
to measure the worth of this kind of evidence: and when we find the
Volitional theory entirely built upon the assertion that by our mental
constitution we are compelled to recognise our volitions as efficient
causes, and then find other thinkers maintaining that we know that they
are not and cannot be such causes, and cannot conceive them to be so, I
think we have a right to say, that this supposed law of our mental
constitution does not exist.

Dr. Tulloch [Theism] (pp. 45-7) thinks it a sufficient answer to this,
fthat Leibnitz and the Cartesians were Theists, and believed the will of
God to be an efficient cause. Doubtless they did, and the Cartesians
even believed (though Leibnitz did not) that it is the only such cause.
Dr. Tulloch gmistakes the nature of the question. I was not writing on
Theism, as Dr. Tulloch is, but against a particular theory of causation,
which, if it be unfounded, can give no effective support to Theism or to
anything else. I found it asserted that volition is the only efficient
cause, on the ground that no other efficient cause is conceivable. To
this assertion I hopposeh the instances of Leibnitz and of the
Cartesians, who affirmed with equal positiveness that volition as an
efficient cause is itself not conceivable, and that omnipotence, which
renders all things conceivable, can alone take away the impossibility.
This I thought, and think, a conclusive answer to the argument on which
this theory of causation avowedly depends. But I certainly did not
imagine that Theism was bound up with that theory; nor expected to be
charged with denying Leibnitz and the Cartesians to be Theists because I
denied that they held the theory.a

Edition: current; Page: [370]


CHAPTER VI: aOna the Composition of Causes

§ 1. [Two modes of the conjunct action of causes, the mechanical and the
chemical] To complete the general notion of causation on which the rules
of experimental inquiry into the laws of nature must be founded, one
distinction still remains to be pointed out: a distinction so bradicalb,
and of so much importance, as to require a chapter to itself.

The preceding discussions have rendered us familiar with the case in
which several agents, or causes, concur as conditions to the production
of an effect; a case, in truth, almost universal, there being very few
effects to the production of which no more than one agent contributes.
Suppose, then, that two different agents, operating jointly, are
followed, under a certain set of collateral conditions, by a given
effect. If either of these agents, instead of being joined with the
other, had operated alone, under the same set of conditions in all other
respects, some effect would probably have followed; which would have
been different from the joint effect of the two, and more or less
dissimilar to it. Now, if we happen to know what would be the ceffectc
of each cause when acting separately from the other, we are often able
to arrive deductively, or à priori, at a correct dpredictiond of what
will arise from their conjunct agency. To erender this possiblee, it is
only necessary that the same law which expresses the effect of each
cause acting by itself, shall also correctly express the part due to
that cause, of the effect which follows from the two together. This
condition is realized in the extensive and important class of phenomena
commonly called mechanical, fnamelyf the phenomena of the communication
of motion (or of pressure, which is tendency to motion) from one body to
another. In this important class of cases of causation, one cause never,
properly speaking, defeats or frustrates another; both have their full
effect. If a body is propelled in two directions by two forces, one
tending to drive it to the north and the other to the east, it is caused
to move in a given time exactly as far in both directions as the two
forces would separately have Edition: current; Page: [371] carried it;
and is left precisely where it would have arrived if it had been acted
upon first by one of the two forces, and afterwards by the other. This
law of nature is called, in gdynamicsg, the principle of the Composition
of Forces: and in imitation of that well-chosen expression, I shall give
the name of the Composition of Causes to the principle hwhich ish
exemplified in all cases in which the joint effect of iseverali causes
is identical with the sum of their separate effects.

This principle, however, by no means prevails in all departments of the
field of nature. The chemical combination of two substances produces, as
is well known, a third substance with properties jdifferent from those
of either of the two substances separately, or kof bothk of them taken
together. Not a trace of the properties of hydrogen or of oxygen is
observable in those of their compound, water. The taste of sugar of lead
is not the sum of the tastes of its component elements, acetic acid and
lead or its oxide; nor is the colour of lbluel vitriol a mixture of the
colours of sulphuric acid and copper. This explains why mechanics is a
deductive or demonstrative science, and chemistry not. In the one, we
can compute the effects of mcombinations of causes, whether real or
hypothetical, from the laws which we know to govern those causes when
acting separately; because they continue to observe the same laws when
in combination which they observed when separate: whatever would have
happened in consequence of each cause taken by itself, happens when they
are together, and we have only to ncast upn the results. Not so in the
phenomena which are the peculiar subject of the science of chemistry.
There, most of the uniformities to which the causes conformed when
separate, cease altogether when they are conjoined; and we are not, at
least in the present state of our knowledge, able to foresee what result
will follow from any new combination, until we have tried otheo specific
experiment.

If this be true of chemical combinations, it is still more true of those
far more complex combinations of elements which constitute organized
bodies; and in which those extraordinary new uniformities arise, which
are called the laws of life. All organized bodies are composed of parts
similar to those composing inorganic nature, and which have even
themselves existed in an inorganic state; but the phenomena of life,
which result from the juxtaposition of those parts in a certain manner,
bear no analogy to any of the effects which would be produced by the
action of the component substances considered as mere physical agents.
To whatever degree we might imagine our knowledge of the properties of
the several ingredients of a living body to be extended and perfected,
it is certain that no mere summing up of the Edition: current; Page:
[372] separate actions of those elements will ever amount to the action
of the living body itself. The tongue, for instance, is, like all
potherp parts of the animal frame, composed of gelatine, fibrin, and
other products of the chemistry of digestion, but from no knowledge of
the properties of those substances could we ever predict that it could
taste, unless gelatine or fibrin could themselves taste; for no
elementary fact can be in the conclusion, which was not qin the
premises.

There are thus two different modes of the conjunct action of causes;
from which arise two modes of conflict, or mutual interference, between
laws of nature. Suppose, at a given point of time and space, two or more
causes, which, if they acted separately, would produce effects contrary,
or at least conflicting with each other; one of them tending to undo,
wholly or partially, what the other tends to do. Thus, the expansive
force of the gases generated by the ignition of gunpowder tends to
project a bullet towards the sky, while its gravity tends to make it
fall to the ground. A stream running into a reservoir at one end tends
to fill it higher and higher, while a drain at the other extremity tends
to empty it. Now, in such cases as these, even if the two causes which
are in joint action exactly annul one another, still the laws of both
are fulfilled; the effect is the same as if the drain had been open for
half an hour first,* and the stream had flowed in for as long
afterwards. Each agent produced the same amount of effect as if it had
acted separately, though the contrary effect which was taking place
during the same time obliterated it as fast as it was produced. Here
then varev two causes, producing by their joint operation an effect
which at first seems quite dissimilar to those which they produce
separately, but which on examination proves to be really the sum of
those separate effects. It will be noticed that we here enlarge the idea
of the sum of two effects, so as to include what is commonly called
their difference, but which is in reality the result of the addition of
opposites; a conception to which wmankind are indebted for that
admirable extension of the algebraical calculus, which has so vastly
increased its powers as an instrument of discovery, by introducing into
its reasonings (with the sign of subtraction prefixed, and under the
name of Negative Quantities) every description whatever of positive
phenomena, provided they are of such a Edition: current; Page: [373]
quality in reference to those previously introduced, that to add the one
is equivalent to subtracting an equal quantity of the other.

xThere is, then,x one mode of the mutual interference of laws of nature,
in which, even when the concurrent causes annihilate each other’s
effects, each exerts its full efficacy according to its own law, its law
as a separate agent. But in the other description of cases, the
yagencies which are brought together cease entirely, and a totally
different set of phenomena arise: as in the experiment of two liquids
which, when mixed in certain proportions, instantly becomez, not a
larger amount of liquid, but a solid massz.

§ 2. [The composition of causes the general rule; the other case
exceptional] This difference between the case in which the joint effect
of causes is the sum of their separate effects, and the case in which it
is heterogeneous to them; between laws which work together without
alteration, and laws which, when called upon to work together, cease and
give place to others; is one of the fundamental distinctions in nature.
The former case, that of the Composition of Causes, is the general one;
the other is always special and exceptional. There are no objects which
do not, as to some of their phenomena, obey the principle of the
Composition of Causes; none that have not some laws which are rigidly
fulfilled in every combination into which the objects enter. The weight
of a body, for instance, is a property which it retains in all the
combinations in which it is placed. The weight of a chemical compound,
or of an organized body, is equal to the sum of the weights of the
elements which compose it. The weight either of the elements or of the
compound will vary, if they be carried farther from their centre of
attraction, or brought nearer to it; but whatever affects the one
affects the other. They always remain precisely equal. So again, the
component parts of a vegetable or animal substance do not lose their
mechanical and chemical properties as separate agents, when, by a
peculiar mode of juxtaposition, they, as an aggregate whole, acquire
physiological or vital properties in addition. Those bodies continue, as
before, to obey mechanical and chemical laws, aina so far as the
operation of those laws is not counteracted by the new laws which govern
them as organized beings. When, in short, a concurrence of causes takes
place which calls into action new laws bearing no analogy to any that we
can trace in the separate operation of the causes, the new lawsb, while
they supersede one portion of the previous laws, mayb coexist with
another portion, and may even compound the effect of those previous laws
with their own.

Edition: current; Page: [374]
Again, laws which were themselves generated in the second mode, may
generate others in the first. Though there carec laws which, like those
of chemistry and physiology, owe their existence to a breach of the
principle of Composition of Causes, it does not follow that these
peculiar, or as they might be termed, heteropathic laws, are not capable
of composition with one another. The causes which by one combination
have had their laws altered, may carry their new laws with them
unaltered into their ulterior combinations. And hence there is no reason
to despair of ultimately raising chemistry and physiology to the
condition of deductive sciences; for though it is impossible to deduce
all chemical and physiological truths from the laws or properties of
simple substances or elementary agents, they may dpossiblyd be deducible
from laws which commence when ethesee elementary agents are brought
together into some moderate number of not very complex combinations. The
Laws of Life will never be deducible from the mere laws of the
ingredients, but the prodigiously complex Facts of Life may all be
deducible from comparatively simple laws of life; which laws (depending
indeed on combinations, but on comparatively simple combinations, of
antecedents) may, in more complex circumstances, be strictly compounded
with one another, and with the physical and chemical laws of the
ingredients. The details of fthef vital phenomena, even now, afford
innumerable exemplifications of the Composition of Causes; and in
proportion as gtheseg phenomena are more accurately studied, there
appears more hreason to believe that the same laws which operate in the
simpler combinations of circumstances do, in fact, continue to be
observed in the more complex. iThis will be found equally true in the
phenomena of mind; and even in social and political phenomena, Edition:
current; Page: [375] the jresultsj of the laws of mind. It is in the
case of chemical phenomena that the least progress has yet been made in
bringing the special laws under general ones from which they may be
deduced; but there are even in chemistry many circumstances to encourage
the hope that such general laws will khereafterk be discovered. The
different actions of a chemical compound will never, undoubtedly, be
found to be the lsumsl of the actions of its separate elements; but
there may exist, between the properties of the compound and those of its
elements, some constant relation, which, if discoverable by a sufficient
induction, would enable us to foresee the sort of compound which will
result from a new combination before we have actually tried it, and to
judge of what sort of elements some new substance is compounded before
we have analysed itm. The nlaw of definite proportions, first discovered
in its full generality by Dalton, is a complete solution of this problem
in oneo, though but a secondary aspect,o that of quantity: and in
respect to quality, we have already some partial generalizations,
sufficient to indicate the possibility of ultimately proceeding
pfartherp. We can predicate qsomeq common properties of the kind of
compounds which result from the combination, in each of the small number
of possible proportions, of any acid whatever with any base. We have
also the rcurious law, discovered by Berthollet, that two soluble salts
mutually decompose one another whenever the new combinations which
result produce an insoluble compound, or one less soluble than the two
former. Another uniformity sis thats called the law of isomorphism; the
identity of the crystalline forms of substances which possess in common
certain peculiarities of chemical composition.* Thus it appears that
even heteropathic laws, such laws of combined agency as are not
compounded of the laws of the separate agencies, are yet, at least in
some cases, derived from them according to a fixed principle. There may,
therefore, be laws of the generation of laws from others dissimilar to
them; and in chemistry, these Edition: current; Page: [376] undiscovered
laws of the dependence of the properties of the compound on the
properties of its elements, may, together with the laws of the elements
themselves, furnish the premises by which the science is tperhapst
destined one day to be rendered deductive.

It would seem, therefore, that there is no class of phenomena in which
the Composition of Causes does not obtain: that as a general rule,
causes in combination produce exactly the same effects as when acting
singly: but that this rule, though general, is not universal: that in
some instances, at some particular points in the transition from
separate to united action, the laws change, and an entirely new set of
effects are either added to, or take the place of, those which arise
from the separate agency of the same causes: the laws of these new
effects being again susceptible of composition, to an indefinite extent,
like the laws which they superseded.

§ 3. [Are effects proportional to their causes?] That effects are
proportional to their causes is laid down by some writers as an axiom in
the theory of causation; and great use is sometimes made of this
principle in reasonings respecting the laws of nature, though it is
encumbered with many difficulties and apparent exceptions, which much
ingenuity has been expended in showing not to be real ones. This
proposition, in so far as it is true, enters as a particular case into
the general principle of the Composition of Causes; the causes
compounded being, in this instance, homogeneous; in which case, if in
any, their joint effect might be expected to be identical with the sum
of their separate effects. If a force equal to one hundred weight will
raise a certain body along an inclined plane, a force equal to two
hundred weight will araise two bodies exactly similar, and thus the
effect is proportional to the cause. But does not a force equal to two
hundred weight actually contain in itself two forces each equal to one
hundred weight, which, if employed apart, would separately raise the two
bodies in question? The fact, therefore, that when exerted jointly they
raise both bodies at once, results from the Composition of Causes, and
is a mere instance of the general fact that mechanical forces are
subject to the law of Composition. And so in every other case which can
be supposed. For the doctrine of the proportionality of effects to their
causes cannot of course be applicable to cases in which the augmentation
of the cause alters the kind of effect; that is, in which the surplus
quantity superadded to the cause does not become compounded with it, but
the two together generate an altogether new phenomenon. Suppose that the
application of a certain quantity of heat to a body merely increases its
bulk, that a double quantity melts it, and a triple quantity decomposes
it: these three effects being heterogeneous, no ratio, whether
corresponding or Edition: current; Page: [377] not to that of the
quantities of heat applied, can be established between them. Thus bthe
supposed axiom of the proportionality of effects to their causes fails
at the precise point where the principle of the Composition of Causes
also fails; cviz. wherec the concurrence of causes is such as to
determine a change in the properties of the body generally, and render
it subject to new laws, more or less dissimilar to those to which it
conformed in its previous stated. The recognition, therefore, of any
such law of proportionality, is superseded by the more comprehensive
principle, in which as much of it as is true is implicitly asserted.*

The general remarks on causation, which seemed necessary as an
introduction to the theory of the inductive process, may here terminate.
That process is essentially an inquiry into cases of causation. All the
uniformities which exist in the succession of phenomena, and most of
ethe uniformitiese in their co-existence, are either, as we have seen,
themselves laws of causation, or consequences resulting from, and
corollaries capable of being deduced from, such laws. If we could
determine what causes are correctly assigned to what effects, and what
effects to what causes, we should be virtually acquainted Edition:
current; Page: [378] with the whole course of nature. All those
uniformities which are mere results of causation might then be explained
and accounted for; and every individual fact or event might be
predicted, provided we had the requisite data, that is, the requisite
knowledge of the circumstances which, in the particular instance,
preceded it.

To ascertain, therefore, what are the laws of causation which exist in
nature; to determine the feffectf of every cause, and the causes of all
effects,—is the main business of Induction; and to point out how this is
done is the chief object of Inductive Logic.

Edition: current; Page: [379]


CHAPTER VII: Of Observation and Experiment

§ 1. [The first step of inductive inquiry is a mental analysis of
complex phenomena into their elements] It results from the preceding
exposition, that the process of ascertaining what consequents, in
nature, are invariably connected with what antecedents, or in other
words what phenomena are related to each other as causes and effects, is
in some sort a process of analysis. That every fact which begins to
exist has a cause, and that this cause must be found ain some fact or
concourse ofa facts which immediately preceded btheb occurrence, may be
taken for certain. The whole of the present facts are the infallible
result of all past facts, and more immediately of all the facts which
existed at the moment previous. Here, then, is a great sequence, which
we know to be uniform. If the whole prior state of the entire universe
could again recur, it would again be followed by the cpresent state. The
question is, how to resolve this complex uniformity into the simpler
uniformities which compose it, and assign to each portion of the vast
antecedent dthed portion of the consequent which is attendant on it.

This operation, which we have called analytical, inasmuch as it is the
resolution of a complex whole into the component elements, is more than
a merely mental analysis. No mere contemplation of the phenomena, and
partition of them by the intellect alone, will of itself accomplish the
end we have now in view. Nevertheless, such a mental partition is an
indispensable first step. The order of nature, as perceived at a first
glance, presents at every instant a chaos followed by another chaos. We
must decompose each chaos into single facts. We must learn to see in the
chaotic antecedent a multitude of distinct antecedents, in the chaotic
consequent a multitude of distinct consequents. This, supposing it done,
will not of itself tell us on which of the antecedents each consequent
is invariably attendant. To determine that point, we must endeavour to
effect a separation of the efactse from one another, not in our minds
only, but in nature. The mental analysis, however, must take place
first. And every one knows that in the mode of performing it, one
intellect differs immensely from another. It is the essence of the act
of observing; Edition: current; Page: [380] for the observer is not he
who merely sees the thing which is before his eyes, but he who sees what
parts that thing is composed of. To do this well is a rare talent. One
person, from inattention, or attending only in the wrong place,
overlooks half of what he sees; another sets down much more than he
sees, confounding it with what he imagines, or with what he infers;
another takes note of the kind of all the circumstances, but being
inexpert in estimating their degree, leaves the quantity of each vague
and uncertain; another sees indeed the whole, but makes such an awkward
division of it into parts, throwing things into one mass which require
to be separated, and separating others which might more conveniently be
considered as one, that the result is much the same, sometimes even
worse, than if no analysis had been attempted at all. It would be
possible to point out what qualities of mind, and modes of mental
culture, fit a person for being a good observer: that, however, is a
question not of Logic, but of the Theory of Education, in the most
enlarged sense of the term. There is not properly an Art of Observing.
fTheref may be rules for observing. But these, like rules for inventing,
are properly instructions for the preparation of one’s own mind; for
putting it into the state in which it will be most fitted to observe, or
most likely to invent. They are, therefore, essentially rules of
self-education, which is a different thing from Logic. They do not teach
how to do the thing, but how to make ourselves capable of doing it. They
are an art of strengthening the limbs, not an art of using them.

The extent and minuteness of observation which may be requisite, and the
degree of decomposition to which it may be necessary to carry the mental
analysis, depend on the particular purpose in view. To ascertain the
state of the whole universe at any particular moment is impossible, but
would also be useless. In making chemical experiments, we gdog not think
it necessary to note the position of the planets; because experience has
shown, as a very superficial experience is sufficient to show, that in
such cases that circumstance is not material to the result: and
accordingly, in the hagesh when men believed in the occult influences of
the heavenly bodies, it might have been unphilosophical to omit
ascertaining the precise condition of those bodies at the moment of the
experiment. As to the degree of minuteness of the mental subdivision, if
we were obliged to break down what we observe into its very simplest
elements, that is, literally into single facts, it would be difficult to
say where we should find them: we can hardly ever affirm that our
divisions of any kind have reached the ultimate unit. But this, too, is
fortunately unnecessary. The only object of the mental separation is to
suggest the requisite Edition: current; Page: [381] physical separation,
so that we may either accomplish it ourselves, or seek for it in nature;
and we have done enough when we have carried the subdivision as far as
the point at which we are able to see what observations or experiments
we require. It is only essential, at whatever point our mental
decomposition of facts may for the present have stopped, that we should
hold ourselves ready and able to carry it farther as occasion requires,
and should not allow the freedom of our discriminating faculty to be
imprisoned by the swathes and bands of ordinary classification; as was
the case with all early speculative inquirers, not excepting the Greeks,
to whom it iseldomi occurred that what was called by one abstract name
might, in reality, be several phenomena, or that there was a possibility
of decomposing the facts of the universe into any elements but those
which ordinary language already recognised.

§ 2. [The next step of inductive inquiry is an actual separation of
those elements of complex phenomena] The different antecedents and
consequents, being, then, supposed to be, so far as the case requires,
ascertained and discriminated from one another; we are to inquire which
is connected with which. In every instance which comes under our
observation, there are many antecedents and many consequents. If those
antecedents could not be severed from one another except in thought, or
if those consequents never were found apart, it would be impossible for
us to distinguish (à posteriori at least) the real laws, or to assign to
any cause its effect, or to any effect its cause. To do so, we must be
able to meet with some of the antecedents apart from the rest, and
observe what follows from them; or some of the consequents, and observe
by what they are preceded. We must, in short, follow the Baconian rule
of varying the circumstances.[*] This is, indeed, only the first rule of
physical inquiry, and not, as some have thought, the sole rule; but it
is the foundation of all the rest.

For the purpose of varying the circumstances, we may have recourse
(according to a distinction commonly made) either to observation or to
experiment; we may either find an instance in nature suited to our
purposes, or, by an artificial arrangement of circumstances, make one.
The value of the instance depends on what it is in itself, not on the
mode in which it is obtained: its employment for the purposes of
induction depends on the same principles in the one case and in the
other; as the uses of money are the same whether it is inherited or
acquired. There is, in short, no difference in kind, no real logical
distinction, between the two processes of investigation. There are,
however, practical distinctions to which it is of considerable
importance to advert.

Edition: current; Page: [382]
§ 3. [Advantages of experiment over observation] The first and most
obvious distinction between Observation and Experiment is, that the
latter is an immense extension of the former. It not only enables us to
produce a much greater number of variations in the circumstances than
nature spontaneously offers, but aalsoa, in thousands of cases, to
produce the precise sort of variation which we are in want of for
discovering the law of the phenomenon; a service which nature, being
constructed on a quite different scheme from that of facilitating our
studies, is seldom so friendly as to bestow upon us. For example, in
order to ascertain what principle in the atmosphere enables it to
sustain life, the variation we require is that a living animal should be
immersed in each component element of the atmosphere separately. But
nature does not supply either oxygen or azote in a separate state. We
are indebted to artificial experiment for our knowledge that it is the
former, and not the latter, which supports respiration; and bfor our
knowledge of the very existence of the two ingredients.

Thus far the advantage of experimentation over simple observation is
universally recognised: all are aware that it enables us to obtain
innumerable combinations of circumstances which are not to be found in
nature, and so add to nature’s experiments a multitude of experiments of
our own. But there is another superiority (or, as Bacon would have
expressed it, another prerogative) of instances artificially obtained
over spontaneous instances,—of our own experiments over even the same
experiments when made by nature,—which is not of less importance, and
which is far from being felt and acknowledged in the same degree.

When we can produce a phenomenon artificially, we can take it, as it
were, home with us, and observe it in the midst of circumstances with
which in all other respects we are accurately acquainted. If we desire
to know what are the effects of the cause A, and are able to produce A
by cmeansc at our disposal, we can generally determine at our own
discretion, so far as is compatible with the nature of the phenomenon A,
the whole of the circumstances which shall be present along with it: and
thus, knowing exactly the simultaneous state of everything else which is
within the reach of A’s influence, we have only to observe what
alteration is made in that state by the presence of A.

For example, by the delectricd machine we can produce, in the midst of
known circumstances, the phenomena which nature exhibits on a grander
scale eine the form of lightning and thunder. Now let any one consider
what amount of knowledge of the effects and laws of electric agency
mankind Edition: current; Page: [383] could fhave obtained from the mere
observation of thunderstorms, and compare it with that which they have
gained, and may expect to gain, from electrical and galvanic
experiments. This example is the more striking, now that we have reason
to believe that electric action is of all natural phenomena g(except
heat)g the most pervading and universal, which, therefore, it might
antecedently have been supposed could stand least in need of artificial
means of production to enable it to be studied; while the fact is so
much the contrary, that without the electric machine, the hLeyden jar,
and the voltaic batteryh, we iprobablyi should never have suspected the
existence of electricity as one of the great agents in nature; the few
electric phenomena we should have known of would have continued to be
regarded either as supernatural, or as a sort of anomalies and
eccentricities in the order of the universe.

When we have succeeded in insulating the phenomenon which is the subject
of inquiry, by placing it among known circumstances, we may produce
further variations of circumstances to any extent, and of such kinds as
we think best calculated to bring the laws of the phenomenon into a
clear light. By introducing one well-defined circumstance after another
into the experiment, we obtain assurance of the manner in which the
phenomenon behaves under an indefinite variety of possible
circumstances. jThus,j chemists, after having obtained some
newly-discovered substance in a pure state (that is, having made sure
that there is nothing present which can interfere with and modify its
agency,) introduce various other substances, one by one, to ascertain
whether it will combine with them, or decompose them, and with what
result; and also apply heat, or electricity, or pressure, to discover
what will happen to kthe substancek under each of these circumstances.

But if, on the other hand, it is out of our power to produce the
phenomenon, and we have to seek for instances in which nature produces
it, the task before us is lvery differentl.

mInstead of being able to nchoosen what the concomitant circumstances
shall be, we now have to discover what they are; which, when we go
beyond the simplest and most accessible cases, it is next to impossible
to do, with any precision and completeness. Let us take, as an
exemplification of a phenomenon which we have no means of ofabricating
artificiallyo, a human mind. Nature produces many; but the consequence
of our not being able to produce Edition: current; Page: [384] pthemp by
art is, that in every instance in which we see a human mind developing
itself, or acting upon other things, we see it surrounded and obscured
by an indefinite multitude of unascertainable circumstances, rendering
the use of the common experimental methods almost delusive. We may
conceive to what extent qthis is true,q if we consider, among other
things, that whenever nature produces a human mind, she produces, in
close connexion with it, ra body; that is, a vast complication of
physical facts, in no two cases perhaps exactly similar, and most of
which (except the mere structure, which we can examine in a sort of
coarse way after it has ceased to act), are radically out of the reach
of our means of exploration. If, instead of a human mind, we suppose the
subject of investigation to be a human society or State, all the same
difficulties recur in a greatly augmented degree.

We have thus already come within sight of a conclusion, which the
progress of the inquiry will, I think, bring before us with the clearest
evidence: namely, that in the sciences which deal with phenomena in
which artificial experiments are impossible (as in the case of
astronomy), or in which they have a very limited range (as in smental
philosophy, social science, and even physiologys) induction from direct
experience is practised at a disadvantage tin most casest equivalent to
impracticability: from which it follows that the methods of those
sciences, in order to accomplish anything worthy of attainment, must be
to a great extent, if not principally, deductive. This is already known
to be the case with the first of the sciences we have mentioned,
astronomy; that it is not generally recognised as true of the others, is
probably one of the reasons why they are unot in a more advanced state.u

§ 4. [Advantages of observation over experiment] If what is called pure
observation ais at so great a disadvantage, compared with artificial
experimentation, in one department of the direct exploration of
phenomena, there is another branch in which the advantage is all on the
side of the former.

Inductive inquiry having for its object to ascertain what causes are
connected with what effects, we may begin this search at either end of
the road which leads from the one point to the other: we may either
inquire into the effects of a given cause, or into the causes of a given
effect. The fact that light blackens chloride of silver might have been
discovered either by experiments on light, trying what effect it would
produce on various substances, or Edition: current; Page: [385] by
observing that portions of the chloride had repeatedly become black, and
inquiring into the circumstances. The effect of the urali poison might
have become known either by administering it to animals, or by examining
how it happened that the wounds which the Indians of Guiana inflict with
their arrows prove so uniformly mortal. Now it is manifest from the mere
statement of the examples, without any theoretical discussion, that
artificial experimentation is applicable only to the former of these
modes of investigation. We can take a cause, and try what it will
produce: but we cannot take an effect, and try what it will be produced
by. We can only watch till we see it produced, or are enabled to produce
it by accident.

This would be of little importance, if it always depended on our choice
from which of the two ends of the sequence we would undertake our
inquiries. But we have seldom any option. As we can only travel from the
known to the unknown, we are obliged to commence at whichever end we are
best acquainted with. If the agent is more familiar to us than its
effects, we watch for, or contrive, instances of the agent, under such
varieties of circumstances as are open to us, and observe the result.
If, on the contrary, the conditions on which a phenomenon depends are
obscure, but the phenomenon itself familiar, we must commence our
inquiry from the effect. If we are struck with the fact that chloride of
silver has been blackened, and have no suspicion of the cause, we have
no resource but to compare instances in which the fact has chanced to
occur, until by that comparison we discover that in all those instances
the bsubstancesb had been exposed to clight. If we knew nothing of the
Indian arrows but their fatal effect, accident alone could turn our
attention to experiments on the urali; in the regular course of
investigation, we could only dinquire, or try to observe,d what had been
done to the arrows in particular instances.

Wherever, having nothing to guide us to the cause, we are obliged to set
out from the effect, and to apply the rule of varying the circumstances
to the consequents, not the antecedents, we are necessarily destitute of
the resource of artificial experimentation. We cannot, at our choice,
obtain consequents, as we can antecedents, under any set of
circumstances compatible with their nature. There are no means of
producing effects but through their causes, and by the supposition the
causes of the effect in question are not known to us. We have,
therefore, no expedient but to study it where it offers itself
spontaneously. If nature happens to present us with instances
sufficiently varied in their circumstances, and if we are able to
discover, either among the proximate antecedents or among some other
order of antecedents, something which is always found when the effect is
found, however various the circumstances, Edition: current; Page: [386]
and never found when it is not; we may discover, by mere observation
without experiment, a real uniformity in nature.

But though this is certainly the most favourable case for sciences of
pure observation, as contrasted with those in which artificial
experiments are possible, there is in reality no case which more
strikingly illustrates the inherent imperfection of direct induction
when not founded on experimentation. Suppose that, by a comparison of
cases of the effect, we have found an antecedent which appears to be,
and perhaps is, invariably connected with it: we have not yet proved
that antecedent to be the cause, until we have reversed the process, and
produced the effect by means of that antecedent. If we can produce the
antecedent artificially, and if, when we do so, the effect follows, the
induction is complete; that antecedent is the cause of that consequent.*
But we ghave theng added the evidence of experiment to that of simple
observation. Until we had done so, we had only proved invariable
antecedence hwithin the limits of experienceh, but not unconditional
antecedence, or causation. Until it had been shown by the actual
production of the antecedent under known circumstances, and the
occurrence thereupon of the consequent, that the antecedent was really
the condition on which it depended; the uniformity of succession which
was proved to exist between them might, for aught we knew, be (like the
succession of day and night) inot ai case of causation at all; both
antecedent and consequent might be successive stages of the effect of an
ulterior cause. Observation, in short, without experiment (jsupposing
noj aid from deduction) can ascertain ksequences and coexistencesk, but
cannot prove causation.

In order to see these remarks verified by the actual state of the
sciences, we have only to think of the condition of natural history. In
zoology, for example, there is an immense number of uniformities
ascertained, some of coexistence, others of succession, to many of
which, notwithstanding considerable variations of the attendant
circumstances, we know not any exception: but the antecedents, for the
most part, are such as we cannot artificially produce; or if we can, it
is only by setting in motion the exact process by which nature produces
them; and this being to us a mysterious process, of which the main
circumstances are not only unknown but unobservable, lwe Edition:
current; Page: [387] do not succeed in obtaining the antecedents under
known circumstances. Whatl is the result? That on this vast subject,
which affords so much and such varied scope for observation, we have
mmade most scanty progress in ascertaining any laws of causationm. We
know not nwith certainty, in the case of mostn of the phenomena that we
find conjoined, which is the condition of the other; which is cause, and
which effect, or whether either of them is so, or they are not rather
oconjunct effects of causes yet to be discovered, complex results of
laws hitherto unknown.

Although some of the foregoing pobservationsp may be, in technical
strictness of arrangement, premature in this place, it seemed that a few
general qremarksq on the difference between sciences of mere observation
and sciences of experimentation, and the extreme disadvantage under
which directly inductive inquiry is necessarily carried on in the
former, were the best preparation for discussing the methods of direct
induction; a preparation rendering superfluous much that must otherwise
have been introduced, with some inconvenience, into the heart of that
discussion. To the consideration of these methods we now proceed.

Edition: current; Page: [388]


CHAPTER VIII: Of the Four Methods of Experimental Inquiry

§ 1. [Method of Agreement] The simplest and most obvious modes of
singling out from among the circumstances which precede or follow a
phenomenon, those with which it is really connected by an invariable
law, are two in number. One is, by comparing together different
instances in which the phenomenon occurs. The other is, by comparing
instances in which the phenomenon does occur, with instances in other
respects similar in which it does not. These two methods may be
respectively denominated, the Method of Agreement, and the Method of
Difference.

In illustrating these methods, it will be necessary to bear in mind the
two-fold character of inquiries into the laws of phenomena; which may be
either inquiries into the cause of a given effect, or into the effects
or properties of a given cause. We shall consider the methods in their
application to either order of investigation, and shall draw our
examples equally from both.

We shall denote antecedents by the large letters of the alphabet, and
the consequents corresponding to them by the small. Let A, then, be an
agent or cause, and let the object of our inquiry be to ascertain what
are the effects of this cause. If we can either find, or produce, the
agent A in such varieties of circumstances, that the different cases
have no circumstance in common except A; then whatever effect we find to
be produced in all our trialsa, is indicated asa the effect of A.
Suppose, for example, that A is tried along with B and C, and that the
effect is a b c; and suppose that A is next tried with D and E, but
without B and C, and that the effect is a d e. Then we may reason thus:
b and c are not effects of A, for they were not produced by it in the
second experiment; nor are d and e, for they were not produced in the
first. Whatever is really the effect of A must have been produced in
both instances; now this condition is fulfilled by no circumstance
except a. The phenomenon a cannot have been the effect of B or C, since
it was produced where they were not; nor of D or E, since it was
produced where they were not. Therefore it is the effect of A.

Edition: current; Page: [389]
For example, let the antecedent A be the contact of an alkaline
substance and an oil. This combination being tried under several
varieties of bcircumstancesb, cresembling each otherc in nothing else,
the results agree in the production of a greasy and detersive or
saponaceous substance: it is therefore concluded that the combination of
an oil and an alkali causes the production of a soap. dIt is thus we
inquire, by the Method of Agreement, intod the effect of a given cause.

In a similar manner we may einquire intoe the cause of a given effect.
Let a be the effect. Here, as fshown in the last chapterf, we have only
the resource of observation without experiment: we cannot take a
phenomenon of which we know not the origin, and try to find its mode of
production by producing it: if we succeeded in such a random gtrialg it
could only be by accident. But if we can observe a in two different
combinations, a b c and a d e; and if we know, or can discover, that the
antecedent circumstances in these cases respectively were A B C and A D
E; we may conclude by a reasoning similar to that in the preceding
example, that A is the antecdent connected with the consequent a by a
law of causation. B and C, we may say, cannot be causes of a, since on
its second occurrence they were not present; nor are D and E, for they
were not present on its first occurrence. A, alone of the five
circumstances, was found among the antecedents of a in both instances.

For example, let the effect a be crystallization. We compare instances
in which bodies are known to assume crystalline structure, but which
have no other point of agreement; and we find them to have one, and as
far as we can observe, only one, antecedent in common: the deposition of
solid matter from a liquid state, either a state of fusion or of
solution. We conclude, therefore, that the solidification of a substance
from a liquid state is an invariable antecedent of its crystallization.

In this example we may go farther, and say, it is not only the
invariable antecedent but the causeh; or at least the proximate event
which completes the causeh. For in this case we are able, after
detecting the antecedent A, to produce it artificially, and by finding
that a follows it, verify the result of our induction. The importance of
thus reversing the proof was istrikingly manifestedi when by keeping a
phial of water charged with siliceous particles undisturbed for years, a
chemist (I believe Dr. Wollaston) succeeded in obtaining crystals of
quartz; jandj in the equally interesting experiment in which Sir James
Hall produced artificial marble by the cooling of its materials Edition:
current; Page: [390] from fusion under immense pressure: two admirable
examples of the light which may be thrown upon the most secret processes
of nature by well-contrived interrogation of her.

kBut if we cannot artificially produce the phenomenon A, the conclusion
that it is the cause of a remains subject to very considerable doubt.
Though an invariable, it may not be the unconditional antecedent of a,
but may precede it as day precedes night or night day. This uncertainty
arises from the impossibility of assuring ourselves that A is the only
immediate antecedent common to both the instances. If we could be
certain of having ascertained all the invariable antecedents, we might
be sure that the unconditional invariable antecedent, or cause, must be
found somewhere among them. Unfortunately it is hardly ever possible to
ascertain all the antecedents, unless the phenomenon is one which we can
produce artificially. Even then, the difficulty is merely lightened, not
removed: men knew how to raise water in pumps long before they adverted
to what was really the operating circumstance in the means they
employed, namely, the pressure of the atmosphere on the open surface of
the water. It is, however, much easier to analyse completely a set of
arrangements made by ourselves, than the whole complex mass of the
agencies which nature happens to be exerting at the moment lof the
production of al given phenomenon. We may overlook some of the material
circumstances in an experiment with an electrical machine; but we shall,
at the worst, be better acquainted with them than with those of a
thunder-storm.

The mode of discovering and proving laws of nature, which we have now
examined, proceeds on the following axiom: Whatever circumstance can be
excluded, without prejudice to the phenomenon, or can be absent
notwithstanding its presence, is not connected with it in the way of
causation. The casual circumstances being thus eliminated, if only one
remains, that one is the cause which we are in search of: if more than
one, they either are, or contain among them, the cause; and so, mutatis
mutandis, of the effect. As this method proceeds by comparing different
instances to ascertain in what they agree, I have termed it the Method
of Agreement: and we may adopt as its regulating principle the following
canon:


First Canon

If two or more instances of the phenomenon under investigation have only
one circumstance in common, the circumstance in which alone all the
instances agree, is the cause (or effect) of the given phenomenon.

Quitting for the present the Method of Agreement, to which we shall
almost immediately return, we proceed to a still more potent instrument
of the investigation of nature, the Method of Difference.

Edition: current; Page: [391]
§ 2. [Method of Difference] In the Method of Agreement, we endeavoured
to obtain instances which agreed in the given circumstance but differed
in every other: in the present method we require, on the contrary, two
instances resembling one another in every other respect, but differing
in the presence or absence of the phenomenon we wish to study. If our
object be to discover the effects of an agent A, we must procure A in
some set of ascertained circumstances, as A B C, and having noted the
effects produced, compare them with the effect of the remaining
circumstances B C, when A is absent. If the effect of A B C is a b c,
and the effect of B C, b c, it is evident that the effect of A is a. So
again, if we begin at the other end, and desire to investigate the cause
of an effect a, we must select an instance, as a b c, in which the
effect occurs, and in which the antecedents were A B C, and we must look
out for another instance in which the remaining circumstances, b c,
occur without a. If the antecedents, in that instance, are B C, we know
that the cause of a must be A: either A alone, or A in conjunction with
some of the other circumstances present.

It is scarcely necessary to give examples of a logical process to which
we owe almost all the inductive conclusions we draw in daily life. When
a man is shot through the heart, it is by this method we know that it
was the gunshot which killed him: for he was in the fulness of life
immediately before, all circumstances being the same, except the wound.

The axioms aimplieda in this method are evidently the following.
Whatever antecedent cannot be excluded without preventing the
phenomenon, is the cause, or a condition, of that phenomenonb: Whateverb
consequent can be excluded, with no other difference in the antecedents
than the absence of a particular one, is the effect of that conec.
Instead of comparing different instances of a phenomenon, to discover in
what they agree, this method compares an instance of its occurrence with
an instance of its non-occurrence, to discover in what they differ. The
canon which is the regulating principle of the Method of Difference may
be expressed as follows:


Second Canon

If an instance in which the phenomenon under investigation occurs, and
an instance in which it does not occur, have every circumstance din
common save oned, that one occurring only in the former; the
circumstance in which alone the two instances differ, is the effect, or
ethee cause, or fan indispensablef part of the cause, of the phenomenon.

Edition: current; Page: [392]
§ 3. [Mutual relation of the Methods of Agreement and Difference] The
two methods which we have now stated have many features of resemblance,
but there are also many distinctions between them. Both are methods of
elimination. This term (aemployed in the theory of equations to denote
the process by which one after another of the elements of a question is
excluded, and the solution made to depend on the relation between the
remaining elements only) is well suited to express the operation,
analogous to this, which has been understood since the time of Bacon to
be the foundation of experimental inquiry: namely, the successive
exclusion of the various circumstances which are found to accompany a
phenomenon in a given instance, in order to ascertain what are those
among them which can be absent consistently with the existence of the
phenomenon. The Method of Agreement stands on the ground that whatever
can be eliminated, is not connected with the phenomenon by any law. The
Method of Difference has for its foundation, that whatever cannot be
eliminated, is connected with the phenomenon by a law.

Of these methods, that of Difference is more particularly a method of
artificial experiment; while that of Agreement is more especially the
resource bemployedb where experimentation is impossible. A few
reflections will prove the fact, and point out the reason of it.

It is inherent in the peculiar character of the Method of Difference,
that the nature of the combinations which it requires is much more
strictly defined than in the Method of Agreement. The two instances
which are to be compared with one another must be exactly similar, in
all circumstances except the one which we are attempting to investigate:
they must be in the relation of A B C and B C, or of a b c and b c. It
is true that this similarity of circumstances needs not extend to such
as are already known to be immaterial to the result. And in the case of
most phenomena we learn at once, from the ccommonestc experience, that
most of the coexistent phenomena of the universe may be either present
or absent without affecting the given phenomenon; or, if present, are
present indifferently when the phenomenon does not happen and when it
does. Still, even limiting the identity which is required between the
two instances, A B C and B C, to such circumstances as are not already
known to be indifferent; it is very seldom that nature affords two
instances, of which we can be assured that they stand in this precise
relation to one another. In the spontaneous operations of nature there
is generally such complication and such obscurity, they are mostly
either on so overwhelmingly large or on so inaccessibly minute a scale,
we are so ignorant of a great part of the facts which really take place,
and even those of which we are not ignorant are so multitudinous, and
therefore so seldom exactly alike in any two cases, that a spontaneous
experiment, of the kind required by the Edition: current; Page: [393]
Method of Difference, is dcommonly notd to be found. When, on the
contrary, we obtain a phenomenon by an artificial experiment, a pair of
instances such as the method requires is obtained almost as a matter of
course, provided the process does not last a long time. A certain state
of surrounding circumstances existed before we commenced the experiment;
this is B C. We then introduce A; say, for instance, by merely bringing
an object from another part of the room, before there has been time for
any change in the other elements. It is, in short (as M. Comte
observes), the very nature of an experiment, to introduce into the
pre-existing state of circumstances a change perfectly definite.[*] We
choose a previous state of things ewith which we are well acquaintede,
so that no unforeseen alteration in that state is likely to pass
unobserved; and into this we introduce, as rapidly as possible, the
phenomenon which we wish to study; so that fin general wef are entitled
to feel complete assurance that the pre-existing state, and the state
which we have produced, differ in nothing except gthe presence or
absence of that phenomenon. If a bird is taken from a cage, and
instantly plunged into carbonic acid gas, the experimentalist may be
fully assured (at all events after one or two repetitions) that no
circumstance capable of causing suffocation had supervened in the
interim, except the change from immersion in the atmosphere to immersion
in carbonic acid gas. There is one doubt, indeed, which may remain in
some cases of this description; the effect may have been produced not by
the change, but by the means hemployed to produce the change. The
possibility, however, of this last supposition generally admits of being
conclusively tested by other experiments. It thus appears that in the
study of the various kinds of phenomena which we can, by our voluntary
agency, modify or control, we can in general satisfy the requisitions of
the Method of Difference; but that by the spontaneous operations of
nature those requisitions are seldom fulfilled.

The reverse of this is the case with the Method of Agreement. We do not
here require instances of so special and determinate a kind. Any
instances whatever, in which nature presents us with a phenomenon, may
be examined for the purposes of this method; and if all such instances
agree in anything, a conclusion of considerable value is already
attained. We can seldom, indeed, be sure that ithei one point of
agreement is the only one; but jthisj ignorance does not, as in the
Method of Difference, vitiate the conclusion; the certainty of the
result, as far as it goes, is not affected. We have ascertained one
invariable antecedent or consequent, however many other invariable
antecedents Edition: current; Page: [394] or consequents may still
remain unascertained. If A B C, A D E, A F G, are all equally followed
by a, then a is an invariable consequent of A. If a b c, a d e, a f g,
all number A among their antecedents, then A is connected as an
antecedent, by some invariable law, with a. But to determine whether
this invariable antecedent is a cause, or this invariable consequent an
effect, we must be able, in addition, to produce the one by means of the
other; or, at least, to obtain that which alone constitutes our
assurance of having produced anything, namely, an instance in which the
effect, a, has come into existence, with no other change in the
pre-existing circumstances than the addition of A. And this, if we can
do it, is an application of the Method of Difference, not of the Method
of Agreement.

It thus appears to be by the Method of Difference alone that we can
ever, in the way of direct experience, arrive kwith certaintyk at
causes. The Method of Agreement leads only to laws of phenomena l(as
some writers call them, but improperly, since laws of causation are also
laws of phenomena): that is, to uniformities, which either are not laws
of causation, orl in which the question of causation must for the
present remain undecided. The Method of Agreement is chiefly to be
resorted to, as a means of suggesting applications of the Method of
Difference (as in the last example the comparison of A B C, A D E, A F
G, suggested that A was the antecedent on which to try the experiment
whether it could produce a); or as an inferior resource, in case the
Method of Difference is impracticable; which, as we before showed,
generally arises from the impossibility of artificially producing the
phenomena. And hence it is that the Method of Agreement, though
applicable in principle to either case, is more emphatically the method
of investigation on those subjects where artificial experimentation is
impossible: because on those it is, generally, our only resource of a
directly inductive nature; while, in the phenomena which we can produce
at pleasure, the Method of Difference generally affords a more
efficacious process, which will ascertain causes as well as mere laws.

§ 4. [Joint Method of Agreement and Difference] aThere are, however,a
many cases in which, though our power of producing the phenomenon is
complete, the Method of Difference either cannot be made available at
all, or not without a previous employment of the Method of Agreement.
This occurs when the agency by which we can produce the phenomenon is
not that of one single antecedent, but ba combination of antecedents,
which we Edition: current; Page: [395] have no power of separating from
each other, and exhibiting apart. For instance, suppose the subject of
inquiry to be the cause of the double refraction of light. We can
produce this phenomenon at pleasure, by employing any one of the many
substances which are known to refract light in that peculiar manner. But
if, taking one of those substances, as Iceland spar for example, we wish
to determine on which of the properties of Iceland spar this remarkable
phenomenon depends, we can make no use, for that purpose, of the Method
of Difference; for we cannot find another substance precisely resembling
Iceland spar except in some one property. The only mode, therefore, of
prosecuting this inquiry is that afforded by the Method of Agreement; by
which, in fact, through a comparison of all the known substances which
chavec the property of doubly refracting light, it was ascertained that
they dagree in thed circumstance of being crystalline substances; and
though the converse does not hold, though all crystalline substances
have not the property of double refraction, it was concluded, with
reason, that there is a real connexion between these two properties;
that either crystalline structure, or the cause which gives rise to that
structure, is one of the conditions of double refraction.

Out of this employment of the Method of Agreement arises a peculiar
modification of that method, which is sometimes of great avail in the
investigation of nature. In cases similar to the above, in which it is
not possible to obtain the precise pair of instances which our second
canon requires—instances agreeing in every antecedent except A, or in
every consequent except a; we may yet be able, by a double employment of
the Method of Agreement, to discover in what the instances which contain
A or a, differ from those which do not.

If we compare various instances in which a occurs, and find that they
all have in common the circumstance A, and (as far as can be observed)
no other circumstance, the Method of Agreement, so far, bears testimony
to a connexion between A and a. In order to convert this eevidencee of
connexion into proof of causation by the direct Method of Difference, we
ought to be able, in some one of these instances, as for example A B C,
to leave out A, and observe whether by doing so, a is prevented. Now
supposing (what is often the case) that we are not able to try this
decisive experiment; yet, provided we can by any means discover what
would be its result if we could try it, the advantage will be the same.
Suppose, then, that as we previously examined a variety of instances in
which a occurred, and found them to agree in containing A, so we now
observe a variety of instances in which a does not occur, and find them
agree in not containing A; which establishes, by the Edition: current;
Page: [396] Method of Agreement, the same connexion between the absence
of A and the absence of a, which was before established between their
presence. As, then, it had been shown that whenever A is present a is
present, so it being now shown that when A is taken away a is removed
along with it, we have by the one proposition A B C, a b c, by the other
B C, b c, the positive and negative finstancesf which the Method of
Difference requires.g

This method may be called the Indirect Method of Difference, or the
Joint Method of Agreement and Difference; and consists in a double
employment of the Method of Agreement, each proof being independent of
the other, and corroborating it. But it is not equivalent to a proof by
the direct Method of Difference. For the requisitions of the Method of
Difference are not satisfied, unless we can be quite sure either that
the instances affirmative of a, agree in no antecedent whatever but A,
or that the instances negative of a agree in nothing but the negation of
A. Now if it were possible, which it never is, to have this assurance,
we should not need the joint method; for either of the two sets of
instances separately, would then be sufficient to prove causation. This
indirect method, therefore, can only be hregardedh as a great extension
and improvement of the Method of Agreement, but not as participating in
the more cogent nature of the Method of Difference. The following may be
stated as its canon:


Third Canon

If two or more instances in which the phenomenon occurs have only one
circumstance in common, while two or more instances in which it does not
occur have nothing in common save the absence of that circumstance; the
circumstance in which alone the two sets of instances differ, is the
effect, or ithei cause, or jan indispensablej part of the cause, of the
phenomenon.

We shall presently kseek that the Joint Method of Agreement and
Difference constitutes, in another respect not yet adverted to, an
improvement upon the common Method of Agreement, namely, in being
unaffected by a characteristic imperfection of that method, the nature
of which still remains to be pointed out. But as we cannot enter into
this exposition without introducing Edition: current; Page: [397] a new
element of complexity into lthis long and intricate discussionl, I shall
postpone it to ma subsequentm chapter, and shall at once proceed to nan
statement of two other methods, which will complete the enumeration of
the means which mankind possess for exploring the laws of nature by
specific observation and experience.

§ 5. [Method of Residues] The first of these has been aptly denominated
the Method of Residues.[*] Its principle is very simple. Subducting from
any given phenomenon all the portions which, by virtue of preceding
inductions, can be assigned to known causes, the remainder will be the
effect of the antecedents which had been overlooked, or of which the
effect was as yet an unknown quantity.

Suppose, as before, that we have the antecedents A B C, followed by the
consequents a b c, and that by previous inductions (founded, we will
suppose, on the Method of Difference) we have ascertained the causes of
some of these effects, or the effects of some of these causes; and are
athencea apprised that the effect of A is a, and that the effect of B is
b. Subtracting the sum of these effects from the total phenomenon, there
remains c, which now, without any fresh bexperimentsb, we may know to be
the effect of C. This Method of Residues is in truth a peculiar
modification of the Method of Difference. If the instance A B C, a b c,
could have been compared with a single instance A B, a b, we should have
proved C to be the cause of c, by the common process of the Method of
Difference. In the present case, however, instead of a single instance A
B, we have had to study separately the causes A and B, and to infer from
the effects which they produce separately, what effect they must produce
in the case A B C where they act together. Of the two instances,
therefore, which the Method of Difference requires,—the one positive,
the other negative,—the negative one, or that in which the given
phenomenon is absent, is not the direct result of observation and
experiment, but has been arrived at by deduction. As one of the forms of
the Method of Difference, the Method of Residues partakes of its
rigorous certainty, provided the previous inductions, those which gave
the effects of A and B, were obtained by the same infallible method, and
provided we are certain that C is the only antecedent to which the
residual phenomenon c can be referred; the only agent of which we had
not already calculated and subducted the Edition: current; Page: [398]
effect. But as we can never be quite certain of this, the evidence
derived from the Method of Residues is not complete unless we can obtain
C artificially and try it separately, or unless its agency, when once
suggested, can be accounted for, and proved deductively, from known
laws.

Even with these reservations, the Method of Residues is one of the most
important among our instruments of discovery. Of all the methods of
investigating laws of nature, this is the most fertile in unexpected
results: often informing us of sequences in which neither the cause nor
the effect were sufficiently conspicuous to attract of themselves the
attention of observers. The agent C may be an obscure circumstance, not
likely to have been perceived unless sought for, nor likely to have been
sought for until attention had been awakened by the insufficiency of the
obvious causes to account for the whole of the effect. And c may be so
disguised by its intermixture with a and b, that it would scarcely have
presented itself spontaneously as a subject of separate study. Of these
uses of the method, we shall presently cite some remarkable examples.
The canon of the Method of Residues is as follows:


Fourth Canon

Subduct from any phenomenon such part as is known by previous inductions
to be the effect of certain antecedents, and the residue of the
phenomenon is the effect of the remaining antecedents.

§ 6. [Method of Concomitant Variations] There remains a class of laws
which it is impracticable to ascertain by any of the three methods which
aIa have attempted to characterize; namely, the laws of those Permanent
Causes, or indestructible natural agents, which it is impossible either
to exclude or to isolate; which we can neither hinder from being
present, nor contrive that they shall be present alone. It would appear
at first sight that we could by no means separate the effects of these
agents from the effects of those other phenomena with which they cannot
be prevented from coexisting. In respect, indeed, to most of the
permanent causes, no such difficulty exists; since though we cannot
eliminate them as coexisting facts, we can eliminate them as influencing
agents, by simply trying our experiment in a local situation beyond the
limits of their influence. The pendulum, for example, has its
oscillations disturbed by the vicinity of a mountain: we remove the
pendulum to a sufficient distance from the mountain, and the disturbance
ceases: from these data we can determine by the Method of Difference,
the amount of effect bdue to the mountain; and beyond a certain distance
everything goes on precisely as it would do if the mountain exercised no
influence whatever, which, accordingly, we, with sufficient reason,
conclude to be the fact.

Edition: current; Page: [399]
The difficulty, therefore, in applying the methods already treated of to
determine the effects of Permanent Causes, is confined to the cases in
which it is impossible for us to get out of the local limits of their
influence. The pendulum can be removed from the influence of the
mountain, but it cannot be removed from the influence of the earth: we
cannot take away the earth from the pendulum, nor the pendulum from the
earth, to ascertain whether it would continue to vibrate if the action
which the earth exerts upon it were withdrawn. On what evidence, then,
do we ascribe its vibrations to the earth’s influence? Not on any
sanctioned by the Method of Difference; for one of the two instances,
the negative instance, is wanting. Nor by the Method of Agreement; for
though all pendulums agree in this, that during their oscillations the
earth is always present, why may we not as well ascribe the phenomenon
to the sun, which is equally a coexistent fact in all the experiments?
It is evident that to establish even so simple a fact of causation as
this, there was required some method over and above those which we have
yet examined.

As another example, let us take the phenomenon Heat. Independently of
all hypothesis as to the real nature of the agency so called, this fact
is certain, that we are unable to exhaust any body of the whole of its
heat. It is equally certain, that no one ever perceived heat not
emanating from a body. Being unable, then, to separate Body and Heat, we
cannot effect such a variation of circumstances as the foregoing three
methods require; we cannot ascertain, by those methods, what portion of
the phenomena exhibited by any body cisc due to the heat contained in
it. If we could observe a body with its heat, and the same body entirely
divested of heat, the Method of Difference would show the effect due to
the heat, apart from that due to the body. If we could observe heat
under circumstances agreeing in nothing but heat, and therefore not
characterized also by the presence of a body, we could ascertain the
effects of heat, from an instance of heat with a body and an instance of
heat without a body, by the Method of Agreement; or dwe could determine
by the Method of Difference what effect was due to the body, when the
remainder which was due to the heat would be given by the Method of
Residues. But we can do enonee of these things; and without them the
application of any of the three methods to the solution of this problem
would be illusory. It would be idle, for instance, to attempt to
ascertain the effect of heat by subtracting from the phenomena exhibited
by a body, all that is due to its other properties; for as we have never
been able to observe any bodies without a portion of heat in them,
feffects due to that heat gmightg form a part of Edition: current; Page:
[400] the very results, which we hwere affectingh to substract in order
that the effect of heat imighti be shown by the residue.

If, therefore, there were no other methods of experimental investigation
than these three, we should be junable to determine the effects due to
heat as a cause. But we have still a resource. Though we cannot exclude
an antecedent altogether, we may be able to produce, or nature may
produce for us, some modification in it. By a modification is here
meant, a change in it, not amounting to its total removal. If some
modification in the antecedent A is always followed by a change in the
consequent a, the other consequents b and c remaining the same; or vice
versâ, if every change in a is found to have been preceded by some
modification in A, none being observable in any of the other
antecedents; we may safely conclude that a is, wholly or in part, an
effect traceable to A, or at least in some way connected with it through
causation. For example, in the case of heat, though we cannot expel it
altogether from any body, we can modify it in quantity, we can increase
or diminish it; and doing so, we find by the various methods of
experimentation or observation already treated of, that such increase or
diminution of heat is followed by expansion or contraction of the body.
In this manner we arrive at the conclusion, otherwise unattainable by
us, that one of the effects of heat is to enlarge the dimensions of
bodies; or what is the same thing in other words, to widen the distances
between their particles.

A change in a thing, not amounting to its total removal, that is, a
change which leaves it still the same thing it was, must be a change
either in its quantity, or in some of its kvariablek relations to other
things, of which lvariablel relations the principal is its position in
space. In the previous example, the modification which was produced in
the antecedent was an alteration in its quantity. Let us now suppose the
question to be, what influence the moon exerts on the surface of the
earth. We cannot try an experiment in the absence of the moon, so as to
observe what terrestrial phenomena her annihilation would put an end to;
but when we find that all the variations in the position of the moon are
followed by corresponding variations in the time and place of high
water, the place being always either mthe partm of the earth which is
nearest to, or nthat which is most remote from, the moon, we have ample
evidence that the moon is, wholly or partially, the cause which
determines the tides. It very commonly happens, as it does in this
instance, that the variations of an effect are correspondent, or
analogous, to those of its cause; as the moon moves ofarthero towards
the east, the high water point does the same: but this is not an
indispensable condition; as may be seen in Edition: current; Page: [401]
the same example, for along with that high water point there is at the
same instant another high water point diametrically opposite to it, and
which, therefore, of necessity, moves towards the west, as the moon,
followed by the nearer of the tide waves, advances towards the east: and
yet both these motions are equally effects of the moon’s motion.

That the oscillations of the pendulum are caused by the earth, is proved
by similar evidence. Those oscillations take place between equidistant
points on the two sides of a line, which, being perpendicular to the
earth, varies with every variation in the earth’s position, either in
space or relatively to the object. Speaking accurately, we only know by
the method now characterized, that all terrestrial bodies tend to the
earth, and not to some unknown fixed point lying in the same direction.
In every twenty-four hours, by the earth’s rotation, the line drawn from
the body at right angles to the earth coincides successively with all
the radii of a circle, and in the course of six months the place of that
circle varies by nearly two hundred millions of miles; yet in all these
changes of the earth’s position, the line in which bodies tend to fall
continues to be directed towards it: which proves that terrestrial
gravity is directed to the earth, and not, as was once fancied by some,
to a fixed point of space.

The method by which these results were obtained, may be termed the
Method of Concomitant Variations: it is regulated by the following
canon:


Fifth Canon

Whatever phenomenon varies in any manner whenever another phenomenon
varies in some particular manner, is either a cause or an effect of that
phenomenon, or is connected with it through some fact of causation.

The last clause is subjoined, because it by no means follows when two
phenomena accompany each other in their variations, that the one is
cause and the other effect. The same thing may, and indeed must happen,
supposing them to be two different effects of a common cause: and by
this method alone it would never be possible to ascertain which of the
psuppositions is the true one. The only way to solve the doubt would be
that which we have so often adverted to, viz. by endeavouring to
ascertain whether we can produce the one set of variations by means of
the other. In the case of heat, for example, by increasing the
temperature of a body we increase its bulk, but by increasing its bulk
we do not increase its temperature; on the contrary, (as in the
rare-faction of air under the receiver of an air-pump,) we generally
diminish it: therefore heat is not an effect, but a cause, of increase
of bulk. If we cannot ourselves produce the variations, we must
endeavour, though it is an attempt Edition: current; Page: [402] which
is seldom successful, to find them produced by nature in some case in
which the pre-existing circumstances are perfectly known to us.

It is scarcely necessary to say, that in order to ascertain the uniform
concomitance of variations in the effect with variations in the cause,
the same precautions must be used as in any other case of the
determination of an invariable sequence. We must endeavour to retain all
the other antecedents unchanged, while that particular one is subjected
to the requisite series of variations; or in other words, that we may be
warranted in inferring causation from concomitance of variations, the
concomitance itself must be proved by the Method of Difference.

It might at first appear that the Method of Concomitant Variations
assumes a new axiom, or law of causation in general, namely, that every
modification of the cause is followed by a change in the effect. And it
does usually happen that when a phenomenon A causes a phenomenon a, any
variation in the quantity or in the various relations of A, is uniformly
followed by a variation in the quantity or relations of a. To take a
familiar instance, that of gravitation. The sun causes a certain
tendency to motion in the earth; here we have cause and effect; but that
tendency is towards the sun, and therefore varies in direction as the
sun varies in the relation of position; and moreover the tendency varies
in intensity, in a certain numerical qcorrespondenceq to the sun’s
distance from the earth, that is, according to another relation of the
sun. Thus we see that there is not only an invariable connexion between
the sun and the earth’s gravitation, but that two of the relations of
the sun, its position with respect to the earth and its distance from
the earth, are invariably connected as antecedents with the quantity and
direction of the earth’s gravitation. The cause of the earth’s
gravitating at all, is simply the sun; but the cause of ritsr
gravitating with a given intensity and in a given direction, is the
existence of the sun in a given direction and at a given distance. It is
not strange that a modified cause, which is in truth a different cause,
should produce a different effect.s

Although it is for the most part true that a modification of the cause
is followed by a modification of the effect, the Method of Concomitant
Variations does not, however, presuppose this as an axiom. It only
requires the converse proposition; that anything on whose modifications,
modifications of an effect are invariably consequent, must be the cause
(or connected with the cause) of that effect; a proposition, the truth
of which is evident; for if the thing itself had no influence on the
effect, neither could the modifications of the thing have any influence.
If the stars have no power over the fortunes Edition: current; Page:
[403] of tmankindt, it is implied in the very terms, that the
conjunctions or oppositions of different stars can have no such power.

Although the most striking applications of the Method of Concomitant
Variations take place in the cases in which the Method of Difference,
strictly so called, is impossible, its use is not confined to those
cases; it may often usefully follow after the Method of Difference, to
give additional precision to a solution which that has ufoundu. When by
the Method of Difference it has first been ascertained that a certain
object produces a certain effect, the Method of Concomitant Variations
may be usefully called in, to determine according to what law the
quantity or the different relations of the effect follow those of the
cause.

§ 7. [Limitations of the Method of Concomitant Variations] The case in
which this method admits of the most extensive employment, is that in
which the variations of the cause are variations of quantity. Of such
variations we may in general affirm with safety, that they will be
attended not only with variations, but with similar variations, of the
effect: the proposition, that more of the cause is followed by more of
the effect, being a corollary from the principle of the Composition of
Causes, which, as we have seen, is the general rule of causation; cases
of the opposite description, in which causes change their properties on
being conjoined with one another, being, on the contrary, special and
exceptional. Suppose, then, that when A changes in quantity, a also
changes in quantity, and in such a manner that we can trace the
numerical relation which the changes of the one bear to such changes of
the other as take place within our limits of observation. We may then,
with certain precautions, safely conclude that the same numerical
relation will hold beyond those limits. If, for instance, we find that
when A is double, a is double; that when A is treble or quadruple, a is
treble or quadruple; we may conclude that if A were a half or a third, a
would be a half or a third, and finally, that if A were annihilated, a
would be annihilated; and that a is wholly the effect of A, or wholly
the effect of the same cause with A. And so with any other numerical
relation according to which A and a would vanish simultaneously; as, for
instance, if a were proportional to the square of A. If, on the other
hand, a is not wholly the effect of A, but yet varies when A varies, it
is probably aa mathematicala function not of A alone, but of A and
bsomething elseb: its changesc, for example, mayc be such as would occur
if part of it remained constant, or varied on some other principle, and
the remainder varied in some numerical relation to the variations of A.
In that Edition: current; Page: [404] case, when A diminishes, a will
dbe seend to approach not towards zero, but towards some other limit:
and when the series of variations is such as to indicate what that limit
is, if constant, or the law of its variation if variable, the limit will
exactly measure how much of a is the effect of some other and
independent cause, and the remainder will be the effect of A (or of the
cause of A).

These conclusions, however, must not be drawn without certain
precautions. In the first place, the possibility of drawing them at all,
manifestly supposes that we are acquainted not only with the variations,
but with the absolute quantities both of A and a. If we do not know the
total quantities, we cannot, of course, determine the real numerical
relation according to which those quantities vary. It is therefore an
error to conclude, as some have concluded, that because increase of heat
expands bodies, that is, increases the distance between their particles,
therefore ethee distance is wholly the effect of heat, and that if we
could entirely exhaust the body of its heat, the particles would be in
complete contact. This fis nof more than a guess, and of the most
hazardous sort, not a legitimate induction: for since we neither know
how much heat there is in any body, nor what is the real distance
between any two of its particles, we cannot judge whether the
contraction of the distance does or does not follow the diminution of
the quantity of heat according to such a numerical relation that the two
quantities would vanish simultaneously.

In contrast with this, let us consider a case in which the absolute
quantities are known; the case contemplated in the first law of motion;
viz. that all bodies in motion continue to move in a straight line with
uniform velocity until acted upon by some new force. This assertion is
in open opposition to first appearances; all terrestrial objects, when
in motion, gradually abate their velocity and at last stop; which
accordingly the ancients, with their inductio per enumerationem
simplicem, imagined to be the law. Every moving body, however,
encounters various obstacles, as friction, the resistance of the
atmosphere, &c., which we know by daily experience to be causes capable
of destroying motion. It was suggested that the whole of the retardation
might be owing to these causes. How was this inquired into? If the
obstacles could have been entirely removed, the case would have been
amenable to the Method of Difference. They could not be removed, they
could only be diminished, and the case, therefore, admitted only of the
Method of Concomitant Variations. This accordingly being employed, it
was found that every diminution of the obstacles diminished the
retardation of the motion: and inasmuch as in this case (unlike the case
of heat) the total quantities Edition: current; Page: [405] both of the
antecedent and of the consequent were known; it was practicable to
estimate, with an approach to accuracy, both the amount of the
retardation and the amount of the retarding causes, or resistances, and
to judge how near they both were to being exhausted; and it appeared
that the effect dwindled as rapidly, and at each step was as far on the
road towards annihilation, as the cause was. The simple oscillation of a
weight suspended from a fixed point, and moved a little out of the
perpendicular, which in ordinary circumstances lasts but a few minutes,
was prolonged in Borda’s experiments to more than thirty hours, by
diminishing as much as possible the friction at the point of suspension,
and by making the body oscillate in a space exhausted as nearly as
possible of its air. There could therefore be no hesitation in assigning
the whole of the retardation of motion to the influence of the
obstacles; and since, after subducting this retardation from the total
phenomenon, the remainder was an uniform velocity, the result was gthe
proposition known asg the first law of motion.

There is also another characteristic uncertainty affecting the inference
that the law of variation which the quantities observe within our limits
of observation, will hold beyond those limits. There is of course, in
the first instance, the possibility that beyond the limits, and in
circumstances therefore of which we have no direct experience, some
counteracting cause might develop itself; either a new agent, or a new
property of the agents concerned, which lies dormant in the
circumstances we are able to observe. This is an element of uncertainty
which enters largely into all our predictions of effects; but it is not
peculiarly applicable to the Method of Concomitant Variations. The
uncertainty, however, of which I am about to speak, is characteristic of
that method; especially in the cases in which the extreme limits of our
hobservationh are very narrow, in comparison with the possible
variations in the quantities of the phenomena. Any one who has the
slightest acquaintance with mathematics, is aware that very different
laws of variation may produce numerical results which differ but
slightly from one another within narrow limits; and it is often only
when the absolute amounts of variation are considerable, that the
difference between the results given by one law and by another becomes
appreciable. When, therefore, such variations in the quantity of the
antecedents as we have the means of observing, are ismall in comparison
with the total quantities, there is much danger lest we should mistake
the numerical law, and be led jto miscalculate the variations which
would take place beyond the limits; a miscalculation which would vitiate
any conclusion respecting the dependence of the effect upon the cause,
kthatk could Edition: current; Page: [406] be founded on those
variations. Examples are not wanting of such mistakes. “The formulæ,”
says Sir John Herschel,* “which have been empirically deduced for the
elasticity of steam, (till very recently,) and those for the resistance
of fluids, and other similar subjects,” when relied on beyond the limits
of the observations from which they were deduced, “have almost
invariably failed to support the theoretical structures which have been
erected on them.”

lInl this uncertainty, the conclusion we may draw from the concomitant
variations of a and A, to the existence of an invariable and exclusive
connexion between them, or to the permanency of the same numerical
relation between their variations when the quantities are much greater
or smaller than those which we have had the means of observing, cannot
be considered to rest on a complete induction. All that in such a case
can be regarded as proved on the subject of causation is, that there is
some connexion between the two phenomena; that A, or something which can
influence A, must be one of the causes which collectively determine a.
We may, however, feel assured that the relation which we have observed
to exist between the variations of A and a, will hold true in all cases
which fall between the same extreme limits; that is, wherever the utmost
increase or diminution in which the result has been found by observation
to coincide with the law, is not exceeded.

The four methods which it has now been attempted to describe, are the
only possible modes of experimental inquiry—of direct induction à
posteriori, as distinguished from deduction: at least, I know not, nor
am able to mimaginem, any others. And even of these, the Method of
Residues, as we have seen, is not independent of deduction; though, as
it nalson requires specific experienceo, it may, without impropriety, be
included among methods of direct observation and experiment.

These, then, with such assistance as can be obtained from Deduction,
compose the available resources of the human mind for ascertaining the
laws of the succession of phenomena. Before proceeding to point out
certain circumstances, by which the employment of these methods is
subjected to an immense increase of complication and of difficulty, it
is expedient to illustrate the use of the methods, by suitable examples
drawn from actual physical investigations. These, accordingly, will form
the subject of the succeeding chapter.

Edition: current; Page: [407]


CHAPTER IX: Miscellaneous Examples of the Four Methods

§ 1. [Liebig’s theory of metallic poisons] I shall select, as aaa first
example, an interesting speculation of one of the most eminent bof
theoretical chemists, Baronb Liebig.[*] The object in view, is to
ascertain the immediate cause of the death produced by metallic poisons.

cArsenious acid, and the salts of lead, bismuth, copper, and mercury, if
introduced into the animal organism, except in the smallest doses,
destroy life. These facts have long been known, as insulated truths of
the lowest order of generalization; but it was reserved for Liebig, by
an apt employment of the first two of our methods of experimental
inquiry, to connect these truths together by a higher induction,
pointing out what property, common to all these deleterious substances,
is the really operating cause of their fatal effect.

When solutions of these substances are placed in sufficiently close
contact with many animal products, albumen, milk, muscular fibre, and
animal membranes, the acid or salt leaves the water in which it was
dissolved, and enters into combination with the animal substance: which
substance, dafterd being thus acted upon, is found to have lost its
tendency to spontaneous decomposition, or putrefaction.

Observation also shows, in cases where death has been produced by these
poisons, that the parts of the body with which the poisonous substances
have been brought into contact, do not afterwards putrefy.

And, finally, when the poison has been supplied in too small a quantity
to destroy life, eschars are produced, that is, certain superficial
portions of the tissues are destroyed, which are afterwards thrown off
by the reparative process taking place in the healthy parts.

These three sets of instances admit of being treated according to the
Edition: current; Page: [408] Method of Agreement. In all of them the
metallic compounds are brought into contact with the substances which
compose the human or animal body; and the instances do not seem to agree
in any other circumstance. The remaining antecedents are as different,
and even opposite, as they could possibly be made; for in some the
animal substances exposed to the action of the poisons are in a state of
life, in others only in a state of organization, in others not even in
that. And what is the result which follows in all the cases? The
conversion of the animal substance (by combination with the poison) into
a chemical compound, held together by so powerful a force as to resist
the subsequent action of the ordinary causes of decomposition. Now,
organic life (the necessary condition of sensitive life) consisting in a
continual state of decomposition and recomposition of the different
organs and tissues; whatever incapacitates them for this decomposition
destroys life. And thus the proximate cause of the death produced by
this description of poisons, is ascertained, as far as the Method of
Agreement can ascertain it.

Let us now bring our conclusion to the test of the Method of Difference.
Setting out from the cases already mentioned, in which the antecedent is
the presence of substances forming with the tissues a compound incapable
of putrefaction, (and à fortiori incapable of the chemical actions which
constitute life,) and the consequent is death, either of the whole
organism, or of some portion of it; let us compare with these cases
other cases, as much resembling them as possible, but in which that
effect is not produced. And, firste, “many insoluble basic salts of
arsenious acid are known not to be poisonous. The substance called
alkargen, discovered by Bunsen, which contains a very large quantity of
arsenic, and approaches very closely in composition to the organic
arsenious compounds found in the body, has not the slightest injurious
action upon the organism.”[*] Now when these substances are brought into
contact with the tissues in any way, they do not combine with them; they
do not arrest their progress to decomposition. As far, therefore, as
these instances go, it appears that when the effect is absent, it is by
reason of the absence of that antecedent which we had already good
ground for considering as the proximate cause.

But the rigorous conditions of the Method of Difference are not yet
satisfied; for we cannot be sure that these unpoisonous bodies agree
with the poisonous substances in every property, except the particular
one, of entering into a difficultly decomposable compound with the
animal tissues. To render the method strictly applicable, we need an
instance, not of a different substance, but of one of the very same
substances, finf circumstances which would prevent it from forming, with
the tissues, the sort of compound in Edition: current; Page: [409]
question; and then, if death does not follow, our case is made out. Now
such instances are afforded by the antidotes to these poisons. For
example, in case of poisoning by arsenious acid, if hydrated peroxide of
iron is administered, the destructive agency is instantly checked. Now
this peroxide is known to combine with the acid, and form a compound,
which, being insoluble, cannot act at all on animal tissues. So, again,
sugar is a well-known antidote to poisoning by salts of copper; and
sugar reduces those salts either into metallic copper, or into the red
suboxide, neither of which enters into combination with animal matter.
The disease called painter’s colic, so common in manufactories of white
lead, is unknown where the workmen are accustomed to take, as a
preservative, sulphuric acid lemonade (a solution of sugar rendered acid
by sulphuric acid). Now diluted sulphuric acid has the property of
decomposing all compounds of lead with organic matter, gorg of
preventing them from being formed.

There is another class of instances, of the nature required by the
Method of hDifferenceh, which seem at first sight to conflict with the
theory. Soluble salts of silver, such for instance as the nitrate, have
the same stiffening antiseptic effect on decomposing animal substances,
as corrosive sublimate and the most deadly metallic poisons; and when
applied to the external parts of the body, the nitrate is a powerful
caustic, depriving those parts of all active vitality, and causing them
to be thrown off by the neighbouring living structures, in the form of
an eschar. The nitrate and the other salts of silver ought, then, it
would seem, if the theory be correct, to be poisonous; yet they may be
administered internally with perfect impunity. From this apparent
exception arises the strongest confirmation which ithe theoryi has yet
received. Nitrate of silver, in spite of its chemical properties, does
not poison when introduced into the stomach; but in the stomach, as in
all animal liquids, there is common salt; and in the stomach there is
also free muriatic acid. These substances operate as natural antidotes,
combining with the nitrate, and if its quantity is not too great,
immediately converting it into chloride of silver; a substance very
slightly soluble, and therefore incapable of combining with the tissues,
although to the extent of its solubility it has a medicinal influence,
through an entirely different class of organic actions.

jThe preceding instances have afforded an induction of a high order of
conclusiveness, illustrative of the two simplest of our four methods;
though not rising to the maximum of certainty which the Method of
Difference, in its most perfect exemplification, is capable of
affording. For (let us not forget) the positive instance and the
negative one which the rigour of that Edition: current; Page: [410]
method requires, ought to differ only in the presence or absence of one
single circumstance. Now, in the preceding argument, they differ in the
presence or absence not of a single circumstance, but of a single
substance: and as every substance has innumerable properties, there is
no knowing what number of real differences are involved in what is
nominally and apparently only one difference. It is conceivable that the
antidote, the peroxide of iron for example, may counteract the poison
through some other of its properties than that of forming an insoluble
compound with it; and if so, the theory would fall to the ground, so far
as it is supported by that instance. This source of uncertainty, which
is a serious hindrance to all extensive generalizations in chemistry, is
however reduced in the present case to almost the lowest degree
possible, when we find that not only one substance, but many substances,
possess the capacity of acting as antidotes to metallic poisons, and
that all these agree in the property of forming insoluble compounds with
the poisons, while they cannot be ascertained to agree in any other
property whatsoever. We have thus, in favour of the theory, all the
evidence which can be obtained by what we termed the Indirect Method of
Difference, or the Joint Method of Agreement and Difference; the
evidence of which, though it never can amount to that of the Method of
Difference properly so called, may approach indefinitely near to it.k

a§ 2.a [Theory of induced electricityb] Let the object be* to ascertain
the law of what is termed induced electricity; to find under what
conditions any electrified body, whether positively or negatively
electrified, gives rise to a contrary electric state in some other body
adjacent to it.

Edition: current; Page: [411]
The most familiar exemplification of the phenomenon to be investigated
is the following. Around the prime conductors of an electrical machine,
the atmosphere to some distance, or any conducting surface suspended in
that atmosphere, is found to be in an electric condition opposite to
that of the prime conductor itself. Near and around the positive prime
conductor there is negative electricity, and near and around the
negative prime conductor there is positive electricity. When pith balls
are brought near to either of the conductors, they become electrified
with the opposite electricity to it; either receiving a share from the
already electrified atmosphere by conduction, or acted upon by the
direct inductive influence of the conductor itself: they are then
attracted by the conductor to which they are in opposition; or, if
withdrawn in their electrified state, they will be attracted by any
other oppositely charged body. In like manner the hand, if brought near
enough to the conductor, receives or gives an electric discharge; now we
have no evidence that a charged conductor can be suddenly discharged
unless by the approach of a body oppositely electrified. In the case,
therefore, of the eelectrice machine, it appears that the accumulation
of electricity in an insulated conductor is always accompanied by the
excitement of the contrary electricity in the surrounding atmosphere,
and in every conductor placed near the former conductor. It does not
seem possible, in this case, to produce one electricity by itself.

Let us now examine all the other instances which we can obtain,
resembling this instance in the given consequent, namely, the evolution
of an opposite electricity in the neighbourhood of an electrified body.
As one remarkable instance we have the Leyden jar; and after the
splendid experiments of Faraday in complete and final establishment of
the substantial identity of magnetism and electricity, we may cite the
magnet, both the natural and the electro-magnet, in neither of which fit
isf possible to produce one kind of electricity by itself, or to charge
one pole without charging an opposite pole with the contrary electricity
at the same time. We cannot have a magnet with one pole: if we break a
natural loadstone into a thousand pieces, each piece will have its two
oppositely electrified poles complete within itself. In the voltaic
circuitg, again,g we cannot have one current without its opposite. In
the ordinary electric machine, the glass cylinder or plate, and the
rubber, acquire opposite electricities.

From all these instances, treated by the Method of Agreement, a general
law appears to result. The instances embrace all the known modes in
which a body can become charged with electricity; and in all of them
there is found, as a concomitant or consequent, the excitement of the
opposite electric state Edition: current; Page: [412] in some other body
or bodies. It seems to follow that the two facts are invariably
connected, and that the excitement of electricity in any body has for
one of its necessary conditions the possibility of a simultaneous
excitement of the opposite electricity in some neighbouring body.

hAs the two contrary electricities can only be produced together, so
they can only cease together. This may be shown by an application of the
Method of Difference to the example of the Leyden jar. It needs scarcely
be here remarked that inh the Leyden jar, electricity can be accumulated
and retained in considerable quantity, by the contrivance of having two
conducting surfaces of equal extent, and parallel to each other through
the whole of that extent, with a non-conducting substance such as glass
between them. When one side of the jar is charged positively, the other
is charged negatively, and it was by virtue of this fact that the Leyden
jar served just now as an instance in our employment of the Method of
Agreement. iNow it is impossible to discharge one of the coatings unless
the other can be discharged at the same time. A conductor held to the
positive side cannot convey away any electricity unless an equal
quantity be allowed to pass from the negative side: if one coating be
perfectly insulated, the charge is safe. The dissipation of one must
proceedi pari passu with jthat ofj the other.k

lThe law thus strongly indicated admits of corroborationl by the Method
of Concomitant Variations. The Leyden jar is capable of receiving a much
higher charge than can ordinarily be given to the conductor of an
electrical machine. Now in the case of the Leyden jar, the metallic
surface which receives the induced electricity is a conductor exactly
similar to that which receives the primary charge, and is therefore as
susceptible of receiving and retaining the one electricity, as the
opposite surface of receiving and retaining the other; but in the
machine, the neighbouring body which is to be oppositely electrified is
the surrounding atmosphere, or any body casually brought near to the
conductor; and as these are generally much inferior in their capacity of
becoming electrified, to the conductor itself, their limited power
imposes a corresponding limit to the capacity of the conductor for being
charged. As the capacity of the neighbouring body for supporting the
opposition increases, Edition: current; Page: [413] a higher charge
becomes possible: and to this appears to be owing the great superiority
of the Leyden jar.

A further and most decisive confirmation by the Method of Difference, is
to be found in one of Faraday’s experiments in the course of his
researches on the subject of Induced Electricity.[*]

Since common or machine electricity, and voltaic electricity, may be
considered for the present purpose to be identical, Faraday wished to
know whether, as the prime conductor developes opposite electricity upon
a conductor in its vicinity, so a voltaic current running along a wire
would induce an opposite current upon another wire laid parallel to it
at a short distance. Now this case is similar to the cases previously
examined, in every circumstance except the one to which we have ascribed
the effect. We found in the former instances that whenever electricity
of one kind was excited in one body, electricity of the opposite kind
must be excited in a neighbouring bodym. But in Faraday’s experiment
this indispensable opposition exists within the wire itself. From the
nature of a voltaic charge, the two opposite currents necessary to the
existence of each other are both accommodated in one wire; and there is
no need of another wire placed beside it to contain one of them, in the
same way as the Leyden jar must have a positive and a negative surface.
The exciting cause can and does produce all the effect which its laws
require, independently of any electric excitement of a neighbouring
body. Now the result of nthen experiment with the second wire was, that
no opposite current was produced. There was an instantaneous effect at
the closing and breaking of the voltaic circuit; electric inductions
appeared when the two wires were moved to and from one another; but
these are phenomena of a different class. There was no induced
electricity in the sense in which this is predicated of the Leyden jar;
there was no sustained current running up the one wire while an opposite
current ran down the neighbouring wire; and this alone would have been a
true parallel case to the other.

It thus appears by the combined evidence of the Method of Agreement, the
Method of Concomitant Variations, and the most rigorous form of the
Method of Difference, that neither of the two kinds of electricity can
be excited without an equal excitement of the other and opposite kind:
that both are effects of the same cause; that the possibility of the one
is a condition of the possibility of the other, and the quantity of the
one an impassable limit to the quantity of the other. A scientific
result of considerable interest in Edition: current; Page: [414] itself,
and illustrating those three methods in a manner both characteristic and
easily intelligible.*

a§ 3.a [Wells’ theory of dew] Our third example shall be extracted from
Sir John Herschel’s Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy, a work
replete with bhappily-selectedb exemplifications of inductive processes
from almost every department of physical science, and in which alone, of
all books which I have met with, the four methods of induction are
cdistinctly recognised, though not so clearly characterized and defined,
nor their correlation so fully shown,c as has appeared to me desirable.
The present example is ddescribed by Sir John Herschel as “one of the
most beautiful specimens” which can be cited “of inductive experimental
inquiry lying within a moderate compass;”[*] the theory of dew, first
promulgated by the late Dr. Wells,[†] and now universally adopted by
scientific eauthoritiese. fThe passages in inverted commas are extracted
verbatim from gthe Discourse.†g

“Suppose dew were the phenomenon proposed, whose cause we would know. In
the first place” we must determine precisely what we mean by dew: what
the fact really is, whose cause we desire to investigate. “We must
separate dew from rain, and the moisture of fogs, and limit the
application Edition: current; Page: [415] of the term to what is really
meant, which is the spontaneous appearance of moisture on substances
exposed in the open air when no rain or visible wet is falling.” This
answers to a preliminary operation which will be characterized in the
ensuing book, treating of operations subsidiary to induction.*h

“Now, here we have analogous phenomena in the moisture which bedews a
cold metal or stone when we breathe upon it; that which appears on a
glass of water fresh from the well in hot weather; that which appears on
the inside of windows when sudden rain or hail chills the external air;
that which runs down our walls when, after a long frost, a warm moist
thaw comes on.” Comparing these cases, we find that they all contain the
phenomenon which was proposed as the subject of investigation. Now “all
these instances agree in one point, the coldness of the object dewed, in
comparison with the air in contact with it.” But there still remains the
most important case of all, that of nocturnal dew: does the same
circumstance exist in this case? “Is it a fact that the object dewed is
colder than the air? Certainly not, one would at first be inclined to
say; for what is to make it so? But . . . the experiment is easy: we
have only to lay a thermometer in contact with the dewed substance, and
hang one at a little distance above it, out of reach of its influence.
The experiment has been therefore made, the question has been asked, and
the answer has been invariably in the affirmative. Whenever an object
contracts dew, it is colder than the air.”

Here then is a complete application of the Method of Agreement,
establishing the fact of an invariable connexion between the deposition
of dew on a surface, and the coldness of that surface compared with the
external air. But which of these is cause, and which effect? or are they
both effects of something else? On this subject the Method of Agreement
can afford us no light: we must call in a more potent method. i“We musti
collect more facts, or, which comes to the same thing, vary the
circumstances; since every instance in which the circumstances differ is
a fresh fact: and especially, we must note the contrary or negative
cases, i.e. where no dew is produced:” ja comparison between instances
of dew and instances of no dew, kbeingk the condition necessary to bring
the Method of Difference into play.

“Now, first, no dew is produced on the surface of polished metals, but
it is very copiously on glass, both exposed with their faces upwards,
and in some Edition: current; Page: [416] cases the under side of a
horizontal plate of glass is also dewed.” lHere is an instance in which
the effect is produced, and another instance in which it is not
produced; but we cannot yet pronounce, as the canon of the Method of
Difference requires, that the latter instance agrees with the former in
all its circumstances except one; for the differences between glass and
polished metals are manifold, and the only thing we can as yet be sure
of is, that the cause of dew will be found among the circumstances by
which the former substance is distinguished from the latter. But if we
could be sure that glass, and the various other substances on which dew
is deposited, have only one quality in common, and that polished metals
and the other substances on which dew is not deposited have also nothing
in common but mthe one circumstance,m of not having the one quality
which the others have; the requisitions of the Method of Difference
would be completely satisfied, and we should recognise, in that quality
of the substances, the cause of dew. This, accordingly, is the path of
inquiry which is next to be pursued.

“In the cases of polished metal and polished glass, the contrast shows
evidently that the substance has much to do with the phenomenon;
therefore let the substance alone be diversified as much as possible, by
exposing polished surfaces of various kinds. This done, a scale of
intensity becomes obvious. Those polished substances are found to be
most strongly dewed which conduct heat worst; while those which conduct
well, resist dew most effectually.” The complication increases; here is
the Method of Concomitant Variations called to our assistance; and no
other method was practicable on this occasion; for the quality of
conducting heat could not be excluded, since all substances conduct heat
in some degree. The conclusion obtained is, that cæteris paribus the
deposition of dew is in some proportion to the power which the body
possesses of resisting the passage of heat; and that this, therefore,
(or something connected with this,) must be at least one of the causes
which assist in producing the deposition of dew on the surface.

“But if we expose rough surfaces instead of polished, we sometimes find
this law interfered with. Thus, roughened iron, especially if painted
over or blackened, becomes dewed sooner than varnished paper; the kind
of surface, therefore, has a great influence. Expose, then, the same
material in very diversified states as to surface,” (that is, employ the
Method of Difference to ascertain concomitance of variations,) “and
another scale of intensity becomes Edition: current; Page: [417] at once
apparent; those surfaces which part with their heat most readily by
radiation, are found to contract dew most copiously.” Here, therefore,
are the requisites for a second employment of the Method of Concomitant
Variations; which in this case also is the only method available, since
all substances radiate heat in some degree or other. The conclusion
obtained by this new application of the method is, that cæteris paribus
the deposition of dew is also in some proportion to the power of
radiating heat; and that the quality of doing this abundantly (or some
cause on which that quality depends) is another of the causes which
promote the deposition of dew on the substance.

“Again, the influence ascertained to exist of substance and surface
leads us to consider that of texture: and here, again, we are presented
on trial with remarkable differences, and with a third scale of
intensity, pointing out substances of a close firm texture, such as
stones, metals, &c., as unfavourable, but those of a loose one, as
cloth, nvelvet, wool,n eider-down, cotton, &c., as eminently favourable
to the contraction of dew.” The Method of Concomitant Variations is
here, for the third time, had recourse to; and, as before, from
necessity, since the texture of no substance is absolutely firm or
absolutely loose. Looseness of texture, therefore, or something which is
the cause of that quality, is another circumstance which promotes the
deposition of dew; but this third cause resolves itself into the first,
viz. the quality of resisting the passage of heat: for substances of
loose texture “are precisely those which are best adapted for clothing,
or for impeding the free passage of heat from the skin into the air, so
as to allow their outer surfaces to be very cold, while they remain warm
within;” and this last is, therefore, an induction (from fresh
instances) simply corroborative of a former induction.

It thus appears that the instances in which much dew is deposited,
owhich are very various, agree in this, and, so far as we are able to
observe, in this only, that they either radiate heat rapidly or conduct
it slowly: qualities between which there is no other circumstance of
agreement, than that by virtue of either, the body tends to lose heat
from the surface more rapidly than it can be restored from within. The
instances, on the contrary, in which no dew, or but a small quantity of
it, is formed, and which are also extremely various, agree (pasp far as
we can observe) in nothing except in not having this same property. We
seem, therefore, to have detected the qcharacteristicq difference
between the substances on which dew is produced, and those on which it
is not produced. And thus have been realized the requisitions of what we
have termed the Indirect Method of Difference, or the Joint Method
Edition: current; Page: [418] of Agreement and Difference. The example
afforded of this indirect method, and of the manner in which the data
are prepared for it by the Methods of Agreement and of Concomitant
Variations, is the most important of all the illustrations of induction
afforded by this rinteresting speculation.

We might now consider the question, on what the deposition of dew
depends, to be completely solved, if we could be quite sure that the
substances on which dew is produced differ from those on which it is
not, in nothing but in the property of losing heat from the surface
faster than the loss can be repaired from within. And though we never
can have that complete certainty, this is not of so much importance as
might at first be supposed; for we have, at all events, ascertained that
even if there be any other quality hitherto unobserved which is present
in all the substances which contract dew, and absent in those which do
not, this other property must be one which, in all that great number of
substances, is present or absent exactly where the property of being a
better radiator than conductor is present or absent; an extent of
coincidence which affords sa strongs presumption of a community of
cause, and a consequent invariable coexistence between the two
properties; so that the property of being a better radiator than
conductor, if not itself the cause, almost certainly always accompanies
the cause, and, for purposes of prediction, no error tis likely tot be
committed by treating it as if it were really such.

Reverting now to an earlier stage of the inquiry, let us remember that
we had ascertained that, in every instance where dew is formed, there is
actual coldness of the surface below the temperature of the surrounding
air; but we were not sure whether this coldness was the cause of dew, or
its effect. This doubt we are now able to resolve. We have found that,
in every such instance, the substance uisu one which, by its own
properties or laws, would, if exposed in the night, become colder than
the surrounding air. vThe coldness therefore being accounted for
independently of the dew, while it is proved that there is a connexion
between the two, it must be the dew which depends on the coldness; or in
other words, the coldness is the cause of the dew.v

Edition: current; Page: [419]
This law of causation, already so amply established, admits, however, of
wefficient additional corroboration in no less than three ways. First,
by deduction from the known laws of aqueous vapour when diffused through
air or any other gas; and though we have not yet come to the Deductive
Method, we will not omit what is necessary to render this speculation
complete. It is known by direct experiment that only a limited quantity
xof waterx can remain suspended in the state of vapour at each degree of
temperature, and that this maximum grows less and less as the
temperature diminishes. From this it follows, deductively, that if there
is already as much vapour suspended as the air will contain at its
existing temperature, any lowering of that temperature will cause a
portion of the vapour to be condensed, and become water. But, again, we
know deductively, from the laws of heat, that the contact of the air
with a body colder than itself, will necessarily lower the temperature
of the stratum of air immediately applied to its surface; and will
therefore cause it to part with a portion of its water, which
accordingly will, by the ordinary laws of gravitation or cohesion,
attach itself to the surface of the bodyy, thereby constituting dewy.
This deductive proof, it will have been seen, has the advantage of zat
once provingz causation as well as coexistence; and it has the
additional advantage that it also accounts for the exceptions to the
occurrence of the phenomenon, the cases in which, although the body is
colder than the air, yet no dew is deposited; by showing that this will
necessarily be the case when the air is so under-supplied with aqueous
vapour, comparatively to its temperature, that even when somewhat cooled
by the contact of the colder body, it can still continue to hold in
suspension all the vapour which was previously suspended in it: thus in
a very dry summer there are no dews, in a very dry winter no hoar frost.
Here, therefore, is an additional condition of the production of dew,
which the methods we previously made use of failed to detect, and which
might have remained astilla undetected, if recourse had not been had to
the plan of deducing the effect from the ascertained properties of the
agents known to be present.

The second corroboration of the theory is by direct experiment,
according to the canon of the Method of Difference. We can, by cooling
the surface of any body, find in all cases some temperature, (more or
less inferior to that of the surrounding air, according to its
hygrometric condition,) at which dew will begin to be deposited. Here,
too, therefore, the causation is directly proved. We can, it is true,
accomplish this only on a small scale; but we have ample reason to
conclude that the same operation, if conducted in Nature’s great
laboratory, would equally produce the effect.

Edition: current; Page: [420]
And, finally, even on that great scale we are able to verify the result.
The case is one of those rare cases, as we have shown them to be, in
which nature works the experiment for us in the same manner in which we
ourselves perform it; introducing into the previous state of things a
single and perfectly definite new circumstance, and manifesting the
effect so rapidly that there is not time for any other material change
in the pre-existing circumstances. b“It is observed that dew is never
copiously deposited in situations much screened from the open sky, and
not at all in a cloudy night; but if the clouds withdraw even for a few
minutes, and leave a clear opening, a deposition of dew presently
begins, and goes on increasing. . . . Dew formed in clear intervals will
often even evaporate again when the sky becomes thickly overcast.”[*]
The proof, therefore, is complete, that the presence or absence of an
uninterrupted communication with the sky causes the deposition or
nondeposition of dew. Now, since a clear sky is nothing but the absence
of clouds, and it is a known property of clouds, as of all other bodies
between which and any given object nothing intervenes but an elastic
fluid, that they tend to raise or keep up the superficial temperature of
the object by radiating heat to it, we see at once that the
disappearance of clouds will cause the surface to cool; so that Nature,
in this case, produces a change in the antecedent by definite and known
means, and the consequent follows accordingly: a natural experiment
which satisfies the requisitions of the Method of Difference.*

Edition: current; Page: [421]
The accumulated proof of which the Theory of Dew has been found
susceptible, is a striking einstancee of the fulness of assurance which
the inductive evidence of laws of causation may attain, in cases in
which the invariable sequence is by no means obvious to a superficial
view.f

a§ 4. [Brown-Séquard’s theory of cadaveric rigidity] The admirable
physiological investigations of Dr. Brown-Séquard afford brilliant
examples of the application of the Inductive Methods to a class of
inquiries in which, for reasons which will presently be given, direct
induction takes place under peculiar difficulties and disadvantages. As
one of the most apt instances, I select his speculation (in the
Proceedings of the Royal Society for May 16, 1861) on the relations
between muscular irritability, cadaveric rigidity, and putrefaction.

The law which Dr. Brown-Séquard’s investigation tends to establish, is
the following: “The greater the degree of muscular irritability at the
time of death, the later the cadaveric rigidity sets in, and the longer
it lasts, and the later also putrefaction appears, and the slower it
progresses.”[*] bOne would say at first sight thatb the method here
required must be that of Concomitant Variations. But this is a delusive
appearance, arising from the circumstance that the conclusion to be
tested is itself a fact of concomitant cvariationsc. For the
establishment of that fact any of the Methods may be put in requisition,
and it will be found that the fourth Method, though really employed, has
only a subordinate place in this particular investigation.

The evidences by which Dr. Brown-Séquard establishes the law may be
enumerated as follows:

1st. Paralysed muscles have greater irritability than healthy muscles.
Now, paralysed muscles are later in assuming the cadaveric rigidity than
healthy muscles, the rigidity lasts longer, and putrefaction sets in
later, and proceeds more slowly.

Both these propositions had to be proved by experiment; and for the
experiments which prove them, science is also indebted to Dr.
Brown-Séquard. The former of the two—that paralysed muscles have greater
irritability Edition: current; Page: [422] than healthy muscles—he
ascertained in various ways, but most decisively by “comparing the
duration of irritability in a paralysed muscle and in the corresponding
healthy one of the opposite side, while they are both submitted to the
same excitation.”[*] He “often found in experimenting in that way, that
the paralysed muscle remained irritable twice, three times, or even four
times as long as the healthy one.”[†] This is a case of induction by the
Method of Difference. The two limbs, being those of the same animal,
were presumed to differ in no circumstance material to the case except
the paralysis, to the presence and absence of which, therefore, the
difference in the muscular irritability was to be attributed. This
assumption of complete resemblance in all material circumstances save
one, evidently could not be safely made in any one pair of experiments,
because the two legs of any given animal might be accidentally in very
different pathological conditions; but if, besides taking pains to avoid
any such difference, the experiment was repeated sufficiently often in
different animals to exclude the supposition that any abnormal
circumstance could be present in them all, the conditions of the Method
of Difference were adequately secured.

In the same manner in which Dr. Brown-Séquard proved that paralysed
muscles have greater irritability, he also proved the correlative
proposition respecting cadaveric rigidity and putrefaction.[‡] Having,
by section of the roots of the sciatic nerve, and again of a lateral
half of the spinal cord, produced paralysis in one hind leg of an animal
while the other remained healthy, he found that not only did muscular
irritability last much longer in the paralysed limb, but rigidity set in
later and ended later, and putrefaction began later and was less rapid
than on the healthy side. This is a common case of the Method of
Difference, requiring no comment. A further and very important
corroboration was obtained by the same method. When the animal was
killed, not shortly after the section of the nerve, but a month later,
the effect was reversed; rigidity set in sooner, and lasted a shorter
time, than in the healthy muscles. But after this lapse of time, the
paralysed muscles, having been kept by the paralysis in a state of rest,
had lost a great part of their irritability, and instead of more, had
become less irritable than those on the healthy side. This gives the A B
C, a b c, and B C, b c, of the Method of Difference. One antecedent,
increased irritability, being changed, and the other circumstances being
the same, the consequence did not follow; and moreover, when a new
antecedent, contrary to the first, was supplied, it was followed by a
contrary consequent. This instance is attended with the special
advantage, of proving that the retardation and prolongation of the
rigidity do not depend directly on the paralysis, since that was the
same in both the Edition: current; Page: [423] instances; but
specifically on one effect of the paralysis, namely, the increased
irritability; since they ceased when it ceased, and were reversed when
it was reversed.

2ndly. Diminution of the temperature of muscles before death increases
their irritability. But diminution of their temperature also retards
cadaveric rigidity and putrefaction.

Both these truths were first made known by Dr. Brown-Séquard himself,[*]
through experiments which conclude according to the Method of
Difference. There is nothing in the nature of the process requiring
specific analysis.

3rdly. Muscular exercise, prolonged to exhaustion, diminishes the
muscular irritability.[†] This is a well-known truth, dependent on the
most general laws of muscular action, and proved by experiments under
the Method of Difference, constantly repeated. Now it has been shown by
observation that overdriven cattle, if killed before recovery from their
fatigue, become rigid and putrefy in a surprisingly short time. A
similar fact has been observed in the case of animals hunted to death;
cocks killed during or shortly after a fight; and soldiers slain in the
field of battle. These various cases agree in no circumstance, directly
connected with the muscles, except that these have just been subjected
to exhausting exercise. Under the canon, therefore, of the Method of
Agreement, it may be inferred that there is a connexion between the two
facts. The Method of Agreement, indeed, as has been shown, is not
competent to prove causation. The present case, however, is already
known to be a case of causation, it being certain that the state of the
body after death must somehow depend upon its state at the time of
death. We are therefore warranted in concluding that the single
circumstance in which all the instances agree, is the part of the
antecedent which is the cause of that particular consequent.

4thly. In proportion as the nutrition of muscles is in a good state,
their irritability is high.[‡] This fact also rests on the general
evidence of the laws of physiology, grounded on many familiar
applications of the Method of Difference. Now, in the case of those who
die from accident or violence, with their muscles in a good state of
nutrition, the muscular irritability continues long after death,
rigidity sets in late, and persists long without the putrefactive
change. On the contrary, in cases of disease in which nutrition has been
diminished for a long time before death, all these effects are reversed.
These are the conditions of the Joint Method of Agreement and
Difference. The cases of retarded and long continued rigidity here in
question, agree only in being preceded by a high state of nutrition of
the muscles; the cases of rapid Edition: current; Page: [424] and brief
rigidity agree only in being preceded by a low state of muscular
nutrition; a connexion is therefore inductively proved between the
degree of the nutrition, and the slowness and prolongation of the
rigidity.

5thly. Convulsions, like exhausting exercise, but in a still greater
degree, diminish the muscular irritability. Now, when death follows
violent and prolonged convulsions, as in tetanus, hydrophobia, some
cases of cholera, and certain poisons, rigidity sets in very rapidly,
and after a very brief duration, gives place to putrefaction. This is
another example of the Method of Agreement, of the same character with
No. 3.

6thly. The series of instances which we shall take last, is of a more
complex character, and requires a more minute analysis.

It has long been observed that in some cases of death by lightning,
cadaveric rigidity either does not take place at all, or is of such
extremely brief duration as to escape notice, and that in these cases
putrefaction is very rapid. In other cases, however, the usual cadaveric
rigidity appears. There must be some difference in the cause, to account
for this difference in the effect. Now “death by lightning may be the
result of, 1st, a syncope by fright, or in consequence of a direct or
reflex influence of lightning on the par vagum; 2ndly, hemorrhage in or
around the brain, or in the lungs, the pericardium, &c.; 3rdly,
concussion, or some other alteration in the brain;”[*] none of which
phenomena have any known property capable of accounting for the
suppression, or almost suppression, of the cadaveric rigidity. But the
cause of death may also be that the lightning produces “a violent
convulsion of every muscle in the body,” of which, if of sufficient
intensity, the known effect would be that “muscular irritability ceases
almost at once.”[†] If Dr. Brown-Séquard’s generalization is a true law,
these will be the very cases in which rigidity is so much abridged as to
escape notice; and the cases in which, on the contrary, rigidity takes
place as usual, will be those in which the stroke of lightning operates
in some of the other modes which have been enumerated. How, then, is
this brought to the test? By experiments not on lightning, which cannot
be commanded at pleasure, but on the same natural agency in a manageable
form, that of artificial galvanism. Dr. Brown-Séquard galvanized the
entire bodies of animals immediately after death. Galvanism cannot
operate in any of the modes in which the stroke of lightning may have
operated, except the single one of producing muscular convulsions. If,
therefore, after the bodies have been galvanized, the duration of
rigidity is much shortened and putrefaction much accelerated, it is
reasonable to ascribe the same effects when produced by lightning, to
the property which galvanism shares with lightning, and not to those
which it does not. Now this Dr. Brown-Séquard found to be the fact. The
galvanic experiment was tried with Edition: current; Page: [425] charges
of very various degrees of strength; and the more powerful the charge,
the shorter was found to be the duration of rigidity, and the more
speedy and rapid the putrefaction. In the experiment in which the charge
was strongest, and the muscular irritability most promptly destroyed,
the rigidity only lasted fifteen minutes.[*] On the principle,
therefore, of the Method of Concomitant Variations, it may be inferred
that the duration of the rigidity depends on the degree of the
irritability; and that if the charge had been as much stronger than Dr.
Brown-Séquard’s strongest, as a stroke of lightning must be stronger
than any electric shock which we can produce artificially, the rigidity
would have been shortened in a corresponding ratio, and might have
disappeared altogether. This conclusion having been arrived at, the case
of an electric shock, whether natural or artificial, becomes an instance
in addition to all those already ascertained, of correspondence between
the irritability of the muscle and the duration of rigidity.

All these instances are summed up in the following statement: “That when
the degree of muscular irritability at the time of death is
considerable, either in consequence of a good state of nutrition, as in
persons who die in full health from an accidental cause, or in
consequence of rest, as in cases of paralysis, or on account of the
influence of cold, cadaveric rigidity in all these cases sets in late
and lasts long, and putrefaction appears late, and progresses slowly:”
but “that when the degree of muscular irritability at the time of death
is slight, either in consequence of a bad state of nutrition, or of
exhaustion from over-exertion, or from convulsions caused by disease or
poison, cadaveric rigidity sets in and ceases soon, and putrefaction
appears and progresses quickly.”[†] These facts present, in all their
completeness, the conditions of the Joint Method of Agreement and
Difference. Early and brief rigidity takes place in cases which agree
only in the circumstance of a low state of muscular irritability.
Rigidity begins late and lasts long in cases which agree only in the
contrary circumstance, of a muscular irritability high and unusually
prolonged. It follows that there is a connexion through causation
between the degree of muscular irritability after death, and the
tardiness and prolongation of the cadaveric rigidity.

dThis investigation places in a strong light the value and efficacy of
the Joint Method. For, as we have already seen, the defect of that
Method is, that like the Method of Agreement, of which it is only an
improved form, it cannot prove causation. But in the present case (as in
one of the steps in the argument which led up to it) causation is
already proved; since there could never be any doubt that the rigidity
altogether, and the putrefaction which follows it, are caused by the
fact of death: the observations and experiments Edition: current; Page:
[426] on which this rests are too familiar to need analysis, and fall
under the Method of Difference. It being, therefore, beyond doubt that
the aggregate antecedent, the death, is the actual cause of the whole
train of consequents, whatever of the circumstances attending the death
can be shown to be followed in all its variations by variations in the
effect under investigation, must be the particular feature of the fact
of death on which that effect depends. The degree of muscular
irritability at the time of death fulfils this condition. The only point
that could be brought into question, would be whether the effect
depended on the irritability itself, or on something which always
accompanied the irritability: and this doubt is set at rest by
establishing, as the instances do, that by whatever cause the high or
low irritability is produced, the effect equally follows; and cannot,
therefore, depend upon the causes of irritability, nor upon the other
effects of those causes, which are as various as the causes themselves;
but upon the irritability, solely.a

a§ 5.a [Examples of the Method of Residues] bThe last two examples will
have conveyed to any one by whom they haveb been duly followed, so clear
a conception of the use and practical management of three of the four
methods of experimental inquiry, as to supersede the necessity of any
further exemplification of them. The remaining method, that of Residues,
not having found ca place in any of thec preceding investigations, I
shall dquoted from Sir John Herschel some examples of that method, with
the remarks by which they are introduced.

It is by this process, in fact, that science, in its present advanced
state, is chiefly promoted. Most of the phenomena which Nature presents
are very complicated; and when the effects of all known causes are
estimated with exactness, and subducted, the residual facts are
constantly appearing in the form of phenomena altogether new, and
leading to the most important conclusions.

For example: the return of the comet predicted by Professor Encke, a
great many times in succession, and the general good agreement of its
calculated with its observed place during any one of its periods of
visibility, would lead us to say that its gravitation towards the sun
and planets is the sole and sufficient cause of all the phenomena of its
orbitual motion; but when the effect of this cause is strictly
calculated and subducted from the observed motion, there is found to
remain behind a residual phenomenon, which would never have been
otherwise ascertained to exist, which is a small anticipation of the
time of its reappearance, or a diminution of its periodic time, which
cannot be accounted for by gravity, and whose cause is therefore to be
inquired into. Such an anticipation would be caused by the resistance of
a medium disseminated through the celestial regions; Edition: current;
Page: [427] and as there are other good reasons for believing this to be
a vera causa, [an actually existing antecedent,] it has therefore been
ascribed to such a resistance.*

M. Arago, having suspended a magnetic needle by a silk thread, and set
it in vibration, observed, that it came much sooner to a state of rest
when suspended over a plate of copper, than when no such plate was
beneath it. Now, in both cases there were two veræ causæ [antecedents
known to exist] why it should come at length to rest, viz. the
resistance of the air, which opposes, and at length destroys, all
motions performed in it; and the want of perfect mobility in the silk
thread. But the effect of these causes being exactly known by the
observation made in the absence of the copper, and being thus allowed
for and subducted, a residual phenomenon appeared, in the fact that a
retarding influence was exerted by the copper itself; and this fact,
once ascertained, speedily led to the knowledge of an entirely new and
unexpected class of relations.[*]

This example belongs, however, not to the Method of Residues but to the
Method of Difference, the law being ascertained by a direct comparison
of the results of two experiments, which differed in nothing but the
presence or absence of the plate of copper. To have made it exemplify
the Method of Residues, the effect of the resistance of the air and that
of the rigidity of the silk should have been calculated à priori, from
the laws obtained by separate and foregone experiments.

Unexpected and peculiarly striking confirmations of inductive laws
frequently occur in the form of residual phenomena, in the course of
investigations of a widely different nature from those which gave rise
to the inductions themselves. A very elegant example may be cited in the
unexpected confirmation of the law of the development of heat in elastic
fluids by compression, which is afforded by the phenomena of sound. The
inquiry into the cause of sound had led to conclusions respecting its
mode of propagation, from which its velocity in the air could be
precisely calcuated. The calculations were performed; but, when compared
with fact, though the agreement was quite sufficient to show the general
correctness of the cause and mode of propagation assigned, yet the whole
velocity could not be shown to arise from this theory. There was still a
residual velocity to be accounted for, which placed dynamical
philosophers for a long time in a great dilemma. At length Laplace
struck on the happy idea, that this might arise from the heat developed
in the act of that condensation which necessarily takes place at every
vibration by which sound is conveyed. The matter was subjected to exact
calculation, and the result was at once the complete explanation of the
residual phenomenon, and a striking confirmation of the general law of
the development of heat by compression, under circumstances beyond
artificial imitation.[†]

Many of the new elements of chemistry have been detected in the
investigation of residual phenomena. Thus Arfwedson discovered lithia by
perceiving an excess of weight in the sulphate produced from a small
portion of what he considered Edition: current; Page: [428] sidered as
magnesia present in a mineral he had analysed. It is on this principle,
too, that the small concentrated residues of great operations in the
arts are almost sure to be the lurking places of new chemical
ingredients: witness iodine, brome, selenium, and the new metals
accompanying platina in the experiments of Wollaston and Tennant. It was
a happy thought of Glauber to examine what everybody else threw away.*

eAlmost all the greatest discoveries in Astronomy, [says the same
author,]† have resulted from the consideration of residual phenomena of
a quantitative or numerical kind. . . . It was thus that the grand
discovery of the precession of the equinoxes resulted as a residual
phenomenon, from the imperfect explanation of the return of the seasons
by the return of the sun to the same apparent place among the fixed
stars. Thus, also, aberration and nutation resulted as residual
phenomena from that portion of the changes of the apparent places of the
fixed stars which was left unaccounted for by precession. And thus again
the apparent proper motions of the stars are the observed residues of
their apparent movements outstanding and unaccounted for by strict
calculation of the effects of precession, nutation, and aberration. The
nearest approach which human theories can make to perfection is to
diminish this residue, this caput mortuum of observation, as it may be
considered, as much as practicable, and, if possible, to reduce it to
nothing, either by showing that something has been neglected in our
estimation of known causes, or by reasoning upon it as a new fact, and
on the principle of the inductive philosophy ascending from the effect
to its cause or causes.e

The disturbing effects mutually produced by the earth and planets upon
each other’s motions were first brought to light as residual phenomena,
by the difference which appeared between the observed places of those
bodies, and the places calculated on a consideration solely of their
gravitation towards the sun. It was this which determined fastronomersf
to consider the law of gravitation as obtaining between all bodies
whatever, and therefore between all particles of matter; their first
tendency having been to regard it as a force acting only between each
planet or satellite and the central body to whose system it belonged.
Again, the catastrophists, in geology, be their opinion right or wrong,
support it on the plea, that after the effect of all causes now in
operation has been allowed for, there remains in the existing
constitution of the earth a large residue of facts, proving the
existence at former periods either of other forces, or of the same
forces in a much greater degree of intensity. To add one more example:
gthose who assert, what no one has shown any real ground for believingg,
that there is in one human individual, Edition: current; Page: [429] one
sex, or one race of mankind over another, an inherent and inexplicable
superiority in mental faculties, hcould only substantiate their
propositionh by subtracting from the differences of intellect which we
in fact see, all that can be traced by known laws either to the
ascertained differences of physical organization, or to the differences
which have existed in the outward circumstances in which the subjects of
the comparison have hitherto been placed. What these causes might fail
to account for, would constitute a residual phenomenon, which and which
alone would be evidence of an ulterior original distinction, and the
measure of its amount. But the iassertors of such supposed differences
have not providedi themselves with these jnecessary logical conditions
of the establishment of their doctrine.

The spirit of the Method of Residues being, it is hoped, sufficiently
intelligible from these examples, and the other three methods having
kalready been so fully exemplifiedk, we may here close our exposition of
the four methods, considered as employed in the investigation of the
simpler and more elementary order of the combinations of phenomena.

ab§ 6.b [Whewell’s objections to the Four Methods] Dr. Whewell chas
expressedc a very unfavourable opinion of the utility of the Four
Methods, as well as of the aptness of the examples by which I have
attempted to illustrate them. His words are these:*

Upon these methods, the obvious thing to remark is, that they take for
granted the very thing which is most difficult to discover, the
reduction of the phenomena to formulæ such as are here presented to us.
When we have any set of complex facts offered to us; for instance, those
which were offered in the cases of discovery which I have mentioned,—the
facts of the planetary paths, of falling bodies, of refracted rays, of
cosmical motions, of chemical analysis; and when, in any of these cases,
we would discover the law of nature which governs them, or, if any one
chooses so to term it, the feature in which all the cases agree, where
are we to look for our A, B, C, and a, b, c? Nature does not present to
us the cases in this form; and how are we to reduce them to this form?
You say, when we find the combination of A B C with a b c and A B D with
a b d, then we may draw our inference. Granted; but when and where are
we to find such combinations? Even now that the discoveries are made,
who will point out to us what Edition: current; Page: [430] are the A,
B, C, and a, b, c elements of the cases which have just been enumerated?
Who will tell us which of the methods of inquiry those historically real
and successful inquiries exemplify? Who will carry these formulæ through
the history of the sciences, as they have really grown up; and show us
that these four methods have been operative in their formation; or that
any light is thrown upon the steps of their progress by reference to
these formulæ?

He adds that, in this work, the methods have not been applied “to a
large body of conspicuous and undoubted examples of discovery, extending
along the whole history of science;” which ought to have been done in
order that the methods might be shown to possess the “advantage” (which
he claims as belonging to his own) of being those “by which all great
discoveries in science have really been made.” (Pp. 264, 277.)

There is a striking similarity between the objections here made against
Canons of Induction, and what was alleged, in the last century, by as
able men as Dr. Whewell, against the acknowledged Canon of
Ratiocination. Those who protested against the Aristotelian Logic said
of the Syllogism, what Dr. Whewell says of the Inductive Methods, that
it “takes for granted the very thing which is most difficult to
discover, the reduction of the argument to formulæ such as are here
presented to us.” The grand difficulty, they said, is to obtain your
syllogism, not to judge of its correctness when obtained. On the matter
of fact, both they and Dr. Whewell are right. The greatest difficulty in
both cases is first that of obtaining the evidence, and next, of
reducing it to the form which tests its conclusiveness. But if we try
dto reduce it without knowing ewhat it is to be reduced toe, we are not
likely to make much progress. It is a more difficult thing to solve a
geometrical problem, than to judge whether a proposed solution is
correct: but if people were not able to judge of the solution when
found, they would have little chance of finding it. And it cannot be
pretended that to judge of an induction when found, is perfectly easy,
is a thing for which aids and instruments are superfluous; for erroneous
inductions, false inferences from experience, are quite as common, on
some subjects much commoner, than true ones. The business of Inductive
Logic is to provide rules and models (such as the Syllogism and its
rules are for ratiocination) to which if inductive arguments conform,
those arguments are conclusive, and not otherwise. This is what the Four
Methods profess to be, and what I believe they are universally
considered to be by experimental philosophers, who had practised all of
them long before any one sought to reduce the practice to theory.

The assailants of the Syllogism had also anticipated Dr. Whewell in the
other branch of his argument. They said that no discoveries were ever
made by syllogism; and Dr. Whewell says, or seems to say, that none were
ever Edition: current; Page: [431] made by the four Methods of
Induction. To the former objectors, Archbishop Whately very pertinently
answered, that their argument, if good at all, was good against the
reasoning process altogether; for whatever cannot be reduced to
syllogism, is not reasoning. And Dr. Whewell’s argument, if good at all,
is good against all inferences from experience. In saying that no
discoveries were ever made by the four Methods, he affirms that none
were ever made by observation and experiment; for assuredly if any were,
it was by fprocesses reducible tof one or other of those methods.

This difference between us accounts for the dissatisfaction which my
examples give him; for I did not select them with a view to satisfy any
one who required to be convinced that observation and experiment are
modes of acquiring knowledge: I confess that in the choice of them I
thought only of illustration, and of facilitating the conception of the
Methods by concrete instances. If it had been my object to justify the
processes themselves as means of investigation, there would have been no
need to look far off, or make use of recondite or complicated instances.
As a specimen of a truth ascertained by the Method of Agreement, I might
have chosen the proposition “Dogs bark.” This dog, and that dog, and the
other dog, answer to A B C, A D E, A F G. The circumstance of being a
dog, answers to A. Barking answers to a. As a truth made known by the
Method of Difference, “Fire burns” might have sufficed. Before I touch
the fire I am not burnt; this is B C; I touch it, and am burnt; this is
A B C, a B C.

Such familiar experimental processes are not regarded as inductions by
Dr. Whewell; but they are perfectly homogeneous with those by which,
even on his own showing, the pyramid of science is supplied with its
base. In vain he attempts to escape from this gconclusiong by laying the
most arbitrary restrictions on the choice of examples admissible as
instances of Induction: they must neither be such as are still matter of
discussion (p. 265), nor must any of them be drawn from mental and
social subjects (p. 269), nor from ordinary observation and practical
life (pp. 241-7). They must be taken exclusively from the
generalizations by which scientific thinkers have ascended to great and
comprehensive laws of natural phenomena. Now it is seldom possible, in
these complicated inquiries, to go much beyond the initial steps,
without calling in the instrument of Deduction, and the temporary aid of
hypotheses; as I myself, in common with Dr. Whewell, have maintained
against the purely empirical school. Since therefore such cases could
not conveniently be selected to illustrate the principles of mere
observation and experiment, Dr. Whewell his misled by their absence into
representingh the Experimental Methods as serving no purpose in
scientific Edition: current; Page: [432] investigation; forgetting that
if those methods had not supplied the first generalizations, there would
have been no materials for his own conception of Induction to work upon.

His challenge, however, to point out which of the four methods are
exemplified in certain important cases of scientific inquiry,[*] is
easily answered. “The planetary paths,” as far as they are a case of
induction at all,* fall under the Method of Agreement. The law of
“falling bodies,” namely that they describe spaces proportional to the
squares of the times, was historically a deduction from the first law of
motion; but the experiments by which it was verified, and by which it
might have been discovered, were examples of the Method of Agreement;
and the apparent variation from the true law, caused by the resistance
of the air, was cleared up by experiments in vacuo, constituting an
application of the Method of Difference. The law of “refracted rays”
(the constancy of the ratio between the sines of incidence and of
refraction for each refracting substance) was ascertained by direct
measurement, and therefore by the Method of Agreement. The “cosmical
motions” were determined by highly complex processes of thought, in
which Deduction was predominant, but the Methods of Agreement and of
Concomitant Variations had a large part in establishing the empirical
laws. Every case without exception of “chemical analysis” constitutes a
well-marked example of the Method of Difference. To any one acquainted
with the subjects—to Dr. Whewell himself, there would not be the
smallest difficulty in setting out “the A B C and a b c elements” of
these cases.

If discoveries are ever made by observation and experiment without
Deduction, the four methods are methods of discovery: but even if they
were not methods of discovery, it would not be the less true that they
are the sole methods of Proof; and in that character, even the results
of deduction are amenable to them. The great generalizations which begin
as Hypotheses, must end by being proved, and are in reality (as will be
shown hereafter) proved, by the Four Methods. Now it is with Proof, as
such, that Logic is principally concerned. This distinction has indeed
no chance of finding favour with Dr. Whewell; for it is the peculiarity
of his system, not to recognise, in cases of Induction, any necessity
for proof. If, after assuming an hypothesis and carefully collating it
with facts, nothing is brought to light inconsistent with it, that is,
if experience does not disprove it, he is content: at least until a
simpler hypothesis, equally consistent with experience, presents itself.
If this be Induction, doubtless there is no necessity for the four
methods. But to suppose that it is so, appears to me a radical
misconception of the nature of the evidence of physical truths.a

Edition: current; Page: [433]
iSo real and practical is the need of a test for induction, similar to
the syllogistic test of ratiocination, that inferences which bid
defiance to the most elementary notions of inductive logic are put forth
without misgiving by persons eminent in physical science, as soon as
they are off the ground on which they are conversant with the facts, and
not reduced to judge only by the arguments; and as for educated persons
in general, it may be doubted if they are better judges of a good or a
bad induction than they were before Bacon wrote. The improvement in the
results of thinking has seldom extended to the processes; or has
reached, if any process, that of investigation only, not that of proof.
A knowledge of many laws of nature has doubtless been arrived at, by
framing hypotheses and finding that the facts corresponded to them; and
many errors have been got rid of by coming to a knowledge of facts which
were inconsistent with them, but not by discovering that the mode of
thought which led to the errors was itself faulty, and might have been
known to be such independently of the facts which disproved the specific
conclusion. Hence it is, that while the thoughts of mankind have on many
subjects worked themselves practically right, the thinking power remains
as weak as ever: and on all subjects on which the facts which would
check the result are not accessible, as in what relates to the invisible
world, and even, as has been seen lately, to the visible world of the
planetary regions, men of the greatest scientific acquirements argue as
pitiably as the merest ignoramus. For though they have made many jsoundj
inductions, they have not learnt from them (and Dr. Whewell thinks there
is no necessity that they should learn) the principles of inductive
evidence.i

Edition: current; Page: [434]


CHAPTER X: Of Plurality of Causes; and of the Intermixture of Effects

§ 1. [One effect may have many causes] In the preceding exposition of
the four methods of observation and experiment, by which we contrive to
distinguish among a mass of coexistent phenomena the particular effect
due to a given cause, or the particular cause which gave birth to a
given effect; it has been necessary to suppose, in the first instance,
for the sake of simplification, that this analytical operation is
encumbered by no other difficulties than what are essentially inherent
in its nature; and to represent to ourselves, therefore, every effect,
on the one hand as connected exclusively with a single cause, and on the
other hand as incapable of being mixed and confounded with any other
coexistent effect. We have regarded a b c d e, the aggregate of the
phenomena existing at any moment, as consisting of dissimilar afactsa,
a, b, c, d, and e, for each of which one, and only one, cause needs be
sought; the difficulty being only that of singling out this one cause
from the multitude of antecedent circumstances, A, B, C, D, and E. bThe
cause indeed may not be simple; it may consist of an assemblage of
conditions; but we have supposed that there was only one possible
assemblage of conditions, from which the given effect could result.b

If such were the fact, it would be comparatively an easy task to
investigate the laws of nature. But the supposition does not hold, in
either of its parts. In the first place, it is not true that the same
phenomenon is always produced by the same cause: the effect a may
sometimes arise from A, sometimes from B. And, secondly, the effects of
different causes are often not dissimilar, but homogeneous, and marked
out by no assignable boundaries from one another: A and B may produce
not a and b, but different portions of an effect a. The obscurity and
difficulty of the investigation of the laws of phenomena is singularly
increased by the necessity of adverting to these two circumstances;
Intermixture of Effects, and Plurality of Causes. To the latter, being
the simpler of the two considerations, we shall first direct our
attention.

Edition: current; Page: [435]
It is not true, then, that one effect must be connected with only one
cause, or assemblage of conditions; that each phenomenon can be produced
only in one way. There are often several independent modes in which the
same phenomenon could have originated. One fact may be the consequent in
several invariable sequences; it may follow, with equal uniformity, any
one of several antecedents, or collections of antecedents. Many causes
may produce cmechanicalc motion: many causes may produce some kinds of
sensation: many causes may produce death. A given effect may really be
produced by a certain cause, and yet be perfectly capable of being
produced without it.

§ 2. [Plurality of causes is the source of a characteristic imperfection
of the Method of Agreement] One of the principal consequences of this
fact of Plurality of Causes is, to render the first of athea inductive
methods, that of Agreement, uncertain. To illustrate that method, we
supposed two instances, A B C followed by a b c, and A D E followed by a
d e. From these instances it might bapparentlyb be concluded that A is
an invariable antecedent of a, and even that it is the unconditional
invariable antecedent, or cause, if we could be sure that there is no
other antecedent common to the two cases. That this difficulty may not
stand in the way, let us suppose the two cases positively ascertained to
have no antecedent in common except A. The moment, however, that we let
in the possibility of a plurality of causes, the conclusion fails. For
it involves a tacit supposition, that a must have been produced in both
instances by the same cause. If there can possibly have been two causes,
those two may, for example, be C and E: the one may have been the cause
of a in the former of the instances, the other in the latter, A having
no influence in either case.

Supposec, for example,c that two great artists, or great philosophers,
that two extremely selfish, or extremely generous characters, were
compared together as to the circumstances of their education and
history, and the two cases were found to agree only in one circumstance:
would it follow that this one circumstance was the cause of the quality
which characterized both those individuals? Not at all; for the causes
dwhich may produce anyd type of character are every numerouse; and the
two persons might equally have agreed in their character, though there
had been no manner of resemblance in their previous history.

This, therefore, is a characteristic imperfection of the Method of
Agreement; from which imperfection the Method of Difference is free. For
if we Edition: current; Page: [436] have two instances, A B C and B C,
of which B C gives b c, and A being added converts it into a b c, it is
certain that in this instance at least, A was feither the cause of a,
orf an indispensable portion of its cause, even though the cause which
produces it in other instances may be altogether different. Plurality of
Causes, therefore, not only does not diminish the reliance due to the
Method of Difference, but does not even render a greater number of
observations or experiments necessary: two instances, the one positive
and the other negative, are still sufficient for the most complete and
rigorous induction. Not so, however, with the Method of Agreement. The
conclusions which that yields, when the number of instances compared is
small, are of no real value, except as, in the character of suggestions,
they may lead either to experiments bringing them to the test of the
Method of Difference, or to reasonings which may explain and verify them
deductively.

It is only when the instances, being indefinitely multiplied and varied,
continue to suggest the same result, that this result acquires any high
degree of independent value. If there are but two instances, A B C and A
D E, though these instances have no antecedent in common except A, yet
as the effect may possibly have been produced in the two cases by
different causes, the result is at most only a slight probability in
favour of A; there may be causation, but it is almost equally probable
that there was only ga coincidence. But the oftener we repeat the
observation, varying the circumstances, the more we advance towards a
solution of this doubt. For if we try A F G, A H K, &c., all hunlike one
another except in containing the circumstance A, and if we find the
effect a entering into the result in all these cases, we must suppose
one of two things, either that it is caused by A, or that it has as many
different causes as there are instances. With each addition, therefore,
to the number of instances, the presumption is strengthened in favour of
A. The inquirer, of course, will not neglect, if an opportunity present
itself, to exclude A from some one of these combinations, from A H K for
instance, and by trying H K separately, appeal to the Method of
Difference in aid of the Method of Agreement. By the iMethod of
Differencei alone can it be ascertained that A is the cause of a; but
that it is either the cause, or another effect of the same cause, may be
placed beyond any reasonable doubt by the Method of Agreement, provided
the instances are very numerous as well as sufficiently various.

After how great a multiplication, then, of varied instances, all
agreeing in no other antecedent except A, is the supposition of a
plurality of causes sufficiently rebutted, and the conclusion that a is
jconnected withj A divested of the characteristic imperfection, and
reduced to a virtual certainty? This is Edition: current; Page: [437] a
question which we cannot be exempted from answering: but the
consideration of it belongs to what is called the Theory of Probability,
which will form the subject of a chapter hereafter. It is seen, however,
at once, that the conclusion does amount to a practical certainty after
a sufficient number of instances, and that the method, therefore, is not
radically vitiated by the characteristic imperfection. The result of
these considerations is only, in the first place, to point out a new
source of inferiority in the Method of Agreement as compared with other
modes of investigation, and new reasons for never resting contented with
the results obtained by it, without attempting to confirm them either by
the Method of Difference, or by connecting them deductively with some
law or laws already ascertained by that superior method. And, in the
second place, we learn from this the true theory of the value of mere
number of instances in inductive inquiry. kThe Plurality of Causes is
the only reason why mere number is of any importance.k The tendency of
unscientific inquirers is to rely too much on number, without analysing
the instances; without looking closely enough into their nature, to
ascertain what circumstances are or are not eliminated by means of them.
Most people hold their conclusions with a degree of assurance
proportioned to the mere mass of the experience on which they appear to
rest; not considering that by the addition of instances to instances,
all of the same kind, that is, differing from one another only in points
already recognised as immaterial, nothing whatever is added to the
evidence of the conclusion. A single instance eliminating some
antecedent which existed in all the other cases, is of more value than
the greatest multitude of instances which are reckoned by their number
alone. It is necessary, no doubt, to assure ourselves, by lrepetition of
the observation or experiment, that no error has been committed
concerning the individual facts observed; and until we have assured
ourselves of this, instead of varying the circumstances, we cannot too
scrupulously repeat the same experiment or observation without any
change. But when once this assurance has been obtained, the
multiplication of instances which do not exclude any more circumstances
mis entirely useless, provided there have been already enough to exclude
the supposition ofm Plurality of Causes.

It is of importance to remark, that the peculiar modification of the
Method of Agreement, which, as partaking in some degree of the nature of
the Method of Difference, I have called the Joint Method of Agreement
and Difference, is not affected by the characteristic imperfection now
pointed out. For, in the joint method, it is supposed not only that the
instances in which a is, agree only in containing A, but also that the
instances in which a is not, Edition: current; Page: [438] agree only in
not containing A. Now, if this be so, A must be not only the cause of a,
but the only possible cause: for if there were another, as for example
B, then in the instances in which a is not, B must have been absent as
well as A, and it would not be true that nthesen instances agree only in
not containing A. This, therefore, constitutes an immense advantage of
the joint method over the simple Method of Agreement. It may seem,
indeed, that the advantage does not belong so much to the joint method,
as to one of its two premises, (if they may be so called,) the negative
premise. The Method of Agreement, when applied to negative instances, or
those in which a phenomenon does not take place, is certainly free from
the characteristic imperfection which affects it in the affirmative
case. The negative premise, it might therefore be supposed, could be
worked as a simple case of the Method of Agreement, without requiring an
affirmative premise to be joined with it. But though this is true in
principle, it is generally altogether impossible to work the Method of
Agreement by negative instances without positive ones: it is so much
more difficult to exhaust the field of negation than that of
affirmation. For instance, let the question be, what is the cause of the
transparency of bodies; with what prospect of success could we set
ourselves to inquire directly in what the multifarious substances which
are not transparent, agree? But we might hope much sooner to seize some
point of resemblance oamongo the comparatively few and definite species
of objects which are transparent; and this being attained, we should
quite naturally be put upon examining whether the absence of this one
circumstance be not precisely the point in which all opaque substances
will be found to resemble.

The Joint Method of Agreement and Difference, therefore, or, as I have
otherwise called it, the Indirect Method of Difference (because, like
the Method of Difference properly so called, it proceeds by ascertaining
how and in what the cases where the phenomenon is present, differ from
those in which it is absent) is, after the Direct Method of Difference,
the most powerful of the remaining instruments of inductive
investigation; and in the sciences which depend on pure observation,
with little or no aid from experiment, this method, so well exemplified
in the pspeculation on the cause of dew, is the primary resource, so far
as direct appeals to experience are concerned.

§ 3. [Plurality of causes, how ascertained] We have thus far treated
Plurality of Causes only as a possible supposition, which, until
removed, renders our inductions uncertain; and have only considered by
what means, Edition: current; Page: [439] where the plurality does not
really exist, we may be enabled to disprove it. But we must also
consider it as a case actually occurring in nature, and which, as often
as it does occur, our methods of induction ought to be capable of
ascertaining and establishing. For this, however, there is required no
peculiar method. When an effect is really producible by two or more
causes, the process for detecting them is in no way different from that
by which we discover single causes. They may a(first)a be discovered as
separate sequences, by separate sets of instances. One set of
observations or experiments shows that the sun is a cause of heat,
another that friction is a source of it, another that percussion,
another that electricity, another that chemical action is such a source.
Or b(secondly)b the plurality may come to light in the course of
collating a number of instances, when we attempt to find some
circumstance in which they all agree, and fail in doing so. We find it
impossible to trace, in all the cases in which the effect is met with,
any common circumstance. We find that we can eliminate all the
antecedents; that no one of them is present in all the instances, no one
of them cindispensable to the effect. On closer scrutiny, however, it
appears that though no one is always present, one or other of several
always is. If, on further analysis, we can detect in these any common
element, we may be able to ascend from them to some one cause which is
the really operative circumstance in them all. Thus it dis now thoughtd
that in the production of heat by friction, percussion, chemical action,
&c., the ultimate source is one and the same. But if (as continually
happens) we cannot take this ulterior step, the different antecedents
must be set down eprovisionallye as distinct causes, each sufficient of
itself to produce the effect.

We fhere close our remarks on the Plurality of Causes, and proceed to
the still more peculiar and more complex case of the Intermixture of
Effects, and the interference of causes with one another: a case
constituting the principal part of the complication and difficulty of
the study of nature; and with which the four only possible methods of
directly inductive investigation by observation and experiment, are for
the most part, as will appear presently, quite unequal to cope. The
instrument of Deduction alone is adequate to unravel the complexities
proceeding from this source; and the four methods have little more in
their power than to supply premises forg, and a verification of,g our
deductions.

Edition: current; Page: [440]
§ 4. [Concurrence of causes which do not compound their effects] A
concurrence of two or more causes, not separately producing each its own
effect, but interfering with or modifying the effects of one another,
takes place, as has already been explained, in two different ways. In
the onea, which is exemplified by the joint operation of different
forces in mechanics, the separate effects of all the causes continue to
be produced, but are compounded with one another, and disappear in one
total. In the otherb, illustrated by the case of chemical action, the
separate effects cease entirely, and are succeeded by phenomena
altogether different, and governed by different laws.

Of these cases the former is by far the more frequent, and this case it
is which, for the most part, eludes the grasp of our experimental
methods. The other and exceptional case is essentially amenable to them.
When the laws of the original agents cease entirely, and a phenomenon
makes its appearance, which, with reference to those laws, is quite
heterogeneous; when, for example, two gaseous substances, hydrogen and
oxygen, on being brought together, throw off their peculiar properties,
and produce the substance called water; in such cases the new fact may
be subjected to experimental inquiry, like any other phenomenon; and the
elements which are said to compose it may be considered as the mere
agents of its production; the conditions on which it depends, the facts
which make up its cause.

The effects of the new phenomenon, the properties of water, for
instance, are as easily found by experiment as the effects of any other
cause. But to discover the cause of it, that is, the particular
conjunction of agents from which it results, is often difficult enough.
In the first place, the origin and actual production of the phenomenon
carec most frequently inaccessible to our observation. If we could not
have learned the composition of water until we found instances in which
it was actually produced from oxygen and hydrogen, we should have been
forced to wait until the casual thought struck some one of passing an
electric spark through a mixture of the two gases, or inserting a
lighted taper into it, merely to try what would happen. dBesides, many
substances, though they can be analysed, cannot by any known artificial
means be recompounded.d Further, even if we could have ascertained, by
the Method of Agreement, that oxygen and hydrogen were both present when
water is produced, no experimentation on oxygen and hydrogen separately,
no knowledge of their laws, could have enabled us deductively to infer
that they would produce water. We require a specific experiment on the
two combined.

Under these difficulties, we should generally have been indebted for our
knowledge of the causes of this class of effects, not to any inquiry
directed Edition: current; Page: [441] specifically towards that end,
but either to accident, or to the gradual progress of experimentation on
the different combinations of which the producing agents are
susceptible; if it were not for a peculiarity belonging to effects of
this description, that they often, under some particular combination of
circumstances, reproduce their causes. If water results from the
juxtaposition of hydrogen and oxygen whenever this can be made
sufficiently close and intimate, so, on the other hand, if water itself
be placed in certain situations, hydrogen and oxygen are reproduced from
it: an abrupt termination is put to the new laws, and the agents
reappear separately with their own properties as at first. What is
called chemical analysis is the process of searching for the causes of a
phenomenon among its effects, or rather among the effects produced by
the action of some other ecausese upon it.

Lavoisier, by heating mercury to a high temperature in a close vessel
containing air, found that the mercury increased in weight, and became
what was then called red precipitate, while the air, on being examined
after the experiment, proved to have lost weight, and to have become
incapable of supporting life or combustion. When red precipitate was
exposed to a still greater heat, it became mercury again, and gave off a
gas which did support life and flame. Thus the agents which by their
combination produced red precipitate, namely the mercury and the gas,
reappear as effects resulting from that precipitate when acted upon by
heat. So, if we decompose water by means of iron filings, we produce two
effects, rust and hydrogen: now rust is already known by experiments
upon the component substances, to be an effect of the union of iron and
oxygen: the iron we ourselves supplied, but the oxygen must have been
produced from the water. The result therefore is that fwater has
disappeared, and hydrogen and oxygen have appeared in its stead: or in
other words, the original laws of these gaseous agents, which had been
suspended by the superinduction of the new laws called the properties of
water, have again started into existence, and the causes of water are
found among its effects.

Where two phenomena, between the laws or properties of which considered
in themselves no connexion can be traced, are thus reciprocally cause
and effect, each capable in its turn of being produced from the other,
and each, when it produces the other, ceasing itself to exist (as water
is produced from oxygen and hydrogen, and oxygen and hydrogen are
reproduced from water); this causation of the two phenomena by one
another, each gbeing generated by the other’s destruction, is properly
transformation. The idea of chemical composition is an idea of
transformation, but of a transformation which is incomplete; since we
consider the oxygen and hydrogen to be present in the water as oxygen
and hydrogen, and capable of being discovered Edition: current; Page:
[442] in it if our senses were sufficiently keen: a supposition (for it
is no more) grounded solely on the fact, that the weight of the water is
the sum of the separate weights of the two ingredients. If there had not
been this exception to the entire disappearance, in the compound, of the
laws of the separate ingredients; if the combined agents had not, in
this one particular of weight, preserved their own laws, and produced a
joint result equal to the sum of their separate results; we should
never, probably, have had the notion now implied by the words chemical
composition: and, in the hfactsh of water produced from hydrogen and
oxygen, and hydrogen and oxygen produced from water, as the
transformation would have been complete, we should have seen only a
transformation.i

In these cases, jwherej the heteropathic effect (as we called it in a
former chapter)* is but a transformation of its cause, or in other
words, kwherek the effect and its cause are reciprocally such, and
mutually convertible into each other; the problem of finding the cause
resolves itself into the far easier one of finding an effect, which is
the kind of inquiry that admits of being prosecuted by direct
experiment. But there are other cases of heteropathic effects to which
this mode of investigation is not applicable. Take, for instance, the
heteropathic laws of mind; that portion of the phenomena of our mental
nature which are analogous to chemical rather than to dynamical
phenomena; as when a complex passion is formed by the coalition of
several elementary impulses, or a complex emotion by several simple
pleasures or pains, of which it is the result without being the
aggregate, or in any respect homogeneous with them. The product, in
these cases, is generated by its various factors; but the factors cannot
be reproduced from the product; just as a youth can grow into an old
man, but an old man cannot grow into a youth. We cannot ascertain from
what simple feelings any of our complex states of mind larel generated,
as we ascertain the ingredients of a chemical compound, by making it, in
its turn, generate them. We can only, therefore, discover these laws by
the slow process of studying the simple feelings themselves, and
ascertaining synthetically, by experimenting on the various combinations
of which they are susceptible, what they, by their mutual action upon
one another, are capable of generating.

§ 5. [Difficulties of the investigation, when causes compound their
effects] It might have been supposed that the other, and apparently
simpler variety Edition: current; Page: [443] of the mutual interference
of causes, where each cause continues to produce its own proper effect
according to the same laws to which it conforms in its separate state,
would have presented fewer difficulties to the inductive inquirer than
that of which we have just finished the consideration. It presents,
however, so far as direct induction apart from deduction is concerned,
infinitely greater difficulties. When a concurrence of causes gives rise
to a new effect, bearing no relation to the separate effects of those
causes, the resulting phenomenon astands forth undisguised, inviting
attention to its peculiarity, and presenting no obstacle to our
recognising its presence or absence among any number of surrounding
phenomena. It admits therefore of being easily brought under the canons
of Induction, provided instances can be obtained such as those canons
require: and the non-occurrence of such instances, or the want of means
to produce them artificially, is the real and only difficulty in such
investigations; a difficulty not logical, but in some sort physical. It
is otherwise with cases of what, in a preceding chapter, has been
denominated the Composition of Causes. There, the effects of the
separate causes do not terminate and give place to others, thereby
ceasing to form any part of the phenomenon to be investigated; on the
contrary, they still take place, but are intermingled with, and
disguised by, the homogeneous and closely allied effects of other
causes. They are no longer a, b, c, d, e, existing side by side, and
continuing to be separately discernible; they are + a, - a, ½ b, - b, 2
b, &c.; some of which cancel one another, while many others do not
appear distinguishably, but merge in one sum: forming altogether a
result, between which and the causes whereby it was produced there is
often an insurmountable difficulty in tracing by observation any fixed
relation whatever.

The general idea of the Composition of Causes has been seen to be, that
though two or more laws interfere with one another, and apparently
frustrate or modify one another’s operation, yet in reality all are
fulfilled, the collective effect being the exact sum bof the effects of
the causes taken separately. A familiar instance is that of a body kept
in equilibrium by two equal and contrary forces. One of the forces if
acting alone would carry cthe body in a given time a certain distancec
to the west, the other if acting alone would carry it exactly as far
towards the east; and the result is the same as if it had been first
carried to the west as far as the one force would carry it, and then
back towards the east as far as the other would carry it, that is,
precisely the same distance; being ultimately left where it was found at
first.

All laws of causation are liable to be in this manner counteracted, and
seemingly frustrated, by coming into conflict with other laws, the
separate result of which is opposite to theirs, or more or less
inconsistent with it. And Edition: current; Page: [444] hence, with
almost every law, many instances in which it really is entirely
fulfilled, do not, at first sight, appear to be cases of its operation
at all. It is so in the example just adduced: a force, in mechanics,
means neither more nor less than a cause of motion, yet the sum of the
effects of two causes of motion may be rest. Again, a body solicited by
two forces in directions making an angle with one another, moves in the
diagonal; and it seems a paradox to say that motion in the diagonal is
the sum of two motions in two other lines. Motion, however, is but
change of place, and at every instant the body is in the exact place it
would have been in if the forces had acted during alternate instants
instead of acting in the same instant; (saving that if we suppose dtwod
forces to act successively which are in truth simultaneous, we must of
course allow them double the time.) It is evident, therefore, that each
force has had, during each instant, all the effect which belonged to it;
and that the modifying influence which one of two concurrent causes is
said to exercise with respect to the other, may be considered as exerted
not over the action of the cause itself, but over the effect after it is
completed. For all purposes of predicting, calculating, or explaining
their joint result, causes which compound their effects may be treated
as if they produced simultaneously each of them its own effect, and all
these effects coexisted visibly.

Since the laws of causes are as really fulfilled when the causes are
said to be counteracted by opposing causes, as when they are left to
their own undisturbed action, we must be cautious not to express the
laws in such terms as would render the assertion of their being
fulfilled in those cases a contradiction. If, for instance, it eweree
stated as a law of nature that a body to which a force is applied moves
in the direction of the force, with a velocity proportioned to the force
directly, and to its own mass inversely; when in point of fact some
bodies to which a force is applied do not move at all, and those which
do move f(at least in the region of our earth)f are, from the very
first, retarded by the action of gravity and other resisting forces, and
at last stopped altogether; it is clear that the general proposition,
though it would be true under a certain hypothesis, gwouldg not express
the facts as they actually occur. To accommodate the expression of the
law to the real phenomena, we must say, not that the object moves, but
that it tends to move, in the direction and with the velocity specified.
We might, indeed, guard our expression in a different mode, by saying
that the body moves in that manner unless prevented, or except in so far
as prevented, by some counteracting cause. But the body does not only
move in that manner unless counteracted; it tends to move in that manner
even when counteracted; it still exerts, in the original direction, the
same energy of movement as if its first impulse had been undisturbed,
and produces, by that energy, an exactly Edition: current; Page: [445]
equivalent quantity of effect. This is true even when the force leaves
the body as it found it, in a state of absolute rest; as when we attempt
to raise a body of three tons weight with a force equal to one ton. For
if, while we are applying this force, hwind or water or any other agent
supplies an additional force just exceeding two tons, the body will be
raised; thus proving that the force we applied exerted its full effect,
by neutralizing an equivalent portion of the weight which it was
insufficient altogether to overcome. And if while we are exerting this
force of one ton upon the object in a direction contrary to that of
gravity, it be put into a scale and weighed, it will be found to have
lost a ton of its weight, or in other words, to press downwards with a
force only equal to the difference of the two forces.

These facts are correctly indicated by the expression tendency. All laws
of causation, in consequence of their liability to be counteracted,
require to be stated in words affirmative of tendencies only, and not of
actual results. In those sciences of causation which have an accurate
nomenclature, there are special words which signify a tendency to the
particular effect with which the science is conversant; thus pressure,
in mechanics, is synonymous with tendency to motion, and forces are not
reasoned on as causing actual motion, but as exerting pressure. A
similar improvement in terminology would be very salutary in many other
branches of science.

The habit of neglecting this necessary element in the precise expression
of the laws of nature, has given birth to the popular prejudice that all
general truths have exceptions; and much unmerited distrust has thence
accrued to the conclusions of isciencei, when they have been submitted
to the judgment of jminds insufficiently disciplined and cultivatedj.
The rough generalizations suggested by common observation usually have
exceptions; but kprinciples of science, or in other words,k laws of
causation, have not. “What is thought to be an exception to a
principle,” (to quote words used on a different occasion,)

is always some other and distinct principle cutting into the former;
some other force which impinges* against the first force, and deflects
it from its direction. There are not a law and an exception to that law,
the law acting in ninety-nine cases, and the exception in one. There are
two laws, each possibly acting in the whole hundred cases, and bringing
about a common effect by their conjunct operation. If the force which,
being the less conspicuous of the two, is called the Edition: current;
Page: [446] disturbing force, prevails sufficiently over the other force
in some one case, to constitute that case what is commonly called an
exception, the same disturbing force probably acts as a modifying cause
in many other cases which no one will call exceptions.

Thus if it were stated to be a law of nature that all heavy bodies fall
to the ground, it would probably be said that the resistance of the
atmosphere, which prevents a balloon from falling, constitutes the
balloon an exception to that pretended law of nature. But the real law
is, that all heavy bodies tend to fall; and to this there is no
exception, not even the sun and moon; for even they, as every astronomer
knows, tend towards the earth, with a force exactly equal to that with
which the earth tends towards them. The resistance of the atmosphere
might, in the particular case of the balloon, from a misapprehension of
what the law of gravitation is, be said to prevail over the law; but its
disturbing effect is quite as real in every other case, since though it
does not prevent, it retards the fall of all bodies whatever. The rule,
and the so-called exception, do not divide the cases between them; each
of them is a comprehensive rule extending to all cases. To call one of
these concurrent principles an exception to the other, is superficial,
and contrary to the correct principles of nomenclature and arrangement.
An effect of precisely the same kind, and arising from the same cause,
ought not to be placed in two different categories, merely as there does
or does not exist another cause preponderating over it.*

a§ 6.a [Three modes of investigating the laws of complex effects] We
have now to consider according to what method these complex effects,
compounded of the effects of many causes, are to be studied; how we are
enabled to trace each effect to the concurrence of causes in which it
originated, and ascertain the conditions of its recurrence—the
circumstances in which it may be expected again to occur. bThe
conditions of a phenomenon which arises from cac composition of causes,
may be investigated either deductively or experimentally.

The case, it is evident, is naturally susceptible of the deductive mode
of investigation. The law of an effect of this description is a result
of the laws of the separate causes on the combination of which it
depends, and is therefore in itself capable of being deduced from
dthesed laws. This is called the method à priori. The other, or à
posteriori method, professes to proceed according to the canons of
experimental inquiry. Considering the whole assemblage of concurrent
causes which produced the phenomenon, as one single cause, it attempts
to ascertain ethee cause in the ordinary manner, by a comparison of
instances. This second method subdivides itself into two different
varieties. If Edition: current; Page: [447] it merely collates instances
of the effect, it is a method of pure observation. If it operates upon
the causes, and tries different combinations of them, in hopes of
ultimately hitting the precise combination which will produce the given
total effect, it is a method of experiment.

In order more completely to clear up the nature of each of these three
methods, and determine which of them deserves the preference, it will be
expedient (conformably to a favourite maxim of Lord Chancellor Eldon, to
which, though it has often incurred philosophical ridicule, a deeper
philosophy will not refuse its sanction) to “clothe them in
circumstances.” We shall select for this purpose a case which as yet
furnishes no very brilliant example of the success of any of the three
methods, but which is all the more suited to illustrate the difficulties
inherent in them. Let the subject of inquiry be, the conditions of
health and disease in the human body; or (for greater simplicity) the
conditions of recovery from a given disease; and in order to narrow the
question still more, let it be limited, in the first instance, to this
one inquiry: Is, or is not some particular medicament (mercury, for
instance) a remedy for fthe givenf disease.

Now, the deductive method would set out from known properties of
mercury, and known laws of the human body, and by reasoning from these,
would attempt to discover whether mercury will act upon the body when in
the morbid condition supposed, in such a manner as gwould tendg to
restore health. The experimental method would simply administer mercury
in as many cases as possible, noting the age, sex, temperament, and
other peculiarities of bodily constitution, the particular form or
variety of the disease, the particular stage of its progress, &c.,
remarking in which of these cases it hwas attended withh a salutary
effect, and with what circumstances it was on those occasions combined.
The method of simple observation would compare instances of recovery, to
find whether they agreed in having been preceded by the administration
of mercury; or would compare instances of recovery with instances of
failure, to find cases which, agreeing in all other respects, differed
only in the fact that mercury had been administered, or that it had not.

a§ 7.a [The method of simple observation inapplicable to the case of
complex effects] That the last of these three modes of investigation is
applicable to the case, no one has ever seriously contended. No
conclusions of value on a subject of such intricacy, ever were obtained
in that way. The utmost that could result would be a vague general
impression for or against Edition: current; Page: [448] the efficacy of
mercury, of no bavail for guidance unless confirmed by one of the other
two methods. Not that the results, which this method strives to obtain,
would not be of the utmost possible value if they could be obtained. If
all the cases of recovery which presented themselves, in an examination
extending to a great number of instances, were cases in which mercury
had been administered, we might generalize with confidence from this
experience, and should have obtained a conclusion of real value. But no
such basis for generalization can we, in a case of this description,
hope to obtain. The reason is that which we have cspoken of as
constituting the characteristic imperfection of the Method of Agreement;
Plurality of Causes. Supposing even that mercury does tend to cure the
disease, so many other causes, both natural and artificial, also tend to
cure it, that there are sure to be abundant instances of recovery in
which mercury has not been administered: unless, indeed, the practice be
to administer it in all cases; on which supposition it will equally be
found in the cases of failure.

When an effect results from the union of many causes, the share which
each has in the determination of the effect cannot in general be great:
and the effect is not likely, even in its presence or absence, still
less in its variations, to followd, even approximately,d any one of the
causes. Recovery from a disease is an event to which, in every case,
many influences must concur. Mercury may be one such influence; but from
the very fact that there are many other such, it will necessarily happen
that although mercury is administered, the patient, for want of other
concurring influences, will often not recover, and that he often will
recover when it is not administered, the other favourable influences
being sufficiently powerful without it. Neither, therefore, will the
instances of recovery agree in the administration of mercury, nor will
the instances of failure agree in eits non-administratione. It is much
if, by multiplied and accurate returns from hospitals and the like, we
can collect that there are rather more recoveries and rather fewer
failures when mercury is administered than when it is not; a result of
very secondary value even as a guide to practice, and almost worthless
as a contribution to the theory of the subject.*

Edition: current; Page: [449]
a§ 8.a [The purely experimental method inapplicable to the case of
complex effects] The inapplicability of the method of simple observation
to ascertain the conditions of effects dependent on many concurring
causes, being thus recognised; we shall next inquire whether any greater
benefit can be expected from the other branch of the à posteriori
method, that which proceeds by directly trying different combinations of
causes, either artificially produced or found in nature, and taking
notice what is their effect: as, for example, by actually trying the
effect of mercury, in as many different circumstances as possible. This
method differs from the one which we have just examined, in turning our
attention directly to the causes or agents, instead of turning it to the
effect, recovery from the disease. And since, as a general rule, the
effects of causes are far more accessible to our study than the causes
of effects, it is natural to think that this method bhas a much better
chance of proving successful than the formerb.

The method now under consideration is called the Empirical Method; and
in order to estimate it fairly, we must suppose it to be completely, not
incompletely, empirical. We must exclude from it everything which
partakes of the nature not of an experimental but of a deductive
operation. If for instance we try experiments with mercury upon a person
in health, in order to ascertain the general laws of its action upon the
human body, and then reason from these laws to determine how it will act
upon persons affected with a particular disease, this may be a really
effectual method, but this is deduction. The experimental method does
not derive the law of a complex case from the simpler laws which
conspire to produce it, but makes its experiments directly upon the
complex case. We must make entire abstraction of all knowledge of the
simpler tendencies, the cmodic operandi of mercury in detail. Our
experimentation Edition: current; Page: [450] must aim at obtaining a
direct answer to the specific question, Does or does not mercury tend to
cure the particular disease?

Let us see, therefore, how far dthed case admits of the observance of
those rules of experimentation, which it is found necessary to observe
in other cases. When we devise an experiment to ascertain the effect of
a given agent, there are certain precautions which we never, if we can
help it, omit. In the first place, we introduce the agent into the midst
of a set of circumstances which we have exactly ascertained. It needs
hardly be remarked how far this condition is from being realized in any
case connected with the phenomena of life; how far we are from knowing
what are all the circumstances which pre-exist in any instance in which
mercury is administered to a living being. This difficulty, however,
though insuperable in most cases, may not be so in all; there are
sometimes econcurrences of many causes, in which we yet know accurately
what the causes are. fMoreover, the difficulty may be attenuated by
sufficient multiplication of experiments, in circumstances rendering it
improbable that any of the unknown causes should exist in them all.f But
when we have got clear of this obstacle, we encounter another still more
serious. In other cases, when we intend to try an experiment, we do not
reckon it enough that there be no circumstance in the case the presence
of which is unknown to us. We require also that none of the
circumstances which we do knowg, shall have effects susceptible of being
confounded with those of the hagentsh whose properties we wish to study.
We take the utmost pains to exclude all causes capable of composition
with the given cause; or if forced to let in any such causes, we take
care to make them such that we can compute and allow for their
influence, so that the effect of the given cause may, after the
subduction of those other effects, be apparent as a residual phenomenon.

These precautions are inapplicable to such cases as we are now
considering. The mercury of our experiment being tried with an unknown
multitude (or even let it be a known multitude) of other influencing
circumstances, the mere fact of their being influencing circumstances
implies that they disguise the effect of the mercury, and preclude us
from knowing whether it has any effect or inoti. Unless we already knew
what and how much is owing to every other circumstance, (that is, unless
we suppose the very problem solved which we are considering the means of
solving,) we cannot tell that those other circumstances may not have
produced the whole of the effect, independently or even in spite of the
mercury. The Method of Difference, in Edition: current; Page: [451] the
ordinary mode of its use, namely, by comparing the state of things
following the experiment with the state which preceded it, is thus, in
the case of intermixture of effects, entirely unavailing; because other
causes than that whose effect we are seeking to determine, have been
operating during the transition. As for the other mode of employing the
Method of Difference, namely by comparing, not the same case at two
different periods, but different cases, this in the present instance is
quite chimerical. In phenomena so complicated it is questionable if two
cases, similar in all respects but one, ever occurred; and were they to
occur, we could not possibly know that they were so exactly similar.

Anything like a scientific use of the method of experiment, in these
complicated cases, is therefore out of the question. We can jgenerally,
evenj in the most favourable cases, only discover by a succession of
trials, that a certain cause is very often followed by a certain effect.
For, in one of these conjunct effects, the portion which is determined
by any one of the influencing agents, is kusuallyk, as we before
remarked, but small; and it must be a more potent cause than most, if
even the tendency which it really exerts is not thwarted by other
tendencies in nearly as many cases as it is fulfilled. lSome causes
indeed there are which are more potent than any counteracting causes to
which they are commonly exposed; and accordingly there are some truths
in medicine which are sufficiently proved by direct experiment. Of these
the most familiar are those that relate to the efficacy of the
substances known as Specifics for particular diseases; “quinine,
colchicum, lime juice, cod liver oil,”* and a few others. Even these are
not invariably followed by success; but they succeed in so large a
proportion of cases, and against such powerful obstacles, that their
tendency to restore health in the disorders for which they are
prescribed may be regarded as an experimental truth.†l

If so little can be done by the experimental method to determine the
conditions of an effect of many combined causes, in the case of medical
science; still less is this method applicable to a class of phenomena
more Edition: current; Page: [452] complicated than even those of
physiology, the phenomena of politics and history. There, Plurality of
Causes exists in almost boundless excess, and meffects are, for the most
part, inextricably interwoven with one another. To add to the
embarrassment, most of the inquiries in political science relate to the
production of effects of a most comprehensive description, such as the
public wealth, public security, public morality, and the like: results
liable to be affected directly or indirectly either in plus or in minus
by nearly every fact which exists, or event which occurs, in human
society. The vulgar notion, that the safe methods on political subjects
are those of Baconian induction—that the true guide is not general
reasoning, but specific experience—will one day be quoted as among the
most unequivocal marks of a low state of the speculative faculties in
any age in which it is accredited. nNothingn can be more ludicrous than
the sort of parodies on experimental reasoning which one is accustomed
to meet with, not in popular discussion only, but in grave treatises,
when the affairs of nations are the theme. “How,” it is asked, “can an
institution be bad, when the country has prospered under it?” “How can
such or such causes have contributed to the prosperity of one country,
when another has prospered without them?” Whoever makes use of an
argument of this kind, not intending to deceive, should be sent back to
learn the elements of some one of the more easy physical sciences. Such
reasoners ignore the fact of Plurality of Causes in the very case which
affords the most signal example of it. So little could be concluded, in
such a case, from any possible collation of individual instances, that
even the impossibility, in social phenomena, of making artificial
experiments, a circumstance otherwise so prejudicial to directly
inductive inquiry, hardly affords, in this case, additional reason of
regret. For even if we could try experiments upon a nation or upon the
human race, with as little scruple as M. Magendie otriedo them on dogs
pandp rabbits, we should never succeed in making two instances identical
in every respect except the presence or absence of some one definite
circumstance. The nearest approach to an experiment in the philosophical
sense, which takes place in politics, is the introduction of a new
operative element into national affairs by some special and assignable
measure of government, such as the enactment or repeal of a particular
law. But where there are so many influences at work, it requires some
time for the influence of any new cause upon national phenomena to
become apparent; and as the causes operating in so extensive a sphere
are not only infinitely numerous, but in a state of perpetual
alteration, it is always certain that before the effect of the new cause
becomes conspicuous enough to be a Edition: current; Page: [453] subject
of induction, so many of the other influencing circumstances will have
changed as to vitiate the experiment.*

Two, therefore, of the three possible methods for the study of phenomena
resulting from the composition of many causes, being, from the very
nature of the case, inefficient and illusory, there remains only the
third,—that which considers the causes separately, and qinfersq the
effect from the balance of the different tendencies which produce it: in
short, the deductive, or à priori method. The more particular
consideration of this intellectual process requires a chapter to itself.

Edition: current; Page: [454]


CHAPTER XI: Of the Deductive Method

§ 1. [First stage; ascertainment of the laws of the separate causes by
direct induction] The mode of investigation which, from the proved
inapplicability of direct methods of observation and experiment, remains
to us as the main source of the knowledge we possess or can acquire
respecting the conditions, and laws of recurrence, of the more complex
phenomena, is called, in its most general expression, the Deductive
Method; and consists of three operations: the first, one of direct
induction; the second, of ratiocination; athe third, of verification.

I call the first step in the process an inductive operation, because
there must be a direct induction as the basis of the whole; though in
many particular investigations the place of the induction may be
supplied by a prior deduction; but the premises of this prior deduction
must have been derived from induction.

The problem of the Deductive Method is, to find the law of an effect,
from the laws of the different tendencies of which it is the joint
result. The first requisite, therefore, is to know the laws of those
tendencies; the law of each of the concurrent causes: and this supposes
a previous process of observation or experiment upon each cause
separately; or else a previous deduction, which also must depend for its
ultimate premises on observation or experiment. Thus, if the subject be
social or historical phenomena, the premises of the Deductive Method
must be the laws of the causes which determine that class of phenomena;
and those causes are human actions, together with the general outward
circumstances under the binfluenceb of which mankind are placed, and
which constitute man’s position con the earthc. The Deductive Method,
applied to social phenomena, must begin, therefore, by investigating, or
must suppose to have been already investigated, the laws of human
action, and those properties of outward things by which the actions of
human beings in society are determined. Some of these general truths
will naturally be obtained by observation and experiment, others by
deduction: the more complex laws of human action, for example, may be
deduced from the Edition: current; Page: [455] simpler ones; but the
simple or elementary laws will always, and necessarily, have been
obtained by a directly inductive process.

To ascertain, then, the laws of each separate cause which takes a share
in producing the effect, is the first desideratum of the Deductive
Method. To know what the causes are, which must be subjected to this
process of study, may or may not be difficult. In the case last
mentioned, this first condition is of easy fulfilment. That social
phenomena ddependd on the acts and mental impressions of human beings,
never could have been a matter of any doubt, however imperfectly it may
have been known either by what laws those impressions and actions are
governed, or to what social consequences their laws naturally lead.
Neither, again, after physical science had attained a certain
development, could there be any real doubt where to look for the laws on
which the phenomena of life depend, since they must be the mechanical
and chemical laws of the solid and fluid substances composing the
organized body and the medium in which it subsists, together with the
peculiar vital laws of the different tissues constituting the organic
structure. In other cases, really far more simple than these, it was
much less obvious in what quarter the causes were to be looked for: as
in the ecase of the celestial phenomena. Until, by combining the laws of
certain causes, it was found that those laws explained all the facts
which experience had proved concerning the heavenly motions, and led to
predictions which it always verified, mankind never knew that those were
the causes. But whether we are able to put the question before, or not
until after, we have become capable of answering it, in either case it
must be answered; the laws of the different causes must be ascertained,
before we can proceed to deduce from them the conditions of the effect.

The mode of ascertaining fthosef laws neither is, nor can be, any other
than the fourfold method of experimental inquiry, already discussed. A
few remarks on the application of that method to cases of the
Composition of Causes, are all that is requisite.

It is obvious that we cannot expect to find the law of a tendency, by an
induction from cases in which the tendency is counteracted. The laws of
motion could never have been brought to light from the observation of
bodies kept at rest by the equilibrium of opposing forces. Even where
the tendency is not, in the ordinary sense of the word, counteracted,
but only modified, by having its geffectsg compounded with the effects
arising from some other tendency or tendencies, we are still in an
unfavourable position for tracing, by means of such cases, the law of
the tendency itself. It would have been hscarcely possibleh to discover
the law that every body in motion tends to continue moving in a straight
line, by an induction from instances in Edition: current; Page: [456]
which the motion is deflected into a curve, by being compounded with the
effect of an accelerating force. Notwithstanding the resources afforded
in this description of cases by the Method of Concomitant Variations,
the principles of a judicious experimentation prescribe that the law of
each of the tendencies should be studied, if possible, in cases in which
that tendency operates alone, or in combination with no agencies but
those of which the effect can, from previous knowledge, be calculated
and allowed for.

Accordingly, in the cases, iunfortunatelyi very numerous and important,
in which the causes do not suffer themselves to be separated and
observed apart, there is much difficulty in laying down with due
certainty the inductive foundation necessary to support the deductive
method. This difficulty is most jof allj conspicuous in the case of
physiological phenomena; it being kseldom possiblek to separate the
different agencies which collectively compose an organized body, without
destroying the very phenomena which it is our object to investigate:

-   

    —following life, in creatures we dissect,
-   

    We lose it, in the moment we detect.[*]

And for this reason I am linclinedl to the opinion, that physiology
m(greatly and rapidly progressive as it now is)m is embarrassed by
greater natural difficulties, and is probably susceptible of a less
degree of ultimate perfection, than nevenn the social science; inasmuch
as it is possible to study the laws oand operations of one human mind
apart from other mindso, much less imperfectly than we can study the
laws of one organ or tissue of the human body apart from the other
organs or tissues.

It phas been judiciously remarkedp that pathological facts, or, to speak
in common language, diseases in their different forms and degrees,
afford in the case of physiological investigation the qmost valuableq
equivalent to experimentation properly so called; inasmuch as they often
exhibit to us a definite disturbance in some one organ or organic
function, the remaining organs and functions being, in the first
instance at least, unaffected. It is true that Edition: current; Page:
[457] from the perpetual actions and reactions which are going on among
all rparts of the organic economy, there can be no prolonged disturbance
in any one function without ultimately involving many of the others; and
when once it has done so, the experiment for the most part loses its
scientific value. All depends on observing the early stages of the
derangement; which, unfortunately, are of necessity the least marked.
If, however, the organs and functions not disturbed in the first
instance, become affected in a fixed order of succession, some light is
thereby thrown upon the action which one organ exercises over another:
and we occasionally obtain a series of effects which we can refer with
some confidence to the original local derangement; but for this it is
necessary that we should know that the original derangement was local.
If it was what is termed constitutional, that is, if we do not know in
what part of the animal economy it took its rise, or the precise nature
of the disturbance which took place in that part, we are unable to
determine which of the various derangements was cause and which effect;
which of them were produced by one another, and which by the direct,
though perhaps tardy, action of the original cause.

Besides snatural pathological facts, we can produce pathological facts
artificially; we can try experiments, even in the popular sense of the
term, by subjecting the living being to some external agent, such as the
mercury of our former examplet, or the section of a nerve to ascertain
the functions of different parts of the nervous systemt. As this
experimentation is not intended to obtain a direct solution of any
practical question, but to discover general laws, from which afterwards
the conditions of any particular effect may be obtained by deduction;
the best cases to select are those of which the circumstances can be
best ascertained: and such are generally not those in which there is any
practical object in view. The experiments are best tried, not in a state
of disease, which is essentially a changeable state, but in the
condition of health, comparatively a fixed state. In the one, unusual
agencies are at work, the results of which we have no means of
predicting; in the other, the course of the accustomed physiological
phenomena would, it may generally be presumed, remain undisturbed, were
it not for the disturbing cause which we introduce.

Such, with the occasional aid of the Method of uConcomitantu Variations,
(the latter not less incumbered than the more elementary methods by the
peculiar difficulties of the subject,) are our inductive resources for
ascertaining the laws of the causes considered separately, when we have
it not in our power to make trial of them in a state of actual
separation. The insufficiency Edition: current; Page: [458] of these
resources is so glaring, that no one can be surprised at the backward
state of the science of physiology; in which indeed our knowledge of
causes is so imperfect, that we can neither explain, nor could without
specific experience have predicted, many of the facts which are
certified to us by the most ordinary observation. Fortunately, we are
much better informed as to the empirical laws of the phenomena, that is,
the uniformities respecting which we cannot yet decide whether they are
cases of causation, or mere results of it. Not only has the order in
which the facts of organization and life successively manifest
themselves, from the first germ of existence to death, been found to be
uniform, and very accurately ascertainable; but, vby a great application
of the Method of Concomitant Variations to the entire facts of
comparative anatomy and physiology, the wcharacteristic organic
structure corresponding to each class of functions hasw been determined
with considerable precision. xWhether these organic conditions are the
whole of the conditions, and yin many cases whether they arey conditions
at all, or mere collateral effects of some common cause, we are quite
ignorant; nor are we ever likely to know, unless we could construct an
organized body, and try whether it would live.

Under such disadvantages do we, in cases of this description, attempt
the initial, or inductive step, in the application of the Deductive
Method to complex phenomena. But such, fortunately, is not the common
case. In general, the laws of the causes on which the effect depends may
be obtained by an induction from comparatively simple instances, or, at
the worst, by deduction from the laws of simpler causes, so obtained. By
simple instances are meant, of course, those in which the action of each
cause was not intermixed or interfered with, or not to any great extent,
by other causes whose laws were unknown. And only when the induction
which furnished the premises to the Deductive Method rested on such
instances, has the application of such a method to the ascertainment of
the laws of a complex effect, been attended with brilliant results.

§ 2. [Second stage; ratiocination from the simple laws aofa the complex
cases] When the laws of the causes have been ascertained, and the first
stage of the great logical operation now under discussion satisfactorily
accomplished, the second part follows; that of determining from the laws
of the causes, what effect any given combination of those causes will
produce. This is a process of calculation, in the wider sense of the
term; and very often Edition: current; Page: [459] involves processes of
calculation in the narrowest sense. It is a ratiocination; and when our
knowledge of the causes is so perfect, as to extend to the exact
numerical laws which they observe in producing their effects, the
ratiocination may reckon among its premises the theorems of the science
of number, in the whole immense extent of that science. Not only are the
bmost advancedb truths of mathematics often required to enable us to
compute an effect, the numerical law of which we already know; but, even
by the aid of those cmost advancedc truths, we can go but a little way.
In so simple a case as the dcommond problem of three bodies gravitating
towards one another, with a force directly as their mass and inversely
as the square of the distance, all the resources of the calculus have
not hitherto sufficed to obtain eany general solution but an approximate
onee. In a case a little more complex, but still one of the simplest
which arise in practice, that of the motion of a projectile, the causes
which affect the velocity and range (for example) of a cannon-ball may
be all known and estimated; the force of the gunpowder, the angle of
elevation, the density of the air, the strength and direction of the
fwindf; but it is one of the most difficult of gmathematical problems to
combine all these, so as to determine the effect resulting from their
collective action.

Besides the theorems of number, those of geometry also come in as
premises, where the effects take place in space, and involve motion and
extension, as in mechanics, optics, acoustics, astronomy. But when the
complication increases, and the effects are under the influence of so
many and such shifting causes as to give no room either for fixed
numbers, or for straight lines and regular curves, (as in the case of
physiological, to say nothing of mental and social phenomena,) the laws
of number and extension are applicable, if at all, only on that large
scale on which precision of details becomes hunimportant. Althoughh
these laws play a conspicuous part in the most striking examples of the
investigation of nature by the Deductive Method, as for example in the
Newtonian theory of the celestial motions, they are by no means an
indispensable part of every such process. All that is essential in it is
ireasoning from a general law to a particular case, that is,
determiningi by means of the particular circumstances of that case, what
result is required in that instance to fulfil the law. Thus in the
Torricellian experiment, if the fact that air jhasj weight had been
previously known, it Edition: current; Page: [460] would have been easy,
without any numerical data, to deduce from the general law of
equilibrium, that the mercury would stand in the tube at such a height
that the column of mercury would exactly balance a column of the
atmosphere of equal diameter; because, otherwise, equilibrium would not
exist.

By such ratiocinations from the separate laws of the causes, we may, to
a certain extent, succeed in answering either of the following
questions: Given a certain combination of causes, what effect will
follow? kandk, What combination of causes, if it existed, would produce
a given effect? In the one case, we determine the effect to be expected
in any complex circumstances of which the different elements are known:
in the other case we learn, according to what law—under what antecedent
conditions—a given complex effect will loccurl.

§ 3. [Third stage; verification by specific experience] But (it may here
be asked) are not the same arguments by which the methods of direct
observation and experiment were set aside as illusory when applied to
the laws of complex phenomena, applicable with equal force against the
Method of Deduction? When in every single instance a multitude, often an
unknown multitude, of agencies, are clashing and combining, what
security have we that in our computation à priori we have taken all
these into our reckoning? How many must we not generally be ignorant of?
Among those which we know, how probable that some have been overlooked;
and, even were all included, how vain the pretence of summing up the
effects of many causes, unless we know accurately the numerical law of
each,—a condition in most cases not to be fulfilled; and even when ait
isa fulfilled, to make the calculation transcends, in any but very
simple cases, the utmost power of mathematical science with ballb its
most modern improvements.

These objections chave realc weight, and would be altogether
unanswerable, if there were no test by which, when we employ the
Deductive Method, we might judge whether an error of any of the above
descriptions had been committed or dnotd. Such a test however there is:
and its application forms, under the name of Verification, the third
essential component part of the Deductive Method; without which all the
results it can give have little other value than that of econjecturee.
To warrant reliance on the general conclusions arrived at by deduction,
fthesef conclusions must be found, on gcareful comparison, to accord
with the results of direct observation wherever it can be had. If, when
we have experience to compare with them, this experience Edition:
current; Page: [461] confirms them, we may safely trust to them in other
cases of which our specific experience is yet to come. But if our
deductions have led to the conclusion that from a particular combination
of causes a given effect would result, then in all known cases where
that combination can be shown to have existed, and where the effect has
not followed, we must be able to show (or at least hto make a probableh
surmise) what frustrated it: if we cannot, the theory is imperfect, and
not yet to be relied upon. Nor is the verification complete, unless some
of the cases in which the theory is borne out by the observed result,
are of at least equal complexity with any other cases in which its
application could be called for.

iIfi direct observation and collation of instances have furnished us
with any empirical laws of the effect (whether true in all observed
cases, or only true for the most part), the most effectual verification
of which the theory could be susceptible would be, that it led
deductively to those empirical laws; that the uniformities, whether
complete or incomplete, which were observed to exist among the
phenomena, were accounted for by the laws of the causes—were such as
could not but exist if those be really the causes by which the phenomena
are produced. Thus it was very reasonably deemed an essential requisite
of any true theory of the causes of the celestial motions, that it
should lead by deduction to Kepler’s laws: which, accordingly, the
Newtonian theory did.

In order, therefore, to facilitate the verification of theories obtained
by deduction, it is important that as many as possible of the empirical
laws of the phenomena should be ascertained, by a comparison of
instances, conformably to the Method of Agreement: as well as (it must
be added) that the phenomena themselves should be described, in the most
comprehensive as well as accurate manner possible; by collecting from
the observation of parts, the simplest possible correct jexpressionsj
for the corresponding wholes: as when the series of the observed places
of a planet was first expressed kby a circle, thenk by a system of
epicycles, and subsequently by an ellipse.

It is worth remarking, that complex instances which would have been of
no use for the discovery of the simple laws into which we ultimately
analyse their phenomena, nevertheless, when they have served to verify
the analysis, become additional evidence of the laws themselves.
Although we could not have got at the law from complex cases, still when
the law, got at otherwise, is found to be in accordance with the result
of a complex case, that case becomes a new experiment on the law, and
helps to confirm what it did not Edition: current; Page: [462] assist
lto discover. It is a new trial of the principle in a different set of
circumstances; and occasionally serves to eliminate some circumstance
not previously excluded, and mthe exclusion of which might require an
experiment impossible to be executed. This was strikingly conspicuous in
nthen example formerly quoted, in which the difference between the
observed and the calculated velocity of sound was ascertained to result
from the heat extricated by the condensation which takes place in each
sonorous vibration. This was a trial, in new circumstances, of the law
of the development of heat by compression; and it oadded materially to
the proof of the universality of that law. Accordingly any law of nature
is deemed to have gained in point of certainty, by being found to
explain some complex case which had not previously been thought of in
connexion with it; and this indeed is a consideration to which it is the
habit of scientific pinquirersp to attach rather too much value than too
little.

To the Deductive Method, thus characterized in its three constituent
parts, Induction, Ratiocination, and Verification, the human mind is
indebted for its most qconspicuousq triumphs in the investigation of
nature. To it we owe all the theories by which vast and complicated
phenomena are embraced under a few simple laws, which, considered as the
laws of those great phenomena, could never have been detected by their
direct study. We may form some conception of what the method has done
for us, from the case of the celestial motions; one of the simplest
among the greater instances of the Composition of Causes, since (except
in a few cases not of primary importance) each of the heavenly bodies
may be considered, without material inaccuracy, to be never at one time
influenced by the attraction of more than two bodies, the sun and one
other planet or satellite; making, with the reaction of the body itself,
and the rforce generated by the body’s own motion and acting in the
direction of the tangentr, only four different agents on the concurrence
of which the motions of that body depend; a much smaller number, no
doubt, than that by which any other of the great phenomena of nature is
determined or modified. Yet how could we ever have ascertained the
combination of forces on which the motions of the earth and planets are
dependent, by merely comparing the orbits or velocities of different
planets, or the different velocities or positions of the same planet?
Notwithstanding Edition: current; Page: [463] the regularity which
manifests itself in those motions, in a degree so rare among the effects
of sconcurrence of causes; tandt although the periodical recurrence of
exactly the same effect, affords positive proof that all the
combinations of causes which occur at all, recur periodically; we should
unotu have known what the causes were, if the existence of agencies
precisely similar on our own earth had not, fortunately, brought the
causes themselves within the reach of experimentation under simple
circumstances. As we shall have occasion to analyse, further on, this
great example of the Method of Deduction, we shall not occupy any time
with it here, but shall proceed to that secondary application of the
Deductive Method, the result of which is not to prove laws of phenomena,
but to explain them.

Edition: current; Page: [464]


CHAPTER XII: Of the Explanation of Laws of Nature

§ 1. [Explanation defined] The deductive operation by which we derive
the law of an effect from the laws of the causes, athe concurrence of
whicha gives rise to it, may be undertaken either for the purpose of
discovering the law, or of explaining a law already discovered. The word
explanation occurs so continually and holds so important a place in
philosophy, that a little time spent in fixing the meaning of it will be
profitably employed.

An individual fact is said to be explained, by pointing out its cause,
that is, by stating the law or laws of causation, of which its
production is an instance. Thus a conflagration is explained, when it is
proved to have arisen from a spark falling into the midst of a heap of
combustibles. And in a similar manner, a law or uniformity in nature is
said to be explained, when another law or laws are pointed out, of which
that law itself is but a case, and from which it could be deduced.

§ 2. [First mode of explanation, by resolving the law of a complex
effect into the laws of the concurrent causes and the fact of their
coexistence] There are three distinguishable sets of circumstances in
which a law of causation may be explained from, or, as it also is often
expressed, resolved into, other laws.

The first is the case already so fully considered; an intermixture of
laws, producing a joint effect equal to the sum of the effects of the
causes taken separately. The law of the complex aeffecta is explained,
by being resolved into the separate laws of the causes which contribute
to it. Thus, the law of the motion of a planet is resolved into the law
of the bacquiredb force, which tends to produce an uniform motion in the
tangent, and the law of the centripetal force which tends to produce an
accelerating motion towards the sun; the real motion being a compound of
the two.

Edition: current; Page: [465]
It is necessary here to remark, that in this resolution of the law of a
complex effect, the laws of which it is compounded are not the only
elements. It is resolved into the laws of the separate causes, together
with the fact of their coexistence. The one is as essential an
ingredient as the other; whether the object be to discover the law of
the effect, or only to explain it. To deduce the laws of the heavenly
motions, we require not only to know the law of a rectilineal and that
of a gravitative force, but the existence of both cthesec forces in the
celestial regions, and even their relative amount. The complex laws of
causation are thus resolved into two distinct kinds of elements: the
one, simpler laws of causation, the other (in the aptly selected
dexpressiond of Dr. Chalmers) collocations;[*] the collocations
consisting in the existence of certain agents or powers, in certain
circumstances of place and time. We shall hereafter have occasion to
return to this distinction, and to dwell on it at such elength as
dispenses with the necessity of further insisting on it here. The first
mode, then, of the explanation of Laws of Causation, is when the law of
an effect is resolved into the various tendencies of which it is the
result, ftogether withf the laws of those tendencies.

§ 3. [Second mode of explanation, by the detection of an intermediate
link in the sequence] A second case is when, between what seemed the
cause and what was supposed to be its effect, further observation
detects an intermediate link; a fact caused by the antecedent, and in
its turn causing the consequent; so that the cause at first assigned is
but the remote cause, operating through the intermediate phenomenon. A
seemed the cause of C, but it subsequently appeared that A was only the
cause of B, and that it is B which was the cause of C. For example:
mankind were aware that the act of touching an outward object caused a
sensation. It was asubsequentlya discovered, that after we have touched
the object, and before we experience the sensation, some change takes
place in a kind of thread called a nerve, which extends from our outward
organs to the brain. Touching the object, therefore, is only the remote
cause of our sensation; that is, not the cause, properly speaking, but
the cause of the cause;—the real cause of the sensation is the change in
the state of the nerve. Future experience may not only give us more
knowledge than we now have of the particular nature of this change, but
may also interpolate another link: between the contact (for example) of
the object with our outward organs, and the production of the change of
state in the nerve, there may take place some electric phenomenonb; or
some phenomenon of a nature not resembling the effects of any known
agencyb. Hitherto, Edition: current; Page: [466] however, no such
intermediate clinkc has been discovered; and the touch of the object
must be considered, provisionallyd, as the proximate cause of the
affection of the nerve. The sequence, therefore, of a sensation of touch
on contact with an object, is ascertained not to be an ultimate law;
eite is resolved, as the phrase is, into two other laws,—the law that
contact with an object produces an affection of the nerve; and the law,
that an affection of the nerve produces sensation.

To take another example: the more powerful acids corrode or blacken
organic compounds. This is a case of causation, but of remote causation;
and is said to be explained when it is shown that there is an
intermediate link, namely, the separation of some of the chemical
elements of the organic structure from the rest, and their entering into
combination with the acid. The acid causes this separation of the
elements, and the separation of the elements causes the disorganization,
and often the charring of the structure. So, again, chlorine extracts
colouring matters (whence its efficacy in bleaching) and purifies the
air from infection. This law is resolved into the two following laws.
Chlorine has a powerful affinity for bases of all kinds, particularly
metallic bases and hydrogen. Such bases are essential elements of
colouring matters and contagious compounds: which substances, therefore,
are decomposed and destroyed by chlorine.

§ 4. [Laws are always resolved into laws more general than themselves]
It is of importance to remark, that when a sequence of phenomena is thus
resolved into other laws, they are always laws more general than itself.
The law that A is followed by C, is less general than either of the laws
which connect B with C and A with B. This will appear from very simple
considerations.

All laws of causation are liable to be counteracted or frustrated, by
the non-fulfilment of some negative condition: the tendency, therefore,
of B to produce C may be defeated. Now the law that A produces B, is
equally fulfilled whether B is followed by C or not; but the law that A
produces C by means of B, is of course only fulfilled when B is really
followed by C, and is therefore less general than the law that A
produces B. It is also less general than the law that B produces C. For
B may have other causes besides A; and as A produces C only by means of
B, while B produces C whether it has itself been produced by A or by
anything else, the second law embraces a greater number of instances,
covers as it were a greater space of ground, than the first.

Thus, in our former example, the law that the contact of an object
causes Edition: current; Page: [467] a change in the state of the nerve,
is more general than the law that contact with an object causes
sensation, since, for aught we know, the change in the nerve may equally
take place when, from a counteracting cause, as, for instance, strong
mental excitement, the sensation does not follow; as in a battle, where
wounds are asometimesa received without any consciousness of receiving
them. And again, the law that change in the state of a nerve produces
sensation, is more general than the law that contact with an object
produces sensation; since the sensation equally follows the change in
the nerve when not produced by contact with an object, but by some other
cause; as in the well-known case, when a person who has lost a limb,
feels the bsameb sensation which he has been accustomed to call a pain
in the limb.

Not only are the laws of more immediate sequence into which the law of a
remote sequence is resolved, laws of greater generality than that law
is, but (as a consequence of, or rather as implied in, their greater
generality) they are more to be relied on; there are fewer chances of
their being ultimately found not to be universally true. From the moment
when the sequence of A and C is shown not to be immediate, but to depend
on an intervening phenomenon, then, however constant and invariable the
sequence of A and C has hitherto been found, possibilities arise of its
failure, exceeding those which can affect either of the more immediate
sequences, A, B, and B, C. The tendency of A to produce C may be
defeated by whatever is capable of defeating either the tendency of A to
produce B, or the tendency of B to produce C; it is therefore twice as
liable to failure as either of those more elementary tendencies; and the
generalization that A is always followed by C, is ctwice as likely to be
found erroneous. And so of the converse generalization, that C is always
preceded and caused by A; which will be erroneous not only if there
should happen to be a second immediate mode of production of C itself,
but moreover if there be a second mode of production of B, the immediate
antecedent of C in the sequence.

The resolution of the one generalization into the other two, not only
shows that there are possible limitations of the former, from which its
two elements are exempt, but dshowsd also where these are to be looked
for. As soon as we know that B intervenes between A and C, we also know
that if there be cases in which the sequence of A and C does not hold,
these are most likely to be found by studying the effects eore the
conditions of the phenomenon B.

It appears, then, that in the second of the three modes in which a law
may be resolved into other laws, the latter are more general, that is,
extend to more cases, and are also less likely to require limitation
from subsequent experience, than the law which they serve to explain.
They are more nearly Edition: current; Page: [468] unconditional; they
are defeated by fewer contingencies; they are a nearer approach to the
universal truth of nature. The same observations are still more
evidently true with regard to the first of the three modes of
resolution. When the law of an effect of combined fforcesf is resolved
into the separate laws of the causes, the nature of the case implies
that the law of the effect is less general than the law of any of the
causes, since it only holds when they are combined; while the law of any
one of the causes holds good both then, and also when that cause acts
apart from the rest. It is also manifest that the complex law is liable
to be oftener unfulfilled than any one of the simpler laws of which it
is the result, since every contingency which defeats any of the laws
prevents so much of the effect as depends on it, and thereby defeats the
complex law. The mere rusting, for example, of some small part of a
great machine, often suffices entirely to prevent the effect which ought
to result from the joint action of all the parts. The law of the effect
of a combination of causes is always subject to the whole of the
negative conditions which attach to the action of all the causes
severally.

There is another and gan equally strongg reason why the law of a complex
effect must be less general than the laws of the causes which conspire
to produce it. The same causes, acting according to the same laws, and
differing only in the proportions in which they are combined, often
produce effects which differ not merely in quantity, but in kind. The
combination of a hcentripetal with a projectileh force, in the
proportions which obtain in all the planets and satellites of our solar
system, gives rise to an elliptical motion; but if the ratio of the two
forces to each other were slightly altered, it is idemonstratedi that
the motion produced would be in a circle, or a parabola, or an
hyperbola: and it jis thoughtj that in the case of some comets kone of
thesek is lprobablyl the fact. Yet the law of the parabolic motion would
be resolvable into the very same simple laws into which that of the
elliptical motion is resolved, namely, the law of the permanence of
rectilineal motion, and the law of mgravitationm If, therefore, in the
course of ages, some circumstance were to manifest itself which, without
defeating the law of either of those forces, should merely alter their
proportion to one another, (such as the shock of nsome solid bodyn, or
even the accumulating effect of the resistance of the medium in which
astronomers have been led to surmise that the motions of the heavenly
bodies take place,) the elliptical motion might be Edition: current;
Page: [469] changed into a motion in some other oconic sectiono; and the
complex law, pthat the planetary motions take place in ellipsesp, would
be deprived of its universality, though the discovery would not at all
detract from the universality of the simpler laws into which that
complex law is resolved. The law, in short, of each of the concurrent
causes remains the same, however their collocations may vary; but the
law of their joint effect varies with every difference in the
collocations. There needs no more to show how much more general the
elementary laws must be, than any of the complex laws which are derived
from them.

§ 5. [Third mode of explanation; the subsumption of less general laws
under a more general one] Besides the two modes which have been treated
of, there is a third mode in which laws are resolved into one another;
and in this it is self-evident that they are resolved into laws more
general than themselves. This third mode is the subsumption (as it has
been called) of one law under another: or (what comes to the same thing)
the gathering up of several laws into one more general law which
includes them all. The most splendid example of this operation was when
terrestrial gravity and the central force of the solar system were
brought together under the general law of gravitation. It had been
proved antecedently that the earth and the other planets atenda to the
sun; and it had been known from the earliest times that bterrestrial
bodies tend towards the earth. These were similar phenomena; and to
enable them both to be subsumed under one law, it was only necessary to
prove that, as the effects were similar in quality, so also they, as to
quantity, conform to the same rules. This was first shown to be true of
the moon, which agreed with terrestrial objects not only in tending to a
centre, but in the fact that this centre was the earth. The tendency of
the moon ctowardsc the earth dbeing ascertained to vary as the inverse
square of the distance,d it was deduced from this, by direct
calculation, that if the moon were as near to the earth as terrestrial
objects are, and the eacquired force in the direction of the tangente
were suspended, the moon would fall towards the earth through exactly as
many feet in a second as those objects do by virtue of their weight.
fHencef the inference was irresistible, that the moon also tends to the
earth by virtue of its weight: and that the two phenomena, the tendency
of the moon to the earth and the tendency of terrestrial objects to the
earth, being Edition: current; Page: [470] not only similar in quality,
but, when ging the same circumstances, identical in quantity, are cases
of one and the same law of causation. But the tendency of the moon to
the earth, and the tendency of the earth and planets to the sun, were
already known to be cases of the same law of causation: and thus the law
of all these tendencies, and the law of terrestrial gravity, were
recognised as identical, handh were subsumed under one general law, that
of gravitation.

In a similar manner, the laws of magnetic phenomena have imorei recently
been subsumed under known laws of electricity. It is thus that the most
general laws of nature are usually arrived at: we mount to them by
successive steps. For, to arrive by correct induction at laws which hold
under such an immense variety of circumstances, laws so general as to be
independent of any varieties of space or time which we are able to
observe, requires for the most part many distinct sets of experiments or
observations, conducted at different times and by different people. One
part of the law is first ascertained, afterwards another part: one set
of observations teaches us that the law holds good under some
conditions, another jthat it holds good under other conditions, by
combining which observations we find that it holds good under conditions
much more general, or even universally. The general law, in this case,
is literally the sum of all the partial ones; it is kak recognition of
the same sequence in different sets of instances; and may, in fact, be
regarded as merely one step in the process of elimination. lThel
tendency of bodies towards one another, which we now call gravity, had
at first been observed only on the earth’s surface, where it manifested
itself only as a tendency of all bodies towards the earth, and might,
therefore, be ascribed to a peculiar property of the earth itself: one
of the circumstances, namely, the proximity of the earth, had not been
eliminated. To eliminate this circumstance required a fresh set of
instances in other parts of the universe: these we could not ourselves
create; and though nature had created them for us, we were placed in
very unfavourable circumstances for observing them. To make these
observations, fell naturally to the lot of a different set of persons
from those who studied terrestrial phenomena; and had, indeed, been a
matter of great interest at a time when the idea of explaining celestial
facts by terrestrial laws was looked upon as the confounding of an
indefeasible distinction. When, however, the celestial motions were
accurately ascertained, and the deductive processes performed, from
which it appeared that their laws and those of terrestrial gravity
corresponded, those celestial observations became a set of instances
which exactly eliminated the circumstance of proximity to the earth; and
proved that in the original case, that of terrestrial objects, it was
Edition: current; Page: [471] not the earth, as such, that caused the
motion or the pressure, but the circumstance common to that case with
the celestial instances, namely, the presence of some great body within
certain limits of distance.

§ 6. [What the explanation of a law of nature amounts to] There are,
then, three modes of explaining laws of causation, or, which is the same
thing, resolving them into other laws. First, when the law of an effect
of combined causes is resolved into the separate laws of the causes,
together with the fact of their combination. Secondly, when the law
which connects any two links, not proximate, in a chain of causation, is
resolved into the laws which connect each with the intermediate links.
Both of these are cases of resolving one law into two or more; in the
third, two or more are resolved into one: when, after the law has been
shown to hold good in several different classes of cases, we decide that
what is true in each of these classes of cases, is true under some more
general supposition, consisting of what all those classes of cases have
in common. We may here remark that this last operation involves none of
the uncertainties attendant on induction by the Method of Agreement,
since we need not suppose the result to be extended by way of inference
to any new class of cases, different from those by the comparison of
which it was engendered.

In all these three processes, laws are, as we have seen, resolved into
laws more general than themselves; laws extending to all the cases which
the former aextendeda to, and others besides. In the first two modes
they are also resolved into laws more certain, in other words, more
universally true than themselves; they are, in fact, proved not to be
themselves laws of nature, the character of which is to be universally
true, but results of laws of nature, which may be only true
conditionally, and for the most part. No difference of this sort exists
in the third case; since here the partial laws are, in fact, the very
same law as the general one, and any exception to them would be an
exception to it too.

By all the three processes, the range of deductive science is extended;
since the laws, thus resolved, may be thenceforth deduced
demonstratively from the laws into which they are resolved. As already
remarked, the same deductive process which proves a law or fact of
causation if unknown, serves to explain it when known.

The word explanation is here used in bits philosophicalb sense. What is
called explaining one law of nature by another, is but substituting one
mystery for another; and does nothing to render the general course of
nature other than mysterious: we can no more assign a why for the more
extensive laws than for the partial ones. The explanation may substitute
a mystery which Edition: current; Page: [472] has become familiar, and
has grown to seem not mysterious, for one which is still strange. And
this is the meaning of explanation, in common parlance. But the process
with which we are here concerned often does the very contrary: it
resolves a phenomenon with which we are familiar, into one of which we
previously knew little or nothing; as when the common fact of the fall
of heavy bodies cwasc resolved into dthed tendency of all particles of
matter towards one another. It must be kept constantly in view,
therefore, that ein science, those who speak of explaining any
phenomenon mean (or should mean)e pointing out not some more familiar,
but merely some more general, phenomenon, of which it is a partial
exemplification; or some laws of causation which produce it by their
joint or successive action, and from which, therefore, its conditions
may be determined deductively. Every such operation brings us a step
nearer towards answering the question which was stated fin a previous
chapterf as comprehending the whole problem of the investigation of
nature, viz. What are the fewest gassumptions, which being granted, the
order of nature as it exists would be the result? What areg the fewest
general propositions from which all the uniformities existing in nature
could be deduced?

The laws, thus explained or resolved, are sometimes said to be accounted
for; but the expression is incorrect, if taken to mean anything more
than what has been already stated. In minds not habituated to accurate
thinking, there is often a confused notion that the general laws are the
causes of the partial ones; that the law of general gravitation, for
example, causes the phenomenon of the fall of bodies to the earth. But
to assert this, would be a misuse of the word cause: terrestrial gravity
is not an effect of general gravitation, but a case of it; that is, one
kind of the particular instances in which that general law obtains. To
account for a law of nature means, and can mean, hnothingh more than to
assign other laws more general, together with collocations, which laws
and collocations being supposed, the partial law follows without any
additional supposition.

Edition: current; Page: [473]


CHAPTER XIII: Miscellaneous Examples of the Explanation of Laws of Nature

a§ 1. [The general theories of the sciences] The most striking example
which the history of science presents, of the explanation of laws of
causation and other uniformities of sequence among special phenomena, by
resolving them into laws of greater simplicity and generality, is the
great Newtonian generalization: respecting which typical instance so
much having already been said, it is sufficient to call attention to the
great number and variety of the special observed uniformities which are
in this case accounted for, either as particular cases, or as
consequences, of one very simple law of universal nature. The simple
fact of a tendency of every particle of matter towards every other
particle, varying inversely as the square of the distance, explains the
fall of bodies to the earth, the revolutions of the planets and
satellites, the motions (so far as known) of comets, and all the various
regularities which have been observed in these special phenomena; such
as the elliptical orbits, and the variations from exact ellipses; the
relation between the solar distances of the planets and the duration of
their revolutions; the precession of the equinoxes; the tides, and a
vast number of minor astronomical truths.

Mention has also been made in the preceding chapter of the explanation
of the phenomena of magnetism from laws of electricity; the special laws
of magnetic agency having been affiliated by deduction to observed laws
of electric action, in which they have ever since been considered to be
included as special cases. An example not so complete in itself, but
even more fertile in consequences, having been the starting point of the
really scientific study of physiology, is the affiliation, commenced by
Bichat, and carried on by subsequent biologists, of the properties of
the bodily organs, to the elementary properties of the tissues into
which they are anatomically decomposed.

Another striking instance is afforded by Dalton’s generalization,
commonly known as the atomic theory. It had been known from the very
commencement of accurate chemical observation, that any two bodies
combine chemically Edition: current; Page: [474] with one another in
only a certain number of proportions; but those proportions were in each
case expressed by a percentage—so many parts (by weight) of each
ingredient, in 100 of the compound; (say 35 and a fraction of one
element, 64 and a fraction of the other): in which mode of statement no
relation was perceived between the proportion in which a given element
combines with one substance, and that in which it combines with others.
The great step made by Dalton consisted in perceiving, that a unit of
weight might be established for each substance, such that by supposing
the substance to enter into all its combinations in the ratio either of
that unit, or of some low multiple of that unit, all the different
proportions, previously expressed by percentages, were found to result.
Thus 1 being assumed as the unit of hydrogen, if 8 were then taken as
that of oxygen, the combination of one unit of hydrogen with one unit of
oxygen would produce the exact proportion of weight between the two
substances which is known to exist in water; the combination of one unit
of hydrogen with two units of oxygen would produce the proportion which
exists in the other compound of the same two elements, called peroxide
of hydrogen; and the combinations of hydrogen and of oxygen with all
other substances, would correspond with the supposition that those
elements enter into combination by single units, or twos, or threes, of
the numbers assigned to them, 1 and 8, and the other substances by ones
or twos or threes of other determinate numbers proper to each. The
result is that a table of the equivalent numbers, or, as they are
called, atomic weights, of all the elementary substances, comprises in
itself, and scientifically explains, all the proportions in which any
substance, elementary or compound, is found capable of entering into
chemical combination with any other substance whatever.

§ 2. [Examples from chemical speculations] Some interesting cases of the
explanation of old uniformities by newly ascertained laws are afforded
by the researches of Professor Graham. That eminent chemist was the
first who drew attention to the distinction which may be made of all
substances into two classes, termed by him crystalloids and colloids; or
rather, of all states of matter into the crystalloid and the colloidal
states, for many substances are capable of existing in either. When in
the colloidal state, their sensible properties are very different from
those of the same substance when crystallized, or when in a state easily
susceptible of crystallization. Colloid substances pass with extreme
difficulty and slowness into the crystalline state, and are extremely
inert in all the ordinary chemical relations. Substances in the colloid
state are almost always, when combined with water, more or less viscous
or gelatinous. The most prominent examples of the state are certain
animal and vegetable substances, particularly gelatine, albumen, starch,
the Edition: current; Page: [475] gums, caramel, tannin, and some
others. Among substances not of organic origin, the most notable
instances are hydrated silicic acid, and hydrated alumina, with other
metallic peroxides of the aluminous class.

Now it is found, that while colloidal substances are easily penetrated
by water, and by the solutions of crystalloid substances, they are very
little penetrable by one another: which enabled Professor Graham to
introduce a highly effective process (termed dialysis) for separating
the crystalloid substances contained in any liquid mixture, by passing
them through a thin septum of colloidal matter, which does not suffer
anything colloidal to pass, or suffers it only in very minute quantity.
This property of colloids enabled Mr. Graham to account for a number of
special results of observation, not previously explained.

For instance, “while soluble crystalloids are always highly sapid,
soluble colloids are singularly insipid,” as might be expected; for, as
the sentient extremities of the nerves of the palate “are probably
protected by a colloidal membrane,” impermeable to other colloids, a
colloid, when tasted, probably never reaches those nerves. Again, “it
has been observed that vegetable gum is not digested in the stomach; the
coats of that organ dialyse the soluble food, absorbing crystalloids,
and rejecting all colloids.” One of the mysterious processes
accompanying digestion, the secretion of free muriatic acid by the coats
of the stomach, obtains a probable hypothetical explanation through the
same law. Finally, much light is thrown upon the observed phenomena of
osmose (the passage of fluids outward and inward through animal
membranes) by the fact that the membranes are colloidal. In consequence,
the water and saline solutions contained in the animal body pass easily
and rapidly through the membranes, while the substances directly
applicable to nutrition, which are mostly colloidal, are detained by
them.*

aThe property which salt possesses of preserving animal substances from
putrefaction is bresolved by Liebigb into two more general laws, the
strong attraction of salt for water, and the necessity of the presence
of water as a condition of putrefaction.[*] The intermediate phenomenon
which is interpolated between the remote cause and the effect, can here
be not merely inferred but seen; for it is a familiar fact, that flesh
upon which salt has been thrown is speedily found swimming in brine.

Edition: current; Page: [476]
The second of the two factors (as they may be termed) into which the
preceding law has been resolved, the necessity of water to putrefaction,
itself affords an additional example of the Resolution of Laws. The law
itself is proved by the Method of Difference, since flesh completely
dried and kept in a dry atmosphere does not putrefy; as we see in the
case of dried provisions, and human bodies in very dry climates. A
deductive explanation of this same law results from Liebig’s
speculations. The putrefaction of animal and other azotised bodies is a
chemical process, by which they are gradually dissipated in a gaseous
form, chiefly in that of carbonic acid and ammonia; now to convert the
carbon of the animal substance into carbonic acid requires oxygen, and
to convert the azote into ammonia requires hydrogen, which are the
elements of water. The extreme rapidity of the putrefaction of azotised
substances, compared with the gradual decay of non-azotised bodies (such
as wood and the like) by the action of oxygen alone, che explainsc from
the general law that substances are much more easily decomposed by the
action of two different affinities upon two of their elements, than by
the action of only one.a

§ 3. [Example from Brown-Séquard’s researches on the nervous system]
Among the many important properties of the nervous system which have
either been first discovered or strikingly illustrated by Dr.
Brown-Séquard, I select the reflex influence of the nervous system on
nutrition and secretion. By reflex nervous action is meant, action which
one part of the nervous system exerts over another part, without any
intermediate action on the brain, and consequently without
consciousness; or which, if it does pass through the brain, at least
produces its effects independently of the will. There are many
experiments which prove that irritation of a nerve in one part of the
body may in this manner excite powerful action in another part; for
example, food injected into the stomach through a divided œsophagus,
nevertheless produces secretion of saliva; warm water injected into the
bowels, and various other irritations of the lower intestines, have been
found to excite secretion of the gastric juice, and so forth. The
reality of the power being thus proved, its agency explains a great
variety of apparently anomalous phenomena; of which I select the
following from Dr. Brown-Séquard’s Lectures on the Nervous System:[*]

The production of tears by irritation of the eye, or of the mucous
membrane of the nose:

The secretions of the eye and nose increased by exposure of other parts
of the body to cold:

Edition: current; Page: [477]
Inflammation of the eye, especially when of traumatic origin, very
frequently excites a similar affection in the other eye, which may be
cured by section of the intervening nerve:

Loss of sight sometimes produced by neuralgia; and has been known to be
at once cured by the extirpation (for instance) of a carious tooth:

Even cataract has been produced in a healthy eye by cataract in the
other eye, or by neuralgia, or by a wound of the frontal nerve:

The well-known phenomenon of a sudden stoppage of the heart’s action,
and consequent death, produced by irritation of some of the nervous
extremities: e.g., by drinking very cold water; or by a blow on the
abdomen, or other sudden excitation of the abdominal sympathetic nerve;
though this nerve may be irritated to any extent without stopping the
heart’s action, if a section be made of the communicating nerves:

The extraordinary effects produced on the internal organs by an
extensive burn on the surface of the body; consisting in violent
inflammation of the tissues of the abdomen, chest, or head: which, when
death ensues from this kind of injury, is one of the most frequent
causes of it:

Paralysis and anæsthesia of one part of the body from neuralgia in
another part; and muscular atrophy from neuralgia, even when there is no
paralysis:

Tetanus produced by the lesion of a nerve; Dr. Brown-Séquard thinks it
highly probable that hydrophobia is a phenomenon of a similar nature:

Morbid changes in the nutrition of the brain and spinal cord,
manifesting themselves by epilepsy, chorea, hysteria, and other
diseases, occasioned by lesion of some of the nervous extremities in
remote places, as by worms, calculi, tumours, carious bones, and in some
cases even by very slight irritations of the skin.a

§ 4. [Examples of following newly-discovered laws into their complex
manifestations] From the foregoing and similar instances, we may see the
importance, when a law of nature previously unknown has been brought to
light, or when new light has been thrown upon a known law by experiment,
of examining all cases which present the conditions necessary for
bringing that law into action; a process a fertile in demonstrations of
special laws previously unsuspected, and explanations of others already
empirically known.

For instance, Faraday discovered by experiment, that voltaic electricity
could be evolved from a natural magnet, provided a conducting body were
set in motion at right angles to the direction of the magnet: and this
he found to hold not only of small magnets, but of that great magnet,
the earth.[*] The law being thus established experimentally, that
electricity is evolved, by a Edition: current; Page: [478] magnet, and a
conductor moving at right angles to the direction of its poles, we may
now look out for fresh instances in which these conditions meet.
Wherever a conductor moves or revolves at right angles to the direction
of the earth’s magnetic poles, there we may expect an evolution of
electricity. In the northern regions, where the polar direction is
nearly perpendicular to the horizon, all horizontal motions of
conductors will produce electricity; horizontal wheels, for example,
made of metal; blikewiseb all running streams will evolve a current of
electricity, which will circulate round them; and the air thus charged
with electricity may be one of the causes of the Aurora Borealis. In the
equatorial regions, on the contrary, upright wheels placed parallel to
the equator will originate a voltaic circuit, and waterfalls will
naturally become electric.

For a second example; it has cbeen provedc, chiefly by the researches of
Professor Graham,[*] that gases have a strong tendency to permeate
animal membranes, and diffuse themselves through the spaces which such
membranes inclose, notwithstanding the presence of other gases in those
spaces. Proceeding from this general law, and reviewing a variety of
cases in which gases lie contiguous to membranes, we are enabled to
demonstrate or to explain the following more special laws: 1st. The
human or animal body, when surrounded with any gas not already contained
within the body, absorbs it rapidly; such, for instance, as the gases of
putrefying matters: which helps to explain malaria. 2nd. The carbonic
acid gas of effervescing drinks, evolved in the stomach, permeates its
membranes, and rapidly spreads through the systemd. 3rd. Alcohol taken
into the stomach epasses into vapour and spreads through the system with
great rapidity; f(which, combined with the high combustibility of
alcohol, or in other words its ready combination with oxygen, may
perhaps help to explain the bodily warmth immediately consequent on
drinking spirituous liquors.)f 4th. In any state of the body in which
peculiar gases are formed within it, these will rapidly exhale through
all parts of the body; and hence the rapidity with which, in certain
states of disease, the surrounding atmosphere becomes tainted. 5th. The
putrefaction of the interior parts of a carcase will proceed as rapidly
as that of the exterior, Edition: current; Page: [479] from the ready
passage outwards of the gaseous products. 6th. The exchange of oxygen
and carbonic acid in the lungs is not prevented, but rather promoted, by
the intervention of the membrane of the lungs and the coats of the
blood-vessels between the blood and the air. It is necessary, however,
that there should be a substance in the blood with which the oxygen of
the air may immediately combine; otherwise instead of passing into the
blood, it would permeate the whole organism: and it is necessary that
the carbonic acid, as it is formed in the capillaries, should also find
a substance in the blood with which it can combine; otherwise it would
leave the body at all points, instead of being discharged through the
lungs.

§ 5. [Examples of empirical generalizations, afterwards confirmed and
explained deductively] The following is a deduction which confirms, by
explaining, the aempirical generalization, that soda powders weaken the
human system. These powders, consisting of a mixture of tartaric acid
with bicarbonate of soda, from which the carbonic acid is set free, must
pass into the stomach as tartrate of soda. Now, neutral tartrates,
citrates, and acetates of the alkalis are found, in their passage
through the system, to be changed into carbonates; and to convert a
tartrate into a carbonate requires an additional quantity of oxygen, the
abstraction of which must lessen the oxygen destined for assimilation
with the blood, bonb the quantity of which the vigorous action of the
human system cpartly dependsc.

The instances of new theories agreeing with and explaining old
empiricisms, are innumerable. All the just remarks made by experienced
persons on human character and conduct, are so many special laws, which
the general laws of the human mind explain and resolve. The empirical
generalizations on which the operations of the arts have usually been
founded, are continually justified and confirmed on the one hand, or
dcorrectedd and improved on the other, by the discovery of the simpler
scientific laws on which the efficacy of those operations depends. The
effects of the rotation of crops, of the various manures, and eother
processes of improved agriculture, have been for the first time resolved
in our own day into known laws of chemical and organic action, by Davyf,
Liebig, and othersf. The processes of the gmedicalg art are even now
mostly empirical: their efficacy is concluded, in each instance, from a
special and most precarious experimental generalization: but as science
advances in discovering the simple laws of chemistry and physiology,
progress is made in ascertaining the intermediate links in the hseries
ofh phenomena, and the more general laws on which they depend; and thus,
while the Edition: current; Page: [480] old processes are either
exploded, or their efficacy, in so far as real, explained, ibetteri
processes, founded on the knowledge of proximate causes, are continually
suggested and brought into use.* Many even of the truths of geometry
were generalizations from experience before they were deduced from first
principles. The quadrature of the cycloid nis said to have beenn first
effected by measurement, or rather by weighing a cycloidal card, and
comparing its weight with that of a piece of similar card of known
dimensions.

§ 6. [Example from mental science] To the foregoing examples from
physical science, let us add another from mental. The following is one
of the simple laws of mind: Ideas of a pleasurable or painful character
form associations more easily and strongly than other ideas, that is,
they become associated after fewer repetitions, and the association is
more durable. This is an experimental law, grounded on the Method of
Difference. By deduction from this law, many of the more special laws
which experience shows to exist among particular mental phenomena may be
demonstrated and explained:—the ease and rapidity, for instance, with
which thoughts connected with our passions or our more cherished
interests are excited, and the firm hold which the facts relating to
them have on our memory; the vivid recollection we retain of minute
circumstances which accompanied any object or event that deeply
interested us, and of the times and places in which we have been very
happy or very miserable; the horror with which we view the accidental
instrument of any occurrence which shocked us, or the locality where it
took place, and the pleasure we derive from any memorial of past
enjoyment; all these effects being proportional to the sensibility of
the individual mind, and atoa the consequent intensity of the pain or
pleasure from which the association Edition: current; Page: [481]
originated. It has been suggested by bthe able writer of a biographical
sketch of Dr. Priestley in ca monthly periodicalcb,* that the same
elementary law of our mental constitution, suitably followed out, would
explain a variety of mental phenomena dpreviouslyd inexplicable, and in
particular some of the fundamental diversities of human character and
genius. eAssociationse being of two sorts, either between synchronous,
or between successive impressions; and the influence of the law which
renders associations stronger in proportion to the pleasurable or
painful character of the impressions, being felt with peculiar force in
the synchronous class of associations; fit is remarked by the writer
referred tof, that in minds of strong organic sensibility synchronous
associations will be likely to predominate, producing a tendency to
conceive things in pictures and in the concrete, grichly clothed ing
attributes and circumstances, a mental habit which is commonly called
Imagination, and is one of the peculiarities of the painter and the
poet; while persons of more moderate susceptibility to pleasure and pain
will have a tendency to associate facts chiefly in the order of their
succession, and hsuch persons,h if they possess mental superiority, will
addict themselves to history or science rather than to creative art.
This interesting speculation the author of the present work has
endeavoured, on another occasion, to pursue ifartheri, and to jexamine
how far it will avail towards explaining thej peculiarities of the
poetical temperament.† It is at least an example which may serve,
instead of many others, to show the extensive scope which exists for
deductive investigation in the important and khitherto sok imperfect
Science of Mind.

§ 7. [aTendency of all the sciences to become deductivea] The
copiousness with which bthe discovery and explanation of special laws of
phenomena Edition: current; Page: [482] by deduction from simpler and
more general ones chas here been exemplifiedc, was prompted by a desire
to characterize clearly, and place in its due position of importance,
the Deductive Method; which, in the present state of knowledge, is
destined dhenceforth irrevocably to predominate in the course of
scientific investigationd. A revolution is peaceably and progressively
effecting itself in philosophy, the reverse of that to which Bacon has
attached his name. That great man changed the emethod of the sciencese
from deductive to experimental, and it is now rapidly reverting from
experimental to deductive. But the deductions which Bacon abolished were
from premises hastily snatched up, or arbitrarily assumed. The
principles were neither established by legitimate canons of experimental
inquiry, nor the results tested by that indispensable element of a
rational Deductive Method, verification by specific experience. Between
the primitive method of Deduction and that which I have attempted to
fcharacterizef, there is all the difference which exists between the
Aristotelian physics and the Newtonian theory of the heavens.

gIt would, however, be a mistake to expect that those great
generalizations, from which the subordinate truths of the more backward
sciences will probably at some future period be deduced by reasoning (as
the truths of astronomy are deduced from the generalities of the
Newtonian theory), will be found, in all, or even in most cases, among
truths now known and admitted. We may rest assured, that many of the
most general laws of nature are as yet entirely unthought of; and that
many others, destined hereafter to assume the same character, are known,
if at all, only as laws or properties of some limited class of
phenomena; just as electricity, now recognised as one of the most
universal of natural agencies, was once known only as a curious property
which certain substances acquired by friction, of first attracting and
then repelling light bodies. If the theories of heat, cohesion,
crystallization, and chemical action, are destined, as there can be
little doubt that they are, Edition: current; Page: [483] to become
deductive, the truths which will then be regarded as the principia of
those sciences would probably, if now announced, appear quite as novel*
as the law of gravitation appeared to the cotemporaries of Newton;
possibly even more so, since Newton’s law, after all, was but an
extension of the law of weight—that is, of a generalization familiar
from of old, and which already comprehended a not inconsiderable body of
natural phenomena. The general laws of a similarly commanding character,
which we still look forward to the discovery of, may not always find so
much of their foundations already laid.

These general truths will doubtless make their first appearance in the
character of hypotheses; not proved, nor even admitting of proof, in the
first instance, but assumed as premises for the purpose of deducing from
them the known laws of concrete phenomena. But this, though their
initial, cannot be their final state. To entitle an hypothesis to be
received as one of the truths of nature, and not as a mere technical
help to the human faculties, it must be capable of being tested by the
canons of legitimate induction, and must actually have been submitted to
that test. When this shall have been done, and done successfully,
premises will have been obtained from which all the other propositions
of the science will thenceforth be presented as conclusions, and the
science will, by means of a new and unexpected Induction, be rendered
Deductive.g

Edition: current; Page: [484]


CHAPTER XIV[*]: aOfa the Limits to the Explanation of Laws of Nature; and of Hypotheses

§ 1. [Can all the sequences in nature be resolvable into one law?] The
preceding considerations have led us to recognise a distinction between
two kinds of laws, or observed uniformities in nature: ultimate laws,
and what may be termed derivative laws. Derivative laws are such as are
deducible from, and may, in any of the modes which we have pointed out,
be resolved into, other and more general ones. Ultimate laws are those
which cannot. We are not sure that any of the uniformities bwith which
we are yet acquaintedb are ultimate laws; but we know that there must be
ultimate laws; and that every resolution of a derivative law into more
general laws, brings us nearer to them.

Since we are continually discovering that uniformities, not previously
known to be other than ultimate, are derivative, and resolvable into
more general laws; since (in other words) we are continually discovering
cthec explanation of some sequence which was previously known only as a
fact; it becomes an interesting question whether there are any necessary
limits to this philosophical operation, or whether it may proceed until
all the uniform sequences in nature are resolved into some one universal
law. For this seems, at first sight, to be the ultimatum towards which
the progress of induction, by the Deductive Method resting on a basis of
observation and experiment, is dtending. Projects of this kind were
universal in the infancy of philosophy; Edition: current; Page: [485]
any speculations which held out a less brilliant prospect, being in
those early times deemed not worth pursuing. And the idea receives so
much apparent countenance from the nature of the most eremarkablee
achievements of modern science, that speculators are even now
ffrequently appearing,f who profess either to have solved the problem,
or to suggest modes in which it may one day be solved. Even where
pretensions of this magnitude are not made, the character of the
solutions which are given or sought of particular classes of phenomena,
often involves such conceptions of what constitutes explanation, as
would render the notion of explaining all phenomena whatever by means of
some one cause or law, perfectly admissible.

§ 2. [Ultimate laws cannot be less numerous than the distinguishable
feelings of our nature] It is therefore useful to remark, that the
ultimate Laws of Nature cannot possibly be less numerous than the
distinguishable sensations or other feelings of our nature;—those, I
mean, which are distinguishable from one another in quality, and not
merely in quantity or degree. For example; since there is a phenomenon
sui generis, called colour, which our consciousness testifies to be not
a particular degree of some other phenomenon, as heat or odour or
motion, but intrinsically unlike all others, it follows that there are
ultimate laws of colour; that though the facts of colour may admit of
explanation, they never can be explained from laws of heat or odour
alone, or of motion alone, but that however far the explanation may be
carried, there will always remain in it a law of colour. I do not mean
that it might not possibly be shown that some other phenomenon, some
chemical or mechanical action for example, invariably precedes, and is
the cause of, every phenomenon of colour. But though this, if proved,
would be an important extension of our knowledge of nature, it would not
explain how or why a motion, or a chemical action, acana produce a
sensation of colour; and however diligent might be our scrutiny of the
phenomena, whatever number of hidden links we might detect in the chain
of causation terminating in the colour, the last link would still be a
law of colour, not a law of motion, nor of any other phenomenon
whatever. Nor does this observation apply only to colour, as compared
with any other of the great classes of sensations; it applies to every
particular colour, as compared with others. White colour can in no
manner be explained exclusively by the laws of the production of red
colour. In any attempt to explain it, we cannot but introduce, as one
element of the explanation, the proposition that some antecedent or
other produces the sensation of white.

Edition: current; Page: [486]
The ideal limit, therefore, of the explanation of natural phenomena
(towards which as towards other ideal limits we are constantly tending,
without the prospect of ever completely attaining it) would be to show
that each distinguishable variety of our sensations, or other states of
consciousness, has only one sort of cause; that, for example, whenever
we perceive a white colour, there is some one condition or set of
conditions which is always present, and the presence of which always
produces in us that sensation. As long as there are several known modes
of production of a phenomenon (several different substances, for
instance, which have the property of whiteness, and between which we
cannot trace any other resemblance) so long it is not impossible that
one of these modes of production may be resolved into another, or that
all of them may be resolved into some more general mode of production,
not hitherto recognised. But when the modes of production are reduced to
one, we cannot, in point of simplification, go any further. This one may
not, after all, be the ultimate mode; there may be other links to be
discovered between the supposed cause and the effect; but we can only
further resolve the known law, by introducing some other law hitherto
unknown; which will not diminish the number of ultimate laws.

In what cases, accordingly, has science been most successful in
explaining phenomena, by resolving their complex laws into laws of
greater simplicity and generality? Hitherto chiefly in cases of the
propagation of various phenomena through space: and, first and
principally, the most extensive and important of all facts of that
description, bmechanicalb motion. Now this is cexactlyc what might be
expected from the principles dhered laid down. Not only is motion one of
the most universal of all phenomena, it is also (as might be expected
from ethate circumstance) one of those which, apparently at least, are
produced in the greatest number of ways; but the phenomenon itself is
always, to our sensations, the same in every respect but degree.
Differences of duration, or of velocity, are evidently differences in
degree only; and differences of direction in space, which alone has any
semblance of being a distinction in kind, entirely disappear (so far as
our sensations are concerned) by a change in our own position; indeed
the very same motion appears to us, according to our position, to take
place in every variety of direction, and motions in every different
direction to take place in the same. And again, motion in a straight
line fandf in a curve are no otherwise distinct than that the one is
motion continuing in the same direction, the other is motion which at
each instant changes its direction. There is, therefore, according to
the gprinciplesg I have stated, no absurdity in supposing that all
Edition: current; Page: [487] motion may be produced in one and the same
way; by the same kind of cause. Accordingly, the greatest achievements
in physical science have consisted in resolving one observed law of the
production of motion into the laws of other known modes of production,
or the laws of several such modes into one more general mode; as when
the fall of bodies to the earth, and the motions of the planets, were
brought under the one law of the mutual attraction of all particles of
matter; when the motions said to be produced by magnetism were shown to
be produced by electricity; when the motions of fluids in a lateral
direction, or even contrary to the direction of gravity, were shown to
be produced by gravity; and hthe likeh. There is an abundance of
distinct causes of motion still unresolved into one another;
gravitation, heat, electricity, chemical action, nervous action, and so
forth; but iwhether the efforts of the present generation of savans to
resolve all these different modes of production into one, are ultimately
successful or noti, the attempt so to resolve them is perfectly
legitimate. For though these various causes produce, in other respects,
sensations intrinsically different, and are not, therefore, capable of
being resolved into one another, yet in so far as they all produce
motion, it is quite possible that the immediate antecedent of the motion
may in all these different cases be the same; jnor is it impossible that
these various agencies themselves mayk, as the new doctrines assert,k
all of them have for their own immediate antecedent, modes of molecular
motionj.

We need not extend our illustration to other cases, as for instance to
the propagation of light, sound, heat, electricity, &c. through space,
or any of the other phenomena which have been found susceptible of
explanation by the resolution of their observed laws into more general
laws. Enough has been said to display the difference between the kind of
explanation and resolution of laws which is chimerical, and that of
which the accomplishment is the great aim of lsciencel; and to show into
what sort of elements the resolution must be effected, if at all.*

Edition: current; Page: [488]
§ 3. [In what sense ultimate facts can be explained] As, however, there
is scarcely any aonea of the principles of a true method of
philosophizing which does not require to be guarded against errors on
both sides, I must enter a caveat against another misapprehension, of a
kind directly contrary to the precedingb. M. Comteb, among other
occasions on which he has condemned, with some asperity, any attempt to
explain phenomena which are “evidently primordial,” (meaning,
apparently, no more than that every cpeculiarc phenomenon must have at
least one peculiar and dtherefored inexplicable Edition: current; Page:
[489] law,) has spoken of the attempt to furnish any explanation of the
colour belonging to each substance, “la couleur élémentaire propre à
chaque substance,” as essentially illusory. “No one,” says he, “in our
time attempts to explain the particular specific gravity of each
substance or of each structure. Why should it be otherwise as to the
specific colour, the notion of which is undoubtedly no less
primordial?”*

Now although, as ehee elsewhere observes,[*] a colour must always remain
a different thing from a weight or a sound, fvarieties of colour might
nevertheless follow, or correspond to, given varieties of weight, or
sound, or some other phenomenon as different as these are from colour
itself. It is one question what a thing is, and another what it depends
on; and though to ascertain the conditions of an elementary phenomenon
is not to obtain any new insight into the nature of the phenomenon
itself, that is no reason against attempting to discover the conditions.
gTheg interdict against endeavouring to reduce distinctions of colour to
any common principle, would have held equally good against a like
attempt on the subject of distinctions of sound; which nevertheless have
been found to be immediately preceded and caused by distinguishable
varieties in the vibrations of elastic bodies: though a sound, no doubt,
is quite as different as a colour is from any motion of particles,
vibratory or otherwise. We might add, that, in the case of colours,
there are strong positive indications that they are not ultimate
properties of the different kinds of substances, but depend on
conditions capable of being superinduced upon all substances; since
there is no substance which cannot, according to the kind of light
thrown upon it, be made to assume halmost any colourh; and since almost
every change in the mode of aggregation of the particles of the same
substance, is attended with alterations in its colour, and iini its
optical properties generally.

The jreally weak pointj in the attempts which have been made to account
for colours by the vibrations of a fluid, is not that the attempt itself
is unphilosophical, but that the existence of the fluid, and the fact of
its vibratory motion, are not proved; but are assumed, on no other
ground than the facility they are supposed to afford of explaining the
phenomena. And kthis consideration leadsk to the important question of
the proper use of scientific Edition: current; Page: [490] hypotheses;
lthe connexion of which with the subjectl of the explanation of the
phenomena of nature, and of the necessary limits to that explanation,
needs not be pointed out.

§ 4. [The proper use of scientific hypotheses] An hypothesis is any
supposition which we make (either without actual evidence, or on
evidence avowedly insufficient) in order to endeavour to deduce from it
conclusions in accordance with facts which are known to be real; under
the idea that if the conclusions to which the hypothesis leads are known
truths, the hypothesis itself either must be, or at least is likely to
be, true. If the hypothesis relates to the cause, or mode of production
of a phenomenon, it will serve, if admitted, to explain such facts as
are found capable of being deduced from it. And this explanation is the
purpose of many, if not most, hypotheses. Since explaining, in the
scientific sense, means resolving an uniformity which is not a law of
causation, into the laws of causation from which it results, or a
complex law of causation into simpler and more general ones from which
it is capable of being deductively inferred; if there do not exist any
known laws which fulfil this requirement, we may feign or imagine some
which would fulfil it; and this is making an hypothesis.

An hypothesis being a mere supposition, there are no other limits to
hypotheses than those of the human imagination; we may, if we please,
imagine, by way of accounting for an effect, some cause of a kind
utterly unknown, and acting according to a law altogether fictitious.
But as hypotheses of this sort would not have any of the plausibility
belonging to those which ally themselves by analogy with known laws of
nature, and besides would not supply the want which arbitrary hypotheses
are generally invented to satisfy, by enabling the imagination to
represent to itself an obscure phenomenon in a familiar light; there is
probably no hypothesis in the history of science in which both the agent
itself and the law of its operation were fictitious. Either the
phenomenon assigned as the cause is real, but the law according to which
it acts, merely supposed; or the cause is fictitious, but is supposed to
produce its effects according to laws similar to those of some known
class of phenomena. An instance of the first kind is afforded by the
different suppositions amadea respecting the law of the planetary
central force, anterior to the discovery of the true law, that the force
varies as the inverse square of the distance; which balso suggested
itself tob Newton, in the first instance, as an hypothesis, and was
verified by proving that it led deductively to Kepler’s laws. Hypotheses
of the second kind are such as the vortices of Descartes, which were
fictitious, but were supposed to obey the known laws of rotatory
Edition: current; Page: [491] motion; or the two rival hypotheses
respecting the nature of light, the one ascribing the phenomena to a
fluid emitted from all luminous bodies, the other (now cgenerally
received) attributing them to vibratory motions among the particles of
an ether pervading all space. Of the existence of either fluid there is
no evidence, save the explanation they are calculated to afford of some
of the phenomena; but they are supposed to produce their effects
according to known laws; the ordinary laws of continued locomotion in
the one case, and in the other, those of the propagation of undulatory
movements among the particles of an elastic fluid.

According to the foregoing remarks, hypotheses are invented to enable
the Deductive Method to be earlier applied to phenomena. But* in order
to discover the cause of any dphenomenond by the Deductive Method, the
process must consist of three parts; induction, ratiocination, and
verification. Induction, (the place of which, however, may be supplied
by a prior deduction,) to ascertain the laws of the causes;
ratiocination, to compute from those laws, how the causes will operate
in the particular combination known to exist in the case in hand;
verification, by comparing this calculated effect with the actual
phenomenon. No one of these three parts of the process can be dispensed
with. In the ededuction which proves the identity of gravity fwithf the
central force of the solar system, all the three are found. First, it is
proved from the moon’s motions, that the earth attracts her with a force
varying as the inverse square of the distance. This (though partly
dependent on prior deductions) corresponds to the first, or purely
inductive, step, the ascertainment of the law of the cause. Secondly,
from this law, and from the knowledge previously obtained of the moon’s
mean distance from the earth, and of the actual amount of her deflection
from the tangent, it is ascertained with what rapidity the earth’s
attraction would cause gthe moong to fall, if she were no further off,
and no more acted upon by extraneous forces, than terrestrial bodies
are: hthath is the second step, the ratiocination. Finally, this
calculated velocity being compared with the observed velocity with which
all heavy bodies fall, by mere gravity, towards the surface of the
earth, (isixteen feet in the first second, forty-eight in the second,
and so forth, in the ratio of the odd numbers, 1, 3, 5, &c.,) the two
quantities jarej found to agree. The order in which kthe steps are here
presented, was not thatk of their discovery; but it is their correct
logical order, as portions of the proof that the same Edition: current;
Page: [492] attraction of the earth which causes the moon’s motion,
causes also the fall of heavy bodies to the earth: a proof which is thus
complete in all its parts.

Now, the Hypothetical Method suppresses the first of the three steps,
the induction to ascertain the law; and contents itself with the other
two operations, ratiocination and verification; the law which is
reasoned from, being assumed, instead of proved.

This process may evidently be legitimate on one supposition, namely, if
the nature of the case be such that the final step, the verification,
shall amount to, and fulfil the conditions of, a complete induction. We
want to be assured that the law we have hypothetically assumed is a true
one; and its leading deductively to true results will afford this
assurance, provided the case be such that a false law cannot lead to a
true result; provided no law, except the very one which we have assumed,
can lead deductively to the same conclusions which that leads to. And
this proviso is loften realized. For example, in mthe very completem
specimen of deduction which we just cited, the original major premise of
the ratiocination, the law of the attractive force, was ascertained in
this nmode; by this legitimate employment of the Hypothetical Method.
Newton began by an assumption, that the force which at each instant
deflects a planet from its rectilineal course, and makes it describe a
curve round the sun, is a force tending directly towards the sun. He
then proved that if this be so, the planet will describe, as we know by
Kepler’s first law that it does describe, equal areas in equal times;
and, lastly, he proved that if the force acted in any other direction
whatever, the planet would not describe equal areas in equal times. It
being thus shown that no other hypothesis owouldo accord with the facts,
the assumption was proved; the hypothesis became pan inductive truthp
Not only did Newton ascertain by this hypothetical process the direction
of the deflecting force; he proceeded in exactly the same manner to
ascertain the law of variation of the quantity of that force. He assumed
that the force varied inversely as the square of the distance; showed
that from this assumption the remaining two of Kepler’s laws might be
deduced; and finally, that any other law of variation would give results
inconsistent with those laws, and inconsistent, therefore, with the real
motions of the planets, of which Kepler’s laws were known to be a
correct expression.

qI have said that in this case the verification fulfils the conditions
of an induction: but an induction of what sort? On examination we find
that it conforms to the canon of the Method of Difference. It affords
the two instances, Edition: current; Page: [493] A B C, a b c, and B C,
b c. A represents central force; A B C, the planets plus a central
force; B C, the planets rapart fromr a central force. The planets with a
central force give a, areas proportional to the times; the planets
without a central force give b c (a set of motions) without a, or with
something else instead of a. This is the Method of Difference in all its
strictness. It is true, the two instances which the method requires are
obtained in this case, not by experiment, but by a prior deduction. But
that is of no consequence. It is immaterial what is the nature of the
evidence from which we derive the assurance that A B C will produce a b
c, and B C only b c; it is enough that we have that assurance. In the
present case, a process of reasoning furnished Newton with the very
instances, which, if the nature of the case had admitted of it, he would
have sought by experiment.q

It is thus perfectly possible, and indeed is a very common occurrence,
that what swass an hypothesis at the beginning of the inquiry, becomes a
proved law of nature before its close. But tin order that this should
happen, we must be able, either by deduction or experiment, to obtain
both the instances which the Method of Difference requires. That we are
able from the hypothesis to deduce the known facts, gives only the
affirmative instance, A B C, a b c. It is equally necessary that we
should be able to obtain, as Newton did, the negative instance B C, b c;
by showing that no antecedent, except the one assumed in the hypothesis,
would in conjunction with B C produce a.

Now it appears to me that this assurance cannot be obtained, when the
cause assumed in the hypothesis is an unknown cause, imagined solely to
account for a. When we are only seeking to determine the precise law of
a cause already ascertained, or to distinguish the particular agent
which is in fact the cause, among several agents of the same kind, one
or other of which it is already known to be, we may then obtain the
negative instance. An inquiry, which of the bodies of the solar system
causes by its attraction some particular irregularity in the orbit or
periodic time of some satellite or comet, would be a case of the second
description. Newton’s was a case of the first.t If it had not been
upreviouslyu known that the planets were hindered from moving in
straight lines by some force tending towards the interior of their
orbit, though the exact direction was doubtful; or if it had not been
known that the force increased in some proportion or other as the
distance diminished, and diminished as it increased; Newton’s argument
would not have proved his conclusion. These facts, however, being
already certain, the range of admissible suppositions was limited to the
various possible directions of a line, and the various possible
numerical relations between the variations of Edition: current; Page:
[494] the distance, and the variations of the attractive force: now
among these it was easily shown that different suppositions could not
lead to identical consequences.

Accordingly, Newton could not have performed his second great
vscientificv operation, that of identifying terrestrial gravity with the
central force of the solar system, by the same hypothetical method. When
the law of the moon’s attraction had been proved from the data of the
moon itself, then on finding the same law to accord with the phenomena
of terrestrial gravity, he was warranted in adopting it as the law of
those phenomena likewise; but it would not have been allowable for him,
without any lunar data, to assume that the moon was attracted towards
the earth with a force as the inverse square of the distance, merely
because that ratio would enable him to account for wterrestrial
gravityw: for it would have been impossible for him to prove that the
observed law of the fall of heavy bodies to the earth could not result
from any force, save one extending to the moon, and proportional to the
inverse square.

It appears, then, to be a condition of xthe mostx genuinely scientific
hypothesis, that it be not destined always to remain an hypothesis, but
be yof such a nature asy to be either proved or disproved by zcomparison
with observed facts. This condition is fulfilled when the effect isz
already known to depend on the very cause supposed, and the hypothesis
arelatesa only to the precise mode of dependence; the law of the
variation of the effect according to the variations in the quantity or
bin theb relations of the cause. With these cmayc be classed the
hypotheses which do not make any supposition with regard to causation,
but only with regard to the law of correspondence between facts which
accompany each other in their variations, though there may be no
relation of cause and effect between them. Such dwered the different
false hypotheses which Kepler made respecting the law of the refraction
of light. It was known that the direction of the line of refraction
varied with every variation in the direction of the line of incidence,
but it was not known how; that is, what changes of the one corresponded
to the different changes of the other. In this case any law, different
from the true one, must have led to false results. And, lastly, we must
add to these, all hypothetical modes of Edition: current; Page: [495]
merely erepresenting, ore describing, phenomena; such as the hypothesis
of the ancient astronomers that the heavenly bodies moved in circles;
the various hypotheses of excentrics, deferents, and epicycles, which
were added to that original hypothesis; the nineteen false hypotheses
which Kepler made and abandoned respecting the form of the planetary
orbits; and even the fdoctrine in which he finally rested, that those
orbits are ellipses, which was but an hypothesis like the rest until
verified by facts.

In all these cases, verification is proof; if the supposition accords
with the phenomena there needs no other evidence of it. But in order
that this may be the case, gI conceive it to beg necessary, when the
hypothesis relates to causation, that the supposed cause should not only
be a real phenomenon, something actually existing in nature, but should
be already known to hexercise, or at least to be capable of exercising,
an influence of some sort over the effecth. In any other case, it is no
isufficienti evidence of the truth of the hypothesis that we are able to
deduce the real phenomena from it.

Is it, then, never allowable, in a scientific hypothesis, to assume a
cause; but only to ascribe an assumed law to a known cause? I do not
assert this. I only say, that in the latter case alone can the
hypothesis be received as true merely because it explains the phenomena.
In the former case it jmay be veryj useful by suggesting a line of
investigation which may possibly terminate in obtaining real proof.
kBut, fork this purpose, as is justly remarked by M. lComte, mit is
indispensable that the cause suggested by the hypothesis should be in
its own nature susceptible of being proved by other evidence. This seems
to be the philosophical import of Newton’s maxim, (so often cited with
approbation by subsequent writers,) that the cause assigned for any
phenomenon must not only be such as if admitted would explain the
phenomenon, but must also be a vera causa.[*] What he meant by a vera
causa Newton did not indeed very explicitly define; and Dr. Whewell, who
dissents from the propriety of any such restriction upon the latitude of
framing hypotheses, has had little difficulty in showing* that his
conception of it was neither precise nor consistent with itself:
accordingly his optical theory was a signal instance Edition: current;
Page: [496] of the violation of his own rule. nIt is certainly notn
necessary that the cause assigned should be a cause already known;
ootherwise we should sacrifice our best opportunities of becoming
acquainted with new causes.o But what is true in the maxim is, that the
cause, though not known previously, should be capable of being known
thereafter; that its existence should be capable of being detected, and
its connexion with the effect ascribed to pit should bep susceptible of
being proved, by independent evidence. The hypothesis, by suggesting
observations and experiments, puts us on the road to that independent
evidence if it be really attainable; and till it be attained, the
hypothesis ought qonly to count for a more or less plausible
conjectureq.

§ 5. [The indispensableness of scientific hypotheses] This function,
however, of hypotheses, is one which must be reckoned absolutely
indispensable in science. When Newton said, “Hypotheses non fingo,”[*]
he did not mean that he deprived himself of the facilities of
investigation afforded by assuming in the first instance what he hoped
ultimately to be able to prove. Without such assumptions, science could
never have attained its present state: they are necessary steps in the
progress to something more certain; and nearly everything which is now
theory was once hypothesis. Even in purely experimental science, some
inducement is necessary for trying one experiment rather than another;
and though it is abstractedly possible that all the experiments which
have been tried, might have been produced by the mere desire to
ascertain what would happen in certain circumstances, without any
previous conjecture as to the result; yet, in point of fact, those
unobvious, delicate, and often cumbrous and tedious processes of
experiment, which have thrown most light upon the general constitution
of nature, would hardly ever have been undertaken by the persons or at
the time they were, unless it had seemed to depend on them whether some
general doctrine or theory which had been suggested, but not yet proved,
should be admitted or not. If this be true even of merely experimental
inquiry, the conversion of experimental into deductive truths could
still less have been effected without large temporary assistance from
hypotheses. The process of tracing regularity in any complicated, and at
first sight confused set of appearances, is necessarily tentative: we
begin by making any supposition, even a false one, to see what
consequences will follow from it; and by observing how these differ from
the real phenomena, we learn what corrections to make in our assumption.
The Edition: current; Page: [497] simplest supposition which accords
with athe morea obvious facts, is the best to begin with; because its
consequences are the most easily traced. This rude hypothesis is then
rudely corrected, and the operation repeated; and the comparison of the
consequences deducible from the corrected hypothesis, with the observed
facts, suggests still further correction, until the deductive results
are at last made to tally with the phenomena. “Some fact bis as yet
little understood, or some law is unknown: we frame on the subject an
hypothesis as accordant as possible with the whole of the data already
possessed; and the science, being thus enabled to move forward freely,
always ends by leading to new consequences capable of observation, which
either confirm or refute, unequivocally, the first supposition.” Neither
induction nor deduction cwould enable us to understand even the simplest
phenomena, “if we did not often commence by anticipating on the results;
by making a provisional supposition, at first essentially conjectural,
as to some of the very notions which constitute the final object of the
inquiry.”* Let any one watch the manner in which he himself unravels dad
complicated mass of evidence; let him observe how, for instance, he
elicits the true history of any occurrence from the involved statements
of one or of many witnesses: he will find that he does not take all the
items of evidence into his mind at once, and attempt to weave them
together: ehe extemporises, from a few of the particulars, a first rude
theory of the mode in which the facts took place, and then looks at the
other statements one by one, to try whether they can be reconciled with
that provisional theory, or what falterationsf or additions it requires
to make it square with them. In this way, which ghas been justly
comparedg to the Methods of Approximation of mathematicians, we arrive,
by means of hypotheses, at conclusions not hypothetical.†

Edition: current; Page: [498]
§ 6. [aThe two degrees of legitimacy in hypothesesa] It is perfectly
consistent with the spirit of the method, to assume in this provisional
manner not only an hypothesis respecting the law of what we already know
to be the cause, but an hypothesis respecting the cause itself. It is
allowable, useful, and often even necessary, to begin by asking
ourselves what cause may have produced the effect, in order that we may
know in what direction to look out Edition: current; Page: [499] for
evidence to determine whether it actually did. The vortices of Descartes
would have been a perfectly legitimate hypothesis, if it had been
possible, by any mode of exploration which we could entertain the hope
of ever possessing, to bring the breality of the vortices, as a fact in
nature, conclusively to the test of observationb. The cvice of the
hypothesis was thatc it could not lead to any course of investigation
capable of converting it from an hypothesis into a proved fact. dIt
might chance to be disproved, either by some want of correspondence with
the phenomena it purported to explain, or (as actually happened) by some
extraneous fact. “The free passage of comets through the spaces in which
these vortices should have been, convinced men that these vortices did
not exist.”* But the hypothesis would have been false, though no such
direct evidence of its falsity had been procurable. Direct evidence of
its truth there could not be.d

eThe prevailing hypothesis of a luminiferous etherf, in other respects
not without analogy to that of Descartes, is not in its own nature
entirely cut off from the possibility of direct evidence in its favour.
It is well known that the difference between the calculated and the
observed times of the periodical return of Encke’s comet, has led to a
conjecture that a medium capable of opposing resistance to motion is
diffused through space. If this surmise should be confirmed, in the
course of ages, by the gradual accumulation of a similar variance in the
case of the other bodies of the solar system, the luminiferous ether
would have made a considerable advance towards the character of a vera
causa, since the existence would have been ascertained of a great
Edition: current; Page: [500] cosmical agent, possessing some of the
attributes which the hypothesis assumes: though there would still remain
many difficulties, and the identification of the ether with the
resisting medium would even, I imagine, give rise to new ones. At
present, however, this supposition cannot be looked upon as more than a
conjecture; the existence of the ether still rests on thef possibility
of deducing from its gassumedg laws a considerable number of hactual
phenomena; and this evidence I cannot regard as conclusiveh, because we
cannot have, in the case of such an hypothesis, the assurance that if
the hypothesis be false it must lead to results at variance with the
true facts.

Accordingly, most thinkers of any degree of sobriety allow, that an
hypothesis of this kind is not to be received as probably true because
it accounts for all the known phenomena; since this is a condition
isometimes fulfilled tolerablyi well by two conflicting hypotheses;
jwhile there are probably kmany othersk which are equally possible, but
which, for want of anything analogous in our experience, our minds are
unfitted to conceive. But it seems to be thought that an hypothesis of
the sort in question is entitled to a more favourable reception, if,
besides accounting for all the facts previously known, it has led to the
anticipation and prediction of others which experience afterwards
verified; as the undulatory theory of light led to the prediction,
subsequently realized by experiment, that two luminous rays might meet
each other in such a manner as to produce darkness. Such predictions and
their fulfilment are, indeed, well calculated to limpress the
uninformedl, whose faith in science rests solely on similar coincidences
between its prophecies and what comes to pass. But it is strange that
any considerable stress should be laid upon such a coincidence by
mpersons of scientific attainmentsm. If the laws of the propagation of
light accord with those of the vibrations of an elastic fluid in as many
respects as is necessary to make the hypothesis nafford a correct
expressionn of all or most of the phenomena known at the time, it is
nothing strange that they should accord with each other in one respect
more. Though twenty such coincidences should occur, they would not prove
the reality of the undulatory ether; it would not follow that the
phenomena of light were results of the laws of elastic fluids, but at
Edition: current; Page: [501] most that they are governed by laws
opartially identical witho these; which, we may observe, is already
certain, from the fact that the hypothesis in question could be for a
moment tenable.* qCases may be cited, even in our imperfect acquaintance
with nature, where agencies that we have good reason to consider as
radically distinct, produce their effects, or some of their effects,
according to laws which are identical. The law, for example, of the
inverse square of the distance, is the measure of the intensity rnot
only of gravitation, but (it is believed)r of illumination, and of heat
diffused from a centre. Yet no one looks upon this identity as proving
similarity in the mechanism by which the three kinds of phenomena are
produced.

According to Dr. Whewell, the coincidence of sresultss predicted from an
hypothesis, with facts afterwards observed, amounts to a conclusive
proof of the truth of the theory. “If I copy a long series of letters,
of which the last half dozen are concealed, and if I guess these aright,
as is found to be the case when they are afterwards uncovered, this must
be because I have made out the import of the inscription. To say, that
because I have copied all that I could see, it is nothing strange that I
should guess those which I cannot see, would be absurd, without
supposing such a ground for guessing.”† If any one, from examining the
greater part of a long inscription, can interpret the characters so that
the inscription gives a rational meaning in a known language, there is a
strong presumption that his interpretation is correct; but I do not
think the presumption much increased by his being able to guess the
Edition: current; Page: [502] few remaining letters without seeing them:
for we should naturally expect (when the nature of the case excludes
chance) that even an erroneous interpretation which accorded with all
the visible tpartst of the inscription would accord also with the small
remainder; as would be the case, for example, if the inscription had
been designedly so contrived as to admit of a double sense. I assume
that the uncovered characters afford an amount of coincidence too great
to be merely casual: otherwise the illustration is not a fair one. No
one supposes the agreement of the phenomena of light with the theory of
undulations to be merely fortuitous. It must arise from the actual
identity of some of the laws of undulations with some of those of light:
and if there be that identity, it is reasonable to suppose that its
consequences would not end with the phenomena which first suggested the
identification, nor be even confined to such phenomena as were known at
the time. But it does not follow, because some of the laws agree with
those of undulations, that there are any actual undulations; no more
than it followed because some (though not so many) of the same laws
agreed with those of the projection of particles, that there was actual
emission of particles. Even the undulatory hypothesis does not account
for all the phenomena of light. The natural colours of objects, the
compound nature of the solar ray, the absorption of light, and its
chemical and vital action, the hypothesis leaves as mysterious as it
found them; and some of these facts are, at least apparently, more
reconcileable with the emission theory than with that of Young and
Fresnel. Who knows but that some third hypothesis, including all these
phenomena, may in time leave the undulatory theory as far behind as that
has left the theory of Newton and his successors?

To the statement, that the condition of accounting for all the known
phenomena is often fulfilled equally well by two conflicting hypotheses,
Dr. Whewell makes answer that he knows “of no such case in the history
of science, where the phenomena are at all numerous and complicated.”*
Such an affirmation, by a writer of Dr. Whewell’s minute acquaintance
with the history of science, would carry great authority, if he had not,
a few pages before, taken pains to refute it,† by maintaining that even
the exploded scientific hypotheses might always, or almost always, have
been so modified as to make them correct representations of the
phenomena. The hypothesis of vortices, he tells us, was, by successive
umodificationsu, brought to coincide in its results with the Newtonian
theory and with the facts. The vortices did not indeed explain all the
phenomena which the Newtonian theory was Edition: current; Page: [503]
ultimately found to account for, such as the precession of the
equinoxes; but this phenomenon was not, at the time, in the
contemplation of either party, as one of the facts to be accounted for.
All the facts which they did contemplate, we may believe on Dr.
Whewell’s authority to have accorded as accurately with the Cartesian
hypothesis, in its finally improved state, as with Newton’s.

But it is not, I conceive, a valid reason for accepting any given
hypothesis, that we are unable to imagine any other which will account
for the facts. There is no necessity for supposing that the true
explanation must be one which, with only our present experience, we
could imagine. Among the natural agents with which we are acquainted,
the vibrations of an elastic fluid may be the only one whose laws bear a
close resemblance to those of light; but we cannot tell that there does
not exist an unknown cause, other than an elastic ether diffused through
space, yet producing effects identical in some respects with those which
would result from the undulations of such an ether. To assume that no
such cause can exist, appears to me an extreme case of assumption
without evidence.q vAnd at the risk of being charged with want of
modesty, I cannot help expressing astonishment that a philosopher of
wDr. Whewell’s abilities and attainmentsw should have written an
elaborate treatise on the philosophy of induction, in which he
recognises absolutely no mode of induction except that of trying
hypothesis after hypothesis until one is found which fits the phenomena;
which one, when found, is to be assumed as true, with no other
reservation than that if on re-examination it should appear to assume
more than is needful for explaining the phenomena, the superfluous part
of the assumption should be cut off. xAnd this without the slightest
distinction between the cases in which it may be known beforehand that
two different hypotheses cannot lead to the same result, and those in
which, for aught we can ever know, the range of suppositions, all
equally consistent with the phenomena, may be infinite.v*

Edition: current; Page: [504]
bNevertheless, I do not agree with M. Comte[*] in condemningb those who
employ themselves in working out into detail cthe application of these
hypotheses to the explanation of ascertained facts; provided they bear
in mind that the utmost they can prove is, not that the hypothesis is,
but that it may be true. The ether hypothesis has a very strong claim to
be so followed out, a claim greatly strengthened since it has been shown
to afford a mechanism Edition: current; Page: [505] which would explain
the mode of production not of light only, but also of heat. Indeed the
speculation has a smaller element of hypothesis in its application to
heat, than in the case for which it was originally framed. We have proof
by our senses of the existence of molecular movement among the particles
of all heated bodies; while we have no similar experience in the case of
light. When, therefore, heat is communicated from the sun to the earth
across apparently empty space, the chain of causation has molecular
motion both at the beginning and end. The hypothesis only makes the
motion continuous, by extending it to the middle. Now motion in a body
is known to be capable of being imparted to another body contiguous to
it; and the intervention of a hypothetical elastic fluid occupying the
space between the sun and the earth, supplies the contiguity which is
the only condition wanting, and which can be supplied by no supposition
but that of an intervening medium. The supposition, notwithstanding, is
at best a probable conjecture, not a proved truth. For there is no proof
that contiguity is absolutely required for the communication of motion
from one body to another. Contiguity does not always exist, to our
senses at least, in the cases in which motion produces motion. The
forces which go under the name of attraction, especially the greatest of
all, gravitation, are examples of motion producing motion without
apparent contiguity. When a planet moves, its distant satellites
accompany its motion. The sun carries the whole solar system along with
it in the progress which it is ascertained to be executing through
space. And even if we were to accept as conclusive the geometrical
reasonings (strikingly similar to those by which the Cartesians defended
their vortices) by which it has been attempted to show that the motions
of the ether may account for gravitation itself, even then it would only
have been proved that the supposed mode of production may be, but not
that no other mode can be, the true one.c

§ 7. [Some inquiries apparently hypothetical are really inductive] It is
necessary, before quitting the subject of hypotheses, to guard against
the appearance of reflecting upon the ascientific valuea of several
branches of physical inquiry, which, though only in their infancy, I
hold to be strictly inductive. There is a great difference between
inventing bagenciesb to account for classes of phenomena, and
cendeavouring, in conformity with known Edition: current; Page: [506]
laws, to conjecture what dformer collocations of known agentsd may have
given birth to individual facts still in existence. The latter is the
elegitimate operation of inferring from an observed effect, the
existence, in time past, of a cause similar to that by which we know it
to be produced in all cases in which we have actual experience of its
origin. This, for example, is the scope of the inquiries of geology; and
they are no more illogical or visionary than judicial inquiries, which
also aim at discovering a past event by inference from those of its
effects which still subsist. As we can ascertain whether a man was
murdered or died a natural death, from the indications exhibited by the
corpse, the presence or absence of signs of struggling on the ground or
on the adjacent objects, the marks of blood, the footsteps of the
supposed murderers, and so on, proceeding throughout on uniformities
ascertained by a perfect induction without any mixture of hypothesis; so
if we find, on and beneath the surface of our planet, masses exactly
similar to deposits from water, or to results of the cooling of matter
melted by fire, we may justly conclude that such has been their origin;
and if the effects, though similar in kind, are on a far larger scale
than any which are fnow producedf, we may rationally, and without
hypothesis, conclude geitherg that the causes existed formerly with
greater intensityh, or that they have operated during an enormous length
of timeh. Further than this no geologist of authority has, since the
rise of the present enlightened school of geological speculation,
attempted to go.

In many geological inquiries it doubtless happens that though the laws
to which the phenomena are ascribed are known laws, and the agents known
agents, those agents are not known to have been present in the
particular case. iIni the speculation respecting the igneous origin of
trap or granite, the fact does not admit of direct proof, that those
substances have been actually subjected to intense heat. But the same
thing might be said of all judicial inquiries which proceed on
circumstantial evidence. We can conclude that a man was murdered, though
it is not proved by the testimony of eye-witnesses that jsome personj
who had the intention of murdering him was present on the spot. It is
enoughk, for most purposes,k if no other known cause could have
generated the effects shown to have been produced.l

Edition: current; Page: [507]
The celebrated speculation of Laplace mconcerning the origin of the
earth and planets, participates essentially in the ninductive character
of modern geological theory.[*] The speculation is, that the atmosphere
of the sun originally extended to the present limits of the solar
system; from which, by the process of cooling, it has contracted to its
present dimensions; and since, by the general principles of mechanics,
the rotation of the sun and of its accompanying atmosphere must increase
in rapidity as its volume diminishes, the increased centrifugal force
generated by the more rapid rotation, overbalancing the action of
gravitation, ohas causedo the sun to abandon successive rings of
vaporous matter, which are supposed to have condensed by cooling, and to
have become pthep planets. There is in this theory no unknown substance
introduced on supposition, nor any unknown property or law ascribed to a
known substance. The known laws of matter authorize us to suppose that a
body which is constantly giving out so large an amount of heat as the
sun is, must be progressively cooling, and that, by the process of
cooling, it must contract; if, therefore, we endeavour, from the present
state of that luminary, to infer its state in a time long past, we must
necessarily suppose that its atmosphere extended much farther than at
present, and we are entitled to suppose that it extended as far as we
can trace qeffects such as it mightq naturally leave behind it on
retiring; and such the planets are. These suppositions being made, it
follows from known laws that successive zones of the solar atmosphere
rmightr be abandoned; that these would continue to revolve round the sun
with the same velocity as when they formed part of sits substance; and
that they would cool down, long before the sun itselfs, to any given
temperature, and consequently to that at which the greater part of the
vaporous matter of which they consisted would become liquid or solid.
The known law of gravitation would then cause them to agglomerate in
masses, which would assume the shape our planets actually exhibit; would
acquire, each taboutt its own axis, a rotatory movement; and would in
that state revolve, as the planets actually do, about the sun, in the
same direction with the sun’s rotation, but with less velocity,
ubecauseu in the vsame periodic Edition: current; Page: [508] time which
the sun’s rotation occupied when his atmosphere extended to that pointw.
There is thus, in Laplace’s theory, nothingx, strictly speaking,x
hypothetical: it is an example of legitimate reasoning from a present
effect to ya possible past cause, according to the known laws of that
causey. The theory therefore is, as I have said, of a similar character
to the theories of geologists; zabut considerably inferior to them in
point of evidencea. Even if it were proved (which it is not) that the
conditions necessary for determining the breaking off of successive
rings would certainly occur; there would still be a much greater chance
of error in assuming that the existing laws of nature are the same which
existed at the origin of the solar system, than in merely presuming
(with geologists) that those laws have lasted through a few revolutions
and transformations of a single one among the bodies of which that
system is composed.z

Edition: current; Page: [509]


CHAPTER XV: Of Progressive Effects; and of the Continued Action of Causes

§ 1. [How a progressive effect results from the simple continuance of
the cause] In the last four chapters we have traced the general outlines
of the theory of the generation of derivative laws from ultimate ones.
In the present chapter our attention will be directed to a particular
case of the derivation of laws from other laws, but a case so general,
and so important, as not only to repay, but to require, a separate
examination. This is, the case of a complex phenomenon resulting from
one simple law, by the continual addition of an effect to itself.

There are some phenomena, some bodily sensations for example, which are
essentially instantaneous, and whose existence can only be prolonged by
the prolongation of the existence of the cause by which they are
produced. But most phenomena are in their own nature permanent; ahaving
begun to exist, theya would exist for ever unless some cause intervened
having a tendency to alter or destroy them. Such, for example, are all
the facts or phenomena which we call bodies. Water, once produced, will
not of itself relapse into bab state of hydrogen and oxygen; such a
change requires some agent having the power of decomposing the compound.
Such, again, are the positions in space, and the movements, of bodies.
No object at rest alters its position without the intervention of some
conditions extraneous to itself; and when once in motion, no object
returns to a state of rest, or alters either its direction or its
velocity, unless some new external conditions are superinduced. It,
therefore, perpetually happens that a temporary cause gives rise to a
permanent effect. The contact of iron with moist air for a few hours,
produces a rust which may endure for centuries; or a projectile force
which launches a cannon ball into space, produces a motion which would
continue for ever unless some other force counteracted it.

Between the two examples which we have here given, there is a difference
worth pointing out. In the former (in which the phenomenon produced is a
Edition: current; Page: [510] substance, and not a motion of a
substance), since the rust remains for ever and unaltered unless some
new cause supervenes, we may speak of the contact of air a hundred years
ago as even the proximate cause of the rust which has existed from that
time until now. But when the effect is motion, which is itself a change,
we must use a different language. The permanency of the effect is now
only the permanency of a series of changes. The second foot, or inch, or
mile of motion, is not the mere prolonged duration of the first foot, or
inch, or mile, but another fact which succeedsc, and which may in some
respects be very unlike the former, since it carries the body through a
different region of space. Now, the original projectile force which set
the body moving is the remote cause of all its motion, however long
continued, but the proximate cause of no motion except that which took
place at the first instant. The motion at any subsequent instant is
proximately caused by the motion which took place at the instant
preceding. It is on that, and not on the original moving cause, that the
motion at any given moment depends. For, suppose that the body passes
through some resisting medium, which partially counteracts the effect of
the original impulse, and dretards the motion: this counteraction (it
eneede scarcely here be repeated) is as strict an example of obedience
to the law of the impulse, as if the body had gone on moving with its
original velocity; but the motion which results is different, being now
a compound of the effects of two causes acting in contrary directions,
instead of the fsinglef effect of one cause. Now, what cause does the
body obey in its subsequent motion? The original cause of motion, or the
actual motion at the preceding instant? The latter: for when the object
issues from the resisting medium, it continues moving, not with its
original, but with its retarded velocity. The motion having once been
diminished, all that which follows is diminished. The effect changes,
because the cause which it really obeys, the proximate cause, the real
cause in fact, has changed. This principle is recognised by
mathematicians when they enumerate among the causes by which the motion
of a body is at any instant determined, the force generated by the
previous motion; an expression which would be absurd if taken to imply
that this “force” was an intermediate link between the cause and the
effect, but which really means only the previous motion itself,
considered as a cause of further motion. We must, therefore, if we would
speak with perfect precision, consider each link in the succession of
motions as the effect of the link preceding it. But if, for the
convenience of discourse, we speak of the whole series as one effect, it
must be as an effect produced by the original impelling force; a
permanent effect produced by an instantaneous cause, and possessing the
property of self-perpetuation.

Edition: current; Page: [511]
Let us now suppose that the original agent or cause, instead of being
instantaneous, is permanent. Whatever effect has been produced up to a
given time, would (unless prevented by the intervention of some new
cause) subsist permanently, even if the cause were to perish. Since,
however, the cause does not perish, but continues to exist and to
operate, it must go on producing more and more of the effect; and
instead of an uniform effect, we have a progressive series of effects,
arising from the accumulated influence of a permanent cause. Thus, the
contact of iron with the atmosphere causes a portion of it to rust; and
if the cause ceased, the effect already produced would be permanent, but
no further effect would be added. If, however, the cause, namely,
exposure to moist air, continues, more and more of the iron becomes
rusted, until gall which is exposed isg converted into a red powder,
when one of the conditions of the production of rust, namely, the
presence of unoxidized iron, has ceased, and the effect cannot any
longer be produced. Again, the earth causes bodies to fall towards it,
that is, the existence of the earth at a given instant, causes an
unsupported body to move towards it at the succeeding instant: and if
the earth were hannihilated, as much of the effect as is already
produced would continue; the object would go on moving in the same
direction, with its acquired velocity, until intercepted by some body or
deflected by some other force. The earth, however, not being
annihilated, goes on producing in the second instant an effect similar
and of equal amount iwithi the first, which two effects being added
together, there results an accelerated velocity; and this operation
being repeated at each successive instant, the mere permanence of the
cause, though without increase, gives rise to a constant progressive
increase of the effect, so long as all the conditions, negative and
positive, of the production of that effect, continue to be realized.

It jisj obvious that this state of things is merely a case of the
Composition of Causes. A cause which continues in action, must on a
strict analysis be considered as a number of causes exactly similar,
successively introduced, and producing by their combination the sum of
the effects which they would severally produce if they acted singly. The
progressive rusting of the iron is in strictness the sum of the effects
of many particles of air acting in succession upon corresponding
particles of iron. The continued action of the earth upon a falling body
is equivalent to a series of forces, applied in successive instants,
each tending to produce a certain constant quantity of motion; and the
motion at each instant is the sum of the effects of the new force
applied at the preceding instant, and kthe motion already acquired. In
each instant, a fresh effect, of which gravity is the proximate cause,
is added to the effect of which Edition: current; Page: [512] it was the
remote cause: or (to express the same thing in another manner) the
effect produced by the earth’s influence at the instant last elapsed, is
added to the sum of the effects of which the remote causes were the
influences exerted by the earth at all the previous instants since the
motion began. The case, therefore, comes under the principle of a
concurrence of causes producing an effect equal to the sum of their
separate effects. But as the causes come into play not all at once, but
successively, and as the effect at each instant is the sum of the
effects of those causes only which have come into action up to that
instant, the result assumes the form of an ascending series; a
succession of sums, each greater than that which preceded it; and we
have thus a progressive effect from the continued action of a cause.

Since the continuance of the cause influences the effect only by adding
to its quantity, and since the addition takes place according to a fixed
law (equal quantities in equal times), the result is capable of being
computed on mathematical principles. In fact, this case, being that of
infinitesimal increments, is precisely the case which the differential
calculus was invented to meet. The questions, what effect will result
from the continual addition of a given cause to itself, and what amount
of the cause, being continually added to itself, will produce a given
amount of the effect, are evidently mathematical questions, and to be
treated, therefore, deductively. If, as we have seen, cases of the
Composition of Causes are seldom adapted for any other than deductive
investigation, this is especially true in the case now examined, the
continual composition of a cause with its own previous effects; since
such a case is peculiarly amenable to the deductive method, while the
undistinguishable manner in which the effects are blended with one
another and with the causes, must make the treatment of such an instance
experimentally, still more chimerical than in any other case.

§ 2. [And how a progressive effect results from the progressiveness of
the cause] We shall next advert to a rather more intricate operation of
the same principle, namely, when the cause does not merely continue in
action, but undergoes, during the same time, a progressive change in
those of its circumstances which contribute to determine the effect. In
this case, as in the former, the total effect goes on accumulating by
the continual addition of a fresh effect to that already produced, but
it is no longer by the addition of equal quantities in equal times; the
quantities added are unequal, and even the quality may now be different.
If the change in the state of the permanent cause be progressive, the
effect will go through a double series of changes, arising partly from
the accumulated action of the cause, and partly from the achangesa in
its action. The effect is still a progressive effect, produced however,
not by the mere continuance of a cause, but by its continuance and its
progressiveness combined.

Edition: current; Page: [513]
A familiar example is afforded by the increase of the temperature as
summer advances, that is, as the sun draws nearer to a vertical
position, and remains a greater number of hours above the horizon. This
instance exemplifies in a very interesting manner the twofold operation
on the effect, arising from the continuance of the cause, and from its
progressive change. When once the sun has come near enough to the
zenith, and remains above the horizon long enough, to give more warmth
during one diurnal rotation than the counteracting cause, the earth’s
radiation, can carry off, the mere continuance of the cause would
progressively increase the effect, even if the sun came no nearer and
the days grew no longer; but in addition to this, a change takes place
in the accidents of the cause (its series of diurnal positions), tending
to increase the quantity of the effect. When the summer solstice has
passed, the progressive change in the cause begins to take place the
reverse way; but, for some time, the accumulating effect of the mere
continuance of the cause exceeds the effect of the changes in it, and
the temperature continues to increase.

Again, the bmotion of a planet isb a progressive effect, produced by
causes at once permanent and progressive. The orbit of a planet is
determined (omitting perturbations) by two causes: first, the action of
the central body, a permanent cause, which alternately increases and
diminishes as the planet draws nearer to or goes further from its
perihelion, and which acts cat every point in a different direction;
and, secondly, the tendency of the planet to continue moving in the
direction and with the velocity which it has already acquired. This
force also grows greater as the planet draws nearer to its perihelion,
because as it does so its velocity increases; and less, as it recedes
from its perihelion: and this force as well as the other acts at each
point in a different direction, because at every point the action of the
central force, by deflecting the planet from its previous direction,
alters the line in which it tends to continue moving. The motion at each
instant is determined by the amount and direction of the motion, and the
amount and direction of the sun’s action, at the previous instant: and
if we speak of the entire revolution of the planet as one phenomenon
(which, as it is periodical and similar to itself, we often find it
convenient to do,) that phenomenon is the progressive effect of two
permanent and progressive causes, the central force and the acquired
motion. Those causes happening to be progressive in the particular way
which is called periodical, the effect necessarily is so too; because
the quantities to be added together returning in a regular order, the
same sums must also regularly return.

This example is dworthy of consideration also in another respect. Though
the causes themselves are permanent, and independent of all conditions
known to us, the changes which take place in the quantities and
relations of Edition: current; Page: [514] the causes are actually
caused by the periodical changes in the effects. The causes, as they
exist at any moment, having produced a certain motion, that motion,
becoming itself a cause, reacts upon the causes, and produces a change
in them. By altering the distance and direction of the central body
relatively to the planet, and the direction and quantity of the eforce
in the direction of the tangente, it alters the elements which determine
the motion at the next succeeding instant. This change renders the next
motion somewhat different; and this difference, by a fresh reaction upon
the causes, renders the next motion fagainf different, and so on. The
original state of the causes might have been such, that this series of
actions modified by reactions would not have been periodical. The sun’s
action, and the original impelling force, might have been in such a
ratio to one another, that the reaction of the effect would have been
such as to alter the causes more and more, without ever bringing them
back to what they were at any former time. The planet would then have
moved in a parabola, or an hyperbola, curves not returning into
themselves. The quantities of the two forces were, however, originally
such, that the successive reactions of the effect bring back the causes,
after a certain time, to what they were before; and from that time all
the variations continue to recur again and again in the same periodical
order, and must so continue while the causes subsist and are not
counteracted.

§ 3. [Derivative laws generated from a single ultimate law] In all cases
of progressive effects, whether arising from the accumulation of
aunchanging or of changing elements, there is an uniformity of
succession not merely between the cause and the effect, but between the
first stages of the effect and its subsequent stages. That a body in
vacuo falls sixteen feet in the first second, forty-eight in the second,
and so on in the ratio of the odd numbers, bis as much an uniform
sequence as that when the supports are removed the body falls. The
sequence of spring and summer is as regular and invariable as that of
the approach of the sun and spring: but we do not consider spring to be
the cause of summer; it is cevident that dboth are successive effects of
the heat received from the sun, and that, considered merely in itselfd,
spring might continue for ever, without having the slightest tendency to
produce summer. As we have so often remarked, not the conditional, but
the unconditional invariable antecedent is termed the cause. That which
would not be followed by the effect unless something else had preceded,
eand which if Edition: current; Page: [515] that something else had
preceded, would not have been required,e is not the cause, however
invariable the sequence may in fact be.

It is in this way that most of fthosef uniformities of succession are
generated, which are not cases of causation. When a phenomenon goes on
increasing, or periodically increases and diminishes, or goes through
any continued and unceasing process of variation reducible to an uniform
rule or law of succession, we do not on this account presume that any
two successive terms of the series are cause and effect. We presume the
contrary; we expect to find that the whole series originates either from
the continued action of fixed causes, or from causes which go through a
corresponding process of continuous change. A tree grows from half an
inch high to a hundred feet; and some trees will generally grow to that
height, unless prevented by some counteracting cause. But we do not call
the seedling the cause of the full-grown tree; the invariable antecedent
it certainly is, and we know very imperfectly on what other antecedents
the sequence is contingent, but we are convinced that it is contingent
on something; because the homogeneousness of the antecedent with the
consequent, the gclose resemblance of the seedling to the tree in all
respects except magnitude, and the graduality of the growth, so exactly
resembling the progressively accumulating effect produced by the long
action of some one cause, hleave noh possibility of doubting that the
seedling and the tree are itwo terms in a series of that description,
the first term of which is yet to seek. The conclusion is further
confirmed by this, that we are able to prove by strict induction the
dependence of the growth of the tree, and even of the continuance of its
existence, upon the continued repetition of certain processes of
nutrition, the rise of the sap, the absorptions and exhalations by the
leaves, &c.; and the same experiments would probably prove to us that
the growth of the tree is the accumulated sum of the effects of these
continued processes, were we not, for want of sufficiently microscopic
eyes, unable to observe correctly and in detail what those effects are.

jThis supposition by no means requires that the effect should not,
during its progress, undergo many modifications besides those of
quantity, or that it should not sometimes appear to undergo a very
marked change of character. This may be either because the unknown cause
consists of several component elements or agents, whose effects,
accumulating according to different laws, are compounded in different
proportions at different periods in the existence of the organized
being; or because, at certain points in its progress, fresh causes or
agencies come in, or are evolved, which intermix their laws with those
of the prime agent.j

Edition: current; Page: [518]


CHAPTER XVI: Of Empirical Laws

§ 1. [Definition of an empirical law] aScientific inquirersa give the
name of Empirical Laws to those uniformities which observation or
experiment has shown to exist, but on which they hesitate to rely in
cases varying much from those which have been actually observed, for
want of seeing any reason why such a law should exist. It is implied,
therefore, in the notion of an empirical law, that it is not an ultimate
law; that if true at all, its truth is capable of being, and requires to
be, accounted for. It is a derivative law, the derivation of which is
not yet known. To state the explanation, the why, of the empirical law,
would be to state the laws from which it is derived; the ultimate causes
on which it is contingent. And if we knew btheseb, we should also know
what are its limits; under what conditions it would cease to be
fulfilled.

The periodical return of eclipses, as originally ascertained by the
persevering observation of the early eastern astronomers, was an
empirical law, until the general laws of the celestial motions had
accounted for it. The following are empirical laws still waiting to be
resolved into the simpler laws from which they are derived. The local
laws of the flux and reflux of the tides in different places: the
succession of certain kinds of weather to certain appearances of sky:
the apparent exceptions to the almost universal truth that bodies expand
by increase of temperature: the law that breeds, both animal and
vegetable, are improved by crossing: that gases have a strong tendency
to permeate animal membranes: cthat substances containing a very high
proportion of nitrogen (such as hydrocyanic acid and morphia) are
powerful poisons: that when different metals are fused together, the
alloy is harder than the various elements: that the number of atoms of
acid required to neutralize one atom of any base, is equal to the number
of atoms of oxygen in the base: that the solubility of substances in one
another, depends* (at least in some degree) on the similarity of their
elements.

Edition: current; Page: [517]
An empirical law, then, is an observed uniformity, presumed to be
resolvable into simpler laws, but not yet resolved into them. The
ascertainment of the empirical laws of phenomena often precedes by a
long interval the explanation of those laws by the Deductive Method; and
the verification of a deduction usually consists in the comparison of
its results with empirical laws previously ascertained.

§ 2. [Derivative laws commonly depend on collocations] From a limited
number of ultimate laws of causation, there are necessarily generated a
vast number of derivative uniformities, both of succession and of
coexistence. Some are laws of succession or of coexistence between
different effects of the same cause: of athesea we had bexamples in the
last chapter. Some are laws of succession between effects and their
remote causes; resolvable into the laws which connect each with the
intermediate link. Thirdly, when causes act together and compound their
effects, the laws of those causes generate the fundamental law of the
effect, namely, that it depends on the coexistence of those causes. And,
finally, the order of succession or of coexistence which obtains among
effects, necessarily depends on their causes. If they are effects of the
same cause, it depends on the laws of that cause; if of different
causes, it depends on the laws of those causes severally, and on the
circumstances which determine their coexistence. If we inquire further
when and how the causes will coexist, that, again, depends on their
causes: and we may thus trace back the phenomena higher and higher,
until the different series of effects meet in a point, and the whole is
shown to have depended ultimately on some common cause; or until,
instead of converging to one point, they terminate in different points,
and the order of the effects is proved to have arisen from the
ccollocation of some of the primeval causes, or natural agents. For
example, the order of succession and of coexistence among the heavenly
motions, which is expressed by Kepler’s laws, is derived from the
coexistence of two primeval causes, the sun, and the original impulse or
projectile force dbelonging tod each planet.* Kepler’s laws are resolved
into the laws of these causes and the fact of their coexistence.

Edition: current; Page: [518]
Derivative laws, therefore, do not depend solely on the ultimate laws
into which they are resolvable: they mostly depend on those ultimate
laws, and an ultimate fact; namely, the mode of coexistence of some of
the ecomponente elements of the universe. The ultimate laws of causation
might be the same as at present, and yet the derivative laws completely
different, if the causes coexisted in different proportions, or with any
difference in those of their relations by which the effects are
influenced. If, for example, the sun’s attraction, and the original
projectile force, had existed in some other ratio to one another than
they did (and we know of no reason why this should not have been the
case), the derivative laws of the heavenly motions might have been quite
different from what they are. The proportions which exist happen to be
such as to produce regular elliptical motions; any other proportions
would have produced different ellipses, or circular, or parabolic, or
hyperbolic motions, but still regular ones; because the effects of each
of the agents accumulate according to an uniform law; and two regular
series of quantities, when their corresponding terms are added, must
produce a regular series of some sort, whatever the quantities
themselves are.

§ 3. [The collocations of the permanent causes are not reducible to any
law] Now this last-mentioned element in the resolution of a derivative
law, the element which is not a law of causation, but a collocation of
causes, cannot itself be reduced to any law. There is (as formerly
remarked*) no uniformity, no norma, principle, or rule, perceivable in
the distribution of the primeval natural agents through the universe.
The adifferenta substances composing the earth, the powers that pervade
the universe, stand in no constant relation to one another. One
substance is more abundant than others, one power acts through a larger
extent of space than others, without any pervading analogy that we can
discover. We not only do not know of any reason why the sun’s attraction
and the bforce in the direction of the tangentb coexist in the exact
proportion they do, but we can trace no coincidence between it and the
proportions in which any other elementary powers in the universe are
intermingled. The utmost disorder is apparent in the combination of the
causes; which is consistent with the most cregularc order in their
effects; for when each agent carries on its own operations according to
an uniform law, even the most capricious combination of agencies will
generate a regularity of some sort; as we see in the kaleidoscope, where
any casual arrangement of coloured bits of glass produces by the laws of
reflection a beautiful regularity in the effect.

Edition: current; Page: [519]
§ 4. [aHencea empirical laws cannot be relied on beyond the limits of
actual experience] In the above considerations lies the justification of
the limited degree of reliance which bscientific inquirersb are
accustomed to place in empirical laws.

A derivative law which results wholly from the operation of some one
cause, will be as universally true as the laws of the cause itself; that
is, it will always be true except where some one of those effects of the
cause, on which the derivative law depends, is defeated by a
counteracting cause. But when the derivative law results not from
different effects of one cause, but from effects of several causes, we
cannot be certain that it will be true under any variation in the mode
of coexistence of those causes, or of the primitive natural agents on
which the causes ultimately depend. The proposition that coal beds rest
on certain descriptions of strata exclusively, though true on the earth
so far as our observation has reached, cannot be extended to the moon or
the other planets, supposing coal to exist there; because we cannot be
assured that the original constitution of any other planet was such as
to produce the different depositions in the same order as in our globe.
The derivative law in this case depends not solely on laws, but on a
collocation; and collocations cannot be reduced to any law.

Now it is the very nature of a derivative law which has not yet been
resolved into its elements, in other words, an empirical law, that we do
not know whether it results from the different effects of one cause, or
from effects of different causes. We cannot tell whether it depends
wholly on laws, or partly on laws and partly on a collocation. If it
depends on a collocation, it will be true in all the cases in which that
particular collocation exists. But, since we are entirely ignorant, in
case of its depending on a collocation, what the collocation is, we are
not safe in extending the law beyond the limits of time and place in
which we have actual experience of its truth. Since within those limits
the law has always been found true, we have evidence that the
collocations, whatever they are, on which it depends, do really exist
within those limits. But, knowing of no rule or principle to which the
collocations themselves conform, we cannot conclude that because a
collocation is proved to exist within certain limits of place or time,
it will exist beyond those limits. Empirical laws, therefore, can only
be creceived asc true within the limits of time and place in which they
have been found true by observation: and not merely the limits of time
and place, but of time, place, and circumstance: for since it is the
very meaning of an empirical law that we do not know the ultimate laws
of causation on which it is dependent, we cannot foresee, without actual
trial, in what manner or to what extent the introduction of any new
circumstance may affect it.

Edition: current; Page: [520]
§ 5. [Generalizations which rest only on the Method of Agreement can
only be received as empirical laws] But how are we to know that an
uniformity, ascertained by experience, is only an empirical law? Since,
by the supposition, we have not been able to resolve it into aany othera
laws, how do we know that it is not an ultimate law of causation?

I answer, that no generalization amounts to more than an empirical law
when the only proof on which it rests is that of the Method of
Agreement. For it has been seen that by that method alone we never can
arrive at causes. bThe utmostb that the Method of Agreement can do is,
to ascertain the whole of the circumstances common to all cases in which
a phenomenon is produced: and this caggregatec includes not only the
cause of the phenomenon, but all phenomena with which it is connected by
any derivative uniformity, whether as being collateral effects of the
same cause, or effects of any other cause which, in all the instances we
have been able to observe, coexisted with it. The method affords no
means of determining which of these uniformities are laws of causation,
and which are merely derivative laws, resulting from those laws of
causation and from the collocation of the causes. None of them,
therefore, can be received in any other character than that of
derivative laws, the derivation of which has not been traced; in other
words, empirical laws: in which light, all results obtained by the
Method of Agreement (and therefore almost all dtruths obtained by simple
observation without experiment) must be considered, until either
confirmed by the Method of Difference, or explained deductively, in
other words accounted for à priori.

These empirical laws may be of greater or eless authority, according as
there is reason to presume that they are resolvable into laws only, or
into laws and collocations together. The sequences which we observe in
the production and subsequent life of an animal or a vegetable, resting
on the Method of Agreement only, are mere empirical laws; but though the
antecedents in those sequences may not be the causes of the consequents,
both the one and the other are fdoubtlessf, in the main, successive
stages of a progressive effect originating in a common cause, and
therefore independent of collocations. The uniformities, on the other
hand, in the order of superposition of strata on the earth, are
empirical laws of a much weaker kind, since they gnot only areg not laws
of causation, but there is no reason to believe that they depend on any
common cause: all appearances are in favour of their depending on the
particular collocation of natural agents which hat some time or otherh
existed on our globe, and from which no inference can be drawn as to the
collocation which exists or has existed in any other portion of the
universe.

Edition: current; Page: [521]
§ 6. [Signs from which an observed uniformity of sequence may be
presumed to be resolvable] Our definition of an empirical law including
not only those uniformities which are not known to be laws of causation,
but also those which are, provided there be reason to presume that they
are not ultimate laws; this is the proper place to consider by what
signs we may judge that even if an observed uniformity be a law of
causation, it is not an ultimate but a derivative law.

The first sign is, if between the antecedent a and the consequent b
there be evidence of some intermediate link; some phenomenon of which we
can asurmisea the existence, though from the imperfection of our senses
or of our instruments we are unable to ascertain its precise nature and
laws. If there be such a phenomenon (which may be denoted by the letter
x), it follows that even if a be the cause of b, it is but the remote
cause, and that the law, a causes b, is resolvable into at least two
laws, a causes x, and x causes b. This is a very frequent case, since
the operations of nature mostly take place on so minute a scale, that
many of the successive steps are either imperceptible, or very
indistinctly perceived.

Take, for example, the laws of the chemical composition of substances;
as that hydrogen and oxygen being combined, water is produced. All we
see of the process is, that the two gases being mixed in certain
proportions, and heat or electricity being applied, an explosion takes
place, the gases disappear, and water remains. There is no doubt about
the law, or about its being a law of causation. But between the
antecedent (the gases in a state of mechanical mixture, heated or
electrified), and the consequent (the production of water), there must
be an intermediate process which we do not see. For if we take any
portion whatever of the water, and subject it to analysis, we find that
it always contains bhydrogen andb oxygen; nay, the very same proportions
of them, namely, two thirds, in volume, of hydrogen, and one third
oxygen. This is true of a single drop; it is true of the minutest
portion which our instruments are capable of appreciating. Since, then,
the smallest perceptible portion of the water contains both those
substances, portions of hydrogen and oxygen smaller than the smallest
perceptible must have come together in every such minute portion of
space; must have come closer together than when the gases were in a
state of mechanical mixture, since (to mention no other reasons) the
water occupies far less space than the gases. Now, as we cannot see this
contact or close approach of the minute particles, we cannot observe
with what circumstances it is attended, or according to what laws it
produces its effects. The production of water, that is, of the sensible
phenomena which characterize the compound, may be a very remote effect
of those laws. There may be innumerable intervening links; and we are
sure that there must be some. Having full proof that corpuscular action
of Edition: current; Page: [522] some kind takes place previous to any
of the great transformations in the sensible properties of substances,
we can have no doubt that the laws of chemical action, as at present
known, are not ultimate but derivative laws; however ignorant we may be,
and even though we should for ever remain ignorant, of the nature of the
laws of corpuscular action from which they are derived.

In like manner, all the processes of vegetative life, whether in the
vegetable properly so called or in the animal body, are corpuscular
processes. Nutrition is the addition of particles to one another,
csometimes merely replacing other particles separated and excreted,
sometimesc occasioning an increase of bulk or weight, so gradual, that
only after a long continuance does it become perceptible. Various
organs, by means of peculiar vessels, secrete from the blood, fluids,
the component particles of which must have been in the blood, but which
differ from it most widely both in mechanical properties and in chemical
composition. Here, then, are abundance of unknown links to be filled up;
and there can be no doubt that the laws of the phenomena of vegetative
or organic life are derivative laws, dependent on properties of the
corpuscles, and of those elementary tissues which are comparatively
simple combinations of corpuscles.

The first sign, then, from which a law of causation, though hitherto
unresolved, may be inferred to be a derivative law, is any indication of
the existence of an intermediate link or links between the antecedent
and the consequent. The second is, when the antecedent is an extremely
complex phenomenon, and its effects therefore, probably, in part at
least, compounded of the effects of its different elements; since we
know that the case in which the effect of the whole is not made up of
the effects of its parts, is exceptional, the Composition of Causes
being by far the more ordinary case.

We will illustrate this by two examples, in one of which the antecedent
is the sum of many homogeneous, in the other of heterogeneous, parts.
The weight of a body is made up of the weights of its minute particles:
a truth which astronomers express in its most general terms, when they
say that bodies, at equal distances, gravitate to one another in
proportion to their quantity of matter. All true propositions,
therefore, which can be made concerning gravity, are derivative laws;
the ultimate law into which they are all resolvable being, that every
particle of matter attracts every other. As our second example, we may
take any of the sequences observed in meteorology: for instance, da
diminution of the pressure of the atmosphere (indicated by a fall of the
barometer) is followed by rain. The antecedent is here a complex
phenomenon, made up of heterogeneous elements; the column of the
atmosphere over any particular place consisting of two parts, a column
of air, and Edition: current; Page: [523] a column of aqueous vapour
mixed with it; and the change in the two together manifested by a fall
of the barometer, and followed by rain, must be either a change in one
of these, or in the other, or in both. We might, then, even in the
absence of any other evidence, form a reasonable presumption, from the
invariable presence of both ethesee elements in the antecedent, that the
sequence is probably not an ultimate law, but a result of the laws of
the two different agents; a presumption only to be destroyed when we had
made ourselves so well acquainted with the laws of both, as to be able
to affirm that those laws could not by themselves produce the observed
result.

fThere are but few known cases of succession from very complex
antecedents, which have not either been actually accounted for from
simpler laws, or inferred with great probability (from the ascertained
existence of intermediate links of causation not yet understood) to be
capable of being so accounted for. It is, therefore, highly probable
that all sequences from complex antecedents are thus resolvable, and
that ultimate laws are in all cases comparatively simple. If there were
not the other reasons already mentioned for believing that the laws of
organized nature are resolvable into simpler laws, it would be almost a
sufficient reason that the antecedents in most of the sequences are so
very complex.g

Edition: current; Page: [524]
a§ 7.a [Two kinds of empirical laws] In the preceding discussion we have
recognised two kinds of empirical laws: those known to be laws of
causation, but presumed to be resolvable into simpler laws; and those
not known to be laws of causation at all. Both these kinds of laws agree
in the demand which they make for being explained by deduction, and
agree in being the appropriate means of verifying such deduction, since
they represent the experience with which the result of the deduction
must be compared. They agree, further, in this, that until explained,
and connected with the ultimate laws from which they result, they have
not attained the highest degree of certainty of which laws are
susceptible. It has been shown on a former occasion that laws of
causation which are derivative, and compounded of simpler laws, are not
only, as the nature of the case implies, less general, but even less
certain, than the simpler laws from which they result; not bin the same
degreeb to be relied on as universally true. The inferiority of
evidence, however, which attaches to this class of laws, is trifling,
compared with that which is inherent in uniformities not known to be
laws of causation at all. So long as these are unresolved, we cannot
tell on how many collocations, as well as laws, their truth may be
dependent; cwec can never, therefore, extend them with danyd confidence
to cases in which we have not assured ourselves, by trial, that the
necessary collocation of causes, whatever it may be, exists. It is to
this class of laws alone that the property, which philosophers usually
consider as characteristic of empirical laws, belongs in all its
strictness; the property of being unfit to be relied on beyond the
limits of time, place, and circumstance, in which the observations have
been made. These are empirical laws in a more emphatic sense; and when I
employ that term (except where the context manifestly indicates the
reverse) I shall generally mean to designate those uniformities only,
whether of succession or of coexistence, which are not known to be laws
of causation.

Edition: current; Page: [525]


CHAPTER XVII: Of Chance and Its Elimination

§ 1. [The proof of empirical laws depends on the theory of chance]
Considering then as empirical laws only those observed uniformities
respecting which the question whether they are laws of causation must
remain undecided until they can be explained deductively, or until some
means are found of applying the Method of Difference to the case; it has
been shown in the preceding chapter, that until an uniformity can, in
one or the other of these modes, be taken out of the class of empirical
laws, and brought either into that of laws of causation or of the
demonstrated results of laws of causation, it cannot with any assurance
be pronounced true beyond the local and other limits within which it has
been found so by actual observation. It remains to consider how we are
to assure ourselves of its truth even within those limits; after what
quantity of experience a generalization which rests solely on the Method
of Agreement, can be considered sufficiently established, even as an
empirical law. In a former chapter, when treating of the Methods of
Direct Induction, we expressly reserved this question,* and the time is
now come for endeavouring to solve it.

We found that the Method of Agreement has the defect of not proving
causation, and can therefore only be employed for the ascertainment of
empirical laws. But we aalso founda that besides this deficiency, it
labours under a characteristic imperfection, tending to render uncertain
even such conclusions as it is in itself adapted to prove. This
imperfection arises from Plurality of Causes. Although two or more cases
in which the phenomenon a has been met with, may have no common
antecedent except A, this does not prove that there is any connexion
between a and A, since a may have many causes, and may have been
produced, in these different instances, not by anything which the
instances had in common, but by some of those elements in them which
were different. We nevertheless observed, that in proportion to the
multiplication of instances pointing to A as the antecedent, the
characteristic uncertainty of the method diminishes, and the existence
of a law of connexion between A and a more nearly approaches to
certainty. It is now Edition: current; Page: [526] to be determined,
after what amount of experience this certainty may be deemed to be
practically attained, and the connexion between A and a may be received
as an empirical law.

This question may be otherwise stated in more familiar terms:—After how
many and what sort of instances may it be concluded, that an observed
coincidence between two phenomena is not the effect of chance?

It is of the utmost importance for understanding the logic of induction,
that we should form a distinct conception of what is meant by chance,
and how the phenomena which common language ascribes to that abstraction
are really produced.

§ 2. [Chance defined and characterized] Chance is usually spoken of in
direct antithesis to law; whatever (it is supposed) cannot be ascribed
to any law, is attributed to chance. It is, however, certain, that
whatever happens is the result of some law; is an effect of causes, and
could have been predicted from a knowledge of the existence of those
causes, and from their laws. If I turn up a particular card, that is a
consequence of its place in the pack. Its place in the pack was a
consequence of the manner in which the cards were shuffled, or of the
order in which they were played in the last game; which, again, were
aeffects of prior causes. At every stage, if we had possessed an
accurate knowledge of the causes in existence, it would have been
abstractedly possible to foretell the effect.

An event occurring by chance, may be bbetterb described as a coincidence
from which we have no ground to infer an uniformity: the occurrence of a
phenomenon in certain circumstances, without our having reason on that
account to infer that it will happen again in those circumstances. This,
however, when looked closely into, implies that the enumeration of the
circumstances is not complete. Whatever the fact be, since it has
occurred once, we may be sure that if all the same circumstances were
repeated, it would occur again; and not only if all, but there is some
particular portion of those circumstances, on which the phenomenon is
invariably consequent. With most of them, however, it is not connected
in any permanent manner: its conjunction with those is said to be the
effect of chance, to be merely casual. Facts casually conjoined are
separately the effects of causes, and therefore of laws; but of
different causes, and causes not connected by any law.

It is incorrect, then, to say that any phenomenon is produced by chance;
but we may say that two or more phenomena are conjoined by chance, that
they coexist or succeed one another only by chance; meaning that they
are in no way related through causation; that they are neither cause and
effect, nor effects of the same cause, nor effects of causes between
which there subsists Edition: current; Page: [527] any law of
coexistence, nor even effects of the same ccollocation of primeval
causes.

If the same casual coincidence never occurred a second time, we should
have an easy test for distinguishing such from the coincidences which
are dthed results of a law. As long as the phenomena had been found
together only once, so long, unless we knew some more general laws from
which the coincidence might have resulted, we could not distinguish it
from a casual one; but if it occurred twice, we should know that the
phenomena so conjoined must be in some way connected through their
causes.

There is, however, no such test. A coincidence may occur again and
again, and yet be only casual. Nay, it would be inconsistent with what
we know of the order of nature, to doubt that every casual coincidence
will sooner or later be repeated, as long as the phenomena between which
it occurred do not cease to exist, or to be ereproducede. The
recurrence, therefore, of the same coincidence more than once, or even
its frequent recurrence, does not prove that it is an instance of any
law; does not prove that it is not casual, or, in common language, the
effect of chance.

And yet, when a coincidence cannot be deduced from known laws, nor
proved by experiment to be itself a case of causation, the frequency of
its occurrence is the only evidence from which we can infer that it is
the result of a law. Not, however, its absolute frequency. The question
is not whether the coincidence occurs often or seldom, in the ordinary
sense of those terms; but whether it occurs more often than chance will
account for; more often than might rationally be expected if the
coincidence were casual. We have to decide, therefore, what degree of
frequency in a coincidence, chance will account for. And to this there
can be no general answer. We can only state the principle by which the
answer must be determined: the answer itself will be different in every
different case.

Suppose that one of the phenomena, A, exists always, and the other
phenomenon, B, only occasionally: it follows that every instance of B
will be an instance of its coincidence with A, and yet the coincidence
will be merely casual, not the result of any connexion between them. The
fixed stars have been constantly in existence since the beginning of
human experience, and all phenomena that have come under human
observation have, in every single instance, coexisted with them; yet
this coincidence, though equally invariable with that which exists
between any of those phenomena and its own cause, does not prove that
the stars are its cause, nor that they are in anywise connected with it.
As strong a case of coincidence, therefore, as can possibly exist, and a
much stronger one in point of mere frequency than most of those Edition:
current; Page: [528] which prove laws, does not here prove a law: why?
because, since the stars exist always, they must coexist with every
other phenomenon, whether connected with them by causation or not. The
uniformity, great though it be, is no greater than would occur on the
supposition that no such connexion exists.

On the other hand, suppose that we were inquiring whether there be any
connexion between rain and any particular wind. Rain, we know,
occasionally occurs with every wind; therefore the connexion, if it
exists, cannot be an actual law: but still, rain may be connected with
some particular wind through causation; that is, though they cannot be
always effects of the same cause (for if so they would fregularlyf
coexist), there may be some causes common to the two, so that in so far
as either is produced by those common causes, they will, from the laws
of the causes, be found to coexist. How, then, shall we ascertain this?
The obvious answer is, by observing whether rain occurs with one wind
more frequently than with any other. That, however, is not enough; for
perhaps that one wind blows more frequently than any other; so that its
blowing more frequently in rainy weather is no more than would happen,
although it had no connexion with the causes of rain, provided it were
not connected with causes adverse to rain. In England, westerly winds
blow during about twice as great a portion of the year as easterly. If,
therefore, it rains only twice as often with a westerly, as with an
easterly wind, we have no reason to infer that any law of nature is
concerned in the coincidence. If it rains more than twice as often, we
may be sure that some law is concerned; either there is some cause in
nature gwhich, in this climate, tendsg to produce both rain and a
westerly wind, or a westerly wind has itself some tendency to produce
rain. But if it rains less than twice as often, we may draw a directly
opposite inference: the one, instead of being a cause, or connected with
causes, of the other, must be connected with causes adverse to it, or
with the absence of some cause which produces it; and though it may
still rain much oftener with a westerly wind than with an easterly, so
far would this be from proving any connexion between the phenomena, that
the connexion proved would be between rain and an easterly wind, hto
which, in mere frequency of coincidence, it is ilessi allied.

Here, then, are two examples: in one, the greatest possible frequency of
coincidence, with no instance whatever to the contrary, does not prove
that there is any law; in the other, a much less frequency of
coincidence, even when non-coincidence is still more frequent, does
prove that there is a law. In both cases the principle is the same. In
both we consider the positive frequency of the phenomena themselves, and
how great frequency of coincidence that must of itself bring about,
without supposing any connexion between them, provided there be no
repugnance; provided neither be connected Edition: current; Page: [529]
with any cause tending to frustrate the other. If we find a greater
frequency of coincidence than this, we conclude that there is some
connexion; if a less frequency, that there is some repugnance. In the
former case, jwe concludej that one of the phenomena can under some
circumstances cause the other, or that there exists something capable of
causing them both; in the latter, that one of them, or some cause which
produces one of them, is capable of counteracting the production of the
other. We have thus to deduct from the observed frequency of
coincidence, as much as may be the effect of chance, that is, of the
mere frequency of the phenomena themselves; and if anything remains,
what does remain is the residual fact which proves the existence of a
law.

The frequency of the phenomena can only be ascertained within definite
limits of space and time; depending as it does on the quantity and
distribution of the primeval natural agents, of which we can know
nothing beyond the boundaries of human observation, since no law, no
regularity, can be traced in it, enabling us to infer the unknown from
the known. But for the present purpose this is no disadvantage, the
question being confined within the same limits as the data. The
coincidences occurred in certain places and times, and within those we
can estimate the frequency with which such coincidences would be
produced by chance. If, then, we find from observation that A exists in
one case out of every two, and B in one case out of every three; then if
there be neither connexion nor repugnance between them, or between any
of their causes, the instances in which A and B will both exist, that is
to say will coexist, will be one case in every six. For A exists in
three cases out of six: and B, existing in one case out of every three
without regard to the presence or absence of A, will exist in one case
out of those three. There will therefore be, of the whole number of
cases, two in which A exists without B; one case of B without A; two in
which neither B nor A exists, and one case out of six in which they both
exist. If then, in point of fact, they are found to coexist oftener than
in one case out of six; and, consequently, A does not exist without B so
often as twice in three times, nor B without A so often as once in every
twice; there is some cause in existence which tends to produce a
conjunction between A and B.

Generalizing the result, we may say, that if A occurs in a larger
proportion of the cases where B is, than of the cases where B is not;
then will B also occur in a larger proportion of the cases where A is,
than of the cases where A is not; and there is some connexion, through
causation, between A and B. If we could ascend to the causes of the two
phenomena, we should find, at some stage, either proximate or remote,
some cause or causes common to both; and if we could ascertain what
these are, we could frame a generalization which would be true without
restriction of place or time; but until we Edition: current; Page: [530]
can do so, the fact of a connexion between the two phenomena remains an
empirical law.

§ 3. [The elimination of chance] Having considered in what manner it may
be determined whether any given conjunction of phenomena is casual, or
the result of some law; to complete the theory of chance, it is
necessary that we should now consider those effects which are partly the
result of chance and partly of law, or, in other words, in which the
effects of casual conjunctions of causes are habitually blended in one
result with the effects of a constant cause.

This is a case of Composition of Causes; and the peculiarity of it is,
that instead of two or more causes intermixing their effects in a
regular manner with those of one another, we have now one constant
cause, producing an effect which is successively modified by a series of
variable causes. Thus, as summer advances, the approach of the sun to a
vertical position tends to produce a constant increase of temperature;
but with this effect of a constant cause, there are blended the effects
of many variable causes, winds, clouds, evaporation, electric agencies
and the like, so that the temperature aofa any given day depends in part
on these fleeting causes, and only in part on the constant cause. If the
effect of the constant cause is always accompanied and disguised by
effects of variable causes, it is impossible to ascertain the law of the
constant cause in the ordinary manner, by separating it from all other
causes and observing it apart. Hence arises the necessity of an
additional rule of experimental inquiry.

When the action of a cause A is liable to be interfered with, not
steadily by the same cause or causes, but by different causes at
different times, and when these are so frequent, or so indeterminate,
that we cannot possibly exclude all of them from any experiment, though
we may vary them; our resource is, to endeavour to ascertain what is the
effect of all the variable causes taken together. In order to do this,
we make as many trials as possible, preserving A invariable. The results
of these different trials will naturally be different, since the
indeterminate modifying causes are different in each; if, then, we do
not find these results to be progressive, but, on the contrary, to
oscillate about a certain point, one experiment giving a result a little
greater, another a little less, one a result tending a little more in
one direction, another a little more in the contrary direction; while
the average or middle point does not vary, but different sets of
experiments (taken binb as great a variety of circumstances as possible)
yield the same mean, provided only they be sufficiently numerous; then
that mean or average result, is the part, in each experiment, which is
due to the cause A, and is the effect which would have been obtained if
A Edition: current; Page: [531] could have acted alone: the variable
remainder is the effect of chance, that is, of causes the coexistence of
which with the cause A was merely casual. The test of the sufficiency of
the induction in this case is, when any increase of the number of trials
from which the average is struck, does not materially alter the average.

This kind of elimination, in which we do not eliminate any one
assignable cause, but the multitude of cfloatingc unassignable ones, may
be termed the Elimination of Chance. We afford an example of it when we
repeat an experiment, in order, by taking the mean of different results,
to get rid of the effects of the unavoidable errors of each individual
experiment. When there is no permanent cause such as would produce a
tendency to error peculiarly in one direction, we are warranted by
experience in assuming that the errors on one side will, in a certain
number of experiments, about balance the errors on the contrary side. We
dtherefored repeat the experiment, until any change which is produced in
the average of the whole by further repetition, falls within limits of
error consistent with the degree of accuracy required by the purpose we
have in view.*

a§ 4.a [Discovery of residual phenomena by eliminating chance] In the
supposition hitherto made, the effect of the constant cause A has been
assumed to form so great and conspicuous a part of the general result,
that its existence never could be a matter of uncertainty, and the
object of the eliminating process was only to ascertain how much is
attributable to that cause; what is its exact law. Cases, however, occur
in which the effect of a constant cause is so small, compared with that
of some of the changeable Edition: current; Page: [532] causes with
which it is liable to be casually conjoined, that of itself it escapes
notice, and the very existence of any effect arising from a constant
cause is first learnt, by the process which in general serves only for
ascertaining the quantity of that effect. This case of induction may be
characterized as follows. A given effect is known to be chiefly, and not
known not to be wholly, determined by changeable causes. If it be wholly
so produced, then if the aggregate be taken of a sufficient number of
instances, the effects of these different causes will cancel one
another. If, therefore, we do not find this to be the case, but, on the
contrary, after such a number of trials has been made that no further
increase alters the average result, we find that average to be, not
zero, but some other quantity, baboutb which, though small in comparison
with the total effect, the effect nevertheless oscillates, and which is
the middle point in its oscillation; we may conclude this to be the
effect of some constant cause: which cause, by some of the methods
already treated of, we may hope to detect. This may be called the
discovery of a residual phenomenon by eliminating the ceffectsc of
chance.

It is in this manner, for example, that dloaded dice may be discoveredd.
Of course no dice are so clumsily loaded that they must always throw
certain numbers; otherwise the fraud would be instantly detected. The
loading, a constant cause, mingles with the changeable causes which
determine what cast will be thrown in each individual instance. If the
dice were not loaded, and the throw were left to depend entirely on the
changeable causes, these in a sufficient number of instances would
balance one another, and there would be no preponderant number of throws
of any one kind. If, therefore, after such a number of trials that no
further increase of their number has any material effect upon the
average, we find a preponderance in favour of a particular throw; we may
conclude with assurance that there is some constant cause acting in
favour of that throw, or in other words, that the dice are not fair; and
ethe exact amount of the unfairness. In a similar manner, what is called
the diurnal variation of the barometer, which is very small compared
with the variations arising from the irregular changes in the state of
the atmosphere, was discovered by comparing the average height of the
barometer at different hours of the day. When this comparison was made,
it was found that there was a small difference, which on the average was
constant, however the absolute quantities might vary, and which
difference, therefore, must be the effect of a constant cause. This
cause was afterwards ascertained, deductively, to be the rarefaction of
the air, occasioned by the increase of temperature as the day advances.

Edition: current; Page: [533]
a§ 5.a [The doctrine of chances] After these general remarks on the
nature of chance, we are prepared to consider in what manner assurance
may be obtained that a conjunction between two phenomena, which has been
observed a certain number of times, is not casual, but a result of
causation, and to be received therefore as one of the uniformities bofb
nature, though (until accounted for à priori) only as an empirical law.

We will suppose the strongest case, namely, that the phenomenon B has
never been observed except in conjunction with A. Even then, the
probability that they are connected is not measured by the total number
of instances in which they have been found together, but by the excess
of that number above the number due to the absolute frequency of A. If,
for example, A exists always, and therefore coexists with everything, no
number of instances of its coexistence with B would prove a connexion;
as in our example of the fixed stars. If A be a fact of such common
occurrence that it may be presumed to be present in half of all the
cases that occur, and therefore in half the cases in which B occurs, it
is only the proportional excess above half, that cisc to be reckoned as
evidence towards proving a connexion between A and B.

In addition to the question, What is the number of coincidences which,
on an average of a great multitude of trials, may be expected to arise
from chance alone? there is also another question, namely, Of what
extent of deviation from that average is the occurrence credible, from
chance alone, in some number of instances smaller than that drequired
for strikingd a fair average? It is not only to be considered what is
the general result of the chances in the long run, but also what are the
extreme limits of variation from ethee general result, which may
occasionally be expected as the result of some smaller number of
instances.

The consideration of the latter question, and any consideration of the
former beyond that already given to it, belong to what mathematicians
term the doctrine of chances, or, in a phrase of greater pretension, the
Theory of Probabilities.f

Edition: current; Page: [534]


CHAPTER XVIII: Of the Calculation of Chances

§ 1. [Foundation of the doctrine of chances, as taught by mathematics]
a“Probability,” says Laplace,*

has reference partly to our ignorance, partly to our knowledge. We know
that among three or more events, one, and only one, must happen; but
there is nothing leading us to believe that any one of them will happen
rather than the others. In this state of indecision, it is impossible
for us to pronounce with certainty on their occurrence. It is, however,
probable that any one of these events, selected at pleasure, will not
take place; because we perceive several cases, all equally possible,
which exclude its occurrence, and only one which favours it.

The theory of chances consists in reducing all events of the same kind
to a certain number of cases equally possible, that is, such that we are
equally undecided as to their existence; and in determining the number
of these cases which are favourable to the event of which the
probability is sought. The ratio of that number to the number of all the
possible cases, is the measure of the probability; which is thus a
fraction, having for its numerator the number of cases favourable to the
event, and for its denominator the number of all the cases which are
possible.

To a calculation of chances, then, according to Laplace, two things are
necessary: we must know that of several events some one will certainly
happen, and no more than one; and we must not know, nor have any reason
to expect, that it will be one of these events rather than another. bIt
has been contendedb that these are not the only requisites, and that
Laplace has overlooked, in cthec general theoretical statement, a
necessary part of the foundation of the doctrine of chances. To be able
(it has been said) to pronounce two events equally probable, it is not
enough that we should know that one or the other must happen, and should
have no dgroundsd for conjecturing which. Experience must have shown
that the two events are of equally frequent occurrence. Why, in tossing
up a halfpenny, do we reckon it equally Edition: current; Page: [535]
probable that we shall throw cross or pile? Because we know that in any
great number of throws, cross and pile are thrown about equally often;
and that the more throws we make, the more nearly the equality is
perfect. We may know this if we please by actual experiment; or by the
daily experience which life affords of events of the same general
character; or deductively, from the effect of mechanical laws on a
symmetrical body acted upon by forces varying indefinitely in quantity
and direction. We may know it, in short, either by specific experience,
or on the evidence of our general knowledge of nature. But, in one way
or the other, we must know it, to justify us in calling the two events
equally probable; and if we knew it not, we should proceed as much at
haphazard in staking equal sums on the result, as in laying odds.

This view of the subject was taken in the first edition of the present
work: but I have since ebecome convincede, that the theory of chances,
as conceived by Laplace and by mathematicians generally, has not the
fundamental fallacy which I had ascribed to it.

We must remember that the probability of an event is not a quality of
the event itself, but a mere name for the degree of fground whichf we,
or some one else, have for expecting it. The probability of an event to
one person is a different thing from the probability of the same event
to another, or to the same person after he has acquired additional
evidence. The probability to me, that an individual of whom I know
nothing but his name, will die within gtheg year, is totally altered by
my being told, the next minute, that he is in the last stage of a
consumption. Yet this makes no difference in the event itself, nor in
any of the causes on which it depends. Every event is in itself certain,
not probable: if we knew all, we should either know positively that it
will happen, or positively that it will not. But its probability to us
means the degree of expectation of its occurrence, which we are
warranted in entertaining by our present evidence.

Bearing this in mind, I think it must be admitted, that even when we
have no knowledge whatever to guide our expectations, except the
knowledge that what happens must be some one of a certain number of
possibilities, we may still reasonably judge, that one supposition is
more probable to us than another supposition; and if we have any
interest at stake, we shall best provide for it by acting conformably to
that judgment.

§ 2. [The doctrine of chances tenable] Suppose that we are required to
take a ball from a box, of which we only know that it contains balls
both black and white, and none of any other colour. We know that the
ball we Edition: current; Page: [536] select will be either a black or a
white ball; but we have no ground afor expecting black rather than
white, or white rather than black. In that case, if we are obliged to
make a choice, and to stake bsomething onb one or the other supposition,
it will, as a question of prudence, be perfectly indifferent which; and
we shall act precisely as we should have acted if we had known
beforehand that the box contained an equal number of black and cwhite
balls. But though our conduct would be the same, it would not be founded
on any surmise that the balls were in fact thus equally divided; for we
might, on the contrary, know, by dauthenticd information, that the box
contained ninety-nine balls of one colour, and only one of the other;
still, if we are not told which colour has only one, and which has
ninety-nine, the drawing of a white and of a black ball will be equally
probable to us; we shall have no reason for staking anything on the one
event rather than on the other; the option between the two will be a
matter of indifference; in other words it will be an even chance.

But let it now be supposed that instead of two there are three
colours—white, black, and red; and that we are entirely ignorant of the
proportion in which they are mingled. We should then have no reason for
expecting one more than another, and if obliged to bet, should venture
our stake on red, white, or black, with equal indifference. But should
we be indifferent whether we betted for or against some one colour, as,
for instance, white? Surely not. From the very fact that black and red
are each of them separately equally probable to us with white, the two
together must be twice as probable. We should in this case expect
not-white rather than white, and so much rather, that we would lay two
to one upon it. It is true, there might for aught we knew be more white
balls than black and red together; and if so, our bet would, if we knew
more, be seen to be a disadvantageous one. But so also, for aught we
eknew, mighte there be more red balls than black and white, or more
black balls than white and red, and in such case the effect of
additional knowledge would be to prove to us that our bet was more
advantageous than we had supposed it to be. There is in the existing
state of our knowledge a rational probability of two to one against
white; a probability fit to be made a basis of conduct. No reasonable
person would lay an even wager in favour of white, against black and
red; though against black alone, or red alone, he might do so without
imprudence.

The common theory, therefore, of the calculation of chances, appears fto
be tenable. Even when we know nothing except the number of the possible
and mutually excluding contingencies, and are entirely ignorant of their
comparative frequency, we may have grounds, and grounds numerically
appreciable, Edition: current; Page: [537] for acting on one supposition
rather than on another; and this is the meaning of Probability.

§ 3. [On what foundation the doctrine of chances really rests] The
principle, however, on which athea reasoning proceeds, is sufficiently
evident. It is the obvious one, that when the cases which exist are
shared among several kinds, it is impossible that each of those kinds
should be a majority of the whole: on the contrary, there must be a
majority against each kind, except one at most; and if any kind has more
than its share in proportion to the total number, bthe others
collectivelyb must have less. Granting this axiom, and assuming that we
have no ground for selecting any one kind as more likely than the rest
to surpass the average proportion, it follows that we cannot rationally
presume this of any; which we should do, if we were to bet in favour of
it, receiving less odds than in the ratio of the cnumber of the other
kinds. Even, therefore, in this extreme case of the calculation of
probabilities, which does not rest on special experience at all, the
logical ground of the process is our knowledge, such knowledge as we
then have, of the laws governing the frequency of occurrence of the
different cases; but in this case the knowledge is limited to that
which, being universal and axiomatic, does not require reference to
specific experience, or to any considerations arising out of the special
nature of the problem under discussion.

Except, however, in such cases as games of chance, where the very
purpose in view requires ignorance instead of knowledge, I can conceive
no case in which we ought to be satisfied with such an estimate of
chances as this; an estimate founded on the absolute minimum of
knowledge respecting the subject. It is plain that, in the case of the
coloured balls, a very slight ground of surmise that the white balls
were really more numerous than either of the other colours, would
suffice to dvitiate the whole of the calculations made in our previous
state of indifference. It would place us in that position of more
advanced knowledge, in which the probabilities, to us, would be
different from what they were before; and in estimating these new
probabilities we should have to proceed on a totally different set of
data, furnished no longer by mere counting of possible suppositions, but
by specific knowledge of facts. Such data it should always be our
endeavour to obtain; and in all inquiries, unless on subjects equally
beyond the range of our means of knowledge and our practical uses, they
may be obtained, if not good, at least better than none at all.*

Edition: current; Page: [538]
It is obvious, too, that even when the probabilities are derived from
observation and experiment, a very slight improvement in the data, by
better observations, or by taking into fuller consideration the special
circumstances of the case, is of more use than the most elaborate
application of the calculus to probabilities founded on the data in
their previous state of inferiority. The neglect of this obvious
reflection has given rise to misapplications of the calculus of
probabilities which have made it the real opprobrium of mathematics. It
is sufficient to refer to the applications made of it to ethe
credibility of witnesses, and toe the correctness of the verdicts of
juries. In regard to the first, common sense would dictate that it is
impossible to strike a general average of the veracity, and other
qualifications for true testimony, of mankind, or of any class of them;
and feven if it were possible, the employment of it for such a purpose
implies a misapprehension of the use of averages: which serve indeed to
protect those whose interest is at stake, against mistaking the general
result of large masses of instances, but are of extremely small value as
grounds of expectation in any one individual instance, unless the case
be one of those in which the great majority of individual instances do
not differ much from the average. In the case of af witness, persons of
common sense would draw their conclusions from the degree of consistency
of his statements, his conduct under cross-examination, and the relation
of the case itself to his interests, his partialities, and his mental
capacity, instead of applying so rude a standard (even if it were
capable of being verified) as the ratio between the number of gtrue and
the number of erroneous statements which he may be supposed to make in
the course of hisg life.

Edition: current; Page: [539]
Again, on the subject of juries, or other tribunals, some mathematicians
have set out from the proposition that the judgment of any one judge, or
juryman, is, at least in some small degree, more likely to be right than
wrong, and have concluded that the chance of a number of persons
concurring in a wrong verdict is diminished, the more the number is
increased; so that if the judges are only made sufficiently numerous,
the correctness of the judgment may hbe reduced almosth to certainty. I
say nothing of the disregard shown to the effect produced on the moral
position of the judges by multiplying their numbers; the virtual
destruction of their individual responsibility, and weakening of the
application of their minds to the subject. I remark only the fallacy of
reasoning from a wide average, to cases necessarily differing greatly
from any average. It may be true that taking all causes one with
another, the opinion of any one of the judges would be oftener right
than wrong; but the argument forgets that in all ibut jthe morej simple
cases, in alli cases in which it is really of much consequence what the
tribunal is, the proposition might probably be reversed; besides which,
the cause of error, whether arising from the intricacy of the case or
from ksome common prejudice or mental infirmityk, if it acted upon one
judge, would be extremely likely to affect all the others in the same
manner, or at least a majority, and thus render a wrong instead of a
right decision more probable, the more the number was increased.

These are but samples of the errors frequently committed by men who,
having lmade themselves familiar withl the difficult formulæ which
algebra affords for the estimation of chances under suppositions of a
complex character, like better to employ those formulæ in computing what
are the probabilities to a person half informed about a case, than to
look out for means of being better informed. Before applying the
doctrine of chances to any scientific purpose, the foundation must be
laid for an evaluation of the chances, by possessing ourselves of the
utmost attainable amount of positive knowledge. The knowledge required
is that of the comparative frequency with which the different events in
fact occur. For the purposes, therefore, of the present work, it is
allowable to suppose, that conclusions respecting the probability of a
fact of a particular kind, rest on our knowledge of the proportion
between the cases in which facts of that kind occur, and those in which
they do not occur: this knowledge being either derived from specific
experiment, or deduced from our knowledge of the causes in operation
which tend to produce, compared with those which tend to prevent, the
fact in question.

Edition: current; Page: [540]
Such mcalculation of chances is grounded on an induction; and to render
the calculation legitimate, the induction must be a valid one. It is not
less an induction, though it does not prove that the event occurs in all
cases of a given description, but only that out of a given number of
such cases, it occurs in about so many. The fraction which
mathematicians use to designate the probability of an event, is the
ratio of these two numbers; the ascertained proportion between the
number of cases in which the event occurs, and the sum of all the cases,
those in which it occurs and in which it does not occur taken together.
In playing at cross and pile, the description of cases concerned are
throws, and the probability of cross is one-half, because nif we throw
often enough, cross is thrown about once in every two throwso. In the
cast of a die, the probability of ace is one-sixth; not simply because
there are six possible throws, of which ace is one, and because we do
not know any reason why one should turn up rather than another; though I
have admitted the validity of this ground in default of a better; but
pbecause we do actually know, either by reasoning orp by experience,
that in a hundred, or a million of throws, ace qisq thrown rinr about
one-sixth of that number, or once in six times.m

a§ 4. [The ultimate dependence of the doctrine of chances on causation]
I say, “either by reasoning or by experience;” meaning specific
experience. But in estimating probabilities, it is not a matter of
indifference from which of these two sources we derive our assurance.
The probability of events as calculated from their mere frequency in
past experience, affords a less secure basis for practical guidance,
than their probability as deduced from an equally accurate knowledge of
the frequency of occurrence of their causes.

The generalization, that an event occurs in ten out of every hundred
cases of a given description, is as real an induction as if the
generalization were that it occurs in all cases. But when we arrive at
the conclusion by merely counting instances in actual experience, and
comparing the number of cases in which A has been present with the
number in which it has been absent, the evidence is only that of the
Method of Agreement, and the conclusion amounts only to an empirical
law. We can make a step beyond this when we can ascend to the causes on
which the occurrence of A or its non-occurrence will depend, and form an
estimate of the comparative frequency of the causes favourable and
Edition: current; Page: [541] of those unfavourable to the occurrence.
These are data of a higher order, by which the empirical law derived
from a mere numerical comparison of affirmative and negative instances
will be either corrected or confirmed, and in either case we shall
obtain a more correct measure of probability than is given by that
numerical comparison. It has been well remarked that in the kind of
examples by which the doctrine of chances is usually illustrated, that
of balls in a box, the estimate of probabilities is supported by reasons
of causation, stronger than specific experience. “What is the reason
that in a box where there are nine black balls and one white, we expect
to draw a black ball nine times as much (in other words, nine times as
often, frequency being the gauge of intensity in expectation) as a
white? Obviously because the local conditions are nine times as
favourable, because the hand may alight in nine places and get a black
ball, while it can only alight in one place and find a white ball; just
for the same reason that we do not expect to succeed in finding a friend
in a crowd, the conditions in order that we and he should come together
being many and difficult. This of course would not hold to the same
extent were the white balls of smaller size than the black, neither
would the probability remain the same: the larger ball would be much
more likely to meet the hand.”*

It is, in fact, evident, that when once causation is admitted as an
universal law, our expectation of events can only be rationally grounded
on that law. To a person who recognises that every event depends on
causes, a thing’s having happened once is a reason for expecting it to
happen again, only because proving that there exists, or is liable to
exist, a cause adequate to produce it.† The frequency of the particular
event, apart from all surmise Edition: current; Page: [542] respecting
its cause, can give rise to no other induction than that per
enumerationem simplicem; and the precarious inferences derived from
this, are superseded, and disappear from the field, as soon as the
principle of causation makes its appearance there.

Notwithstanding, however, the abstract superiority of an estimate of
probability grounded on causes, it is a fact that in almost all cases in
which chances admit of estimation sufficiently precise to render their
numerical appreciation of any practical value, the numerical data are
not drawn from knowledge of the causes, but from experience of the
events themselves. bThe probabilities of life at different ages, or in
different climates; the probabilities of recovery from a particular
disease; the chances of the birth of male or female offspring; the
chances of the destruction of houses or other property by fire; the
chances of the loss of a ship in a particular voyage; are deduced from
bills of mortality, returns from hospitals, registers of births, of
shipwrecks, &c., that is, from the observed frequency not of the causes,
but of the effects.b The reason is, that in all these classes of facts,
the causes are either not amenable to direct observation at all, or not
with the requisite precision, and we have no means of judging of their
frequency except from the empirical law afforded by the frequency of the
effects. The inference does not the less depend on causation alone. We
reason from an effect to a similar effect by passing through the cause.
If the actuary of an insurance office infers from his tables that among
a hundred persons now living, of a particular age, five on the average
will attain the age of seventy, his inference is legitimate, not for the
simple reason that this is the proportion who have lived till seventy in
times past, but because the fact of their having so lived shows that
this is the proportion existing, at that place and time, between the
causes which prolong life to the age of seventy, and those tending to
bring it to an earlier close.*a

Edition: current; Page: [543]
a§ 5.a [Theorem of the doctrine of chances which relates to the cause of
a given event] From bthe preceding principlesb it is easy to deduce the
demonstration of that theorem of the doctrine of probabilities, which is
the foundation of its capplication to dinquiries for ascertaining the
occurrence of a given event, or the reality of an individual fact. The
signs or evidences by which a fact is usually proved, are some of its
consequences: and the inquiry hinges upon determining what cause is most
likely to have produced a given effect. The theorem applicable to such
investigations is the Sixth Principle in Laplace’s Essai Philosophique
sur les Probabilités, which is described by him as ethe “fundamentale
principle of that branch of the Analysis of Chances, which consists in
ascending from events to their causes.”*

Given an effect to be accounted for, and there being several causes
which might have produced it, but of the presence of which in the
particular case nothing is known; the probability that the effect was
produced by any one of these causes is as the antecedent probability of
the cause, multiplied by the probability that the cause, if it existed,
would have produced the given effect.

Let M be the effect, and A, B, two causes, by either of which it might
have been produced. To find the probability that it was produced by the
one and not by the other, ascertain which of the two is most likely to
have existed, and which of them, if it did exist, was most likely to
produce the effect M: the probability sought is a compound of these two
probabilities.

Case I. Let the causes be both alike in the second respect; either A or
B, when it exists, being supposed equally likely (or equally certain) to
produce M; but let A be in itself twice as likely as B to exist, that
is, twice as frequent a phenomenon. Then it is twice as likely to have
existed in this case, and to have been the cause which produced M.

For, since A exists in nature twice as often as B; in any 300 cases in
which one or other existed, A has existed 200 times and B 100. But
either A or B must have existed wherever M is produced: therefore in 300
times that M is produced, A was the producing cause 200 times, B only
100, that is, in the Edition: current; Page: [544] ratio of 2 to 1.
Thus, then, if the causes are alike in their capacity of producing the
effect, the probability as to which actually produced it, is in the
ratio of their antecedent probabilities.

Case II. Reversing the last hypothesis, let us suppose that the causes
are equally frequent, equally likely to have existed, but not equally
likely, if they did exist, to produce M: that in three times in which A
occurs, it produces that effect twice, while B, in three times, produces
it only once. Since the two causes are equally frequent in their
occurrence; in every six times that either one or the other exists, A
exists three times and B three times. A, of its three times, produces M
in two; B, of its three times, produces M in one. Thus, in the whole six
times, M is only produced thrice; but of that thrice it is produced
twice by A, once only by B. Consequently, when the antecedent
probabilities of the causes are equal, the chances that the effect was
produced by them are in the ratio of the probabilities that if they did
exist they would produce the effect.

Case III. The third case, that in which the causes are unlike in both
respects, is solved by what has preceded. For, when a quantity depends
on two other quantities, in such a manner that while either of them
remains constant it is proportional to the other, it must necessarily be
proportional to the product of the two quantities, the product being the
only function of the two which obeys that flaw of variation. Therefore,
the probability that M was produced by either cause, is as the
antecedent probability of the cause, multiplied by the probability that
if it existed it would produce M. Which was to be demonstrated.

Or we may prove the third case as we proved the first and second. Let A
be twice as frequent as B; and let them also be unequally likely, when
they exist, to produce M: let A produce it twice in four times, B thrice
in four times. The antecedent probability of A is to that of B as 2 to
1; the probabilities of their producing M are as 2 to 3; the product of
these ratios is the ratio of 4 to 3g: and thisg will be the ratio of the
probabilities that A or B was the producing cause in the given instance.
hFor, since A is twice as frequent as B, out of twelve cases in which
one or other exists, A exists in 8 and B in 4. But of its eight cases,
A, by the supposition, produces M in only 4, while B of its four cases
produces M in 3. M, therefore, is only produced at all in seven of the
twelve cases; but in four of these it is produced by A, in three by B;
hence, the probabilities of its being produced by A and by B are as 4 to
3, and are expressed by the fractions 4/7 and 3/7. Which was to be
demonstrated.i

Edition: current; Page: [545]
a§ 6.a [How the doctrine of chances is applicable to the elimination of
chance] It remains to examine the bearing of the doctrine of chances on
the peculiar problem bwhich occupied us in the preceding chapterb,
namely, how to distinguish coincidences which are casual from those
which are the result of law; from those in which the facts which
accompany or follow one another are somehow connected through causation.

cThe doctrine of chances affords means by which, if we knew the average
number of coincidences to be looked for between two phenomena connected
only casually, we could determine how often any given deviation from
that average will occur by chance. If the probability of any casual
coincidence, considered in itself, be 1/m, the probability that the same
coincidence will be repeated n times in succession is 1/mn. For example,
in one throw of a die the probability of ace being 1/6; the probability
of throwing ace twice in succession will be 1 divided by the square of
6, or 1/36. For ace is thrown at the first throw once in six, or six in
thirty-six times, and of those six, the die being cast again, ace will
be thrown but once; being altogether once in thirty-six times. The
chance of the same cast three times successively is, by a similar
reasoning, 1/63 or 1/216: that is, the event will happen, on a large
average, only once in two hundred and sixteen throws.

We have thus a rule by which to estimate the probability that any given
series of coincidences arises from chance; provided we can measure
correctly the probability of a single coincidence. If we dcand obtain an
equally precise expression for the probability that the same series of
coincidences arises from causation, we should only have to compare the
numbers. This, however, can rarely be done. Let us see what degree of
approximation can practically be made to the necessary precision.

Edition: current; Page: [546]
The question falls within Laplace’s sixth principle, ejust
demonstratede. The given fact, that is to say, the series of
coincidences, may have originated either in a casual conjunction of
causes, or in a law of nature. The probabilities, therefore, that the
fact originated in these two modes, are as their antecedent
probabilities, multiplied by the probabilities that if they existed they
would produce the effect. But the particular combination of chances, if
it occurred, or the law of nature if real, would certainly produce the
series of coincidences. The probabilities, therefore, that the
coincidences are produced by the two causes in question, are as the
antecedent probabilities of the causes. One of these, the antecedent
probability of the combination of mere chances which would produce the
given result, is an appreciable quantity. The antecedent probability of
the other supposition may be susceptible of a more or less exact
estimation, according to the nature of the case.

In some cases, the coincidence, supposing it to be the result of
causation at all, must be the result of a known cause: as the succession
of aces, if not accidental, must arise from the loading of the die. In
such cases we may be able to form a conjecture as to the antecedent
probability of such a circumstance, from the characters of the parties
concerned, or other such evidence; but it would fbe impossible to
estimate that probability with anything like numerical precision. The
counter-probability, however, that of the accidental origin of the
coincidence, dwindling so rapidly as it does at each new trial; the
stage is soon reached at which the chance of unfairness in the die,
however small in itself, must be greater than that of a casual
coincidence: and on this ground, a practical decision can generally be
come to without much hesitation, if there be the power of repeating the
experiment.

When, however, the coincidence is one which cannot be accounted for by
any known cause, and the connexion between the two phenomena, if
produced by causation, must be the result of some law of nature hitherto
unknown; which is the case we had in view in the last chapter; then,
though the probability of a casual coincidence may be capable of
appreciation, that of the counter-supposition, the existence of an
undiscovered law of nature, is clearly unsusceptible of even an
approximate gvaluationg In order to have the data which such a case
would require, it would be necessary to know what proportion of all the
individual sequences or coexistences occurring in nature are the result
of law, and what proportion are hmere casual coincidencesh. It being
evident that we cannot form any plausible conjecture as to this
proportion, much less appreciate it numerically, we cannot attempt any
precise estimation of the comparative probabilities. But of this we are
sure, that the Edition: current; Page: [547] detection of an unknown law
of nature—of some previously unrecognised constancy of conjunction among
phenomena—is no uncommon event. If, therefore, the number of instances
in which a coincidence is observed, over and above that which would
arise on the average from the mere concurrence of chances, be such that
so great an amount of coincidences from accident alone would be an
extremely uncommon event; we have reason to conclude that the
coincidence is the effect of causation, and may be received (subject to
correction from further experience) as an empirical law. Further than
this, in point of precision, we cannot go; nor, in most cases, is
greater precision required, for the solution of any practical doubt.*a

Edition: current; Page: [548]


CHAPTER XIX: aOfa the Extension of Derivative Laws to Adjacent Cases

§ 1. [Derivative laws, when not causal, are almost always contingent on
collocations] We have had frequent occasion to notice the inferior
generality of derivative laws, compared with the ultimate laws from
which they are derived. This inferiority, which affects not only the
extent of the propositions themselves, but their degree of certainty
within that extent, is most conspicuous in the uniformities of
coexistence and sequence obtaining between effects which depend
ultimately on different primeval causes. Such uniformities will only
obtain where there exists the same collocation of those primeval causes.
If the collocation varies, though the laws themselves remain the same, a
totally different set of derivative uniformities may, and generally
will, be the result.

Even where the derivative uniformity is between different effects of the
same cause, it will by no means obtain as universally as the law of the
cause itself. If a and b accompany or succeed one another as effects of
the cause A, it by no means follows that A is the only cause which can
produce them, or that if there be another cause, as B, capable of
producing a, it must produce b likewise. The conjunction therefore of a
and b perhaps does not hold universally, but only in the instances in
which a arises from A. When it is produced by a cause other than A, a
and b may be dissevered. Day (for example) is always in our experience
followed by night; but day is not the cause of night; both are
successive effects of a common cause, the periodical passage bof the
spectatorb into and out of the earth’s shadow, consequent on the earth’s
rotation, and on the illuminating property of the sun. If, therefore,
day is ever produced by a different cause or set of causes from this,
day will not, or at least may not, be followed by night. On the sun’s
own surface, for instance, this may be the case.

Finally, even when the derivative uniformity is itself a law of
causation (resulting from the combination of several causes), it is not
altogether independent of collocations. If a cause supervenes, capable
of wholly or Edition: current; Page: [549] partially counteracting the
effect of any one of the conjoined causes, the effect will no longer
conform to the derivative law. While, therefore, each ultimate law is
only liable to frustration from one set of counteracting causes, the
derivative law is liable to it from several. Now, the possibility of the
occurrence of counteracting causes which do not arise from any of the
conditions involved in the law itself, depends on the original
collocations.

It is true that (as we formerly remarked) laws of causation, whether
ultimate or derivative, are, in most cases, fulfilled even when
counteracted; the cause produces its effect, though that effect is
destroyed by something else. That the effect may be frustrated, is,
therefore, no objection to the universality of clawsc of causation. But
it is dfatald to the universality of the sequences or coexistences of
effects, which compose the greater part of the derivative laws flowing
from laws of causation. When, from the law of a certain combination of
causes, there results a certain order in the effects; as from the
combination of a single sun with the rotation of an opaque body round
its axis, there results, on the whole surface of that opaque body, an
alternation of day and night; then if we suppose one of the combined
causes counteracted, the rotation stopped, the sun extinguished, or a
second sun superadded, the truth of that particular law of causation is
in no way affected; it is still true that one sun shining on an opaque
revolving body will alternately produce day and night; but since the sun
no longer does shine on such a body, the derivative uniformity, the
succession of day and night on the given planet, is no longer true.
Those derivative uniformities, therefore, which are not laws of
causation, are (except in the rare case of their depending on one cause
alone, not on a combination of causes,) always more or less contingent
on collocations; and are hence subject to the characteristic infirmity
of empirical laws, that of being admissible only where the collocations
are known by experience to be such as are requisite for the truth of the
law, that is, only within the conditions of time and place confirmed by
actual observation.

§ 2. [On what grounds derivative laws can be extended to cases beyond
the bounds of actual experience] This principle, when stated in general
terms, seems clear and indisputable; yet many of the ordinary judgments
of mankind, the propriety of which is not questioned, have at least the
semblance of being inconsistent with it. On what grounds, it may be
asked, do we expect that the sun will rise to-morrow? aTo-morrow is
beyond the limits of time comprehended in our observations.a They have
extended over some thousands of years past, but bthey do not include the
future.b Yet we infer with Edition: current; Page: [550] confidence that
the sun will rise to-morrow; and nobody doubts that we are entitled to
do so. Let us consider what is the warrant for this confidence.

In the example in question, we know the causes on which the derivative
uniformity depends. They are, the sun giving out light, the earth in a
state of rotation and intercepting light. The induction which shows
these to be the real causes, and not merely prior effects of a common
cause, being completec; the only circumstances which could defeat the
derivative law are such as would destroy or counteract one or other of
the combined causes. While the causes exist, and are not counteracted,
the effect will continue. If they exist and are not counteracted
to-morrow, the sun will rise to-morrow.

Since the causes, namely the sun and the earth, the one in the state of
giving out light, the other in a state of rotation, will exist until
something destroys them; all depends on the probabilities of their
destruction, dord of their counteraction. We know by observation
(omitting the inferential proofs of an existence for thousands of ages
anterior), that these phenomena have continued for e(say)e five thousand
years. Within that time there has existed no cause sufficient to
diminish them appreciably; nor which has counteracted their effect in
any appreciable degree. The chance, therefore, that the sun may not rise
to-morrow, amounts to the chance that some cause, which has not
manifested itself in the smallest degree during five thousand years,
will exist to-morrow in such intensity as to destroy the sun or the
earth, the sun’s light or the earth’s rotation, or to produce an immense
disturbance in the effect resulting from those causes.

Now, if such a cause will exist to-morrow, or at any future time, some
cause, proximate or remote, of that cause must exist now, and must have
existed during the whole of the five thousand years. If, therefore, the
sun do not rise to-morrow, it will be because some cause has existed,
the effects of which though during five thousand years they have not
amounted to a perceptible quantity, will in one day become overwhelming.
Since this cause has not been recognised during such an interval of
time, by observers stationed on our earth, it must, if it fbe a single
agent, be either onef whose effects develop themselves gradually and
very slowly, or one which existed in regions beyond our observation, and
is now on the point of arriving in our part of the universe. Now all
causes which we have experience of, act according to laws incompatible
with the supposition that their geffectsg, after accumulating so slowly
as to be imperceptible for five thousand years, should start into
immensity in a single day. No mathematical law of proportion between an
effect and the quantity or relations of its cause, could produce
Edition: current; Page: [551] such contradictory results. The sudden
development of an effect of which there was no previous trace, always
arises from the coming together of several distinct causes, not
previously conjoined; but if such sudden conjunction is destined to take
place, the causes, or their causes, must have existed during the entire
five thousand years; and their not having once come together during that
period, shows how rare that particular combination is. We have,
therefore, the warrant of a rigid induction for considering it probable,
in a degree undistinguishable from certainty, that the known conditions
requisite for the sun’s rising will exist to-morrow.

§ 3. [Cases beyond the bounds of actual experience to which derivative
laws can be extended must be adjacent cases] But this extension of
derivative laws, not causative, beyond the limits of observation, can
only be to adjacent cases. If instead of to-morrow we had said this day
twenty thousand years, the inductions would have been anything but
conclusive. That a cause which, in opposition to very powerful causes,
produced no perceptible effect during five thousand years, should
produce a very considerable one by the end of twenty thousand, has
nothing in it which is not in conformity with our experience of causes.
We know many agents, the effect of which in a short period does not
amount to a perceptible quantity, but by accumulating for a much longer
period becomes considerable. Besides, looking at the immense multitude
of the heavenly bodies, their vast distances, and the rapidity of the
motion of such of them as are known to move, it is a supposition not at
all contradictory to experience that some body may be in motion towards
us, or we towards it, within the limits of whose influence we have not
come during five thousand years, but which in twenty thousand more may
be producing effects upon us of the most extraordinary kind. Or the fact
which is capable of preventing sunrise may be, not the cumulative effect
of one cause, but some new combination of causes; and the chances
favourable to that combination, though they have not produced it once in
five thousand years, may produce it once in twenty thousand. So that the
inductions which authorize us to expect future events, grow weaker and
weaker the further we look into the future, and at length become
inappreciable.

We have considered the probabilities of the sun’s rising to-morrow, as
derived from the real laws, that is, from the laws of the causes on
which that uniformity is dependent. Let us now consider how the matter
would have stood if the uniformity had been known only as an empirical
law; if we had not been aware that the sun’s light, and the earth’s
rotation (or the sun’s motion), were the causes on which the periodical
occurrence of adaylighta depends. We could have extended this empirical
law to cases adjacent in time, though not to so great a distance of time
as we can now. Having Edition: current; Page: [552] evidence that the
effects had remained unaltered and been punctually conjoined for five
thousand years, we could infer that the unknown causes on which the
conjunction is dependent had existed undiminished and uncounteracted
during the same period. The same conclusions, therefore, would follow as
in the preceding case; except that we should only know that during five
thousand years nothing had occurred to defeat perceptibly this
particular effect; while, when we know the causes, we have the
additional assurance, that during that interval no such change has been
noticeable in the causes themselves, as by any degree of multiplication
or length of continuance could defeat the effect.

To this must be added, that when we know the causes, we may be able to
judge whether there exists any known cause capable of counteracting
them; bwhile as long asb they are unknown, we cannot be sure but that if
we did know them, we could predict their destruction from causes
actually in existence. A bedridden savage, who had never seen the
cataract of Niagara, but who lived within hearing of it, might imagine
that the sound he heard would endure for ever; but if he knew it to be
the effect of a rush of waters over a barrier of rock which is
progressively wearing away, he would know that within a number of ages
which may be calculated, it will be heard no more. In proportion,
therefore, to our ignorance of the causes on which the empirical law
depends, we can be less assured that it will continue to hold good; and
the cfartherc we look into futurity, the less improbable is it that some
one of the causes, whose coexistence gives rise to the derivative
uniformity, may be destroyed or counteracted. With every prolongation of
time, the chances multiply of such an event, that is to say, its
non-occurrence hitherto becomes a less guarantee of its not occurring
within the given time. If, then, it is only to cases which in point of
time are adjacent (or nearly adjacent) to those which we have actually
observed, that any derivative law, not of causation, can be extended
with an assurance equivalent to certainty, much more is this true of a
merely empirical law. Happily, for the purposes of life it is to such
cases alone that we can almost ever have occasion to extend them.

In respect of place, it might seem that a merely empirical law could not
be extended even to adjacent cases; that we dcouldd have no assurance of
its being true in any place where it has not been specially observed.
The past duration of a cause is a guarantee for its future existence,
unless something occurs to destroy it; but the existence of a cause in
one or any number of places, is no guarantee for its existence in any
other place, since there is no uniformity in the collocations of
primeval causes. When, therefore, an empirical law is extended beyond
the local limits within which it has been found true by observation, the
cases to which it is thus extended must be Edition: current; Page: [553]
such as are presumably within the influence of the same individual
agents. If we ediscovere a new planet within the known bounds of the
solar system (or even beyond those bounds, but indicating its connexion
with the system by revolving round the sun), we fmayf conclude, with
great probability, that it revolves on its axis. For all the known
planets do so; and this uniformity points to some common cause,
antecedent to the first records of astronomical observation: and though
the nature of this cause can only be matter of conjecture, yet if it be,
as is not unlikely, gand as Laplace’s theory supposes, not merely the
same kind of cause, but the same individual cause (such as an impulse
given to all the bodies at once)g, that cause, acting at the extreme
points of the space occupied by the sun and planets, his likely, unless
defeated by some counteracting cause, toh have acted at every
intermediate point, and probably somewhat beyond; and therefore acted,
in all probability, upon the supposed newly discovered planet.

When, therefore, effects which are always found conjoined, can be traced
with any probability to an identical (and not merely a similar) origin,
we may with ithe samei probability extend the empirical law of their
conjunction to all places within the extreme local boundaries within
which the fact has been observed; subject to the possibility of
counteracting causes in some portion of the field. Still more
confidently may we do so when the law is not merely empirical; when the
phenomena jwhichj we find conjoined are effects of ascertained causes,
from the laws of which the conjunction of their effects is deducible. In
that case, we may both extend the derivative uniformity over a larger
space, and with less kabatementk for the chance of counteracting causes.
The first, because instead of the local boundaries of our observation of
the fact itself, we may include the extreme boundaries of the
ascertained influence of its causes. Thus the succession of day and
night, we know, holds true of all the bodies of the solar system except
the sun litselfl, but we know this only because we are acquainted with
the causes: if we were not, we could not extend the proposition beyond
the orbits of the earth and moon, at both extremities of which we have
the evidence of observation for its truth. With respect to the
probability of counteracting causes, it has been seen that this calls
for a greater abatement of confidence, in proportion to our ignorance of
the causes on which the phenomena depend. On both accounts, therefore, a
derivative law which we know how to resolve, is susceptible of a greater
extension to cases adjacent in place, than a merely empirical law.

Edition: current; Page: [554]


CHAPTER XX: Of Analogy

§ 1. [Various senses of the word analogy] The word Analogy, as the name
of a mode of reasoning, is generally taken for some kind of argument
supposed to be of an inductive nature, but not amounting to a complete
induction. There is no word, however, which is used more loosely, or in
a greater variety of senses, than Analogy. It sometimes stands for
arguments which may be examples of the most arigorousa Induction.
Archbishop Whately, for instance, following Ferguson and other writers,
defines Analogy conformably to its primitive acceptation, that which was
given to it by mathematicians, Resemblance of Relations.[*] In this
sense, when a country which has sent out colonies is termed the mother
country, the expression is analogical, signifying that the colonies of a
country stand in the same relation to her in which children stand to
their parents. And if any inference be drawn from this resemblance of
relations, as, for instance, that bobedience or affection is due from
colonies to the mother countryb, this is called reasoning by analogy. Or
if it be argued that a nation is most beneficially governed by an
assembly elected by the people, from the admitted fact that other
associations for a common purpose, such as joint-stock companies, are
best managed by a committee chosen by the parties interested; thisc,
too,c is an argument from analogy in dthe precedingd sense, because its
foundation is, not that a nation is like a joint-stock company, or
Parliament like a board of directors, but that Parliament stands in the
same relation to the nation in which a board of directors stands to a
joint-stock company. Now, in an argument of this nature, there is no
inherent inferiority of conclusiveness. Like other arguments from
resemblance, it may amount to nothing, or it may be a perfect and
conclusive induction. The circumstance in which the two cases resemble,
may be capable of being shown to be the material circumstance; to be
that on which all the consequences, necessary to be taken into account
in the particular Edition: current; Page: [555] discussion, depend. In
the eexample last givene, the resemblance is one of relation; the
fundamentum relationis being the management by a few persons, of affairs
in which a much greater number are interested along with them. Now, some
may contend that this circumstance which is common to the two cases, and
the various consequences which follow from it, have the chief share in
determining all fthef effects which make up what we term good or bad
administration. If they can establish this, their argument has the force
of a grigorousg induction; if they cannot, they are said to have failed
in proving the analogy between the two cases; a mode of speech which
implies that when the analogy can be proved, the argument founded on it
cannot be resisted.

§ 2. [Nature of analogical evidence] It is on the whole more usual,
however, to extend the name of analogical evidence to arguments from any
sort of resemblance, provided they do not amount to a complete
induction: without peculiarly distinguishing resemblance of relations.
Analogical reasoning, in this sense, may be reduced to the following
formula:—Two things resemble each other in one or more respects; a
certain proposition is true of the one; therefore it is true of the
other. But we have anothing herea by which to discriminate analogy from
induction, since this type will serve for all reasoning from experience.
In the bstrictestb induction, equally with the faintest analogy, we
conclude because A resembles B in one or more properties, that it does
so in a certain other property. The difference is, that in the case of a
ccompletec induction it has been previously shown, by due comparison of
instances, that there is an invariable conjunction between the former
dproperty ord properties and the latter property; but in what is called
analogical reasoning, no such conjunction has been made out. There have
been no opportunities of putting in practice the Method of Difference,
or even the Method of Agreement; but we conclude (and that is all which
the argument of analogy amounts to) that a fact m, known to be true of
A, is more likely to be true of B if B agrees with A in some of its
properties (even though no connexion is known to exist between m and
those properties), than if no resemblance at all could be traced between
B and any other thing known to possess the attribute m.

To this argument it is of course requisite, that the properties common
to A with B shall be merely not known to be connected with m; they must
not be properties known to be unconnected with it. If, either by
processes of elimination, or by deduction from previous knowledge of the
laws of the Edition: current; Page: [556] properties in question, it can
be concluded that they have nothing to do with m, the argument of
analogy is put out of court. The supposition must be that m is an effect
really dependent on some property of A, but we know not on which. We
cannot point out any of the properties of A, which is the cause of m, or
united with it by any law. After rejecting all which we know to have
nothing to do with it, there remain several ebetweene which we are
unable to decide: of which remaining properties, B possesses one or
more. This accordingly, we consider as affording grounds, of more or
less fstrengthf, for concluding by analogy that B possesses the
attribute m.

There can be no doubt that every such resemblance which can be pointed
out between B and A, affords some degree of probability, beyond what
would otherwise exist, in favour of the conclusion drawn from it. If B
resembled A in all its ultimate properties, its possessing the attribute
m would be a certainty, not a probability: and every resemblance which
can be shown to exist between them, places it by so much the nearer to
that point. If the resemblance be in an ultimate property, there will be
resemblance in all the derivative properties dependent on that ultimate
property, and of these m may be one. If the resemblance be in a
derivative property, there is reason to expect resemblance in the
ultimate property on which it depends, and in the other derivative
properties dependent on the same ultimate property. Every resemblance
which can be shown to exist, affords ground for expecting an indefinite
number of other resemblances: the particular resemblance sought will,
therefore, be oftener found among things thus known to resemble, than
among things between which we know of no resemblance.g

For example, I might infer that there are probably inhabitants in the
moon, because there are inhabitants on the earth, in the sea, and in the
air: and this is the evidence of analogy. The circumstance of having
inhabitants is here assumed not to be an ultimate property, but (as his
reasonable to Edition: current; Page: [557] suppose) a consequence of
other properties; and depending, therefore, in the case of ithei earth,
on some of its properties as a portion of the universe, but on which of
those properties we know not. Now the moon resembles the earth in being
a solid, opaque, nearly spherical substancej, appearing to contain, or
to have contained,j active volcanoes; receiving heat and light from the
sun, in about the same quantity as our earth; revolving on its axis;
kcomposed of materials which gravitate, and obeyingk all the various
laws resulting from that property. And I think no one will deny that if
this were all that was known of the moon, the existence of inhabitants
in that luminary would derive from these various resemblances to the
earth, a greater degree of probability than it would otherwise have:
though the amount of the augmentation it would be luselessl to attempt
to estimate.

If, however, every resemblance proved between B and A, in any point not
known to be immaterial with respect to m, forms some additional reason
for presuming that B has the attribute m; it is clear, è contra, that
every dissimilarity which can be proved between them, furnishes a
counter-probability of the same nature on the other side. It is not
indeed munusual that different ultimate properties shouldm, in some
particular instances, produce the same derivative property; but on the
whole it is certain that things which differ in their ultimate
properties, will differ at least as much in the aggregate of their
derivative properties, and that the differences which are unknown will
on the average of cases bear some proportion to those which are known.
There will, therefore, be a competition between the known points of
agreement and the known points of difference in A and B; and according
as the one or the other nmay ben deemed to preponderate, the probability
derived from analogy will be for or against B’s having the property m.
The moon, for instance, agrees with the earth in the circumstances
already mentioned; but differs in being smaller, in having its surface
more unequal, and apparently volcanic throughout, in havingo, at least
on the side next the earth,o no atmosphere sufficient to refract light,
no clouds, and p(it is therefore concluded)p no water. These
differences, considered merely as such, might perhaps balance the
resemblances, so that analogy would afford no presumption either way.
But considering that some of the circumstances which are wanting on the
moon are among those which, on qtheq earth, are found to be
indispensable conditions Edition: current; Page: [558] of animal life,
we may conclude that if that phenomenon does exist in the moon, r(or at
all events on the nearer side,)r it must be as sans effect of causes
totally different from those on which it depends here; as a consequence,
therefore, of the moon’s differences from the earth, not of tthet points
of agreement. Viewed in this light, all the resemblances which exist
become presumptions against, not in favour of, uthe moon’su being
inhabited. Since life cannot exist there in the manner in which it
exists here, the greater the resemblance of the lunar world to the
terrestrial in vother respects, the less reason we have to believe that
it can contain life.

There are, however, other bodies in our system, between which and the
earth there is a much closer resemblance; which possess an atmosphere,
clouds, consequently water (or some fluid analogous to it), and even
give strong indications of snow in their polar regions; while the cold,
or heat, though differing greatly on the average from ours, is, in some
parts at least of those planets, possibly not more extreme than in some
regions of our own which are habitable. To balance these agreements, the
ascertained differences are chiefly in the average light and heat,
velocity of rotation, wdensity of material,w intensity of gravity, and
similar circumstances of a secondary kind. With regard to these planets,
therefore, the argument of analogy gives a decided preponderance in
favour of their resembling the earth in any of its derivative
properties, such as that of having inhabitants; though, when we consider
how immeasurably multitudinous are those of their properties which we
are entirely ignorant of, compared with the few which we know, we xcan
attach butx trifling weight to any considerations of resemblance in
which the known elements bear so inconsiderable a proportion to the
unknown.

Besides the competition between analogy and diversity, there may be a
competition of conflicting analogies. The new case may be similar in
some of its circumstances to cases in which the fact m exists, but in
others to cases in which it is known not to exist. Amber has some
properties in common with vegetable, others with mineral products. A
painting of unknown origin, may resemble, in certain of its characters,
known works of a particular master, but in others it may as strikingly
resemble ythose of some other paintery. A vase may bear some analogy to
works of Grecian, and some to those of Etruscan, or Egyptian art. We are
of course supposing that it does not possess any quality which has been
ascertained, by a sufficient induction, to be a conclusive mark either
of the one or of the other.

Edition: current; Page: [559]
§ 3. [On what circumstances the value of analogical evidence depends]
Since the value of an analogical argument inferring one resemblance from
other resemblances without any antecedent evidence of a connexion
between them, depends on the extent of ascertained resemblance, compared
first with the amount of ascertained difference, and next with the
extent of the unexplored region of unascertained properties; it follows
that where the resemblance is very great, the ascertained difference
very small, and our knowledge of the subject-matter tolerably extensive,
the argument from analogy may approach in strength very near to a valid
induction. If, after much observation of B, we find that it agrees with
A in nine out of ten of its known properties, we may conclude with a
probability of nine to one, that it will possess any given derivative
property of A. If we discover, for example, an unknown animal or plant,
resembling closely some known one in the greater number of the
properties we observe in it, but differing in some few, we may
reasonably expect to find in the unobserved remainder of its properties,
a general agreement with those of the former; but also a difference
corresponding aproportionatelya to the amount of observed diversity.

It thus appears that the conclusions derived from analogy are only of
any considerable value, when the case to which we reason is an adjacent
case; adjacent, not as before, in place or time, but in circumstances.
In the case of effects of which the causes are imperfectly or not at all
known, when consequently the observed order of their occurrence amounts
only to an empirical law, it often happens that the conditions which
have coexisted whenever the effect was observed, have been very
numerous. Now if a new case presents itself, in which all these
conditions do not exist, but the far greater part of them do, some one
or a few only being wanting, the inference that the effect will occur,
notwithstanding this deficiency of complete resemblance to the cases in
which it has been observed, may, though of the nature of analogy,
possess a high degree of probability. It is hardly necessary to add
that, however considerable this probability may be, no competent
inquirer into nature will rest satisfied with it when ba complete
induction is attainableb; but will consider the analogy as a mere
guide-post, pointing out the direction in which more rigorous
investigations should be prosecuted.

It is in this last respect that considerations of analogy have the
highest cscientificc value. The cases in which analogical evidence
affords in itself any very high degree of probability, are, as we have
dobserved, only those in which the resemblance is very close and
extensive; but there is no analogy, however faint, which may not be of
the utmost value in suggesting experiments Edition: current; Page: [560]
or observations that may lead to more positive conclusions. When the
agents and their effects are out of the reach of further observation and
experiment, as in the speculations already alluded to respecting the
moon and planets, such slight probabilities are no more than an
interesting theme for the pleasant exercise of imagination; but any
suspicion, however slight, that sets an ingenious person at work to
contrive an experiment, or eaffords a reason for trying one experiment
rather than another, may be of fthe greatest benefit to sciencef.

On this ground, gthough I cannot accept as positive htruthsh any of
those scientific hypothesesg which are unsusceptible of being ultimately
brought to the test of actual induction, such, for instance, as the two
theories of light, the emission theory of the last century, and the
undulatory theory which predominates in the present, I am yet unable to
agree with ithose who consider suchi hypotheses to be worthy of entire
disregard. As is well said by Hartley (and concurred in by a jthinkerj
in general so diametrically opposed to Hartley’s kopinionsk as Dugald
Stewart), “any hypothesis lwhichl has so much plausibility as to explain
a considerable number of facts, helps us to digest these facts in proper
order, to bring new ones to light, and make experimenta crucis for the
sake of future inquirers.”* If an hypothesis mboth explains known facts,
andm has led to the prediction of others previously unknown, and since
verified by experience, the laws of the phenomenon which is the subject
of inquiry must bear at least a great similarity to those of the class
of phenomena to which the hypothesis assimilates it; and since the
analogy which extends so far may probably extend nfarthern, nothing is
more likely to suggest experiments tending to throw light upon the real
properties of the phenomenon, than the following out such an hypothesis.
But to this end it is by no means necessary that the hypothesis be
mistaken for a scientific truth. On the contrary, that illusion is in
this respect, as in every other, an Edition: current; Page: [561]
impediment to the progress of real knowledge, by leading oinquirerso to
restrict themselves arbitrarily to the particular hypothesis which is
most accredited at the time, instead of looking out for every class of
phenomena between the laws of which and those of the given phenomenon
any analogy exists, and trying all such experiments as may tend to the
discovery of ulterior analogies pointing in the same direction.

Edition: current; Page: [562]


CHAPTER XXI: Of the Evidence of the Law of Universal Causation

§ 1. [The law of causality adoes not rest on an instincta] We have now
completed our review of the logical processes by which the laws, or
uniformities, of the bsequenceb of phenomena, and those uniformities in
their coexistence which depend on the laws of their sequence, are
ascertained cor testedc. As we recognised in the commencement, and have
been enabled to see more clearly in the progress of the investigation,
the basis of all these logical operations is dthe law of causation. The
validity of all the Inductive Methods depends on the assumption that
every event, or the beginning of every phenomenon, must have some cause;
some antecedent, on the existence of which it is invariably and
unconditionally consequent. In the Method of Agreement this is obvious;
that method avowedly proceeding on the supposition that we have found
the true cause ease soon as we have negatived every other. The assertion
is equally true of the Method of Difference. That method authorizes us
to infer a general law from two instances; one, in which A exists
together with a multitude of other circumstances, and B follows;
another, in which, A being removed, and all other circumstances
remaining the same, B is prevented. What, however, does this prove? It
proves that fB, in the particular instance, cannot have had any other
cause than Af; but to conclude from this that A was the cause, or that A
will on other occasions be followed by B, is only allowable on the
assumption that B must have some cause; that among its antecedents in
any single instance in which it occurs, there must be one which has the
capacity of producing it at other timesg. Thisg being admitted, it is
seen that in the case in question that antecedent can be no other than
A; but, that if it be no other than A it must be A, is not proved, by
these instances at least, but taken for granted. There is no need to
Edition: current; Page: [563] spend time in proving that the same thing
is true of the other Inductive Methods. The universality of the law of
causation is assumed in them all.

But is this assumption warranted? Doubtless (it may be said) most
phenomena are connected as effects with some antecedent or cause, that
is, are never produced unless some assignable fact has preceded them;
but the very circumstance that complicated processes of induction are
sometimes necessary, shows that cases exist in which this regular order
of succession is not apparent to our hunaidedh apprehension. If, then,
the processes which bring these cases within the same category with the
rest, require that we should assume the universality of the very law
which they do not at first sight appear to exemplify, is not this a
ipetitio principii? Can we prove a proposition, by an argument which
takes it for granted? And if not so proved, on what evidence does it
rest?

For this difficulty, which I have purposely stated in the strongest
terms it jwillj admit of, the school of metaphysicians who have long
predominated in this country find a ready salvo. They affirm, that the
universality of causation is a truth which we cannot help believing;
that the belief in it is an instinct, one of the laws of our believing
faculty. As the proof of this, they say, and they have nothing else to
say, that everybody does believe it; and they number it among the
propositions, rather numerous in their catalogue, which may be logically
argued against, and perhaps cannot be logically proved, but which are of
higher authority than logic, and kso essentially inherent in the human
mind, that even he who denies themk in speculation, shows by his
habitual practice that his arguments make no impression upon himself.

lInto the merits of this question, considered as one of psychology, it
would be foreign to my purpose to enter mherem: but I must protest
against adducing, as evidence of the truth of a fact in external nature,
the disposition, however strong or however general, of the human mind to
believe it. Belief is not proof, and does not dispense with the
necessity of proof. I am aware, Edition: current; Page: [564] that to
ask for evidence of a proposition which we are supposed to believe
instinctively, is to expose oneself to the charge of rejecting the
authority of the human faculties; which of course no one can
consistently do, since the human faculties are all which any one has to
judge by: and inasmuch as the meaning of the word evidence is supposed
to be, something which when laid before the mind, induces it to believe;
to demand evidence when the belief is ensured by the mind’s own laws, is
supposed to be appealing to the intellect against the intellect. But
this, I apprehend, is a misunderstanding of the nature of evidence. By
evidence is not meant anything and everything which produces belief.
There are many things which generate belief besides evidence. A mere
strong association of ideas often causes a belief so intense as to be
unshakeable by experience or argument. Evidence is not that which the
mind does or must yield to, but that which it ought to yield to, namely,
that, by yielding to which, its belief is kept conformable to fact.
There is no appeal from the human faculties generally, but there is an
appeal from one human faculty to another; from the judging faculty, to
those which take cognizance of fact, the faculties of sense and
consciousness. nThe legitimacy of this appeal is admitted whenever it is
allowed that our judgments ought to be conformable to fact.n To say that
belief suffices for its own justification is making opinion the test of
opinion; it is denying the existence of any outward standard, the
conformity of an opinion to which constitutes its truth. We call one
mode of forming opinions right and another wrong, because the one does,
and the other does not, tend to make the opinion agree with the fact—to
make people believe what really is, and expect what really will be. Now
a mere disposition to believe, even if supposed instinctive, is no
guarantee for the truth of the thing believed. If, indeed, the belief
ever amounted to an irresistible necessity, there would then be no use
in appealing from it, because there would be no possibility of altering
it. But even then the truth of the belief would not follow; it would
only follow that mankind were under a permanent necessity of believing
what might possibly not be true; oin other words, that a case might
occur in which our senses or consciousness, if they could be appealed
to, might testify one thing, and our reason believe anothero. But in
fact there is no such permanent necessity. There is no proposition of
which it can be asserted that every human mind must eternally and
irrevocably believe it. Many of the propositions of which this is most
confidently pstatedp, great numbers of human beings have disbelieved.
The things which it has been supposed that nobody could possibly help
believing, are innumerable; but no two generations would make out the
same catalogue of Edition: current; Page: [565] them. One age or nation
believes implicitly what to another seems incredible and inconceivable;
one individual has not a vestige of a belief which another qdeemsq to be
absolutely inherent in humanity. There is not one of these supposed
instinctive beliefs which is really rinevitabler. It is in the power of
every one to cultivate habits of thought which make him independent of
them. The habitl of philosophical analysis, s(of which it is the surest
effect to enable the mind to command, instead of being commanded by, the
laws of the merely passive part of its own nature,) by showing to us
that things are not necessarily connected in fact because their ideas
are connected in our minds, is able to loosen innumerable associations
which reign despotically over the undisciplined tort early-prejudiced
mind. Ands this habit is not without power even over those associations
which the uschool of which I have been speaking regard as connate and
instinctive. I am convinced that any one accustomed to abstraction and
analysis, who will fairly exert his faculties for the purpose, will,
when his imagination has once learnt to entertain the notion, find no
difficulty in conceiving that in some one, for instance, of the many
firmaments into which sidereal astronomy now divides the universe,
events may succeed one another at random, without any fixed law; nor can
anything in our experience, or in our mental nature, constitute a
sufficient, or indeed any, reason for believing that this is nowhere the
case.v

wWere we to suppose (what xit isx perfectly possible to imagine) that
the present order of the universe were brought to an end, and ythaty a
chaos succeeded in which there was no fixed succession of events, and
the past gave no assurance of the future; zif a human being were
miraculously kept alive to witness this change, he surely would soon
cease to believe in any uniformity, the uniformity itself no longer
existing. If this be admitted, the belief in Edition: current; Page:
[566] uniformity either is not an instinct, or it is an instinct
conquerable, like all other instincts, by acquired knowledge.w

aBut there is no need to speculate on what might be, when we have
positive and certain knowledge of what has been. It is not true as a
matter of fact, that mankind have always believed that all the
successions of events were uniform and according to fixed laws. The
Greek philosophers, not even excepting Aristotle, recognised Chance and
Spontaneity (τύχη and τὸ αὐτομάτον) as among the agents in nature; in
other words, they believed that to that extent there was no guarantee
that the past had been similar to itself, or that the future would
resemble the past. Even now a full half of the philosophical world,
including the very same metaphysicians who contend most for the
instinctive character of the belief in uniformity, consider one
important class of phenomena, volitions, to be an exception to the
uniformity, and not governed by a fixed law.a*

Edition: current; Page: [567]
a§ 2.a [The law of causality rests on an induction by simple
enumeration] As was observed in a former place,* the belief we entertain
in the universality, throughout nature, of the law of cause and effect,
is itself an instance of induction; and by no means one of the earliest
which any of us, or which mankind in general, can have made. We arrive
at this universal law, by generalization from many laws of inferior
generality. bWe should never have had the notion of causation (in the
philosophical meaning of the term) as a condition of all phenomena,
unlessb many cases of causation, or in other words, many partial
uniformities of sequence, had cpreviouslyc become familiar. The more
obvious of the particular uniformities suggest, and dgive evidence of,
the general uniformity, and thed general uniformity, once established,
enables us to prove the remainder of the particular uniformities of
which it is made up. As, however, all rigorous processes of induction
presuppose the general uniformity, our knowledge of the particular
uniformities from which it was first inferred was not, of course,
derived from erigorouse induction, but from the loose and uncertain mode
of induction per enumerationem simplicem; and the law of universal
causation, being collected from results so obtained, cannot itself rest
on any better foundation.

fIt would seem, therefore, that induction per enumerationem simplicem
not only is not necessarily an illicit logical process, but is in
reality the only kind of induction possible; since the more elaborate
process depends for its validity on a law, itself obtained in that
inartificial mode. Is there not then an inconsistency in contrasting the
looseness of one method with the rigidity of another, when that other is
indebted to the looser method for its own foundation?

The inconsistency, however, is only apparent. Assuredly, if induction by
Edition: current; Page: [568] simple enumeration were an invalid
process, no process grounded on it could be valid; just as no reliance
could be placed on telescopes, if we could not trust our eyes. But
though a valid process, it is a fallible one, and fallible in very
different degrees: if therefore we can substitute for the more fallible
forms of the process, an operation grounded on the same process in a
less fallible form, we shall have effected a very material improvement.
And this is what scientific induction does.

A mode of concluding from experience must be pronounced untrustworthy,
when subsequent experience refuses to confirm it. According to this
criterion, induction by simple enumeration—in other words,
generalization of an observed fact from the mere absence of any known
instance to the contrary—affords in general a precarious and unsafe
ground of assurance; for such generalizations are incessantly
discovered, on further experience, to be false. Still, however, it
affords some assurance, sufficient, in many cases, for the ordinary
guidance of conduct. It would be absurd to say, that the generalizations
arrived at by mankind in the outset of their experience, such as these,
Food nourishes, Fire burns, Water drowns, were unworthy of reliance.*
There is a scale of trustworthiness in the results of the original
unscientific Induction; and on this diversity (as observed in the fourth
chapter of the present book) depend the rules for the improvement of the
process. The improvement consists in correcting one of these
hinartificialh generalizations by means of another. As has been already
pointed out, this is all that art can do. To test a generalization, by
showing that it either follows from, or conflicts with, some stronger
induction, some generalization resting on a broader foundation of
experience, is the beginning and end of the logic of Induction.

Edition: current; Page: [569]
a§ 3.a [In what cases induction by simple enumeration is allowable] Now
the precariousness of the method of simple enumeration is in an inverse
ratio to the largeness of the generalization. The processf is delusive
and insufficient, exactly in proportion as the subject-matter of the
observation is special and limited in extent. As the sphere widens, this
unscientific method becomes less and less liable to mislead; and the
most universal class of truths, the law of causation for instance, and
the principles of number and of geometry, are duly and satisfactorily
proved by that method alone, nor are they susceptible of any other
proof.

With respect to bthe wholeb class of generalizations of which we have
recently treated, the uniformities which depend on causation, the truth
of the remark just made follows by obvious inference from the principles
laid down in the preceding chapters. When a fact has been observed a
certain number of times to be true, and is not in any instance known to
be false; if we at once affirm that fact as an universal truth or law of
nature, without ceither testing it by any of the four methods of
induction, orc deducing it dfrom other known laws, we shall in general
err grossly: but we are perfectly justified in affirming it as an
empirical law, true within certain limits of time, place, and
circumstance, provided the number of coincidences ebee greater than can
with any probability be ascribed to chance. The reason for not extending
it beyond those limits is, that the fact of its holding true within them
may be a consequence of collocations, which cannot be concluded to exist
in one place because they exist in another; or may be dependent on the
accidental absence of counteracting agencies, which fanyf variation of
time, or the smallest change of circumstances, may possibly bring into
play. If we suppose, then, the subject-matter of any generalization to
be so widely diffused that there is no time, no place, and no
combination of circumstances, but must afford an example either of its
truth or of its falsity, and if it be never found otherwise than true,
its truth cannot gbe contingentg on any collocations, unless such as
exist at all times and places: nor can it be frustrated by any
counteracting agencies, unless by such as never actually occur. It is,
therefore, an empirical law coextensive with all human experience; at
which point the distinction between empirical laws and laws of nature
vanishes, and the proposition takes its place hamong the most firmly
established as well as largesth truths accessible to science.

Edition: current; Page: [570]
iNow, the most extensive in its subject-matter of all generalizations
which experience warrants, respecting the sequences and coexistences of
phenomena, is the law of causation. It stands at the head of all
observed uniformities, in point of universality, and therefore (if the
preceding observations are correct) in point of certainty. And if we
consider, not what mankind would have been justified in believing in the
infancy of their knowledge, but what may rationally be believed in its
present more advanced state, we shall find ourselves warranted in
considering this fundamental law, though itself obtained by induction
from particular laws of causation, as not less certain, but on the
contrary, more so, than any of those from which it was drawn. It adds to
them as much proof as it receives from them. For there is probably no
one even of the best established laws of causation which is not
sometimes counteracted, and to which, therefore, apparent exceptions do
not present themselves, which would have necessarily and justly shaken
the confidence of mankind in the universality of those laws, if
inductive processes founded on the universal law had not enabled us to
refer those exceptions to the agency of counteracting causes, and
thereby reconcile them with the law with which they apparently conflict.
Errors, moreover, may have slipped into the statement of any one of the
special laws, through inattention to some material circumstance: and
instead of the true proposition, another may have been Edition: current;
Page: [571] enunciated, false as an universal law, though leading, in
all cases hitherto observed, to the same result. To the law of
causation, on the contrary, we not only do not know of any exception,
but the exceptions which limit or apparently invalidate the special
laws, are so far from contradicting the universal one, that they confirm
it; since in all cases which are sufficiently open to our observation,
we are able to trace the difference of result, either to the absence of
a cause which had been present in ordinary cases, or to the presence of
one which had been absent.

The law of cause and effect, being thus certain, is capable of imparting
its certainty to all other inductive propositions which can be deduced
from it; and the narrower inductions may be regarded as receiving their
ultimate sanction from that law, since there is no one of them which is
not rendered more certain than it was before, when we are able to
connect it with that larger induction, and to show that it cannot be
denied, consistently with the law that everything which begins to exist
has a cause. And hence we are justified in the seeming inconsistency, of
holding induction by simple enumeration to be good for proving this
general truth, the foundation of scientific induction, and yet refusing
to rely on it for any of the narrower inductions. I fully admit that if
the law of causation were unknown, generalization in the Edition:
current; Page: [572] more obvious cases of uniformity in phenomena would
nevertheless be possible, and though in all cases more or less
precarious, and in some extremely so, would suffice to constitute a
certain measure of probability: but what the amount of this probability
might be, we are dispensed from estimating, since it never could amount
to the degree of assurance which the proposition acquires, when, by the
application to it of the Four Methods, the supposition of its falsity is
shown to be inconsistent with the Law of Causation. We are therefore
logically entitled, and, by the necessities of scientific Induction,
required, to disregard the probabilities derived from the early rude
method of generalizing, and to consider no minor generalization as
proved except so far as the law of causation confirms it, nor probable
except so far as it may reasonably be expected to be so confirmed.

§ 4. [The universal prevalence of the law of causality, on what grounds
admissible] aThe assertion, that our inductive processes assume the law
of causation, while the law of causation is itself a case of induction,
is a paradox, only on the old theory of reasoning, which supposes the
universal truth, or major premise, in a ratiocination, to be the real
proof of the particular truths which are ostensibly inferred from it.
According to the doctrine maintained in the present treatise,* the major
premise is not the proof of the conclusion, but is itself proved, along
with the conclusion from the same evidence. “All men are mortal” is not
the proof that Lord Palmerston is mortal; but our past experience of
mortality authorizes us to infer both the general truth and the
particular fact, and the one with exactly the same degree of assurance
as the other. The mortality of Lord Palmerston is not an inference from
the mortality of all men, but from the experience which proves the
mortality of all men; and is a correct inference from experience, if
that general truth is so too. This relation between our general beliefs
and their particular applications holds equally true in the more
comprehensive case which we are now discussing. Any new fact of
causation inferred by induction, is rightly inferred, if no other
objection can be made to the inference than can be made to the general
truth that every event has a cause. The utmost certainty which can be
given to a conclusion arrived at in the way of inference, stops at this
point. When we have ascertained that the particular conclusion must
stand or fall with the general uniformity of the laws of nature—that it
is liable to no doubt except the doubt whether every event has a
cause—we have done Edition: current; Page: [573] all that can be done
for it. The strongest assurance we can obtain of any theory respecting
the cause of a given phenomenon, is that the phenomenon has either that
cause or none.

The latter supposition might have been an admissible one in a very early
period of our study of nature. But we have been able to perceive that in
the stage which mankind have now reached, the generalization which gives
the Law of Universal Causation has grown intoa a stronger and better
induction, one deserving of greater reliance, than any of the
subordinate generalizations. bWe may evenb, I think, go a step further
than this, and regard the certainty of that great induction as not
merely comparative, but, for all practical purposes, ccompletec.

The considerations, which, as I apprehend,i give, at the present day, to
the proof of the law of uniformity of succession as true of all
phenomena without exception, this character of completeness and
conclusiveness, are the following:—First, that we now know it directly
to be true of far the greatest number of phenomena; that there are none
of which we know it not to be true, the utmost that can be said being,
that of some we cannot positively from direct evidence affirm its truth;
dwhiled phenomenon after phenomenon, as they become better known to us,
are constantly passing from the latter class into the former; and in all
cases in which that transition has not yet taken place, the absence of
direct proof is accounted for by the rarity or the obscurity of the
phenomena, our deficient means of observing them, or the logical
difficulties arising from the complication of the circumstances in which
they occur; insomuch that, notwithstanding as rigid a dependence on
given conditions as exists in the case of any other phenomenon, it was
not likely that we should be better acquainted with those conditions
than we are. Besides this first class of considerations, there is a
second, which still further corroborates the conclusione. Although there
are phenomena the production and changes of which elude all our attempts
to reduce them universally to any ascertained law; yet in every such
case, the phenomenon, or the objects concerned in it, are found in some
instances to obey the known laws of nature. The wind, for example, is
the type of uncertainty and caprice, yet we find it in some cases
obeying with as much constancy as any phenomenon in nature the law of
the tendency of fluids to distribute themselves so as to equalize the
pressure on every side of each of their particles; as in the case of the
trade winds, and the monsoons. Lightning might once have been supposed
to obey no laws; but fsince it has been ascertained to be identical with
electricity, we know that the very same phenomenon in gsome of itsg
manifestations is implicitly Edition: current; Page: [574] obedient to
the action of fixed causes. I do not believe that there is now one
object or event in all our experience of nature, within the bounds of
the solar system at least, which has not either been ascertained by
direct observation to follow laws of its own, or been proved to be
hcloselyh similar to objects and events which, in more familiar
manifestations, or on a more limited scale, follow strict laws: our
inability to trace the same laws on iai larger scale and in the more
recondite instances, being accounted for by the number and complication
of the modifying causes, or by their inaccessibility to observation.

The progress of experience, therefore, has dissipated the doubt which
jmustj have rested on the universality of the law of causation while
there were phenomena which seemed to be sui generis, not subject to the
same laws with any other class of phenomena, and knotk as yet
ascertained to have peculiar laws of their own. This great
generalization, however, might reasonably have been, as it in fact wasl,
acted on as a probability of the highest order, before there were
sufficient grounds for receiving it as a certainty. mIn matters of
evidence, as in all other human things, we neither require, nor can
attain, the absolute. We must hold even our strongest convictions with
an opening left in our minds for the reception of facts which contradict
them; and only when we have taken this precaution, have we earned the
right to act upon our convictions with complete confidence when no such
contradiction appears.m nWhatevern has been found true in innumerable
instances, and never found to be false after due examination in any, we
are safe in acting on as universal provisionally, until an undoubted
exception appears; provided the nature of the case be such that a real
exception could scarcely have escaped onotice. When every phenomenon
that we ever knew sufficiently well to be able to answer the question,
had a cause on which it was invariably consequent, it was more rational
to suppose that our inability to assign the causes of other phenomena
arose from our ignorance, than that there were phenomena which were
uncaused, and which happened pto be exactly those which we qhad
hithertoq had no sufficient opportunity of studying.

rIt must, at the same time, be remarked, that the reasons for this
reliance do not hold in circumstances unknown to us, and beyond the
possible range of our experience. In distant parts of the stellar
regions, where the phenomena may be entirely unlike those with which we
are acquainted, it would Edition: current; Page: [575] be folly to
affirm confidently that this general law prevails, any more than those
special ones which we have found to hold universally on our own planet.
The uniformity in the succession of events, otherwise called the law of
causation, must be received not as a law of the universe, but of that
portion of it only which is within the range of our means of sure
observation, with a reasonable degree of extension to adjacent cases. To
extend it further is to make a supposition without evidence, and to
which, in the absence of any ground from experience for estimating its
degree of probability, it would be sidle to attempts to assign any.*t

Edition: current; Page: [576] Edition: current; Page: [577]

Edition: current; Page: [578]


CHAPTER XXII: Of Uniformities of Coexistence not Dependent on Causation

§ 1. [aUniformitiesa of coexistence which result from laws of sequence]
The order of the occurrence of phenomena in time, is either successive
or simultaneous; the uniformities, therefore, which obtain in their
occurrence, are either uniformities of succession or of coexistence.
Uniformities of succession are all comprehended under the law of
causation and its consequences. Every phenomenon has a cause, which it
invariably follows; and from this are derived other invariable sequences
among the successive stages of the same effect, as well as between the
effects resulting from causes which invariably succeed one another.

In the same manner with these derivative uniformities of succession, a
great variety of uniformities of coexistence also take their rise.
Coordinate effects of the same cause naturally coexist with one another.
High water at any point on the earth’s surface, and high water at the
point diametrically opposite to it, are effects uniformly simultaneous,
resulting from the direction in which the combined battractionsb of the
sun and moon act upon the waters of the ocean. An eclipse of the sun to
us, and an eclipse of the earth to a spectator situated in the moon, are
in like manner phenomena invariably coexistent; and their coexistence
can equally be deduced from the laws of their production.

It is can obviousc question, therefore, whether all the uniformities of
coexistence among phenomena may not be accounted for in this manner. And
it cannot be doubted that between phenomena which are themselves
effects, the coexistences must necessarily depend on the causes of those
phenomena. If they are effects immediately or remotely of the same
cause, they cannot coexist except by virtue of some laws or properties
of that cause: if they are effects of different causes, they cannot
coexist unless it be because their causes coexist; and the uniformity of
coexistence, if such there be, between the effects, proves that dthose
particular causes, within the limits of our observation, have uniformly
been coexistent.

Edition: current; Page: [579]
§ 2. [The properties of Kinds are uniformities of coexistence] But these
same considerations compel us to recognise that there must be one class
of coexistences which cannot depend on causation; the coexistences
between the ultimate properties of athings—thosea properties which are
the causes of all phenomena, but are not themselves caused by any
phenomenon, and ba cause for which could only be sought by ascendingb to
the origin of all things. Yet among these ultimate properties there are
not only coexistences, but uniformities of coexistence. General
propositions may be, and are, formed, which assert that whenever certain
properties are found, certain others are found along with them. We
perceive an object; say, for instance, water. We recognise it to be
water, of course by certain of its properties. Having recognised it, we
are able to affirm of it innumerable other properties; which we could
not do unless it were a general truth, a law or uniformity in nature,
that the set of properties by which we identify the substance as water,
always have those other properties conjoined with them.

In a cformer placec,* it has been explained in some detail what is meant
by the Kinds of objects; those classes which differ from one another not
by a limited and definite, but by an indefinite and unknown, number of
distinctions. To this we have now to add, that every proposition by
which anything is asserted of a Kind, affirms an uniformity of
coexistence. Since we know nothing of Kinds but their properties, the
Kind, to us, is the set of properties by which it is identified, and
which must of course be sufficient to distinguish it from every other
Kind.† In affirming anything, therefore, of a Kind, we are affirming
something to be uniformly coexistent with the properties by which the
Kind is recognised; and that is the sole meaning of the assertion.

Among the uniformities of coexistence which exist in nature, may hence
be numbered all the properties of Kinds. The whole of these, however,
are Edition: current; Page: [580] not independent of causation, but only
a portion of them. Some are ultimate properties, others derivative; of
some, no cause can be assigned, but others are manifestly dependent on
causes. Thus, hpure oxygen gash is a Kind, and one of its most
unequivocal properties is its gaseous form: this property, however, has
for its cause the presence of a certain quantity of latent heat; and if
that heat could be taken away (as has been done from so many gases in
iFaraday’s experiments),[*] the gaseous form would doubtless disappear,
together with numerous other properties which depend on, or are caused
by, that property.

In regard to all substances which are chemical compounds, and which
therefore may be regarded as products of the juxtaposition of substances
different in Kind from themselves, there is considerable reason to
presume that the specific properties of the compound are consequent, as
effects, on some of the properties of the elements, though jlittle
progress has yet been made in tracing any invariable relation between
the latter and the former. Still more strongly will a similar
presumption exist, when the object itself, as in the case of organized
beings, is no primeval agent, but an effect, which depends on a cause or
causes for its very existence. The Kinds therefore which are called in
chemistry simple substances, or elementary natural agents, are the only
ones, any of whose properties can with certainty be considered ultimate;
and of these the ultimate properties are probably much more numerous
than we at present recognise, since every successful instance of the
resolution of the properties of their compounds into simpler laws,
generally leads to the recognition of properties in the elements
distinct from any previously known. The resolution of the laws of the
heavenly motions, established the previously unknown ultimate property
of a mutual attraction between all bodies: the resolution, so far as it
has yet proceeded, of the laws of crystallization, of chemical
composition, electricity, magnetism, &c. points to various polarities,
ultimately inherent in the particles of which bodies are composed; the
comparative atomic weights of different kinds of bodies were ascertained
by resolving, into more general laws, the uniformities observed in the
proportions in which substances kcombinek with one another; and so
forth. Thus although every resolution of a complex uniformity into
simpler and more elementary laws has an apparent tendency to diminish
the number of the ultimate properties, and really does remove many
properties from the list; yet, (since the result of this simplifying
process is to trace up an ever greater variety of different effects to
the same agents,) the lfartherl we advance Edition: current; Page: [581]
in this direction, the greater number of distinct properties we are
forced to recognise in one and the same object: the coexistences of
which properties must accordingly be ranked among the ultimate
generalities of nature.

§ 3. [Some properties of Kinds are derivative, others ultimate] There
are, therefore, only two kinds of propositions which assert auniformity
of coexistence between properties. Either the properties depend on
causes, or they do not. If they do, the proposition which affirms them
to be coexistent is a derivative law of coexistence between effects, and
until resolved into the laws of causation on which it depends, is an
empirical law, and to be tried by the principles of induction to which
such laws are amenable. If, on the other hand, the properties do not
depend on causes, but are ultimate properties; then if it be true that
they invariably coexist, they must ballb be ultimate properties of one
and the same Kind; and it is of these only that the coexistences can be
classed as a peculiar sort of laws of nature.

When we affirm that all crows are black, or that all negroes have woolly
hair, we assert an uniformity of coexistence. We assert that the
property of blackness, or of having woolly hair, invariably coexists
with the properties which, in common language, or in the scientific
classification that we adopt, are taken to constitute the class crow, or
the class negro. Now, supposing blackness to be an ultimate property of
black objects, or woolly hair an ultimate property of the animals which
possess it; supposing that these properties are not results of
causation, are not connected with antecedent phenomena by any law; then
if all crows are black, and all negroes have woolly hair, cthesec must
be ultimate properties of the Kind crow, or negro, or of some Kind which
includes them. If, on the contrary, blackness or woolly hair be an
effect depending on causes, these general propositions are manifestly
empirical laws; and all that has already been said respecting that class
of generalizations may be applied without modification to these.

Now, we have seen that in the case of all compounds—of all things, in
short, except the elementary substances and primary powers of nature—the
presumption is, that the properties do really depend upon causes; and it
is impossible in any case whatever to be certain that they do not. We
therefore should not be safe in claiming for any generalization
respecting the coexistence of properties, a degree of certainty to
which, if the properties should happen to be the result of causes, it
would have no claim. A generalization respecting coexistence, or in
other words respecting the properties of Kinds, may be an ultimate
truth, but it may, also, be merely a derivative one; and since, if so,
it is one of those derivative laws which are neither laws of Edition:
current; Page: [582] causation, nor have been resolved into the laws of
causation on which they depend, it can possess no higher degree of
evidence than belongs to an empirical law.

§ 4. [No universal axiom of coexistence] This conclusion will be
confirmed by the consideration of one great deficiency, which precludes
the application to the ultimate uniformities of coexistence, of a system
of rigorous ascientific induction, such as the uniformities in the
succession of phenomena have been found bto admitb of. The basis of such
a system is wanting: there is no general axiom, standing in the same
relation to the uniformities of coexistence as the law of causation does
to those of succession. The Methods of Induction applicable to the
ascertainment of causes and effects, are grounded on the principle that
everything which has a beginning must have some cause or other; that
among the circumstances which actually existed at the time of its
commencement, there is certainly some one ccombinationc, on which the
effect in question is unconditionally consequent, and on the repetition
of which it would certainly again recur. But in an inquiry whether some
kind (as crow) universally possesses a certain property (as blackness),
there is no room for any assumption analogous to this. We have no
previous certainty that the property must have something which
constantly coexists with it; must have an invariable coexistent, in the
same manner as an event must have an invariable antecedent. When we feel
pain, we must be in some circumstances under which if exactly repeated
we should always feel pain. But when we are conscious of blackness, it
does not follow that there is something delsed present of which
blackness is a constant accompaniment. There is, therefore, no room for
elimination; no Method of Agreement or Difference, or of Concomitant
Variations (which is but a modification either of the Method of
Agreement or of the Method of Difference). We cannot conclude that the
blackness we see in crows must be an invariable property of crows,
merely because there is nothing else present of which it can be an
invariable property. We therefore inquire into the truth of a
proposition like “All crows are black,” under the same disadvantage as
if, in our inquiries into causation, we were compelled to let in, as one
of the possibilities, that the effect may in that particular instance
have arisen without any cause at all.

To overlook this grand distinction was, as it seems to me, the capital
error in Bacon’s view of inductive philosophy. The principle of
elimination, that great logical instrument which he had the immense
merit of first bringing into general use, he deemed applicable in the
same sense, and in as unqualified Edition: current; Page: [583] a
manner, to the investigation of the coexistences, as to that of the
successions of phenomena. He seems to have thought that as every event
has a cause, or invariable antecedent, so every property of an object
has an invariable coexistent, which he called its Form: and the examples
he chiefly selected for the application and illustration of his method,
were inquiries into such Forms; attempts to determine in what else all
those objects resembled, which agreed in some one general property, as
hardness or softness, dryness or moistness, heat or coldness. Such
inquiries could lead to no result. The objects seldom have any such
ecircumstancese in common. They usually agree in the one point inquired
into, and in nothing else. A great proportion of the properties which,
so far as we can conjecture, are the likeliest to be really ultimate,
would seem to be inherently properties of many different Kinds of
things, not allied in any other respect. And as for the properties
which, being effects of causes, we are able to give some account of,
they have generally nothing to do with the ultimate resemblances or
diversities in the objects themselves, but depend on some outward
circumstances, under the influence of which any objects whatever are
capable of manifesting those properties; as is emphatically the case
with those favourite subjects of Bacon’s scientific inquiries, hotness
and coldness; as well as with hardness and softness, solidity and
fluidity, and many other fconspicuous qualities.

In the absence, then, of any universal law of coexistence, similar to
the universal law of causation which regulates sequence, we are thrown
back upon the unscientific induction of the ancients, per enumerationem
simplicem, ubi non reperitur instantia contradictoria. The reason we
have for believing that all crows are black, is simply that we have seen
and heard of many black crows, and never one of any other colour. It
remains to be considered how far this evidence can reach, and how we are
to measure its strength in any given case.

§ 5. [The evidence of uniformities of coexistence, how measured] It
sometimes happens that a mere change in the mode of verbally enunciating
a question, though nothing is really added to the meaning expressed, is
of itself a considerable step towards its solution. This, I think,
happens in the present instance. The degree of certainty of any
generalization which rests on no other evidence than the agreement, so
far as it goes, of all past observation, is but another phrase for the
degree of improbability that an exception, if aanya existed, could have
hitherto remained unobserved. The reason for believing that all crows
are black, is measured by the improbability that crows of any other
colour should have existed to the present time without Edition: current;
Page: [584] our being aware of it. Let us state the question in this
last mode, and consider what is implied in the supposition that there
may be crows which are not black, and under what conditions we can be
justified in regarding this as incredible.

If there really exist crows which are not black, one of two things must
be the fact. Either the circumstance of blackness, in all crows hitherto
observed, must be, as it were, an accident, not connected with any
distinction of Kind; or if it be a property of Kind, the crows which are
not black must be a new Kind, a Kind hitherto overlooked, though coming
under the same general description by which crows have hitherto been
characterized. The first supposition bwould be proved trueb if we were
to discover casually a white crow among black ones, or if it were found
that black crows sometimes turn white. The second would be shown to be
the fact if in Australia or Central Africa a species or a race of white
or grey crows were found to cexistc.

§ 6. [When uniformities of coexistence are derivative, their evidence is
that of empirical laws] The former of these suppositions necessarily
implies that the colour is an effect of causation. If blackness, in the
crows in which it has been observed, be not a property of Kind, but can
be present or absent without any difference generally in the properties
of the object; then it is not an ultimate fact in the individuals
themselves, but is certainly dependent on a cause. There are, no doubt,
many properties which vary from individual to individual of the same
Kind, even the same infima species, or lowest Kind. aSome flowersa may
be either white or red, without differing in any other respect. But
these properties are not ultimate; they depend on causes. So far as the
properties of a thing belong to its own nature, and do not arise from
some cause extrinsic to it, they are always the same in the same Kind.
bTake, for instance, all simple substances and elementary powers; the
only things of which we are certain that some at least of ctheirc
properties are really ultimate. Colour is generally esteemed the most
variable of all properties: yet we do not find that sulphur is sometimes
yellow and sometimes white, or that it varies in colour at all, except
so far as colour is the effect of some extrinsic cause, as of the sort
of light thrown upon it, the mechanical arrangement of the particles
d(as after fusion) &c.d We do not find that iron is sometimes fluid and
sometimes solid at the same temperature; gold sometimes malleable
Edition: current; Page: [585] and sometimes brittle; that hydrogen will
sometimes combine with oxygen and sometimes not; or the like. If from
simple substances we pass to any of their definite compounds, as water,
lime, or sulphuric acid, there is the same constancy in their
properties. When properties vary from individual to individual, it is
either in the case of miscellaneous aggregations, such as atmospheric
air or rock, composed of heterogeneous substances, and not constituting
or belonging to any real Kind,* or it is in the case of organic beings.
In them, indeed, there is variability in a high degree. Animals of the
same species and race, human beings of the same age, sex, and country,
will be most different, for example, in face and figure. But organized
beings (from the extreme complication of the laws by which they are
regulated) being more eminently modifiable, that is, liable to be
influenced by a greater number and variety of causes, than any other
phenomena whatever; having ealsoe themselves had a beginning, and
therefore a cause; there is reason to believe that none of their
properties are ultimate, but all of them derivative, and produced by
causation. And the presumption is confirmed, by the fact that the
properties which vary from one individual to another, also generally
vary more or less at different times in the same individual; which
variation, like any other event, supposes a cause, and implies,
consequently, that the properties are not independent of causation.

If, therefore, blackness be merely accidental in crows, and capable of
varying while the Kind remains the same, its presence or absence is
doubtless no ultimate fact, but the effect of some unknown cause: and in
that case the universality of the experience that all crows are black is
sufficient proof of a common cause, and establishes the generalization
as an empirical law. Since there are innumerable instances in the
affirmative, and hitherto none at all in the negative, the causes on
which the property depends must exist everywhere in the limits of the
observations which have been made; and the proposition may be received
as universal within those limits, and with the allowable degree of
extension to adjacent cases.

§ 7. [So also, when uniformities of coexistence are ultimate, their
evidence is that of empirical laws] If, in the second place, the
property, in the instances in which it has been observed, is not an
effect of causation, ait is a property of Kind; and in that case the
generalization can only be set aside by the discovery of a new Kind of
crow. That, however, a peculiar Kind, not hitherto discovered, should
exist in nature, is a supposition so often realized, Edition: current;
Page: [586] that it cannot be considered at all improbable. We have
nothing to authorize us in attempting to limit the Kinds of things which
exist in nature. The only unlikelihood would be that a new Kind should
be discovered in localities which there was previously reason to believe
had been thoroughly explored; and even this improbability depends on the
degree of conspicuousness of the difference between the newly-discovered
Kind and all others, since new Kinds of minerals, plants, and even
animals, previously overlooked or confounded with known species, are
still continually detected in the most frequented situations. On this
second ground, therefore, as well as on the first, the observed
uniformity of coexistence can only hold good as an empirical law, within
the limits not only of actual observation, but of an observation as
accurate as the nature of the case required. And hence it is that (as
remarked in an early chapter of the present Book) we so often give up
generalizations of this class at the first summons. If any credible
witness stated that he had seen a white crow, under circumstances which
made it not incredible that it should have escaped notice previously, we
should give full credence to the statement.

It appears, then, that the uniformities which obtain in the coexistence
of phenomena,—those which we have reason to consider as ultimate, no
less than those which arise from the laws of causes yet undetected—are
entitled to reception only as empirical laws; are not to be presumed
true except bwithinb the limits of time, place, and circumstance, in
which the observations were made, or except in cases strictly adjacent.

§ 8. [The evidence of empirical laws is stronger in proportion as the
law is more general] We have seen in the last chapter that there is a
point of generality at which empirical laws become as certain as laws of
nature, or rather, at which there is no longer any distinction between
empirical laws and laws of nature. As empirical laws approach this
point, in other words, as they rise in their degree of generality, they
become more certain; their universality may be more strongly relied on.
For, in the first place, if they are results of causation (which, even
in the class of uniformities treated of in the present chapter, we never
can be certain that they are not) the more general they are, the greater
is proved to be the space over which the necessary collocations prevail,
and within which no causes exist capable of counteracting the unknown
causes on which the empirical law depends. To say that anything is an
invariable property of some very limited class of objects, is to say
that it invariably accompanies some very numerous and complex group of
distinguishing properties; which, if causation be at all concerned in
the matter, argues a combination of many causes, and therefore a agreat
liability Edition: current; Page: [587] to counteraction; while the
comparatively narrow range of the observations renders it impossible to
predict to what extent unknown counteracting causes may be distributed
throughout nature. But when a generalization has been found to hold good
of a very large proportion of all things whatever, it is already proved
that nearly all the causes which exist in nature have no power over it;
that very few changes in the combination of causes can affect it; since
the greater number of possible combinations must have already existed in
some one or other of the instances in which it has been found true. If,
therefore, any empirical law is a result of causation, the more general
it is, the more it may be depended on. And even if it be no result of
causation, but an ultimate coexistence, the more general it is, the
greater amount of experience it is derived from, and the greater
therefore is the probability that if exceptions had existed, some would
already have presented themselves.

For these reasons, it requires much more evidence to establish an
exception to one of the more general empirical laws than to the more
special ones. We should not have any difficulty in believing that there
might be a new Kind of crow; or a bnewb kind of bird resembling a crow
in the properties hitherto considered distinctive of that Kind. But it
would require stronger proof to convince us of the existence of a Kind
of crow having properties at variance with any generally recognised
universal property of birds; and a still higher degree if the properties
conflict with any recognised universal property of animals. And this is
conformable to the mode of judgment recommended by the common sense and
general practice of mankind, who are more incredulous as to any
novelties in nature, according to the degree of generality of the
experience which these novelties seem to contradict.

§ 9. [Every distinct Kind must be examined] aIt is conceivable that the
alleged properties might conflict with some recognised universal
property of all matter. In that case their improbability would be at the
highest, but would not even then amount to incredibility. There are only
two known properties common to all matter; in other words, there is but
one known uniformity of coexistence of properties, coextensive with all
physical nature: namely, that whatever opposes resistance to movement,
gravitates; or, as Professor Bain expresses it, Inertia and Gravity are
coexistent through all matter, and proportionate in their amount.[*]
These properties, as he truly says, are not mutually implicated; from
neither of them could we, on grounds of causation, presume the other.
But, for this very reason, we are never certain that a Kind may not be
discovered possessing one of the properties without the other. The
hypothetical ether, if it exists, may be such a Kind. Our senses
Edition: current; Page: [588] cannot recognise in it either resistance
or gravity: but if the reality of a resisting medium should eventually
be proved (by alteration, for example, in the times of revolution of
periodic comets, combined with the evidences afforded by the phenomena
of light and heat), it would be rash to conclude from this alone,
without other proofs, that it must gravitate.a

bFor even theb greater generalizations, which embrace comprehensive
Kinds containing under them a great number and variety of infimæ
species, are only empirical laws, resting on induction by simple
enumeration merely, and not on any process of elimination, a process
wholly inapplicable to cthis sortc of case. Such generalizations,
therefore, ought to be grounded on an examination of all the infimæ
species comprehended in them, and not of a portion only. We cannot
conclude d(where causation is not concerned),d because a proposition is
true of a number of things resembling one another only in being animals,
that it is therefore true of all animals. If, indeed, anything be true
of species which differ more from one another than either differs from a
third, (especially if that third species occupies in most of its known
properties a position between the two former,) there is some probability
that the same thing will also be true of that intermediate species; for
it is often, though by no means universally, found, that there is a sort
of parallelism in the properties of different Kinds, and that their
degree of unlikeness in one respect bears some proportion to their
unlikeness in others. We see this parallelism in the properties of the
different metals; in those of sulphur, phosphorus, and carbon; of
echlorine, iodine, and fbrominef; in the natural orders of plants and
animals, &c. But there are innumerable anomalies and exceptions to this
sort of conformityg; if indeed the conformity itself be anythingg but an
anomaly and an exception in nature.

Universal propositions, therefore, respecting the properties of superior
Kinds, unless grounded on proved or presumed connexion by causation,
ought not to be hazarded except after separately examining every known
sub-kind included in the larger Kind. And even then such generalizations
must be held in readiness to be given up on the occurrence of some new
anomaly, which, when the uniformity is not derived from causation, can
never, even in the case of the most general of these empirical laws, be
considered very improbable. Thus, all the universal propositions which
it has been attempted to lay down respecting simple substances, or
concerning any of the classes which have been formed among simple
substances, (and the attempt has been often made,) have, with the
progress of experience, either Edition: current; Page: [589] faded into
inanity, or been proved to be erroneous; and each Kind of simple
substance remains with its own collection of properties apart from the
rest, saving a certain parallelism with a few other Kinds, the most
similar to itself. In organized beings, indeed, there are abundance of
propositions ascertained to be universally true of superior genera, to
many of which the discovery hereafter of any exceptions must be regarded
as hextremelyh improbable. But these, as already observed, are, we have
every reason to believe, ipropertiesi dependent on causation.*

Uniformities of coexistence, then, not only when they are consequences
of laws of succession, but also when they are ultimate truths, must be
ranked, for the jpurposej of logic, among empirical laws; and are
amenable in every respect to the same rules with those unresolved
uniformities which are known to be dependent on causation.†

Edition: current; Page: [590]

Edition: current; Page: [591]


CHAPTER XXIII: Of Approximate Generalizations, and Probable Evidence

§ 1. [The inferences called probable, rest on approximate
generalizations] In our inquiries into the nature of the inductive
process, we amust not confinea our notice to such generalizations from
experience as profess to be universally true. bThere is a class of
inductive truthsb avowedly not universal; in which it is not pretended
that the predicate is always true of the subject; but the value of
which, as generalizations, is nevertheless extremely great. An important
portion of the field of inductive knowledge does not consist of
universal truths, but of approximations to such truths; and when a
conclusion is said to rest on probable evidence, the premises it is
drawn from are usually generalizations of this sort.

As every certain inference respecting a particular case, implies that
there is ground for a general proposition, of the form, Every A is B; so
does every probable inference suppose that there is ground for a
proposition of the form, Most A are B: and the degree of probability of
the inference in an average case, will depend on the proportion between
the number of instances existing in nature which accord with the
generalization, and the number of those which conflict with it.

§ 2. [Approximate generalizations less useful in science than in life]
Propositions in the form, Most A are B, are of a very different degree
of importance in science, and in the practice of life. To the scientific
inquirer they are valuable chiefly as materials for, and steps towards,
universal truths. The discovery of these is the proper end of science:
its work is not done if it stops at the proposition that a majority of A
are B, without circumscribing Edition: current; Page: [592] that
majority by some common character, afitted to distinguisha them from the
minority. Independently of the inferior precision of such imperfect
generalizations, and the inferior assurance with which they can be
applied to individual cases, it is plain that, compared with exact
generalizations, they are almost useless as means of discovering
ulterior truths by way of deduction. We may, it is true, by combining
the proposition Most A are B, with an universal proposition, Every B is
C, arrive at the conclusion that Most A are C. But when a second
proposition of the approximate kind is introduced,—or even when there is
but one, if that one be the major premise,—nothing can bin generalb be
positively concluded. When the major is Most B are D, then, even if the
minor be Every A is B, we cannot infer that most A are D, or with any
certainty that even some A are D. Though the majority of the class B
have the attribute signified by D, the whole of the sub-class A may
belong to the minority.*

Though so little use can be made, in science, of approximate
generalizations, except as a stage on the road to something better, for
practical guidance they are often all we have to rely on. Even when
science has really determined the universal laws of any phenomenon, not
only are those laws generally too much encumbered with conditions to be
adapted for every-day use, but the cases which present themselves in
life are too complicated, and our decisions require to be taken too
rapidly, to admit of waiting till the existence of a phenomenon can be
proved by what have been scientifically ascertained to be universal
marks of it. To be indecisive and reluctant to act, because we have not
evidence of a perfectly conclusive character to act on, is a defect
sometimes incident to scientific minds, but which, cwhereverc it exists,
renders them unfit for practical emergencies. If we would succeed in
action, we must judge by indications which, though they do not generally
mislead us, sometimes do; and dmustd make up, as far as possible, for
the incomplete conclusiveness of any one indication, by obtaining others
to corroborate it. The principles of induction applicable to approximate
generalization are therefore a not less important subject of inquiry,
than the rules for the investigation of universal truths; and might
reasonably be expected to detain us almost as long, were it not that
these principles are mere corollaries from those which have been already
treated of.

Edition: current; Page: [593]
§ 3. [In what cases approximate generalizations amaya be resorted to]
There are two sorts of cases in which we are forced to guide ourselves
by generalizations of the imperfect form, Most A are B. The first is,
when we have no others; when we have not been able to carry our
investigation of the laws of the phenomena any farther: as in the
following propositions: Most dark-eyed persons have dark hair; Most
springs contain mineral substances; Most stratified formations contain
fossils. The importance of this class of generalizations is not very
great; for, though it frequently happens that we see no reason why that
which is true of most individuals of a class is not true of the
remainder, nor are able to bring the former under any general
description which can distinguish them from the latter, yet if we are
willing to be satisfied with propositions of a less degree of
generality, and to break down the class A into sub-classes, we may
generally obtain a collection of propositions exactly true. We do not
know why most wood is lighter than water, nor can we point out any
general property which discriminates wood that is lighter than water
from that which is heavier. But we know exactly what species are the one
and what the other. And if we meet with a specimen not conformable to
any known species (the only case in which our previous knowledge affords
no other guidance than the approximate generalization), we can generally
make a specific experiment, bwhich is a surerb resource.

It coftenc happens, however, that the proposition, Most A are B, is not
the ultimatum of our scientific dattainmentsd, though the knowledge we
possess beyond it cannot conveniently be brought to bear upon the
particular instance. eWe maye know well enough what circumstances
fdistinguish the portion of A which ghas the attribute B from the
portion which hasg it not, but hmay have no means, or may not haveh
time, to examine whether those characteristic circumstances exist or not
in the individual case. This is ithe situation we are generallyi in when
the inquiry is of the kind called moral, that is, of the kind which
jhasj in view to predict human actions. To enable us to affirm anything
universally concerning the actions of classes of khuman beingsk, the
classification must be grounded on the circumstances of their mental
culture and habits, which in an individual case are seldom exactly
Edition: current; Page: [594] known; and classes grounded on these
distinctions would never precisely accord with those into which mankind
are ldivided for social purposes. All propositions which can be framed
respecting the actions of mhuman beingsm as ordinarily classified, or as
classified according to any kind of outward indications, are merely
approximate. We can only say, Most npersonsn of a particular age,
profession, country, or rank in society, have such and such qualities;
or, Most persons when placed in certain circumstances act in such and
such a way. Not that we do not oofteno know well enough on what causes
the qualities depend, or what sort of persons they are who act in that
particular way; but we have seldom the means of knowing whether any
individual person has been under the influence of those causes, or is a
person of that particular sort. We could replace the approximate
generalizations by propositions universally true; but these would hardly
ever be capable of being applied to practice. We should be sure of our
majors, but we should not be able to get minors pto fitp: we are forced,
therefore, to draw our conclusions from coarser and more fallible
indications.

§ 4. [In what manner approximate generalizations are proved] Proceeding
now to consider, what is to be regarded as sufficient evidence of an
approximate generalization; we can have no difficulty in at once
recognising that when admissible at all, it is admissible only as an
empirical law. Propositions of the form, Every A is B, are not
necessarily laws of causation, or ultimate uniformities of coexistence;
propositions like Most A are B, cannot be so. Propositions hitherto
found true in every observed instance, may yet be no necessary
aconsequencea of laws of causation, or of ultimate uniformities, and
unless they are so, may, for aught we know, be false beyond the limits
of actual observation: still more evidently must this be the case with
propositions which are only true in a mere majority of the observed
instances.

There is some difference, however, in the degree of certainty of the
proposition, Most A are B, according as that approximate generalization
composes the whole of our knowledge of the subject, or not. Suppose,
first, that the former is the case. We know only that most A are B, not
why they are so, nor in what respect those which are, differ from those
which are not. How then did we learn that most A are B? Precisely in the
manner in which we should have learnt, had such happened to be the fact,
that all A are B. We collected a number of instances sufficient to
eliminate chance, and having done so, compared the number of instances
in the affirmative with the number in the negative. The result, like
other unresolved derivative laws, can be relied on solely within the
limits not only of place and time, but also of Edition: current; Page:
[595] circumstance, under which its truth has been actually observed;
for as we are supposed to be ignorant of the causes which make the
proposition true, we cannot tell in what manner any new circumstance
might perhaps affect it. The proposition, Most judges are inaccessible
to bribes, would bprobablyb be found true of Englishmen, Frenchmen,
Germans, North Americans, and so forth; but if on this evidence alone we
extended the assertion to Orientals, we should step beyond the limits,
not only of place but of circumstance, within which the fact had been
observed, and cshouldc let in possibilities of the absence of the
determining causes, or dthe presence of counteracting ones, which might
be fatal to the approximate generalization.

In the case where the approximate proposition is not the ultimatum of
our scientific knowledge, but only the most available form of it for
epractical guidance; where we know, not only that most A have the
attribute B, but also the causes of B, or some properties by which the
portion of A which has that attribute is distinguished from the portion
which has it not; we are rather more favourably situated than in the
preceding case. For we have now a double mode of ascertaining whether it
be true that most A are B; the direct mode, as before, and an indirect
one, that of examining whether the proposition admits of being deduced
from the known cause, or from fanyf known criterion, of B. Let the
question, for example, be whether most Scotchmen can read? We may not
have observed, or received the testimony of others respecting, a
sufficient number and variety of Scotchmen to ascertain this fact; but
when we consider that the cause of being able to read is the having been
taught it, another mode of determining the question presents itself,
namely, by inquiring whether most Scotchmen have been sent to schools
where reading is effectually taught. Of these two modes, sometimes one
and sometimes the other is the more available. In some cases, the
frequency of the effect is the more accessible to that extensive and
varied observation which is indispensable to the establishment of an
empirical law; at other times, the frequency of the causes, or of some
collateral indications. It commonly happens that neither is susceptible
of so satisfactory an induction as could be desired, and that the
grounds on which the conclusion is received are compounded of both. Thus
a gpersong may believe that most Scotchmen can read, because, so far as
his information extends, most Scotchmen have been sent to school, and
most Scotch schools teach reading effectually; and also because most of
the Scotchmen whom he has known or heard of, could read; though hneither
of these two sets of observationsh may by itself fulfil the necessary
conditions of extent and variety.

Although the approximate generalization may in most cases be
indispensable Edition: current; Page: [596] for our guidance, even when
we know the cause, or some certain mark, of the attribute predicated; it
needs hardly be observed that we may always replace the uncertain
indication by a certain one, in any case in which we can actually
recognise the existence of the cause or mark. For example, an assertion
is made by a witness, and the question is, whether to believe it. If we
do not look to any of the individual circumstances of the case, we have
nothing to direct us but the approximate generalization, that truth is
more common than falsehood, or, in other words, that most persons, on
most occasions, speak truth. But if we consider in what circumstances
the cases iwherei truth is spoken differ from those in which it is not,
we find, for instance, the following: the witness’s being an honest
jpersonj or not; his being an accurate observer or not; his having an
interest to serve in the matter or not. Now, not only may we be able to
obtain other approximate generalizations respecting the degree of
frequency of these various possibilities, but we may know which of them
is positively realized in the individual case. That the witness has or
has not an interest to serve, we kperhapsk know directly; and the other
two points indirectly, by means of marks; as, for example, from his
conduct on some former occasion; or from his reputation, which, though
la very uncertainl mark, affords an approximate generalization (as, for
instance, Most persons who are mbelieved to bem honest by those with
whom they have had frequent dealings, are really so) which approaches
nearer to an universal truth than the approximate general proposition
with which we set out, viz. Most persons on most occasions speak truth.

As it seems unnecessary to dwell nfurther on the question of the
evidence of approximate generalizations, we shall proceed to a not less
important topic, that of the cautions to be observed in arguing from
these incompletely universal propositions to particular cases.

§ 5. [With what precautions approximate generalizations may be employed]
So far as regards the direct application of an approximate
generalization to an individual instance, this question presents no
difficulty. If the proposition, Most A are B, has been established, by a
sufficient induction, as an empirical law, we may conclude that any
particular A is B with a probability proportioned to the preponderance
of the number of affirmative instances over the number of exceptions. If
it has been found practicable to attain numerical precision in the data,
a corresponding degree of precision may be given to the evaluation of
the chances of error in the conclusion. If it can be established as an
empirical law that nine out of every ten A are B, there will be one
chance in ten of error in assuming that any A, not individually Edition:
current; Page: [597] known to us, is a B: but this of course holds only
within the limits of time, place, and circumstance, embraced in the
observations, and therefore cannot be counted on for any sub-class or
variety of A (or for A in any set of external circumstances) which were
not included in the average. It must be added, that we can aguide
ourselves by the proposition, Nine out of every ten A are B, onlya in
cases of which we know nothing except that they fall within the class A.
For if we know, of any particular instance i, not only that it falls
under A, but to what species or variety of A it belongs, we shall
generally err in applying to i the average struck for the whole genus,
from which the average corresponding to that species alone would, in all
probability, materially differ. And so if i, instead of being a
particular sort of instance, is an instance known to be under the
influence of a particular set of circumstances. The presumption drawn
from the numerical proportions in the whole genus would probably, in
such a case, only mislead. A general average should only be applied to
bcases which are neither known, nor can be presumed, to be other than
average casesb. Such averages, therefore, are commonly of little use for
the practical guidance of any affairs but those which concern large
numbers. Tables of the chances of life are useful to insurance offices,
but they go a very little way towards informing any one of the chances
of his own life, or any other life in which he is interested, since
almost every life is either better or worse than the average. Such
averages can only be considered as supplying the first term in a series
of approximations; the subsequent terms proceeding on an appreciation of
the circumstances belonging to the particular case.

§ 6. [The two modes of combining probabilities] From the application of
a single approximate generalization to individual cases, we proceed to
the application of two or more of them together to the same case.

When a judgment applied to an individual instance is grounded on two
approximate generalizations taken in conjunction, the propositions may
co-operate towards the result in two different ways. In the one, each
proposition is separately applicable to the case in hand, and our object
in combining them is to give to the conclusion in that particular case
the double probability arising from the two propositions separately.
This may be called joining two probabilities by way of Addition; and the
result is a probability greater than either. The other mode is, when
only one of the propositions is directly applicable to the case, the
second being only applicable to it by virtue of the application of the
first. This is joining two probabilities by way of aRatiocination ora
Deduction; the result of which is a less probability than either.
Edition: current; Page: [598] The type of the first argument is, Most A
are B; most C are B; this thing is both an A and a C; therefore it is
probably a B. The type of the second is, Most A are B; most C are A;
this is a C; therefore it is probably an A, therefore it is probably a
B. The first is exemplified when we prove a fact by the testimony of two
unconnected witnesses; the second, when we adduce only the testimony of
one witness that he has heard the thing asserted by another. Or again,
in the first mode it may be argued that the accused committed the crime,
because he concealed himself, and because his clothes were stained with
blood; in the second, that he committed it because he bwashed or
destroyedb his clothes, which is supposed to render it probable that
they were stained with blood. Instead of only two links, as in these
instances, we may suppose chains of any length. A chain of the former
kind was termed by cBentham* a self-corroborative chain of evidence; the
second, a self-infirmative chain.

When approximate generalizations are joined by way of addition, dwe may
deduced from the theory of probabilities laid down in a former chapter,
in what manner each of them adds to the probability of a conclusion
which has the warrant of them all.

eIff, on an average,f two of every three gAs are Bs, and three of every
four Cs are Bsg, the probability that something which is both an A and a
C is a B, will be more than two in three, or than three in four. Of
every twelve things which are As, all except four are Bs by the
supposition; and if the whole twelve, and consequently those four, have
the characters of C likewise, three hof theseh will be Bs on that
ground. Therefore, out of twelve which are both As and Cs, eleven are
Bs. To state the argument in another way; a thing which is both ian A
and a C, but which is not ai B, is found in only one of three sections
of the class A, and in only one of four sections of the class C; but
this fourth of C being spread over the whole of A indiscriminately, only
one-third part of it (or one-twelfth of the whole number) belongs to the
third section of A; therefore a thing which is not jaj B occurs only
once, among Edition: current; Page: [599] twelve things which are both
As and Cs. The argument would in the language of the doctrine of
chances, be thus expressed: the chance that an A is not kak B is ⅓, the
chance that a C is not lal B is ¼; hence if the thing be both an A and a
C, the chance is ⅓ of ¼ = 1/12.*n

Edition: current; Page: [600]
oIn this computation it is of course supposedo that the probabilities
arising from A and C are independent of peach otherp. There must not be
any such connexion between A and C, that when a thing belongs to the one
class it will therefore belong to the other, or even have a greater
chance of doing so. qOtherwise the not-Bs which are Cs may be, most or
even all of them, identical Edition: current; Page: [601] with the
not-Bs which are Asq; in which last case the probability arising from A
and C together rwillr be no greater than that arising from A alone.

When approximate generalizations are joined together in the other mode,
that of deduction, the degree of probability of the inference, instead
of increasing, diminishes at each step. From two such premises as Most A
are B, Most B are C, we cannot with certainty conclude that even a
single A is C; for the whole of the portion of A which in any way falls
under B, may perhaps be comprised in the exceptional part of it. Still,
the two propositions in question afford an appreciable probability that
any given A is C, provided the average on which the second proposition
is grounded, was taken fairly with reference to the first; provided the
proposition, Most B are C, was arrived at in a manner leaving no
suspicion that the probability arising from it is otherwise than fairly
distributed over the section of B which belongs to A. For though the
instances which are A may be all in the minority, they may, also, be all
in the majority; and the one possibility is to be set against the other.
On the whole, the probability arising from the two propositions taken
together, will be correctly measured by the probability arising from the
one, abated in the ratio of that arising from the other. If nine out of
ten Swedes have light hair, and eight out of nine inhabitants of
Stockholm are Swedes, the probability arising from these two
propositions, that any given inhabitant of Stockholm is light-haired,
will amount to eight in ten; though it is rigorously possible sthat the
whole Swedish population of Stockholm tmightt belong to that tenth
section of the people of Sweden who are an exception to the rest.

If the premises are known to be true not of a bare majority, but of
nearly the whole, of their respective subjects, we may go on joining one
such proposition to another for several steps, before we reach a
conclusion not presumably true even of a majority. The error of the
conclusion will amount to the aggregate of the errors of all the
premises. Let the proposition, Most A are B, be true of nine in ten;
Most B are C, of eight in nine: then not only will one A in ten not be
C, because not B, but even of the nine-tenths which are B, only
eight-ninths will be C: that is, the cases of A which are C will be only
8/9 of 9/10, or four-fifths. Let us now add Most C are D, and suppose
this to be true of seven cases out of eight; the proportion of A which
is D will be only ⅞ of 8/9 of 9/10, or 7/10. Thus the probability
progressively dwindles. The experience, however, on which our
approximate generalizations are grounded, has so rarely been subjected
to, or admits of, accurate numerical estimation, that we cannot in
general apply any measurement to the diminution of probability Edition:
current; Page: [602] which takes place at each illation; but must be
content with remembering that it does diminish at every step, and that
unless the premises approach very nearly indeed to being uuniversally
trueu, the conclusion after a very few steps is worth nothing. A hearsay
of a hearsay, or an argument from presumptive evidence depending not on
immediate marks but on marks of marks, is worthless at a very few
removes from the first stage.

§ 7. [How approximate generalizations may be converted into accurate
generalizations equivalent to them] There are, however, two cases in
which reasonings depending on approximate generalizations may be carried
to any length we please with as much assurance, and are as strictly
scientific, as if they were composed of universal laws of nature. aButa
these cases are exceptions of the sort which are currently said to prove
the rule. The approximate generalizations are as suitable, in the cases
in question, for purposes of ratiocination, as if they were complete
generalizations, because they are bcapable of beingb transformed into
complete generalizations exactly equivalent.

First: If the approximate generalization is of the class in which cour
reason for stopping at the approximation is not the impossibility, but
onlyc the inconvenience, of going further; if we are cognizant of the
character which distinguishes the cases that accord with the
generalization from those which are exceptions to it; we may then
substitute for the approximate proposition, an universal proposition
with a proviso. The proposition, Most persons who have uncontrolled
power employ it ill, is a generalization of this class, and may be
transformed into the following:—All persons who have uncontrolled power
employ it ill, provided they are not persons of unusual strength of
judgment dand rectitude of purposed. The proposition, carrying the
hypothesis or proviso with it, may then be dealt with no longer as an
approximate, but as an universal proposition; and to whatever number of
steps the reasoning may reach, the hypothesis, being carried forward to
the conclusion, will exactly indicate how far that conclusion is from
being applicable universally. If in the course of the argument other
approximate generalizations are introduced, each of them being in like
manner expressed as an universal proposition with a condition annexed,
the sum of all the conditions will appear at the end as the sum of all
the errors which affect the conclusion. Thus, to the proposition last
cited, let us add the following:—All absolute monarchs have uncontrolled
power, unless their position is such that they need the active support
of their subjects (as was the case with Queen Edition: current; Page:
[603] Elizabeth, Frederick of Prussia, and others). Combining these two
propositions, we can deduce from them an universal conclusion, which
will be subject to both the hypotheses in the premises; All absolute
monarchs employ their power ill, unless their position makes them need
the active support of their subjects, or unless they are persons of
unusual strength of judgment eand rectitude of purposee. It is of no
consequence how rapidly the errors in our premises accumulate, if we are
able in this manner to record each error, and keep an account of the
aggregate as it swells up.

Secondly: there is a case in which approximate propositions, even
without our taking note of the conditions under which they are not true
of individual cases, are yet, for the purposes of science, universal
ones; namely, in the finquiries which relate to the properties not of
individuals, but of multitudes. The principal of these is the science of
politics, or of human society. This science is principally concerned
with the actions not of solitary individuals, but of masses; with the
fortunes not of single persons, but of communities. For the statesman,
therefore, it is generally enough to know that most persons act or are
acted upon in a particular way; since his speculations and his practical
arrangements refer almost exclusively to cases in which the whole
community, or some large portion of it, is acted upon at once, and in
which, therefore, what is done or felt by most persons determines the
result produced by or upon the body at large. He can get on well enough
with approximate generalizations on human nature, since what is true
approximately of all individuals is true absolutely of all masses. And
even when the operations of individual men have a part to play in his
deductions, as when he is reasoning of kings, or other single rulers,
still, as he is providing for indefinite duration, involving an
indefinite succession of such individuals, he must in general both
reason and act as if what is true of most persons were true of all.

The two kinds of considerations above adduced are a sufficient
refutation of the popular error, that speculations on society and
government, as resting on merely probable evidence, must be inferior in
certainty and scientific accuracy to the conclusions of what are called
the exact sciences, and less to be relied on in practice. There are
reasons enough why the moral sciences must remain inferior to at least
the more perfect of the physical: why the laws of their more complicated
phenomena cannot be so completely deciphered, nor the phenomena
predicted with the same degree of assurance. But though we cannot attain
to so many truths, there is no reason that those we can attain should
deserve less reliance, or have less of a scientific character. Of this
topic, however, gIg shall treat more systematically in the concluding
Book, to which place any further consideration of it must be deferred.

Edition: current; Page: [604]


CHAPTER XXIV: Of the Remaining Laws of Nature

§ 1. [Propositions which assert mere existence] In the First Book, we
found that all the assertions which can be conveyed by language, express
some one or more of five different things: Existence; Order in Place;
Order in Time; Causation; and Resemblance.* Of these, Causation, in our
view of the subject, not being fundamentally different from Order in
Time, the five species of possible assertions are reduced to four. The
propositions which affirm Order in Time, in either of its two modes,
Coexistence and Succession, have formed, thus far, the subject of the
present Book. And we have now concluded the exposition, so far as it
falls within the limits assigned to this work, of the nature of the
evidence on which these propositions rest, and the processes of
investigation by which they are aascertaineda and proved. There remain
three classes of facts: Existence, Order in Place, and Resemblance; in
regard to which the same questions are now to be resolved.

Regarding the first of these, very little needs be said. Existence in
general, is a subject not for our science, but for bmetaphysics. To
determine what things can be recognised as really existing,
independently of our own sensible or other impressions, and in what
meaning the term is, in that case, predicated of them, belongs to the
consideration of “Things in themselves,” from which, throughout this
work, we have as much as possible kept aloof. Existence, so far as Logic
is concerned about it, has reference only to phenomena; to actual, or
possible, states of external or internal consciousness, in ourselves or
others. Feelings of sensitive beings, or possibilities of having such
feelings, are the only things the existence of which can be a subject of
logical induction, because the only things of which the existence in
individual cases can be a subject of experience.

It is true that a thing is said by us to exist, even when it is absent,
and therefore is not and cannot be perceived. But even then, its
existence is to us only another word for our conviction that we should
perceive it on a certain supposition; cnamely, if we werec in the
needful circumstances of time and Edition: current; Page: [605] place,
and endowed with the needful perfection of organs. My belief that the
Emperor of China exists, is simply my belief that if I were transported
to the imperial palace or some other locality in Pekin, I should see
him. My belief that Julius Cæsar existed, is my belief that I should
have seen him if I had been present in the field of Pharsalia, or in the
senate-house at Rome. When I believe that stars exist beyond the utmost
range of my vision, though assisted by the most powerful telescopes yet
invented, my belief, philosophically expressed, is, that with still
better telescopes, if such existed, I could see them, or that they may
be perceived by beings less remote from them in space, or whose
capacities of perception are superior to mine.

The existence, therefore, of a phenomenon, is but another word for its
being perceived, or for the inferred possibility of perceiving it. When
the phenomenon is within the range of present observation, by present
observation we assure ourselves of its existence; when it is beyond that
range, and is therefore said to be absent, we infer its existence from
marks or evidences. But what can these evidences be? Other phenomena;
ascertained by induction to be connected with the given phenomenon,
either in the way of succession or of coexistence. The simple existence,
therefore, of an individual phenomenon, when not directly perceived, is
inferred from some inductive law of succession or coexistence: and is
consequently not amenable to any peculiar inductive principles. We prove
the existence of a thing, by proving that it is connected by succession
or coexistence with some known thing.

With respect to general propositions of this class, that is, which
affirm the bare fact of existence, they have a peculiarity which renders
the logical treatment of them a very easy matter; they are
generalizations which are sufficiently proved by a single instance. That
ghosts, or unicorns, or sea-serpents exist, would be fully established
if it could be ascertained positively that such things had been even
once seen. Whatever has once happened, is capable of happening again;
the only question relates to the conditions under which it happens.

So far, therefore, as relates to simple existence, the Inductive Logic
has no knots to untie. And we may proceed to the remaining two of the
great classes into which facts have been divided; Resemblance, and Order
in dPlaced.

§ 2. [Resemblance, considered as a subject of science] Resemblance and
its opposite, except in the case in which they assume the names of
Equality and Inequality, are seldom regarded as subjects of science;
they are supposed to be perceived by simple apprehension; by merely
applying our senses or directing our attention to the two objects at
once, or in immediate succession. And this simultaneous, or virtually
simultaneous, application of our faculties Edition: current; Page: [606]
to the two things which are to be compared, does necessarily constitute
the ultimate appeal, wherever such application is practicable. But, in
most cases, it is not practicable: the objects cannot be brought so
aclosea together that the feeling of their resemblance (at least a
complete feeling of it) directly arises in the mind. We can only compare
each of them with some third object, capable of being transported from
one to the other. And besides, even when the objects can be brought into
immediate juxtaposition, their resemblance or difference is but
imperfectly known to us, unless we have compared them minutely, part by
part. Until this has been done, things in reality very dissimilar often
appear undistinguishably alike. Two lines of very unequal length will
appear about equal when lying in different directions; but place them
parallel with their farther extremities even, and if bweb look at the
nearer extremities, their inequality becomes a matter of direct
perception.

To ascertain whether, and in what, two phenomena resemble or differ, is
not always, therefore, so easy a thing as it might at first appear. When
the two cannot be brought into juxtaposition, or not so that the
observer is able to compare their several parts in detail, he must
employ the indirect means of reasoning and general propositions. When we
cannot bring two straight lines together, to determine whether they are
equal, we do it by the physical aid of a foot rule applied first to one
and then to the other, and the logical aid of the general proposition or
formula, “Things which are equal to the same thing are equal to one
another.” The comparison of two things through the intervention of a
third thing, when their direct comparison is impossible, is the
appropriate scientific process for ascertaining resemblances and
dissimilarities, and is the sum total of what Logic has to teach on the
subject.

An undue extension of cthis remarkc induced Locke to consider reasoning
itself as nothing but the comparison of two ideas through the medium of
a third, and knowledge as the perception of the agreement or
disagreement of two ideas: doctrines which the Condillac school blindly
adopted, without the qualifications and distinctions with which they
were studiously guarded by their illustrious author. Where, indeed, the
agreement or disagreement (otherwise called resemblance or
dissimilarity) of any two things is the very matter to be determined, as
is the case particularly in the sciences of quantity and extension;
there, the process by which a solution, if not attainable by direct
perception, must be indirectly sought, consists in comparing these two
things through the medium of a third. But this is far from being true of
all inquiries. The knowledge that bodies fall to the ground is not a
perception of agreement or disagreement, but of a series of physical
occurrences, a succession of sensations. Locke’s definitions of
knowledge and of reasoning required Edition: current; Page: [607] to be
limited to our knowledge of, and reasoning about, resemblances. Nor,
even when thus restricted, are the propositions strictly correct; since
the comparison is not made, as he represents, between the ideas of the
two phenomena, but between the phenomena themselves. This mistake has
been pointed out in an earlier part of our inquiry,* and we traced it to
an imperfect conception of what takes place in mathematics, where very
often the comparison is really made between the ideas, without any
appeal to the outward senses; only, however, because in mathematics a
comparison of the ideas is strictly equivalent to a comparison of the
phenomena themselves. Where, as in the case of numbers, lines, and
figures, our idea of an object is a complete picture of the object, so
far as respects the matter in hand; we can, of course, learn from the
picture, whatever could be learnt from the object itself by mere
contemplation of it as it exists at the particular instant when the
picture is taken. No mere contemplation of gunpowder would ever teach us
that a spark would make it explode, nor, consequently, would the
contemplation of the idea of gunpowder do so: but the mere contemplation
of a straight line shows that it cannot inclose a space: accordingly the
contemplation of the idea of it will show the same. What takes place in
mathematics is thus no argument that the comparison is between the ideas
only. It is always, either indirectly or directly, a comparison of the
phenomena.

In cases in which we cannot bring the phenomena to the test of direct
inspection at all, or not in a manner sufficiently precise, but must
judge of their resemblance by inference from other resemblances or
dissimilarities more accessible to observation, we of course require, as
in all cases of ratiocination, generalizations or formulæ applicable to
the subject. We must reason from laws of nature; from the uniformities
which are observable in the fact of likeness or unlikeness.

§ 3. [The axioms and theorems of mathematics comprise the principal laws
of resemblance] Of these laws or uniformities, the most comprehensive
are those supplied by mathematics; the axioms relating to equality,
inequality, and proportionality, and the various theorems thereon
founded. And these are the only Laws of Resemblance which require to be,
or which can be, treated apart. It is true there are innumerable other
theorems which affirm resemblances among phenomena; as that the angle of
the reflection of light is equal to its angle of incidence (equality
being merely exact resemblance in magnitude). Again, that the heavenly
bodies describe equal areas in equal times; and that their periods of
revolution are proportional (another species of resemblance) to the
sesquiplicate powers of their distances from the centre of force. These
and similar propositions affirm resemblances, of the same nature with
those asserted in the theorems of mathematics; but the distinction
Edition: current; Page: [608] is, that the propositions of mathematics
are true of all phenomena whatever, or at least without distinction of
origin; while the truths in question are affirmed only of special
phenomena, which originate in a certain way; and the equalities,
proportionalities, or other resemblances, which exist between such
phenomena, must necessarily be either derived from, or identical with,
the law of their origin—the law of causation on which they depend. The
equality of the areas described ain equal timesa by the planets, is
derived from the laws of the causes; and, until its derivation was
shown, it was an empirical law. The equality of the angles of reflexion
and incidence is identical with the law of the cause; for the cause is
the incidence of a ray of light upon a reflecting surface, and the
equality in question is the very law according to which that cause
produces its effects. This class, therefore, of btheb uniformities of
resemblance between phenomena, are inseparable, in fact and in thought,
from the laws of the production of those phenomena: and the principles
of induction applicable to them are no other than those of which we have
treated in the preceding chapters of this Book.

It is otherwise with the truths of mathematics. The laws of equality and
inequality between spaces, or between numbers, have no connexion with
laws of causation. That the angle of reflexion is equal to the angle of
incidence, is a statement of the mode of action of a particular cause;
but that when two straight lines intersect each other the opposite
angles are equal, is true of all such lines and angles, by whatever
cause produced. That the squares of the periodic times of the planets
are proportional to the cubes of their distances from the sun, is an
uniformity derived from the laws of the causes c(or forces) which
produce the planetary motionsc; but that the square of any number is
four times the square of half the number, is true independently of any
cause. The only laws of resemblance, therefore, which we are called upon
to consider independently of causation, belong to the province of
mathematics.

§ 4. [The axioms and theorems of mathematics also comprise the principal
laws of order in space, and rest on induction by simple enumeration] The
same thing is evident with respect to the only aone remaininga of our
five categories, Order in Place. The order in place, of the effects of a
cause, is (like everything else belonging to the effects) a consequence
of the laws of that cause. The order in place, or, as we have termed it,
the collocation, of the primeval causes, is (as well as their
resemblance) in each instance an ultimate fact, in which no laws or
uniformities are traceable. The only remaining Edition: current; Page:
[609] general propositions respecting order in place, and the only ones
which have nothing to do with causation, are bsomeb of the truths of
geometry; laws through which we are able, from the order in place of
certain points, lines, or spaces, to infer the order in place of others
which are connected with the former in some known mode; quite
independently of the particular nature of those points, lines, or
spaces, in any other respect than position or magnitude, as well as
independently of the physical cause from which in any particular case
they happen to derive their origin.

It thus appears that mathematics is the only department of science into
the methods of which it still remains to inquire. And there is the less
necessity that this inquiry should occupy us long, as we have already,
in the Second Book, made considerable progress in it. We there remarked,
that the directly inductive truths of mathematics are few in number;
consisting of the axioms, together with certain propositions concerning
existence, tacitly involved in most of the so-called definitions. And we
cgave what appeared conclusive reasons for affirmingc that these
original premises, from which the remaining truths of the science are
deduced, are, notwithstanding all appearances to the contrary, results
of observation and experience; founded, in short, on the evidence of the
senses. That things equal to the same thing are equal to done another,
andd that two straight lines which have once intersected eone another
continue to diverge, are inductive truths; resting, indeed, like the law
of universal causation, only on induction per enumerationem simplicem;
on the fact that they have been perpetually fperceived to be true, and
never once found to bef false. But, as we have seen in a recent chapter
that this evidence, in the case of a law so completely universal as the
law of causation, amounts to the fullest proofg, so is this even more
evidently true of the general propositions to which we are now
adverting; because, as a perception of their truth in any individual
case whatever, requires only the simple act of looking at the objects in
a proper position, there never could have been in their case (what, for
a long period, hthere were in the case of the law of causationh)
instances which were apparently, though not really, exceptions to them.
Their infallible truth was recognised from the very dawn of speculation;
and as their extreme familiarity made it impossible for the mind to
conceive the objects under any other law, they were, and still are,
generally considered as truths recognised by their own evidence, or by
instinct.

Edition: current; Page: [610]
§ 5. [The propositions of arithmetic affirm the modes of formation of
some given number] There is something which seems to require
explanation, in the fact that the immense multitude of truths (a
multitude still as far from being exhausted as ever) comprised in the
mathematical sciences, can be elicited from so small a number of
elementary laws. One sees not, at first, how it is that there can be
room for such an infinite variety of true propositions, on subjects
apparently so limited.

To begin with the science of number. The elementary or ultimate truths
of this science are the common axioms concerning equality, namely,
“Things which are equal to the same thing are equal to one another,” and
“Equals added to equals make equal sums,” (no other axioms are
arequireda,*) together with the definitions of the various numbers. Like
other so-called definitions, these are composed of two things, the
explanation of a name, and the assertion of a fact: of which the latter
alone can form a first principle or premise of a science. The fact
asserted in the definition of a number is a physical fact. Each of the
numbers two, three, four, &c., denotes physical phenomena, and connotes
a physical property of those phenomena. Two, for instance, denotes all
pairs of things, and twelve all dozens of things, connoting what makes
them pairs, or dozens; and that which makes them so is something
physical; since it cannot be denied that two apples are physically
distinguishable from three apples, two horses from one horse, and so
forth: that they are a different visible and tangible phenomenon. I am
not undertaking to say what the difference is; it is enough that there
is a difference of which the senses can take cognizance. And although a
hundred and two horses are not so easily distinguished from a hundred
and three, as two horses are from three—though in most positions the
senses do not perceive any difference—yet they may be so placed that a
difference will be perceptible, or else we should never have
distinguished them, and given them different Edition: current; Page:
[611] names. Weight is confessedly a physical property of things; yet
small differences between great weights are as imperceptible to the
senses in most situations, as small differences between great numbers;
and are only put in evidence by placing the two objects in a peculiar
position—namely, in the opposite scales of a delicate balance.

What, then, is that which is connoted by a name of number? Of course,
some property belonging to the agglomeration of things which we call by
the name; and that property is, the characteristic manner in which the
agglomeration is made up of, and may be separated into, parts. cIc will
endeavour to make this more intelligible by a few explanations.

When we call a collection of objects two, three, or four, they are not
two, three, or four in the abstract; they are two, three, or four things
of some particular kind; pebbles, horses, inches, pounds weight. What
the name of number connotes is, the manner in which single objects of
the given kind must be put together, in order to produce that particular
aggregate. If the aggregate be of pebbles, and we call it two, the name
implies that, to compose the aggregate, one pebble must be joined to one
pebble. If we call it three, done and one and one pebble must be brought
together to produce it, or elsed one pebble must be joined to an
aggregate of the kind called two, already existing. The aggregate which
we call four, has a still greater number of characteristic modes of
formation. One and one and one and one pebble may be brought together;
or two aggregates of the kind called two may be united; or one pebble
may be added to an aggregate of the kind called three. Every succeeding
number in the ascending series, may be formed by the junction of smaller
numbers in a progressively greater variety of ways. Even limiting the
parts to two, the number may be formed, and consequently may be divided,
in as many different ways as there are numbers smaller than itself; and,
if we admit of threes, fours, &c., in a still greater variety. Other
modes of arriving at the same aggregate present themselves, not by the
union of smaller, but by the dismemberment of larger aggregates. Thus,
three pebbles may be formed by taking away one pebble from an aggregate
of four; two pebbles, by an equal division of a similar aggregate; and
so on.

Every arithmetical proposition; every statement of the result of an
arithmetical operation; is a statement of one of the modes of eformation
of a given number. It affirms that a certain aggregate might have been
formed by putting together certain other aggregates, or by withdrawing
certain portions of some aggregate; and that, by consequence, we might
reproduce those aggregates from it, by reversing the process.

Thus, when we say that the cube of 12 is 1728, what we affirm is this:
Edition: current; Page: [612] that if, having a sufficient number of
pebbles or of any other objects, we put them together fintof the
particular sort of parcels or aggregates called twelves; and put
together these twelves again into similar collections; and, finally,
make up twelve of these largest parcels; the aggregate thus formed will
be such a one as we call 1728; namely, that which (to take the most
familiar of its modes of formation) may be made by joining the parcel
called a thousand pebbles, the parcel called seven hundred pebbles, the
parcel called twenty pebbles, and the parcel called eight pebbles.

gThe converse proposition, that the cube root of 1728 is 12, asserts
that this large aggregate may again be decomposed into the twelve
twelves of twelves of pebbles which it consists of.

The modes of formation of any number are innumerable; but when we know
one mode of formation of each, all the rest may be determined
deductively. If we know that a is formed from b and c, b from hah and e,
c from d and f, and so forth, until we have included all the numbers of
any scale we choose to select, (taking care that for each number the
mode of formation ibei really a distinct one, not bringing us round
again to the former numbers, but introducing a new number,) we have a
set of propositions from which we may reason to all the other modes of
formation of those numbers from one another. Having established a chain
of inductive truths connecting together all the numbers of the scale, we
can ascertain the formation of any one of those numbers from any other
by merely travelling from jone to the other along the chain. Suppose
that we know only the following modes of formation: 6 = 4 + 2, 4 = 7 -
3, 7 = 5 + 2, 5 = 9 - 4. We kcouldk determine how 6 may be formed from
9. For 6 = 4 + 2 = 7 - 3 + 2 = 5 + 2 - 3 + 2 = 9 - 4 + 2 - 3 + 2. It may
lthereforel be formed by taking away 4 and 3, and adding 2 and 2. If we
know besides that 2 + 2 = 4, we obtain 6 from 9 in a simpler mode, by
merely taking away 3.

It is sufficient, therefore, to select one of the various modes of
formation of each number, as a means of ascertaining all the rest. And
since things which are uniform, and therefore simple, are most easily
received and retained by the understanding, there is an obvious
advantage in selecting a mode of formation which shall be alike for all;
in fixing the connotation of names of number on one uniform principle.
The mode in which our existing numerical nomenclature is contrived
possesses this advantage, with the additional one, that it happily
conveys to the mind two of the modes of formation of every number. Each
number is considered as formed by the addition of an unit to the number
next below it in magnitude, and this mode Edition: current; Page: [613]
of formation is conveyed by the place which it occupies in the series.
And meachm is also considered as formed by the addition of a number of
units less than ten, and a number of aggregates each equal to one of the
successive powers of ten; and this mode of its formation is expressed by
its spoken name, and by its nnumericaln character.

What renders arithmetic othe type ofo a deductive science, is the
fortunate applicability to it of a law so comprehensive as “The sums of
equals are equals:” or (to express the same principle in less familiar
but more characteristic language), Whatever is made up of parts, is made
up of the parts of those parts. This truth, obvious to the senses in all
cases which can be fairly referred to their decision, and so general as
to be coextensive with nature itself, being true of all sorts of
phenomena, (for all admit of being numbered,) must be considered an
inductive truth, or law of nature, of the highest order. And every
arithmetical operation is an application of this law, or of other laws
capable of being deduced from it. This is our warrant for all
calculations. We believe that five and two are equal to seven, on the
evidence of this inductive law, combined with the definitions of those
numbers. We arrive at that conclusion (as all know who remember how they
first learned it) by adding a single unit at a time: 5 + 1 = 6,
therefore 5 + 1 + 1 = 6 + 1 = 7: and again 2 = 1 + 1, therefore 5 + 2 =
5 + 1 + 1 = 7.

§ 6. [The propositions of algebra affirm the equivalence of different
modes of formation of numbers generally] Innumerable as are the true
propositions which can be formed concerning particular numbers, no
adequate conception could be gained, from these alone, of the extent of
the truths composing the science of number. Such propositions as we have
spoken of are the least general of all numerical truths. It is true that
even these are coextensive with all nature: the properties of the number
four are true of all objects that are divisible into four equal parts,
and all objects are either actually or ideally so divisible. But the
propositions which compose the science of algebra are true, not of a
particular number, but of all numbers; not of all things under the
condition of being divided in a particular way, but of all things under
the condition of being divided in any way—of being designated by a
number at all.

Since it is impossible for different numbers to have any of their modes
of formation completely in common, it ais a kind ofa paradox to say,
that all propositions which can be made concerning numbers relate to
their modes of formation from other numbers, and yet that there are
propositions which are true of all numbers. But this very paradox leads
to the real principle of Edition: current; Page: [614] generalization
concerning the properties of numbers. Two different numbers cannot be
formed in the same manner from the same numbers; but they may be formed
in the same manner from different numbers; as nine is formed from three
by multiplying it into itself, and sixteen is formed from four by the
same process. Thus there arises a classification of modes of formation,
or in the language commonly used by mathematicians, a classification of
Functions. Any number, considered as formed from any other number, is
called a function of it; and there are as many kinds of functions as
there are modes of formation. The simple functions are by no means
numerous, most functions being formed by the combination of several of
the operations which form simple functions, or by successive repetitions
of some one of those operations. The simple functions of any number x
are all reducible to the following forms: x + a, x - a, a x, x/a, xa,
a√x, log. x (to the base a), and the same expressions varied by putting
x for a and a for x, wherever that substitution would alter the value:
to which perhaps bought to be addedb sin x, and arc (sin = x). All other
functions of x are formed by putting some one or more of the simple
functions in the place of x or a, and subjecting them to the same
elementary operations.

In order to carry on general reasonings on the subject of Functions, we
require a nomenclature enabling us to express any two numbers by names
which, without specifying what particular numbers they are, shall show
what function each is of the other; or, in other words, shall put in
evidence their mode of formation from one another. The system of general
language called algebraical notation does this. The expressions a and
a2 + 3a denote, the one any number, the other the number formed from it
in a particular manner. The expressions a, b, n, and (a + b)n, denote
any three numbers, and a fourth which is formed from them in a certain
mode.

The following may be stated as the general problem of the algebraical
calculus: F being a certain function of a given number, to find what
function F will be of any function of that number. For example, a
binomial a + b is a function of its two parts a and b, and the parts
are, in their turn, functions of a + b: now (a + b)n, is a certain
function of the binomial; what function will this be of a and b, the two
parts? The answer to this question is the binomial theorem. The formula
(a + b)n = an + [lf0223-07_eq03.png] an-1b + [lf0223-07_eq04.png]
an-2b2 + &c., shows in what manner the number which is formed by
multiplying a + b into itself n times, might be formed without that
process, directly from a, b, and n. And of this nature are all the
theorems of the science of number. They assert the identity of the
result of different modes of formation. They affirm that some mode of
formation from x, and some mode of formation from a certain function of
x, produce the same number.

Edition: current; Page: [615]
Besides these general theorems or formulæ, what remains in the
algebraical calculus is the resolution of equations. But the resolution
of an equation is also a theorem. If the equation be x2 + ax = b, the
resolution of this equation, viz. x = -½ a ± √¼ a2 + b, is a general
proposition, which may be regarded as an answer to the question, If b is
a certain function of x and a (namely x2 + ax), what function is x of b
and a? The resolution of equations is, therefore, a mere variety of the
general problem as above stated. The problem is—Given a function, what
function is it of some other function? And in the resolution of an
equation, the question is, to find what function of one of its own
functions the number itself is.

Such as above described, is the aim and end of the calculus. As for its
processes, every one knows that they are simply deductive. In
demonstrating an algebraical theorem, or in resolving an equation, we
travel from the datum to the quæsitum by pure ratiocination; in which
the only premises introduced, besides the original hypotheses, are the
fundamental axioms already mentioned—that things equal to the same thing
are equal to one another, and that the sums of equal things are equal.
At each step in the demonstration or in the calculation, we apply one or
other of these truths, or truths cdeduciblec from them, as, that the
differences, products, &c., of equal numbers are equal.

It would be inconsistent with the scale of this work, and not necessary
to its design, to carry the analysis of the truths and processes of
algebra any farther; which is dalso the less needful, as the task has
been, to a very great extent,d performed by other writers. ePeacock’s
Algebra, and Dr. Whewell’s Doctrine of Limits,[*] fare full of
instruction on the subject. The profound treatises of a truly
philosophical mathematician, Professor De Morgan,f should be studied by
every one who desires to comprehend the evidence of mathematical truths,
and the meaning of the obscurer processes of the calculus;[†] gand the
speculations of M. Comte, in his Cours de Philosophie Edition: current;
Page: [616] Positive, on the philosophy of the higher branches of
mathematics, are among the hmanyh valuable gifts for which philosophy is
indebted to that eminent thinker.g

§ 7. [The propositions of geometry are laws of outward nature] If the
extreme generality, and remoteness not so much from sense as from the
visual and tactual imagination, of the laws of number, renders it a
somewhat difficult effort of abstraction to conceive those laws as being
in reality physical truths obtained by observation; the same difficulty
does not exist with regard to the laws of extension. The facts of which
those laws are aexpressionsa, are of a kind peculiarly accessible to the
bsensesb, and suggesting eminently distinct images to the fancy. That
geometry is a strictly physical science would doubtless have been
recognised in all ages, had it not been for the illusions produced by
two ccircumstancesc. One of these is the characteristic property,
already noticed, of the facts of geometry, that they may be collected
from our ideas or mental pictures of objects as effectually as from the
objects themselves. The other is, the demonstrative character of
geometrical truths; which was at one time supposed to constitute a
radical distinction between them and physical truths, the latter, as
resting on merely probable evidence, being deemed essentially uncertain
and unprecise. The advance of knowledge has, however, made it manifest
that physical science, in its better understood branches, is quite as
demonstrative as geometry. The task of deducing its details from a few
comparatively simple principles dis found to be anything but the
impossibility it was once supposed to be; and the notion of the superior
certainty of geometry isd an illusion, arising from the ancient
prejudice which, in that science, mistakes the ideal data from which we
reason, for a peculiar class of realities, while the corresponding ideal
data of any deductive physical science are recognised as what they
really are, ehypotheses.

Every theorem in geometry is a law of external nature, and might have
been ascertained by generalizing from observation and experiment, which
in this case resolve themselves into comparison and measurement. But it
was found practicable, and being practicable, was desirable, to deduce
these Edition: current; Page: [617] truths by ratiocination from a small
number of general laws of nature, the certainty and universality of
which faref obvious to the most careless observer, and which compose the
first principles and ultimate premises of the science. Among these
general laws must be included the same two which we have noticed as
ultimate principles of the Science of Number also, and which are
applicable to every description of quantity; viz. The sums of equals are
equal, and Things which are equal to the same thing are equal to one
another; the latter of which may be expressed in a manner more
suggestive of the inexhaustible multitude of its consequences, by the
following terms: Whatever is equal to any one of a number of equal
magnitudes, is equal to any other of them. To these two must be added,
in geometry, a third law of equality, namely, that lines, surfaces, or
solid spaces, which can be so applied to one another as to coincide, are
equal. Some writers have asserted that this law of nature is a mere
verbal definition; that the expression “equal magnitudes” means nothing
but magnitudes which can be so applied to one another as to coincide.
But in this opinion I cannot agree. The equality of two geometrical
magnitudes cannot differ fundamentally in its nature from the equality
of two weights, two degrees of heat, or two portions of duration, to
none of which would this gdefinition of equality be suitable. None of
these things can be so applied to one another as to coincide, yet we
perfectly understand what we mean when we call them equal. Things are
equal in magnitude, as things are equal in weight, when they are felt to
be exactly similar in respect of the attribute in which we compare them:
and the application of the objects to each other in the one case, like
the balancing them with a pair of scales in the other, is but a mode of
bringing them into a position in which our senses can recognise
deficiencies of exact resemblance that would otherwise escape our
notice.

Along with these three general principles or axioms, the remainder of
the premises of geometry hconsistsh of the so-called definitions: that
is to say, propositions asserting the real existence of the various
objects therein designated, together with some one property of each. In
some cases more than one property is commonly assumed, but in no case is
more than one necessary. It is assumed that there are such things in
nature as straight lines, and that any two of them setting out from the
same point, diverge more and more without limit. This assumption, (which
includes and goes beyond Euclid’s axiom that two straight lines cannot
inclose a space,)[*] is as indispensable in geometry, and as evident,
resting on as simple, familiar, and universal observation, as Edition:
current; Page: [618] any of the other axioms. It is also assumed that
straight lines diverge from one another in different degrees; in other
words, that there are such things as angles, and that they are capable
of being equal or unequal. It is assumed that there is such a thing as a
circle, and that all its radii are equal; such things as ellipses, and
that the sums of the focal distances are equal for every point in an
ellipse; such things as parallel lines, and that those lines are
everywhere equally distant.*

§ 8. [Why geometry is almost entirely deductive] It is a matter of amore
than curiosity to consider, to what peculiarity of the physical truths
which are the subject of geometry, it is owing that they can all be
deduced from so small a number of original premises: why it is that we
can set out from only one characteristic property of each kind of
phenomenon, and with that and two or three general truths relating to
equality, can travel from mark to mark until we obtain a vast body of
derivative truths, to all appearance extremely unlike those elementary
ones.

The explanation of this remarkable fact seems to lie in the following
circumstances. In the first place, all questions of position and figure
may be resolved into questions of magnitude. The position and figure of
any object bareb determined by determining the position of a sufficient
number of points in it; and the position of any point may be determined
by the magnitude of three rectangular co-ordinates, that is, of the
perpendiculars drawn from the Edition: current; Page: [619] point to
three cplanesc at right angles to one another, arbitrarily selected. By
this transformation of all questions of quality into questions only of
quantity, geometry is reduced to the single problem of the measurement
of magnitudes, that is, the ascertainment of the equalities which exist
between them. Now when we consider that by one of the general axioms,
any equality, when ascertained, is proof of as many other equalities as
there are other things equal to either of the two equals; and that by
another of those axioms, any ascertained equality is proof of the
equality of as many pairs of magnitudes as can be formed by the numerous
operations which resolve themselves into the addition of the equals to
themselves or to other equals; we cease to wonder that in proportion as
a science is conversant about equality, it should afford a more copious
supply of marks of marks; and that the sciences of number and extension,
which are conversant with little else than equality, should be the most
deductive of all the sciences.

There are dalsod two or three of the principal laws of space or
extension which are unusually fitted for rendering one position or
magnitude a mark of another, and thereby contributing to render the
science largely deductive. First; the magnitudes of inclosed spaces,
whether superficial or solid, are completely determined by the
magnitudes of the lines and angles which bound them. Secondly, the
length of any line, whether straight or curve, is measured (certain
other things being given) by the angle which it subtends, and vice
versâ. Lastly, the angle which any two straight lines make with each
other at an inaccessible point, is measured by the angles they severally
make with any third line we choose to select. By means of these general
laws, the measurement of all lines, angles, and spaces whatsoever might
be accomplished eby measuring a single straight line and a sufficient
number of angles; which is fthe plan actually pursued in the
trigonometrical survey of a country; and fortunate it is that this is
practicable, the exact measurement of glong straight lines being always
difficult, and often impossibleg, but that of angles very easy. Three
such generalizations as the foregoing afford such facilities for the
indirect measurement of magnitudes, (by supplying us with known lines or
angles which are marks of the magnitude of unknown ones, and thereby of
the spaces which they inclose,) that it is easily hintelligibleh how
from a few data we can go on to ascertain the magnitude of an indefinite
multitude of lines, angles, and spaces, which we could not easily, or
could not at all, measure by any more direct process.

Edition: current; Page: [620]
§ 9. [Function of mathematical truths in the other sciences, and limits
of that function] Such are the aremarks which it seemsa necessary to
make in this place, respecting the laws of nature which are the peculiar
subject of the sciences of number and extension. The immense part which
those laws take in giving a deductive character to the other departments
of physical science, is well known; and is not surprising, when we
consider that all causes operate according to mathematical laws. The
effect is always dependent on, or bis a function of, the quantity of the
agent; and generally of its position also. We cannot, therefore, reason
respecting causation, without introducing considerations of quantity and
extension at every step; and if the nature of the phenomena admits of
our obtaining numerical data of sufficient accuracy, the laws of
quantity become the grand cinstrumentc for calculating forward to an
effect, or backward to a cause. That in all other sciences, as well as
in geometry, questions of quality are scarcely ever independent of
questions of quantity, may be seen from the most familiar phenomena.
Even when several colours are mixed on a painter’s palette, the
comparative quantity of each entirely determines the colour of the
mixture.

With this mere suggestion of the general causes which render
mathematical principles and processes so predominant in those deductive
sciences which afford precise numerical data, I must, on the present
occasion, content myself: referring the reader who desires a dmore
thorough acquaintance with thed subject, to the first two volumes of M.
Comte’s systematic work.

In the same work, and more particularly in the third volume, are also
fully discussed the elimits of the applicability of mathematical
principles to the improvement of other sciences. Such principles are
manifestly inapplicable, where the causes on which any class of
phenomena depend are so imperfectly accessible to our observation, that
we cannot ascertain, by a proper induction, their numerical laws; or
where the causes are so numerous, and intermixed in so complex a manner
with one another, that even supposing their laws known, the computation
of the aggregate effect transcends the powers of the calculus as it is,
or fisf likely to be; or lastly, where the causes themselves are in a
state of perpetual fluctuation; as in physiology, and still more, if
possible, in the social science. gTheg mathematical solutions of
physical questions become progressively more difficult and himperfect,
in proportion as the questions Edition: current; Page: [621] divest
themselves of their abstract and hypothetical character, and approach
nearer to the degree of complication actually existing in nature;
insomuch that beyond the limits of astronomical phenomena, and iofi
those most nearly analogous to them, mathematical accuracy is generally
obtained “at the expense of the reality of the inquiry:” while even in
astronomical questions, “notwithstanding the admirable simplicity of
their mathematical elements, our feeble intelligence becomes incapable
of following out effectually the logical combinations of the laws on
which the phenomena are dependent, as soon as we attempt to take into
simultaneous consideration more than two or three essential
influences.”* Of this, the problem of the Three Bodies has already been
citedk, more than once, as a remarkable instance; the complete solution
of so comparatively simple a question having vainly tried the skill of
the most profound mathematicians. We may conceive, then, how chimerical
would be the hope that mathematical principles could lbe advantageously
applied to phenomena dependent on the mutual action of the innumerable
minute particles of bodies, as those of chemistry, and still more, of
physiology; and for similar reasons those principles mremainm
inapplicable to the still more complex inquiries, the subjects of which
are phenomena of society and government.

The value of mathematical instruction as a preparation for those more
difficult investigations, consists in the applicability not of its
doctrines, but of its method. Mathematics will ever remain the most
perfect type of the Deductive Method in general; and the applications of
mathematics to the ndeductiven branches of physics, furnish the only
school in which philosophers can effectually learn the most difficult
and important portion of their art, the employment of the laws of
simpler phenomena for explaining and predicting those of the more
complex. These grounds are quite sufficient for deeming mathematical
training an indispensable basis of real scientific education, and
regarding o(according to the dictum which an old but punauthenticp
tradition ascribes to Plato)o one who is qἀγεωμέτρητοςq, as wanting in
one of the most essential qualifications for the successful cultivation
of the higher branches of philosophy.

Edition: current; Page: [622]


CHAPTER XXV: Of the Grounds of Disbelief

§ 1. [Improbability and impossibility] The method of arriving at general
truths, or general propositions fit to be believed, and the nature of
the evidence on which they are grounded, have been discussed, as far as
space and the writer’s faculties permitted, in the twenty-four preceding
chapters. But the result of the examination of evidence is not always
belief, nor even suspension of judgment; it is sometimes disbelief. The
philosophy, therefore, of induction and experimental inquiry is
incomplete, unless the grounds not only of belief, but of disbelief, are
treated of; and to this topic we shall devote one, and the final,
chapter.

By disbelief is not here to be understood the mere absence of belief.
The ground for abstaining from belief is simply the absence or
insufficiency of proof; and in considering what is sufficient evidence
to support any given conclusion, we have already, by implication,
considered what evidence is not sufficient for the same purpose. By
disbelief is here meant, not the state of mind in which we aform no
opinion concerninga a subject, but that in which we are fully persuaded
that some opinion is not true; insomuch that if evidence, even of great
bapparent strength, (whether grounded on the testimony of others or on
our own supposedb perceptions,) were produced in favour of the opinion,
we should believe that the witnesses spoke falsely, or that they, or
cwec ourselves if we were the direct percipients, were mistaken.

That there are such cases, no one is likely to dispute. Assertions for
which there is abundant positive evidence are often disbelieved, on
account of what is called their improbability, or impossibility. And the
question for consideration is what, in the present case, these words
mean, and how far and dind what circumstances the properties which they
express are sufficient grounds for disbelief.

§ 2. [Examination of Hume’s doctrine of miracles] It is to be remarked
in the first place, that the positive evidence produced in support of an
assertion Edition: current; Page: [623] which is nevertheless rejected
on the score of impossibility or improbability, is never such as amounts
to full proof. It is always grounded on some approximate generalization.
The fact may have been asserted by a hundred witnesses; but there are
many exceptions to the universality of the generalization that what a
hundred witnesses affirm is true. We may seem to ourselves to have
actually seen the fact: but, that we really see what we think we see, is
by no means an universal truth; our organs may have been in a morbid
state; or we may have inferred something, and imagined that we perceived
it. The evidence, then, in the affirmative being never more than an
approximate generalization, all will depend on what the evidence in the
negative is. If that also rests on an approximate generalization, it is
a case for comparison of probabilities. If the approximate
generalizations leading to the affirmative are, when added together,
less strong, or in other words, afarther from being universala, than the
approximate generalizations which support the negative side of the
question, the proposition is said to be improbable, and is to be
disbelieved provisionally. If however ban alleged factb be in
contradiction, not to any number of approximate generalizations, but to
a completed generalization grounded on a rigorous induction, it is said
to be impossible, and is to be disbelieved totally.

This last principle, simple and evident as it appears, is the doctrine
which, on the occasion of an attempt to apply it to the question of the
credibility of miracles, excited so violent a controversy. Hume’s
celebrated cdoctrinec, that nothing is credible which is contradictory
to experience, or at variance with laws of nature,[*] is merely this
very plain and harmless proposition, that whatever is dcontradictoryd to
a complete induction is incredible. That such a maxim as this should
either be accounted a dangerous heresy, or mistaken for a great and
recondite truth, speaks ill for the state of philosophical speculation
on such subjects.

But does not (it may be asked) the very statement of the proposition
imply a contradiction? An alleged fact, according to this theory, is not
to be believed if it contradict a complete induction. But it is
essential to the completeness of an induction that it shall not
contradict any known fact. Is it not then a petitio principii to say,
that the fact ought to be disbelieved because the induction opposed to
it is complete? How can we have a right to declare the induction
complete, while facts, supported by credible evidence, present
themselves in opposition to it?

Edition: current; Page: [624]
I answer, we have that right whenever the scientific canons of induction
give it to us; that is, whenever the induction can be complete. We have
it, for example, in a case of causation in which there has been an
experimentum crucis. If an antecedent A, superadded to a set of
antecedents in all other respects unaltered, is followed by an effect B
which did not exist before, A is, in that instance at least, the cause
of B, or ean indispensable part of itse cause; and if A be tried again
with many totally different sets of antecedents and B still follows,
then it is the whole cause. If these observations or experiments have
been repeated so often, and by so many persons, as to exclude all
supposition of error in the observer, a law of nature is established;
and so long as this law is received as such, the assertion that on any
particular occasion A took place, and yet B did not follow, without any
counteracting cause, must be disbelieved. Such an assertion is not to be
credited on any less evidence than what would suffice to overturn the
law. The general truths, that whatever has a beginning has a cause, and
that when none but the same causes exist, the same effects follow, rest
on the strongest inductive evidence possible; the proposition that
things affirmed by even a crowd of respectable witnesses are true, is
but an approximate generalization; and—even if we fancy we actually saw
or felt the fact which is in contradiction to the law—what a human being
can see is no more than a set of appearances; from which the real nature
of the phenomenon is merely an inference, and in this inference
approximate generalizations usually have a large share. If, therefore,
we make our election to hold by the law, no quantity of evidence
whatever ought to persuade us that there has occurred anything in
contradiction to it. If, indeed, the evidence produced is such that it
is more likely that the set of observations and experiments on which the
law rests should have been inaccurately performed or incorrectly
interpreted, than that the evidence in question should be false, we may
believe the evidence; but then we must abandon the law. And since the
law was received on what seemed a complete induction, it can only be
rejected on evidence equivalent; fnamely,f as being inconsistent not
with any number of approximate generalizations, but with some other and
better established law of nature. This extreme case, of a conflict
between two supposed laws of nature, has probably never actually
occurred where, in the process of investigating both the laws, the true
canons of scientific induction had been kept in view; but if it did
occur, it must terminate in the total rejection of one of the supposed
laws. It would prove that there must be a flaw in the logical process by
which either one or the other was established: and if there be so, that
supposed general truth is gno truthg at all. We cannot admit a
proposition as a law of nature, and yet believe Edition: current; Page:
[625] a fact in real contradiction to it. We must disbelieve the alleged
fact, or believe that we were mistaken in admitting the supposed law.

But in order that any alleged fact should be contradictory to a law of
causation, the allegation must be, not simply that the cause existed
without being followed by the effect, for that would be no uncommon
occurrence; but that this happened in the absence of any adequate
counteracting cause. Now in the case of an alleged miracle, the
assertion is the exact opposite of this. It is, that the effect was
defeated, not in the absence, but in consequence of a counteracting
cause, namely, a direct interposition of an act of the will of some
being who has power over nature; and in particular of a Being, whose
will hbeing assumed to haveh endowed all the causes with the powers by
which they produce their effects, may well be supposed able to
counteract them. A miracle (as was justly remarked by Brown*) is no
contradiction to the law of cause and effect; it is a new effect,
jsupposed to bej produced by the introduction of a new cause. Of the
adequacy of that cause, if kpresentk, there can be no doubt; and the
only antecedent improbability which can be ascribed to the miracle, is
the improbability that any such cause lexistedl.

All, therefore, which Hume has made out, and this he must be considered
to have made out, is, that m(at least in the imperfect state of our
knowledge of natural agencies, which leaves it always possible that some
nof the physical antecedents may have been hidden from us,)m no evidence
can oprove a miracle to any one who did not previously believe the
existence of a being or beings with supernatural power; or who
pbelievesp himself to have full proof that the character of the Being
whom he recognises, is inconsistent with his having seen fit to
interfere on the occasion in question.

qIf we do not already believe in supernatural agencies, no miracle can
prove to us their existence. The miracle itself, considered merely as an
extraordinary Edition: current; Page: [626] ordinary fact, may be
satisfactorily certified by our senses or by testimony; but nothing can
ever prove that it is a miracle: there is still another possible
hypothesis, that of its being the result of some unknown natural cause:
and this possibility cannot be so completely shut out, as to leave no
alternative but that of admitting the existence and intervention of a
being superior to nature. Those, however, who already believe in such a
being, have two hypotheses to choose from, a supernatural and an unknown
natural agency; and they have to judge which of the two is the most
probable in the particular case. In forming this judgment, an important
element of the question will be the conformity of the result to the laws
of the supposed agent, that is, to the character of the Deity as they
conceive it. But, with the knowledge which we now possess of the general
uniformity of the course of nature, religion, following in the wake of
science, has been compelled to acknowledge the government of the
universe as being on the whole carried on by general laws, and not by
special interpositions. To whoever holds this belief, there is a general
presumption against any supposition of divine agency not operating
through general laws, or in other words, there is an antecedent
improbability in every miracle, which, in order to outweigh it, requires
an extraordinary strength of antecedent probability derived from the
special circumstances of the case.q

§ 3. [The degrees of improbability correspond to differences in the
nature of the generalization with which an assertion conflicts] It
appears from what has been said, that the assertion that a cause has
been defeated of an effect awhich isa connected with it by a completely
ascertained law of causation, is Edition: current; Page: [627] to be
disbelieved or not, according to the probability or improbability that
there existed in the particular instance an adequate counteracting
cause. To form an estimate of this, is not more difficult than of bother
probabilitiesb. With regard to all known causes capable of counteracting
the given causes, we have generally some previous knowledge of the
frequency or rarity of their occurrence, from which we may draw an
inference as to the antecedent improbability of their having been
present in any particular case. And neither in respect to known cnorc
unknown causes are we required to pronounce on the probability of their
existing in nature, but only of their having existed at the dtime and
place at which the transaction is alleged to have happened. We are
seldom, therefore, without the means (when the circumstances of the case
are at all known to us) of judging how far it is likely that such a
cause should have existed at that time and place without manifesting its
presence by some other marks, and (in the case of an unknown cause)
without having hitherto manifested its existence in any other instance.
According as this circumstance, or the falsity of the testimony, appears
more improbable, that is, conflicts with an approximate generalization
of a higher order, we believe the testimony, or disbelieve it; with a
stronger or a weaker degree of conviction, according to the
preponderance: at least until we have sifted the matter further.

So much, then, for the case in which the alleged fact conflicts, or
appears to conflict, with a real law of causation. But a more common
case, perhaps, is that of its conflicting with uniformities of mere
coexistence, not proved to be dependent on causation: in other words,
with the properties of Kinds. It is with these uniformities principally,
that the marvellous stories related by travellers are apt to be at
variance: as of men with tails, or with wings, and (until confirmed by
experience) of flying fish; or of ice, in the celebrated anecdote of the
Dutch travellers and the King of Siam. Facts of this description, facts
previously unheard of but which could not from any known law of
causation be pronounced impossible, are what Hume characterizes as not
contrary to experience, but merely unconformable to it; and Bentham, in
his treatise on Evidence, denominates them facts disconformable in
specie, as distinguished from such as are disconformable in toto or in
degree.[*]

In a case of this description, the fact asserted is the existence of a
new Kind; which in itself is not in the slightest degree incredible, and
only to be rejected if the improbability that any variety of object
existing at the particular place and time should not have been
discovered sooner, be greater than Edition: current; Page: [628] that of
error or mendacity in the witnesses. Accordingly, such assertions, when
made by credible persons, and of unexplored places, are not disbelieved,
but at most regarded as requiring confirmation from subsequent
observers; unless the alleged properties of the supposed new Kind are at
variance with known properties of some larger Kind which includes it; or
in other words, unless, in the new Kind which is asserted to exist, some
properties are said to have been found disjoined from others which have
always been known to accompany them; as in the case of Pliny’s men, or
any other kind of animal of a structure different from that which has
always been found to coexist with animal life. On the mode of dealing
with any such case, little needs be added to what has been said on the
same topic in the twenty-second chapter.* When the uniformities of
coexistence which the alleged fact would violate, are such as to raise a
strong presumption of their being the result of causation, the fact
which conflicts with them is to be disbelieved; at least provisionally,
and subject to further investigation. When the presumption amounts to a
virtual certainty, as in the case of the general structure of organized
beings, the only question requiring consideration is whether, in
phenomena so little eunderstoode, there may not be liabilities to
counteraction from causes hitherto unknown; or whether the phenomena may
not be capable of originating in some other way, which would produce a
different set of derivative uniformities. Where (as in the case of the
flying fish, or the ornithorhynchus) the generalization to which the
alleged fact would be an exception is very special and of limited range,
neither of the above suppositions can be deemed very improbable; and it
is generally, in the case of such alleged anomalies, wise to suspend our
judgment, pending the subsequent inquiries which will not fail to
confirm the assertion if it be true. But when the generalization is very
comprehensive, embracing a vast number and variety of observations, and
covering a considerable province of the fdomainf of nature; then, for
reasons which have been fully explained, such an empirical law comes
near to the certainty of an ascertained law of causation: and any
alleged exception to it cannot be admitted, unless on the evidence of
some law of causation proved by a still more complete induction.

Such uniformities in the course of nature as do not bear marks of being
the results of causation, are, as we have already seen, admissible as
universal truths with a degree of credence proportioned to their
generality. Those which are true of all things whatever, or at least
which are totally independent of the varieties of Kinds, namely, the
laws of number and extension, to which we may add the law of causation
itself, are probably the only ones, an exception to which is absolutely
and gpermanentlyg incredible. Accordingly, it is to Edition: current;
Page: [629] assertions supposed to be contradictory to these laws, or
htoh some others coming near to them in generality, that the word
impossibility (at least itotali impossibility) seems to be generally
confined. Violations of other laws, of special laws of causation for
instance, are said, by persons studious of accuracy in expression, to be
impossible in the circumstances of the case; or impossible unless some
cause had existed which did not exist in the particular case.* Of no
assertion, not in contradiction to some of these very general laws, will
more than improbability be asserted by any cautious person; and
improbability not of the mhighest degree, unless the time and place in
which the fact is said to have occurred, render it almost certain that
the anomaly, if real, could not have been overlooked by other observers.
Suspension of judgment is in all other cases the resource of the
judicious inquirer; provided the testimony in favour of the anomaly
presents, when well sifted, no suspicious circumstances.

But the testimony is scarcely ever found to stand that test, in cases in
which the anomaly is not real. In the instances on record in which a
great number of witnesses, of good reputation and scientific
acquirements, have testified to the truth of something which has turned
out untrue, there have almost always been circumstances which, to a keen
observer who had taken due pains to sift the matter, would have rendered
the testimony untrustworthy. Edition: current; Page: [630] There have
generally been means of accounting for the impression on the senses or
minds of the alleged percipients, by fallacious appearances; or some
epidemic delusion, propagated by the contagious influence of popular
feeling, has been concerned in the case; or some strong interest has
been implicated—religious zeal, party feeling, vanity, or at least the
passion for the marvellous, in persons strongly susceptible of it. When
none of these or similar circumstances exist to account for the apparent
strength of the testimony; and where the assertion is not in
contradiction either to those universal laws which know no counteraction
or anomaly, or to the generalizations next in comprehensiveness to them,
but would only amount, if admitted, to the existence of an unknown cause
or an anomalous Kind, in circumstances not so thoroughly explored but
that it is credible that things hitherto unknown may still come to
light; a cautious person will neither admit nor reject the testimony,
but will wait for confirmation at other times and from other unconnected
sources. Such ought to have been the conduct of the King of Siam when
the Dutch travellers affirmed to him the existence of ice. But an
ignorant person is as obstinate in his contemptuous incredulity as he is
unreasonably credulous. Anything unlike his own narrow experience he
disbelieves, if it flatters no npropensityn; any onurseryo tale is
swallowed implicitly by him if it does.

§ 4. [A fact is not incredible because the chances are against it] aI
shall nowa advert to a very serious misapprehension of the principles of
the subject, which has been committed by some of the writers against
Hume’s Essay on Miracles, band by Bishop Butler before them,b[*] in
their anxiety to destroy what appeared to them a formidable weapon of
assault against the Christian religion; and cthe effect of which isc
entirely to confound the doctrine of the Grounds of Disbelief. The
mistake consists in overlooking the distinction between (what may be
called) improbability before the fact, and improbability after it; dor
(since, as Mr. Venn remarks,[†] the distinction of past and future is
not the material circumstance) between the improbability of a mere guess
being right, and the improbability of an alleged fact being trued.

Edition: current; Page: [631]
Many events are altogether improbable to us, before they have happened,
or before we are informed of their happening, which are not in the least
incredible when we are informed of them, because not contrary to any,
even approximate, induction. In the cast of a perfectly fair die, the
chances are five to one against throwing ace, that is, ace will be
thrown on an average only once in six throws. But this is no reason
against believing that ace was thrown on a given occasion, if any
credible witness asserts it; since though ace is only thrown once in six
times, some number which is only thrown once in six times must have been
thrown if the die was thrown at all. The improbability, then, or in
other words, the unusualness, of any fact, is no reason for disbelieving
it, if the nature of the case renders it certain that either that or
something equally improbable, that is, equally unusual, did happen. eNor
is this all: for even if the other five sides of the die were all twos,
or all threes, yet as ace would still on the average come up once in
every six throws, its coming up in a given throw would be not in any way
contradictory to experience.e If we disbelieved all facts which had the
chances against them beforehand, we should believe hardly anything. We
are told that A. B. died yesterday: the moment before we were so told,
the chances against his having died on that day may have been ten
thousand to one; but since he was certain to die at some time or other,
and when he died must necessarily die on some particular day, while the
fpreponderance of chances is very greatf against every day in
particular, experience affords no ground gfor discrediting any testimony
which may be produced to the event’s having taken place on a given day.

Yet it has been considered, by Dr. Campbell[*] and others, hash a
complete answer to Hume’s doctrine (that things are incredible which are
contrary to the uniform course of experience), that we do not
disbelieve, merely because the chances were against them, things in
strict conformity to the uniform course of experience; that we do not
disbelieve an alleged fact merely because the combination of causes on
which it depends occurs only once in a certain number of times. It is
evident that whatever is shown by iobservation, or can be proved from
laws of nature,i to occur in a certain proportion (however small) of the
whole number of possible cases, is not contrary to experience; jthough
we are right in disbelieving it, if some other supposition respecting
the matter in question involves on the whole a less departure from the
ordinary Edition: current; Page: [632] course of events. Yet, on such
grounds as this have able writers been led to the extraordinary
conclusion, that nothing supported by credible testimony ought ever to
be disbelieved.f

a§ 5. [Are coincidences less credible than other facts?] We have
considered two species of events, commonly said to be improbable; one
kind which are in no way extraordinary, but which, having an immense
preponderance of chances against them, are improbable until they are
affirmed, but no longer; another kind which, being contrary to some
recognised law of nature, are incredible on any amount of testimony
except such as would be sufficient to shake our belief in the law
itself. But between these two classes of events, there is an
intermediate class, consisting of what are commonly termed Coincidences:
in other words, those combinations of chances which present some
peculiar and unexpected regularity, assimilating them, in so far, to the
results of law. As if, for example, in a lottery of a thousand tickets,
the numbers should be drawn in the exact order of what are called the
natural numbers, 1, 2, 3, &c. We have still to consider the principles
of evidence applicable to this case: whether there is any difference
between coincidences and ordinary events, in the amount of testimony or
other evidence necessary to render them credible.

It is certain, that on every rational principle of expectation, a
combination of this peculiar sort may be expected quite as often as any
other given series of a thousand numbers; that with perfectly fair dice,
sixes will be thrown twice, thrice, or any number of times in
succession, quite as often in a thousand or a million throws, as any
other succession of numbers fixed upon beforehand; and that no judicious
player would give greater odds against the one series than against the
other. Notwithstanding this, there is a general disposition to regard
the one as much more improbable than the other, and as requiring much
stronger evidence to make it credible. Such is the force of this
impression, that it has led some bthinkersb to the conclusion, that
nature has greater cdifficultyc in producing regular combinations than
irregular ones; or in other words, that there is some general tendency
of things, some law, which prevents regular combinations from occurring,
or at least from occurring so often as others. Among these dthinkersd
may be numbered D’Alembert; who, in an Essay on Probabilities to be
found in the fifth volume of his Edition: current; Page: [633]
Mélanges,[*] contends that regular combinations, though equally probable
according to the mathematical theory with any others, are physically
less probable. He appeals to common sense, or in other words, to common
impressions; saying, if dice thrown repeatedly in our presence gave
sixes every time, should we not, before the number of throws had reached
ten, (not to speak of thousands eofe millions,) be ready to affirm, with
the most positive conviction, that the dice were false?

The common and natural impression is in favour of D’Alembert: the
regular series would be thought much more unlikely than an irregular.
But this common impression is, I apprehend, fmerely grounded on thef
fact, that scarcely anybody remembers to have ever seen one of these
peculiar coincidences: the reason of which is simply that no one’s
experience extends to anything like the number of trials, within which
that or any other given combination of events gcan be expectedg to
happen. The chance of sixes on a single throw of two dice being 1/36,
the chance of sixes ten times in succession is 1 divided by the tenth
power of 36; in other words, such a concurrence is only likely to happen
once in 3,656,158,440,062,976 trials, a number which no dice-player’s
experience comes up to a millionth part of. But if, instead of sixes ten
times, any other given succession of ten throws had been fixed upon, it
would have been exactly as unlikely that in any individual’s experience
that particular succession had ever occurred; although this does not
seem equally improbable, because no one hwould be likely toh have
remembered whether it had occurred or not, and because the comparison is
tacitly made, not between sixes ten times and any one particular series
of throws, but between all regular and all irregular successions taken
together.

That (as D’Alembert says) if the succession of sixes was actually thrown
before our eyes, we should ascribe it not to chance, but to unfairness
in the dice, is unquestionably true. But this arises from a totally
different principle. We should then be considering, not the probability
of the fact in itself, but the comparative probability with which, when
it is known to have happened, it may be referred to one or to another
cause. The regular series is not at all less likely than the irregular
one to be brought about by chance, but it is much more likely than the
irregular one to be produced by design; or by some general cause
operating through the structure of the dice. It is the nature of casual
combinations to produce a repetition of the same event, as often and no
oftener than any other series of events. But it is the nature of general
causes to reproduce, in the same circumstances, always the same event.
Edition: current; Page: [634] Common sense and science alike dictate
that, all other things being the same, we should rather attribute the
effect to a cause which if real would be very likely to produce it, than
to a cause which would be very unlikely to produce it. According to
Laplace’s sixth theorem, which we demonstrated in a former chapter, the
difference of probability arising from the superior efficacy of the
constant cause, unfairness in the dice, would after a very few throws
far outweigh any antecedent probability which there could be against its
existence.

D’Alembert should have put the question in another manner. He should
have supposed that we had ourselves previously tried the dice, and knew
by ample experience that they were fair. Another person then tries them
in our absence, and assures us that he threw sixes ten times in
succession. Is the assertion credible or not? Here the effect to be
accounted for is not the occurrence itself, but the fact of the
witness’s asserting it. This may arise either from its having really
happened, or from some other cause. What we have to estimate is the
comparative probability of these two suppositions.

If the witness affirmed that he had thrown any other series of numbers,
supposing him to be a person of veracity, and tolerable accuracy, and to
profess that he took particular notice, we should ibelieve him. But the
ten sixes are exactly as likely to have been really thrown as the other
series. If, therefore, this assertion is less credible than the other,
the reason must be, not that it is less likely than the other to be made
truly, but that it is more likely than the other to be made falsely.

One reason obviously presents itself why what is called a coincidence,
should be oftener asserted falsely than an ordinary combination. It
excites wonder. It gratifies the love of the marvellous. The motives,
therefore, to falsehood, one of the most frequent of which is the desire
to astonish, operate more strongly in favour of this kind of assertion
than of the other kind. Thus far there is evidently more reason for
discrediting an alleged coincidence, than a statement in itself not more
probable, but which if made would not be thought remarkable. There are
cases, however, in which the presumption on this ground would be the
other way. There are some witnesses who, the more extraordinary an
occurrence might appear, would be the more anxious to verify it by the
utmost jcarefulness of observation before they would venture to believe
it, and still more before they would assert it to others.a

a§ 6. [An opinion of Laplace examined] Independently, however, of any
peculiar chances of mendacity arising from the nature of the assertion,
Edition: current; Page: [635] Laplace contends, that merely on the
general ground of the fallibility of testimony, a coincidence is not
credible on the same amount of testimony on which we should be warranted
in believing an ordinary combination of events. In order to do justice
to his argument, it is necessary to illustrate it by the example chosen
by himself.

If, says Laplace,[*] there were one thousand tickets in a box, and one
only has been drawn out, then if an eye-witness affirms that the number
drawn was 79, this, though the chances were 999 in 1000 against it, is
not on that account the less credible; its credibility is equal to the
antecedent probability of the witness’s veracity. But if there were in
the box 999 black balls and only one white, and the witness affirms that
the white ball was drawn, the case according to Laplace is very
different: the credibility of his assertion is bbut a small fractionb of
what it was in the former case; the reason of the difference being as
follows.

cThe witnesses of whom we are speaking must, from the nature of the
case, be of a kind whose credibility falls materially short of
certainty: let us suppose, then, the credibility of the witnessc in the
case in question to be 9/10; that is, let us suppose that in every ten
statements dwhichd the witness makes, nine on an average are correct,
and one incorrect. Let us now suppose that there ehavee taken place a
sufficient number of drawings to exhaust all the possible combinations,
the witness deposing in every one. In one case out of every ten in all
these drawings he will actually have made a false announcement. But in
the case of the thousand tickets these false announcements will have
been distributed impartially over all the numbers, and of the f999f
cases in which No. 79 was not drawn, there will have been only one
gcaseg in which it was announced. On the contrary, in the case of the
thousand balls, (the announcement being always either “black” or
“white,”) if white was not drawn, and there was a false announcement,
that false announcement must have been white; and since by the
supposition there was a false announcement once in every ten times,
white will have been announced falsely in one tenth part of all the
cases in which it was not drawn, that is, in one tenth part of 999 cases
out of every thousand. White, then, is drawn, on an average, exactly as
often as No. 79, but it is announced, without having been really
Edition: current; Page: [636] drawn, 999 times as often as No. 79; the
announcement therefore requires ha much greater amount ofh testimony to
render it credible.*

jTo make thisj argument valid it must of course be supposed, that the
announcements made by the witness are average specimens of his general
veracity and accuracy; or, at least, that they are kneither more nor
lessk so in the case of the black and white balls, lthanl in the case of
the thousand ticketsm. This assumption, however, is not warranted. A
person is far less likely to mistake, who has only one form of error to
guard against, than if he had 999 different errors to avoid. For
instance, in the example chosen, a messenger who might make a mistake
once in ten times in reporting the number drawn in a lottery, might not
err once in a thousand times if sent simply to observe whether a ball
nwasn black or white. Laplace’s argument therefore is faulty even as
applied to his own case. Still less can that case be received as
completely representing all cases of coincidence. Laplace has so
contrived his example,m that though black answers to 999 distinct
possibilities, and white only to one, the witness has nevertheless no
bias which can make him prefer black to white. oThe witness did not know
that there were 999 black balls in the box and only one white; or if he
did, Laplace has taken care to make all the 999 cases so
undistinguishably alike, that there is hardly a possibility of any cause
of falsehood or error operating in favour of pany ofp them, which would
not operate in the same manner if there were only one. Alter this
supposition, and the whole argument falls to the ground. Let the balls,
for instance, be numbered, and let the white ball be No. 79. Considered
Edition: current; Page: [637] in respect of their colour, there are but
two things which the witness can be interested in asserting, or can have
dreamt or hallucinated, or has to choose from if he answers at random,
viz. black and white: but considered in respect of the numbers attached
to them, there are a thousand: and if his interest or error happens to
be connected with the numbers, though the only assertion he makes is
about the colour, the case becomes precisely assimilated to that of the
thousand tickets. Or instead of the balls suppose a lottery, with 1000
tickets and but one prize, and that I hold No. 79, and being interested
only in that, ask the witness not what was the number drawn, but whether
it was 79 or some other. There are now only two cases, as in Laplace’s
example; yet he surely would not say that if the witness answered 79,
the assertion would be qin an enormous proportionq less credible, than
if he made the same answer to the rsame question asked in the otherr
way. If, for instance, (to put a case supposed by Laplace himself,) he
has staked a large sum on one of the chances, and thinks that by
announcing its occurrence he shall increase his credit; he is equally
likely to have betted on any one of the 999 numbers which are attached
to black balls, and so far as the chances of mendacity from this cause
are concerned, there will be 999 times as many chances of his announcing
black falsely as white.

Or suppose a regiment of 1000 men, 999 Englishmen and one Frenchman, and
that of these one man has been killed, and it is not known which. I ask
the question, and the witness answers, the Frenchman. This was not only
as improbable à priori, but is in itself as singular a circumstance, as
remarkable a coincidence, as the drawing of the white ball: yet we
should believe the statement as readily, as if the answer had been John
Thompson. Because, though the 999 Englishmen were all alike in the point
in which they differed from the Frenchman, they were not, like the 999
black balls, undistinguishable in every other respect; but being all
different, they admitted as many chances of interest or error, as if
each man had been of a different nation; and if a lie was told or a
mistake made, the misstatement was as likely to fall on any Jones or
Thompson of the set, as on the Frenchman.

The example of a coincidence selected by D’Alembert, that of sixes
thrown on a pair of dice ten times in succession, belongs to this sort
of cases rather than to such as Laplace’s. The coincidence is here far
more remarkable, because of far rarer occurrence, than the drawing of
the white ball. But though the improbability of its really occurring is
greater, the superior probability of its being announced falsely cannot
be established with the same evidence. The announcement “black”
represented 999 cases, but the witness may not have known this, and if
he did, the 999 cases are so exactly alike, that there is really only
one set of possible causes of mendacity corresponding Edition: current;
Page: [638] to sthe wholes. The announcement “sixes not drawn ten
times,” represents, and is known by the witness to represent, a great
multitude of contingencies, every one of which being unlike every other,
there may be a different and a fresh set of tcausest of mendacity
corresponding to each.

It appears to me, therefore, that Laplace’s doctrine uis not strictly
true of any coincidences, and is wholly inapplicable to most:u and that
to know whether a coincidence does or does not require more evidence to
render it credible than an ordinary event, we must refer, in every
instance, to first principles, and estimate afresh what is the
probability that the given testimony would have been vdeliveredv in that
instance, supposing the fact which it asserts not to be true.

With these remarks we close the discussion of the Grounds of Disbelief;
and along with it, such exposition as wspace admits, and as the writer
hasw it in his power to furnish, of the Logic of Induction.a

a-a
MS defining

