

ONLINE LIBRARY OF LIBERTY


A collection of scholarly works about individual liberty and free
markets. A project of Liberty Fund, Inc.



JOHN STUART MILL, _THE COLLECTED WORKS OF JOHN STUART MILL, VOLUME XXVII – JOURNALS AND DEBATING SPEECHES PART II_ [1827]


Edition used:

John Stuart Mill, _The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, Volume XXVI
– Journals and Debating Speeches Part II,_ ed. John M. Robson (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1988).
http://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/261

About this Title:

Vol. 27 of the 33 vol. Collected Works contains Mill’s diaries of his
walking tours 1827-32, a diary from 1854 and other material from the
early 1820s.

Copyright information:

The online edition of the _Collected Works_ is published under licence
from the copyright holder, The University of Toronto Press. ©2006 The
University of Toronto Press. All rights reserved. No part of this
material may be reproduced in any form or medium without the permission
of The University of Toronto Press.

Fair use statement:

This material is put online to further the educational goals of Liberty
Fund, Inc. Unless otherwise stated in the Copyright Information section
above, this material may be used freely for educational and academic
purposes. It may not be used in any way for profit.

Table of Contents:

-   Contents
-   WALKING TOURS 1827-32
-   29.: Walking Tour of Sussex 20-30 JULY, 1827
-   30.: Walking Tour of Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, and
    Surrey 3-15 JULY, 1828
-   31.: Walking Tour of Yorkshire and the Lake District JULY-AUGUST
    1831
-   32.: Walking Tour of Hampshire, West Sussex, and the Isle of Wight
    19 JULY-6 AUGUST, 1832
-   33.: Walking Tour of Cornwall 3-9 OCTOBER, 1832
-   DIARY 1854
-   34.: Diary 8 JANUARY-15 APRIL, 1854
-   APPENDICES
-   Appendix A
-   The Manuscripts
-   Appendix B
-   I.: PLAN OF A DIALOGUE ON GOVERNMENT
-   II.: “LIEUES DE POSTE”
-   III.: TRANSLATION OF CICERO
-   LETTER FROM LADY BENTHAM TO JAMES MILL
-   V.: LETTERS FROM RICHARD DOANE
-   Appendix C
-   Textual Emendations
-   Appendix D
-   Index of Persons and Works Cited, with Variants and Notes
-   PARLIAMENTARY PAPERS AND SESSIONAL PAPERS OF THE HOUSE OF LORDS
-   STATUTES
-   BRITISH
-   FRENCH
-   IRISH
-   SPANISH

Edition: current; Page: [i]
COLLECTED WORKS OF JOHN STUART MILL

volume xxvii

Edition: current; Page: [ii]
The Collected Edition of the Works of John Stuart Mill has been planned
and is being directed by an editorial committee appointed from the
Faculty of Arts and Science of the University of Toronto, and from the
University of Toronto Press. The primary aim of the edition is to
present fully collated texts of those works which exist in a number of
versions, both printed and manuscript, and to provide accurate texts of
works previously unpublished or which have become relatively
inaccessible.

Editorial Committee

john m. robson, General Editor

harald bohne, j.c. cairns, j.b. conacher,

d.p. dryer, marion filipiuk, francess halpenny,

samuel hollander, r.f. mcrae, ian montagnes,

f.e.l. priestley, ann p. robson, f.e. sparshott

Edition: current; Page: [iii]
Journals and Debating Speeches

by JOHN STUART MILL

Edited by JOHN M. ROBSON University Professor and Professor of English,
Victoria College, University of Toronto

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO PRESS

ROUTLEDGE

Edition: current; Page: [iv]
© University of Toronto Press 1988

Toronto and Buffalo

Printed in Canada

ISBN 0-8020-2674-5

London: Routledge

ISBN 0-415-03789-1

ISBN 0-415-03790-S (set)

archival

Printed on acid-free paper

Canadian Cataloguing in Publication data

Mill, John Stuart, 1806-1873.

[Works]

Collected works of John Stuart Mill

Includes bibliographies and indexes.

partial contents: v. 26-27.

Journals and debating speeches /

edited by John M. Robson

ISBN 0-8020-2674-5 (v. 26-27).

1. - Collected works. 2. -Collected works.

I. Robson, John M., 1927-

II. Title.

B1602.A2 1963 192 C65-188-2 rev.

This volume has been published with the assistance of a grant from the
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada

Edition: current; Page: [v]


Contents

-   

    Walking Tours, 1827-32
    -   

        29. Walking Tour of Sussex (20-30 July, 1827) 455
    -   

        30. Walking Tour of Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, and
        Surrey (3-15 July, 1828) 477
    -   

        31. Walking Tour of Yorkshire and the Lake District (July-Aug.
        1831) 501
    -   

        32. Walking Tour of Hampshire, West Sussex, and the Isle of
        Wight (19 July-6 Aug., 1832) 557
    -   

        33. Walking Tour of Cornwall (3-9 Oct., 1832) 613

-   

    Diary, 1854
    -   

        34. Diary (8 Jan.-15 Apr., 1854) 639

-   

    Appendices
-   

    Appendix A. The Manuscripts 671
-   

    Appendix B. Journal and Notebook: Ancillary Materials (1820-21)
    -   

        I) Plan of a Dialogue on Government 679
    -   

        II) “Lieues de poste” 680
    -   

        III) Translation of Cicero 681
    -   

        IV) Letter from Lady Bentham to James Mill 682
    -   

        V) Letters from Richard Doane 683

-   

    Appendix C. Textual Emendations 685
-   

    Appendix D. Index of Persons and Works Cited 691
-   

    Index 751
-   

    Maps
-   

    Sussex viii
-   

    Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, and Surrey 476 Edition:
    current; Page: [vi]
-   

    Yorkshire and the Lake District 502-3
-   

    Hampshire, West Sussex, and the Isle of Wight 558
-   

    Cornwall 612
-   

    Sketches, by Henry Cole
-   

    White’s House, Selborne, 1832 560
-   

    Christchurch, Hampshire, 1832 603

Edition: current; Page: [vii]


WALKING TOURS
 1827-32

Edition: current; Page: [viii]
[lf0223-27_figure_001.jpg]

Edition: current; Page: [455]


29.: Walking Tour of Sussex
 20-30 JULY, 1827

MS, St. Andrews University Library, MS 1499. Mill’s companions on this
trip were George John Graham (1801-88) and Horace Grant (1800-59), both
close associates of his in the late 1820s, collaborating in his study
and debating groups, and accompanying him on walks through London as
well as in the countryside. Grant was also a colleague of Mill’s in the
Examiner’s Office of the East India Company, 1826-45. As not published
in Mill’s lifetime, not listed in his bibliography.

20th July 1827

This morning I commenced a short tour of the Sussex coast in company
with Graham and Grant. I was taken up at Leatherhead by a Chichester
coach which proceeded through Bookham, Effingham, East Horsley, Clandon
and Merrow. The road skirts the foot of the Ranmer hills, of which
however the ascent on the north is so gradual that little is visible of
their peculiarities except an occasional chalk pit. To the right,
although we had the advantage of a clear horizon and a blue sky
chequered with flying white clouds, by far the best weather for
surveying the country, we could perceive nothing remarkable for the
first eight miles except a black ridge of high land which must lie near
Cobham,1 but of which, although I have often observed it from Ranmer
common, I do not know the name. N.B. I have since discovered that it
does lie just beyond Cobham—and is called St. George’s Hill.2 Towards
Guildford however the distant country to the right becomes less
monotonous, and a long ridge of high hills presents itself in front,
which must extend from Farnham to Bagshot or beyond. After passing
through the cheerful old town of Guildford, and crossing the Wey, we
turned to the left, and entered into the valley which extends from that
place to Godalming. We left the vale of Albury, and the beautiful hills
which almost close the mouth of it, to the westward, and pursued our
course between a low rather tame range of hills on the right, and a
series of higher and more abrupt insulated hills covered with oak copse
on the side next us, and prettily feathered at the top. Through this
country we proceeded to Godalming, an old and very ill paved town, much
less clean and well built than Guildford, but apparently of the same
date, that is to say, the best houses built about the reign of Charles
II, the others about that of Queen Elizabeth.3 The place, Edition:
current; Page: [456] I believe, is chiefly remarkable for its pleasant
situation, and its bread, which we were told is the best in England: but
this will not be easily credited by any person who has lived at Dorking.
After Godalming the country rises for a time, and the road passes over
some high sandy ground, leaving to the left the last of the range of
sand hills which commence with Boars hill and end at Godalming. In
ascending the sand hill a fine view opens behind of the ridge called the
Hog’s back, which extends from Guildford to Farnham. In gradually
descending into the plain of Sussex, we passed to the right, the high
and peculiarly shaped elevation of Hindhead, which seems composed of
several lofty eminences, some of them conical, united together by short
ridges, and a little farther we passed the still higher eminence called
Blackdown hill, which rises gradually from the foot of Hindhead, passes
into a long ridge and ends abruptly towards the south like Leith hill.
The vegetation and general cast of these hills, which are all of sand,
very much resembles in appearance the sand hills near Dorking. The
smaller occasional elevations and diversified appearance of the well
wooded country through which we were passing, added to the occasional
glimpses which we caught of Leith hill and the whole of that high range
of country, rendered this drive one of the most agreeable which I ever
experienced. After Blackdown hill there is an almost continued series of
sand hills to the right, not connected into a ridge, but, like the Leith
hill range, entirely separate. We skirted Lord Egremont’s park4 for
about two miles, which seemed as far as we could observe, to have
nothing remarkable about it except its size, and arrived at Petworth, a
very old ill built town, with narrow and winding streets, like many
other old towns upon a hill. We could perceive that the arrival of a
coach from London was a rare sort of event (although occurring every
day) by the number of people whom it drew to the windows to observe
us.—For some distance before Petworth we could perceive distinctly
before us the range of the South Downs, which we easily recognized by
the waving lines, characteristic of chalk hills. On leaving Petworth we
could see and distinguish clearly two great ranges of chalk hills, the
one extending far westward into Hampshire, but eastward only a short
distance, the other appearing to rise somewhat farther south than the
termination of the first, and extending far to the east. After
descending from Petworth, we perceived, in the valley of the little
river Rother, almost the first meadows we had seen: the country thus far
being entirely woodland or corn, the corn much less advanced than we had
found it between Leatherhead and Guildford, probably because the country
was more inclosed and shaded by trees and hedgerows. After crossing the
Rother, we commenced ascending the western branch of the South Downs.
The view to the north, in ascending, is among the most delightful I ever
beheld. Not only, to the east, we could perceive the whole series of
sand hills from Dorking to Godalming, but in Edition: current; Page:
[457] the direction of Hindhead and Blackdown the country was thickly
studded with beautiful sand hills, extending nearly as far as the
celebrated Selborne. On reaching the top of the hill, we perceived that
this chain is composed of two complete ridges, one to the north, the
other to the south, with a long valley of considerable elevation between
them. In this remarkable valley lies the village or hamlet of Waltham
and it wants nothing but water, the usual deficiency in chalk hills, to
be perfectly lovely. The descent from the further ridge is gradual,
through a thick but very beautiful copse. The plain of Sussex lay before
us, the Downs behind, the sea most visibly to our left at the distance
of about eight miles. From these hills our road lay over a dead level to
Chichester, which we reached about four o’clock. While our dinner was
preparing we walked into the cathedral, which is small, and not very
well arranged for architectural beauty in the interior, being too much
filled up, but on the outside it is one of the most elegant buildings of
the sort which I have seen. Chichester, which is not a very pretty or
well built town, has nothing remarkable except its cathedral and the
cross, as it is called, I suppose from being situated where two roads
cross, for it bears no resemblance whatever to that figure, but is a
fine specimen of the oldest Gothic architecture, as the cathedral is (if
I mistake not) of the latest.—After dining at the Dolphin, we walked to
Bognor, over a dull and dreary flat, and arrived at that watering place
just in time to perceive its extreme ugliness both in what pertains to
nature and art. We put up at the Claremont hotel, preferring the name as
well as the look of the building to a new house of much larger
dimensions under the pompous title of The Hotel.

21st

In the morning before breakfast we walked out and looked at the town,
which in situation possesses as few advantages as a place on the sea
side can have, and in appearance, though an insignificant village, is
full of abortive attempts to rival Brighton. We walked westward a little
way on the beach, which we found still duller and more monotonous than
the sea shore usually is. It is not indeed wholly destitute of trees,
but there are none of any great height, and both trees and hedges
uniformly grow away from the sea, so that the side of a hedge which is
next the sea is as bare as if all the leaves had been picked off, or as
if it were winter on one side of the hedge and summer on the other. This
walk however afforded the Atriplex laciniata and littoralis, Hordeum
maritimum, Phleum arenarium and Beta maritima. On leaving Bognor, we
continued to follow the beach towards the east, which remained equally
dull and uninteresting, nor could we even walk upon it with any comfort,
since even the sand which the sea left behind it in retiring was
scattered all over with shingle. Corn however grows quite down to the
seaside, but is far less advanced towards ripeness than we had found it
farther north. The sole ornament of this coast is the Glaucium luteum or
horn poppy, which grows in immense abundance among the shingle. The only
grasses which abound are the Triticum repens, which is perfectly
glaucous by the sea side, and Hordeum Edition: current; Page: [458]
maritimum, which grows in such profusion as almost to form a bed. We
found in this morning’s walk the Poa maritima, Medicago sativa, Apium
petroselinum and graveolens, Scirpus maritimus, and Conium maculatum:
the latter we had also found near Chichester. It is remarkable that I
have never seen this plant in Surrey though very common all over Sussex.
After passing two or three stations of the preventive service,5 and
meeting one of the men in almost every two miles, but seeing scarcely
any ships, as those which come down the Channel put further to the
southward in order to turn Beachy Head, and Selsea point, we discovered
the river Arun by the vessels which we perceived in it. We crossed it by
a ferry, and perambulated the town of Little Hampton which appears to be
wholly built of the flints picked up on the seashore; pointed and in a
few of the best houses faced with brick; but flint composes the side and
back walls even of these, and almost the whole of a curious new church
which they have recently erected at this place in rather better taste
than has been usual lately. It is more unpretending than Bognor, and
therefore less ugly; but there is nothing positively pretty about it
except the little gardens in front of the cottages, which in general are
exceedingly well stocked with flowers. This town I believe is becoming a
place of some resort as what is called a watering place, though surely
no place can be less suited for acquiring health than the low lands at
the mouth of a tide river, overflowed every spring tide. We walked from
this place to Arundel by the coach road, which we found more cheerful
and diversified as well as fortunately shorter than the road from
Chichester to Bognor. When, on climbing the hill beyond Leominster, we
caught the first view of Arundel, its castle and park on the opposite
hill, and of the South Downs to the north, separated from it only by a
narrow valley, we were extremely struck by the sight.—A town on a hill
is always striking when seen from the opposite hill, but here the fine
Gothic building which overlooks the town, one of the few specimens
remaining of the perfect Gothic castle, and the park behind rising above
it, and spreading itself over a high ridge of chalk hills, renders the
view when it first breaks upon the approaching traveller, one of the
most striking conceivable. On stopping at the immense inn called the
Norfolk arms, we were much annoyed by discovering that we were too late
to see the Castle that day, and that the next day, Sunday, it could not
be seen. We however climbed the hill, and first looked at the church,
which is built in the cathedral shape, with the steeple in the middle:
and the interior, at least that half of it which is in front of the
organ, is considerably finer than that of Chichester cathedral. The
other half, which is the Gothic of a considerably earlier period, is, it
seems, the burial place of the Fitz Alans, earls of Arundel; it was
destroyed by Oliver Cromwell (so at least we were told by the woman who
shews the church) and has never been restored till now, Edition:
current; Page: [459] when the present duke of Norfolk is about to repair
it.6 We could perceive nothing remarkable in the interior of it except
some curiously carved woodwork. An owl has her nest in the inside, which
is indeed a fit place for her. On leaving the church, from the roof of
which I should first say that we had a very fine view of the surrounding
country, it being at the very top of the hill on which Arundel
stands,—we skirted the park for a short distance, reserving a fuller
view of it for the next day. We passed through some beautiful hanging
beech woods on the sides of a very deep dell; from which issues a
copious stream as clear as that of Carshalton, and saw a chalk cliff of
considerable height, which affords shelter to a number of jack daws.
Near the base of this cliff we found the Dipsacus pilosus. The valley
below Arundel, through which the Arun flows, is perfectly flat, and
filled with meadows which must I should think be overflowed in winter,
if not every spring tide, for they are scarcely to appearance, above the
level of the sea. The hills which inclose it are low and tame below
Arundel; above that town the valley gradually narrows, and the hills
which contain it are high, being on one side the hill on which the
castle and park are situated, on the other the downs which descend
southward from the range of hills commonly called the South Downs. There
is a gap in those hills through which the Arun flows, very similar in
appearance to the gap between Box Hill and Norbury. The termination of
the western range very much resembles that of Norbury Park, but there is
nothing to the east so striking as Box Hill.

22nd Sunday

This day set in rainy at an early hour, but after having remained at
Arundel till eleven o’clock, seeing some appearances of its clearing up,
we pursued our journey through Arundel Park. The road from Arundel to
London passes through the park, and by far the greatest portion of it
lies west of that road, but this part is not open to the public, though
it appears equally ornamented with the rest. We traversed that part of
it which lies east of the road and nearest to the valley of the Arun.
This covers both sides of an extremely deep dell, such as is not
unfrequently observed in chalk hills. A ridge rises from the valley to a
considerable height, then turns round and descends again parallel to
itself leaving a dell between. Other dells run up from the principal
dell to the two ridges, particularly on the eastern side: we followed
the west. At the very bottom of the dell, issues from under the chalk
the beautiful body of water which I mentioned in my journal of
yesterday: above which, on the side next the town, is the tall hanging
wood of beeches also Edition: current; Page: [460] mentioned in the same
journal. We ascended to the summit of the ridge, the whole of which is
composed of a beautiful turfy down with here and there a beech copse,
and issued out through a castellated gate (for about Arundel everything
is castellated) upon the broad open downs. Here we met the London road,
which we followed across the downs and a little way down the hill, and
should doubtless have enjoyed the prospect extremely, had not the rain
here begun to increase. To the west of it, extends a fine open down
towards Dale Park (Mr. John Smith’s new acquisition)7 and Eartham: and
we could now clearly perceive that the western range of the South Downs,
which we crossed at Waltham, instead of dropping down over the valley of
the Arun, merely turned round and descended gradually by the ridge we
had now ascended, after the manner of chalk hills to Arundel where it
stops, having nothing but low insignificant hills towards the sea. We
returned to the Park Gate where a road turns off to Steyning. By this
road we descended gently, by a pretty woody slope, into the valley of
the Arun, and put into a little village named Houghton to wait for fair
weather: but as we saw no signs of improvement in the sky, we crossed
the Arun, which, we could perceive, continues to wind through the same
flat low lying meadows to the north of the Downs, as it does to the
south,—and leaving the coach road to Steyning, ascended the Downs. The
rain soon after set in with such violence, and the clouds descended so
thick upon the summits of the highest hills, that I can give but an
indifferent account of the Downs or of the surrounding country between
the valleys of the Arun and of the Addur.8 But we could plainly see that
the Downs at first consisted, as at Waltham of two ridges, with a valley
between them, but much more bare of trees; afterwards of three ridges, a
series of curious round-ended eminences seeming to rise in the middle of
the valley, which seemed about the same time to widen, and the
southernmost ridge to slope away towards the sea. We could perceive
indistinctly through the mist, as we walked along the northernmost
ridge, that many of those furzy dells, so frequent in chalk hills, came
up the side of the ridge from the intermediate valley. We could see
little of the plain except sundry churches and commons and fields just
at the base of the hills, and frequently not even that. We crossed the
ravine through which the road from London to Worthing mounts upon the
downs and after passing a round hill* covered with wood which either was
a camp, or is laid out in imitation of one. At length, after some
difficulty in finding our way through the clouds we arrived on the hill
above Steyning, to which we descended through cornfields, and at which
we arrived perfectly drenched. We were taken good care of by the old
people at the White Horse, at which we put up.

Edition: current; Page: [461]
23rd

After raining till a late hour this morning it ceased raining and began
to shew symptoms of clearing up, but we felt by no means certain of a
fine day when we left Steyning. Steyning, though a borough, is an
exceedingly small place, and, as we had some reason to know from the
difficulty we found in obtaining certain articles which we wanted, a
place of very inconsiderable commerce. It is a mean looking place too,
in its interior, though looking tolerably well when seen from the high
grounds above it: nor is there any thing remarkable in its appearance,
except that the public footpath on one side of the street is planted in
several places with flowers, sometimes under the walls of the houses,
sometimes on the side next the street; which gives it a very pretty and
cheerful appearance. Steyning lies at the entrance of another of the
valleys, which intersect the range of the South Downs: this is the
valley of the Addur, one of the little rivers which rise in the plain of
Sussex, and which would be inconsiderable and perhaps pretty if the tide
did not come up them and render them navigable and ugly. This valley is
also called Shoreham gap, from the two Shorehams, which lie the one
near, the other close upon, the mouth of the Adur. This valley, at
Steyning, is well cultivated and contains some fine cornfields; it
continues pretty for some distance below. It gradually narrows, and we
soon perceived that the round hill with the wood upon it, which we
observed yesterday, is in reality the boundary of Shoreham gap, although
we had to follow a long receding ridge beyond it before we came to the
spot where the plain appears to narrow itself into a valley, and where
Steyning stands.—On leaving Steyning we pursued for some distance the
Shoreham and Brighton road, turning aside only to view the ruins of
Bramber castle, which lies close to Steyning, and which must have been
strong from the steep though not high elevation on which it stands,
though now looking very like any other ruin. Parts of the outer wall,
and one of the walls of a single tower, are all that now remain. The
road passes through the village of Bramber, which is rather extensive.
It then crosses the Adur, and soon after leaves the valley, and crosses
over part of the eastern hill, to save, as I imagine, one of the
sinuosities of the valley or perhaps to be out of all danger from floods
on the low ground. We also left the valley, but did not climb the hill
in the same direction: We ascended to the top of the downs, of which
this point is called Beeding hill; and could from its summit perceive
almost the whole of the gap from Steyning to the sea, with the mouth of
the Adur, the town of New Shoreham close upon the sea, in the eastern
angle formed between it and the Adur, and the whole series of hills or
downs which compose the western côteau of the gap, commencing from the
round wooded hill, or camp, so often mentioned, and terminating not far
from the sea: for the downs, as we had suspected yesterday, spread
themselves out in the direction of the sea, and came much nearer to it
in the direction of Shoreham, than they were near Arundel, though
gradually becoming lower as they approached it in so much that we could
for a considerable distance see the sea over the top of them, from the
hill where we stood. The horizon in that Edition: current; Page: [462]
direction was enveloped in thick and heavy clouds so that the rising of
the sea (which like any other plain of course seems to rise when seen
from a height) was completely confounded with the clouds: and to me at
least, who am unused to sea views, and could not at first justly
estimate the extent of the visible horizon where unlimited by any thing
except the convexity of the earth, it appeared as if the more distant of
the vessels which we perceived were actually sailing at a great altitude
in the clouds. On the side of the gap on which we now were, as well as
on the other, and indeed still more than on the other, the downs now
spread themselves out towards the sea, so as entirely to lose the
character of a ridge, except on the northern side, and might be
considered a range of hills, rising very abruptly on one side, sloping
very gradually on the other, and intersected on that side in a direction
perpendicular to the ridge by several prodigiously long dells,
cultivated in the lower part and bare in the higher. Had it been our
object to arrive as expeditiously as possible at the place where we
intended to abide for the night, we should have kept on the ridge of the
hills; but wishing to look down towards the coast, we proceeded
diagonally across the downs, nearly in the direction of Brighton and
soon perceived, in addition to the port of New Shoreham at the mouth of
the Adur, the town of Old Shoreham on the same side of the river higher
up, the village of Lower Lancing beyond the river on the coast, and the
town of Worthing still further to the west, which was enveloped in a sea
fog, though on the heights we were free from clouds, except over our
heads. As we rose over the top of the descending ridge on which we were,
and looked down into a long deep dell or ravine, which extended to
Brighton, we could perceive that that place, a considerable part of
which we could now see, became enveloped in like manner in a sea fog,
which was moving rapidly to the north east and after leaving Brighton
ascended to the heights beyond us to the east, to which we were about to
proceed, and which we observed enveloped in fog as we sat on the ridge
where we were. We at length summoned courage and descended the ravine,
on the sides of which was a large quantity of South Down sheep, the
black faced breed, of which we observed always two or three flocks
within sight during the whole of this day’s walk. After we had crossed
this ravine and ascended the opposite hill, we found that we had the
same process to repeat, a second ravine lying in our way, which also
abutted at Brighton. This time we did not cross the ravine, but went
round it, as it was filled and covered, at the spot where we were, with
a very large field of beautiful oats. Having gone round another ravine
in a similar manner, and been rewarded with nothing but two specimens of
the Ophrys aranifera, and a fine view of Brighton; for the downs here
are extremely tame, and appear to be still tamer immediately above that
town; we ascended to the main ridge, from which we obtained a splendid
view of the plain of Sussex bounded on the north by the Surrey sand
hills and to the west by Blackdown hill and Hindhead, both of which we
could most distinctly perceive, as well as the high range of the Western
South Downs from Waltham to Arundel gap, and the Eastern from Arundel
gap to Shoreham gap, Edition: current; Page: [463] including the camp so
often mentioned, which served us as a landmark during a great part of
this day’s walk. The air, which during the early part of the morning had
been oppressively sultry, now became fresh and clear; we had a fine
breeze on the heights, and the weather after being for a long time
dubious, became now (about two o’clock) decidedly fine, and sunny,
though with some clouds, which, and the clearness of the air after
yesterday’s rain, rendered our view of the plain, which we scarcely lost
sight of during the rest of the day, still finer than its inherent
beauties of themselves sufficed to make it.—After proceeding a short way
along the ridge, we perceived at the foot of the hills the village of
Poynings, close to the road from Brighton to Horsham and Dorking; and a
ravine in front of us, through which that road ascends the downs. In
order to cross this ravine, we descended a very steep declivity on our
right, and ascended beyond it into the higher part of the ravine in
question, from which, when we looked back, we perceived that the
declivity we had climbed and that which we had descended formed the two
sides of one of those dells which so often run up into chalk hills, but
I never saw one in which the hilly sides were so bold or the bottom more
neatly cut out. I have since learned that this is the celebrated Devil’s
Dyke. We ascended the eastern side of the ravine, from the summit of
which we could now not only perceive the tower on Leith hill,9 with the
whole of that range of sand hills, but also the ridge of chalk hills
which terminates at Box hill, the slope of Denbies, and the Dorking gap
together with the chalk pits above Reigate. At a considerable distance
south of these but considerably north of the South Downs, we observed a
range of tolerably high sand hills stretching from West to East, which
we supposed to be the range of St. Leonard’s forest. We saw more and
more of this as we gradually left the Surry10 hills behind us to the
left. We soon came to another ravine and accordingly descended the side
of it on which we were, in a sloping direction, towards the village of
Pyecombe in the ravine. The downy slope of this hill was covered with
the Genista tinctoria and Rosa spinosissima, but of the latter we could
discover only one specimen in flower, the remainder having gone by: The
lower part of the descent lay through corn fields, in which, as in all
other places which we have observed in our tour, the corn appeared fine.
Two Brighton roads meet at the little village of Pyecombe; the road
through Reigate and Crawley, and that through Red Hill and Cuckfield. We
crossed these roads, and ascended, by a gentle slope, the other side of
the ravine, from which all the remainder of our day’s march lay on the
summit of the hill. We perceived that the downs here returned to their
original form of a double ridge with an irregular valley between; at
least this was the form in which they appeared to us, though beyond the
south ridge they probably spread themselves out towards the sea. The
north ridge, a little beyond the last ravine, Edition: current; Page:
[464] turns short round to the south towards the other, dropping down
into the valley however, before it meets it; which accounts for the
apparent termination of the South Downs at this point when seen from the
hills about Dorking. We here took our last view of the Surry hills,
which we now saw with extreme distinctness as well as Hindhead but
Blackdown hill and the western range of the South Downs, though
perfectly visible, were greatly obscured by a white glaring haze. At
this point, we were in the centre of a vast amphitheatre bounded by
hills on almost all sides. We could see far beyond Petworth, to the
west, as far as the country about Hailsham to the east, as far as
Dorking to the north, and to the south the Downs, and an immense extent
of sea, appearing like a range of high hills. We seemed about as far
elevated above the plain, as we appear when on the top of Leith hill,
and this ridge is probably as high above its base as Leith hill, though
not so high above the sea. We soon came in sight of another large gap in
the Downs, the valley of the Ouse, which we could trace quite down to
its mouth, and to the tall cliffs about Newhaven and Seaford: this gap
being wider and less sinuose than those of the Arun or Adur. Chalk
hills, though much lower than those on which we were, seemed to rise
beyond the gap and extend themselves a short way at the entrance of the
valley in the same line with those which we were upon: but what I have
before called the southern range of the South Downs rose up on the
eastern side of the Ouse into high bold hills, very steep toward the
north and sloping towards the sea. We crossed another Brighton road,
that through Godstone, and proceeded along the ridge above Plumpton (a
village and estate on the plain) enjoying all the way a most delightful
prospect, in which the verdure and brightness of the plain contrasted
charmingly with the dreariness of the Downs, now somewhat obscured by
clouds; until at last these hills dropped down, and so did we, into the
valley of the Ouse in which the large town of Lewes lay before us, and
in this, after crossing another of the roads from London to Brighton,
viz. that by Lewes, (which, curiously enough, crosses a hill instead of
coming up the valley, and enters at the further end of the town instead
of the nearer) we took up our residence for the night at the Star Inn.
In the evening we strolled out to take a view of the town, which is very
considerable, having three churches and a principal street full a mile
in length. It is, great part of it, on the slope of a hill, and is one
of the neatest and most cheerful country towns I ever saw, as its valley
is one of the most richly cultivated. We observed late this evening a
meteorological phenomenon not, I believe, very uncommon, but well worthy
of notice; very heavy clouds hanging over the hill, and blown
continually over the edge of it by a brisk wind, but dissipated and
entirely disappearing immediately after.

24th

We commenced the business of this morning by visiting the Castle, which
is an old building on the highest point of the town, only partially
preserved, but not in Edition: current; Page: [465] ruins, Mr. Kemp (who
holds it of the three Lords of Lewes)11 having fitted it up to be
inhabited by the person who shews it, and occasionally for a night by
himself. What remains of it is chiefly two watchtowers, one of which we
ascended and looked down from the roof of it upon the valley of the
Ouse, the town of Lewes and the surrounding hills. The woman who shewed
the place pointed out to us seven churches instead of three, as I had
supposed; all of them in the town, or suburbs connected with it. At the
foot of the hill is an Infant School, which we inspected: it is a
general school, there being a Church of England one beside; I was
therefore glad to perceive, among the patrons and benefactors of this
school the families of all the candidates for Lewes at the last
election, a Mr. Kemp, Mr. Donovan and Sir John Shelley.12 It seems an
extremely well managed school and the ideas given to the children are
rather less exclusively religious than is frequently the case at these
schools. We left Lewes by an extensive suburb called Cliff, on the
opposite side of the river, and commenced climbing the hill above it,
which is one of the chalk hills which I mentioned in my journal of
yesterday as lying nearly in a line with those about Plumpton, though
decidedly farther to the south. From the ridge of this hill we descended
into a ravine which runs up into the hill in the manner so often
described. The bottom of the hill, which was rather highly cultivated,
afforded us several specimens of a somewhat rare plant, the Papaver
hybridum. We went up the ravine for some distance, and at last ascended
the other of the ridges which include it; we then mounted up to the top
of the ridge, from which we observed, from a seat which had been
generously placed there, the surrounding country. We found that the
hills on which we then were, entirely ceased immediately beyond the hill
where we were sitting. The plain which bounded them appeared flat, dull,
and uninteresting, mostly covered with water meadows without hedges,
hedgerows, or trees of any kind. To the south, between us and the bold
ridge of hills mentioned in yesterday’s journal lay a valley richly laid
out in corn fields like the valleys at Dorking, though of little extent,
opening on one side into the valley of the Ouse, on the other into the
plain. To the west lay the valley of the Ouse itself, which is the
ugliest gap we have yet fallen in with. The Ouse, like all rivers
artificially made navigable, looks like a mere canal: the valley is as
flat as a deal table; a quality which adds beauty to a valley when the
hills which bound it are bold Edition: current; Page: [466] and abrupt,
but spoils it when, as in this case, they ascend gradually and tamely.
The whole valley is filled with water meadows, which are inclosed by
ditches instead of hedges or trees; and though more than a dozen small
villages lay in sight, none of them were quite in the valley, but all of
them a little, though a very little way up the hill, shewing that the
valley is frequently flooded, indeed I should think that spring tides
must almost overflow it. We descended into the little valley to the
south, where after passing the village of Glynd, and crossing one or two
meadows of extremely coarse herbage, we fell in with the Glynd river, an
ugly muddy canal-like stream, which falls into the Ouse, and into which
the tide was running with great force. We crossed this river and the
valley and then ascended the range of bold hills which extend, as I have
before observed, towards the east, and which though so far south of the
hills we yesterday traversed, are here the outermost ridge of the whole
chain. Our object was, to make for the cliff above Newhaven, which we
had observed from the Plumpton hills the day before. We could now
plainly perceive Newhaven at the mouth of the river and as the downs
spread out towards the sea, exactly as they appeared to do above
Brighton, sloping extremely, and being intersected by dells which run up
from the sea to the very top of the ridge, we thought that by following
one of these dells we should reach the sea more agreeably than in any
other way. We did not however go into the bottom of the dell, but
followed it about half way up its western side. At first we encountered
down, then furze, then down again for a short distance, and then ground
which had been ploughed up and allowed to go out of culture, like that
on Box hill; the first land of the sort which we had seen. We here found
the Marrubium vulgare. We then met with some barley, also the first we
had seen on the downs, all the corn which we had hitherto met with being
either wheat or oats. The barley however seemed as fine as the other
grains which we had met with in this country. We now descended by a
chalky field-side into the ravine, which here turns away somewhat to the
east; and perceiving a village in the bottom lower down, although the
path to Newhaven seemed to lie further to the right we pursued the
ravine. We found some fine wheat in the bottom, and a large field of
lucerne; which we met with not unfrequently during the rest of this
day’s walk and the deep green of which among these dry hills was highly
ornamental. The hamlet of Norton, through which we now passed, is a
wretched looking place, with the exception of one rather large cottage
with a moderately large and richly stocked flower garden round it. We
next skirted an immense barley-field—I should state that all the corn
fields are uninclosed throughout the whole of the Downs. Here we again
found the Papaver hybridum; and the edges of this and of all the other
barley fields in the neighbourhood abound with the Caucalis nodosa. At
the extremity of this field, and a little lower down than Norton, was
the village of Bishopstone, which contained a church and some ugly but
not poor-looking farm houses and barns. We continued to follow the
valley quite down to the seaside. In the meadows at the bottom of it,
south of Bishopstone, we saw some rather fine trees. At Bognor, and
Edition: current; Page: [467] on the Downs from Poynings to Lewes, the
trees were stunted, and grew away to the north east in a very marked
manner; being the direction opposite to the sea, and to the prevailing
wind. But here, being sheltered in that direction, the trees grew
tolerably well. The dell is bounded to the west by the cliff already
mentioned, above Newhaven: this we therefore missed. After searching a
sort of bog or place of reeds in the bottom of the valley which was
covered with Scirpus maritimus and Apium graveolens (wild celery) and in
which we found the Samolus valerandi and Oenanthe pimpinelloides, we
crossed the road which runs along the coast from Hastings to Brighton,
and mounted a little sandy cliff over the sea, to the east, where we saw
the Salvia verbenaca and our old friend the horn-poppy. Beyond this was
a rather high chalk cliff immediately above the sea, which we climbed,
and enjoyed the magnificent spectacle of the ocean spread out under our
feet. The sky being now clear with a few clouds interspersed, we saw the
sea of a deep blue intermixed with patches of white, which is its finest
state. At the foot of this cliff was the old borough of Seaford, a
rather shabby looking place, surrounded however by fine cornfields: we
passed through it, and descending to the beach, found the Statice
armeria, or common thrift, which we also saw in great abundance on the
cliffs during all the remainder of our walk. Here we saw one of the
Martello towers, put up to frighten Bonaparte:13 it seemed about ten
feet high, and cut the most ridiculous figure imaginable. We climbed the
next cliff, which was rather higher than the preceding, and from which
we could perceive that the whole coast was skirted by such cliffs to
Beachy Head, which is the southernmost point of Sussex, unless Selsea
near the western border be farther south. From this hill we could
perceive another gap in the hills, having a river in it and terminating
in the small haven or bay termed Cuckmere haven. We descended the hill,
and forded the stream, which, among the shingles, had not more than a
foot of depth; much water being lost in the stones from which it oozes
out here and there. We were rewarded by finding the Crambe maritima, or
sea-cale a short way up the adjoining cliff. We ascended the cliff, and
found that the coast from this point to Beachy Head resembled on a large
scale a number of graves laid side by side, so regular and frequent were
the ascents and descents. We met with stations of the preventive service
every two or three miles and with the men themselves almost every half
mile. This coast yielded to us a grass which I believe to be the Hordeum
pratense; but a more striking object was the sea, rolling beneath us at
a depth of from 200 to 300 feet, and a more interesting one was the
flights of seagulls hovering and sporting about the cliffs; we admired
the extreme beauty of their flight, in which their wings scarcely appear
to move. Almost as soon as we had passed over Beachy Head, the summit
and extremity of the highest of these grave-like promontories, Edition:
current; Page: [468] the coast turns off almost at right angles, having
sloped E.S.E. almost from Shoreham, and turning now almost directly N.E.
Here the downs suddenly cease, and the flats commence: and though it was
now nearly dark, we could perceive the town of Eastbourne a little way
beyond the foot of the hill to which place we descended, and in which
(at the New Inn) we took up our quarters for the night.

25th

Our perambulations in the South Downs were now finished, and the
remainder of our walk lay through a comparatively flat country. We first
went down to the sea. The village or small town of Eastbourne is about
three quarters of a mile from the beach: the principal houses of
entertainment for visitants are at the hamlet of South Bourne on the
beach. The two together compose a tolerably pretty town, at least when
compared with most of the other watering places on the Sussex coast. The
vicinity of the South Downs and of Beachy Head is of itself sufficient
to give this place a decided superiority, as far as regards situation,
over such a place as Bognor. Here too there are trees, of tolerable
magnitude, and not growing away from the sea, as we had observed in most
other places, because the open side is here to the south east, and the
place is sheltered from the prevailing, or South-west wind, by Beachy
Head and the adjacent downs. We proceeded along the Pevensey road,
between the sea and the South Downs, that is to say, their eastern
boundary: for, as I have already mentioned, the chain, considered in
regard to its length, drops here, but considered in its breadth it
extends of course northward to the eastern extremity of the bold hills
which commence south of Lewes. To our right now lay a long row of
Martello towers, and the shingles of the beach, which are here extremely
wide, and thickly covered with horn-poppy, echium, cynoglossum, and
other common plants. To the left lay watermeadows divided from one
another by ditches; in some of which the hay-harvest was not yet
concluded. These ditches afforded the Hydrocharis morsus ranae, Typhya
angustifolia or minor, Sparganium simplex, Cicuta virosa, Sagittaria
sagittaefolia; they also abounded in the Butomus umbellatus and Scirpus
maritimus. After two or three miles of this sort of country, the road
lying over a dead flat, we came among some little sand hills, on which
there were cornfields, but the corn, though every where fine, not much
advanced for the season. We soon reached Pevensey, a shabby looking town
of no great size, containing the ruins of a large castle, placed as
those buildings usually are, on a little eminence; and surrounded by a
moat. The greater part of the outer enceinte is preserved, and much of
the walls of the keep: but in other respects it was just like any other
ruin. On its walls we gathered the Anethum foeniculum, a fennel. On
leaving Pevensey, we crossed, for several miles, a tract of country
resembling Romney marsh, that is to say, composed of watermeadows
intersected by ditches. The grass appeared good, and the cattle upon it,
which were chiefly bullocks, the finest I had ever seen. But indeed all
which we had seen since we left Lewes were of the same kind. Some are
red, others black, and both superb animals of their kind. In this and
the neighbouring country they appear to employ chiefly Edition: current;
Page: [469] bullocks for draught, and even for ploughing. The ditches
here afforded the Scirpus lacustris. On leaving the marsh, we passed
through the little village of Wartling, and turning to the left, made
for Herstmonceux park. This park, which is in itself nothing
extraordinary is, however, rather pretty for such a spot. It lies on
several little heathy sandhills. But the remarkable feature in it is the
old castle of Herstmonceux, which is in excellent preservation. We could
perceive by its lying in a bottom instead of being situated upon an
eminence, as well as by its being built of brick instead of stone, and
by the stile of its architecture, that, although imitated from the
Gothic, it is of a date greatly posterior to the feudal times. We were
accordingly told by the person who shews it, that it was built in the
reign of Henry VI, although there is a wall standing in it of a much
earlier date. The outer walls are almost perfect, and some of the inner
ones: even some of the timbers still subsist, in good condition. In
fact, it was inhabited till about sixty years ago, when it was
dilapidated in order to build the present Herstmonceux house. It derived
its odd name, according to the man who shews it, from the names of its
founder, Mr. Herst, and a subsequent possessor named Monceux.14
Altogether it is the best worth seeing of any castle we have inspected
in this tour. On leaving Herstmonceux, we approached the sand hills
which we had seen from Plumpton downs and taken for the St. Leonard’s
forest range, but which in fact commence about Uckfield and end at
Hastings, as we could now plainly perceive. The approaches to the main
range of sand hills, though merely common place pretty country, with
gentle sandy slopes and corn fields, appeared delightful to us after the
dull flats which we had just crossed. We passed through the village of
Boreham, on the road from Lewes to Battel15 and Hastings, which road we
followed for some time, and found the Linum angustifolium under a hedge
by its side. We however soon left this road, and turning off to the
left, crossed a bottom, ascended a pretty high sandy ridge, and
descending into the valley beyond, came to Ashburnham park. This park,
for the beauty of its trees and the pretty manner in which the ground is
laid out, is really one of the best which I have seen, but it appeared
still finer to us, who came from among water meadows and ditches. The
house, of which the architecture is chaste though not without ornament,
had the merit of appearing solid and at the same time light. It belongs
to the Earl of Ashburnham, who is I believe descended from Ashburnham
the attendant of Charles I,16 and they shew various relics of that
monarch at the place, but we could not see it, as part of the family was
there. Having ascended from the bottom in Edition: current; Page: [470]
which we were, by a beautiful dell among trees, forming part of the
park, we found ourselves on the top of the main ridge of these sand
hills, and soon came in sight of Battel, a pretty though not large town,
on the same ridge. Having dined at the George Inn, finding that there
was nothing to be seen at Battel (for the Abbey is shewn only on
Mondays) we walked to Hastings. It was nearly dark when we set out but
we had light enough to see the exterior of the Abbey, the front of which
though not symmetrical appeared to us a very fine specimen of that
branch of the Gothic architecture. The part which is inhabited is
comparatively modern, but the uninhabited part has been prevented from
falling into ruins by judicious repairs.

26th

Hastings is, as all know, a very old town and the greater part of it has
the appearance of one, the streets being paved, but narrow, and the
houses high. The part which lies immediately on the beach is the only
part which has the appearance of a watering place, and this has not the
tawdry appearance of watering places in general: the houses are large
and well built, and the place appears to have no greater pretensions
than it is able to support. It is a great fishing place, and we saw
abundance of fishing vessels in the harbour. Compared with most watering
places, the country about Hastings is certainly fine, there being some
tolerably pretty sand slopes, though not equal to those about Battel,
and some very bold sand stone cliffs on both sides of the town. We went
to the base of the first cliff west of the town, on which the ruins of
the castle stand, and then ascended the first cliff to the east of which
we explored both the summit and the base, as well as part of the base of
the second cliff, and a little woody dell between them. As cliffs, they
are not equal to the chalk cliffs about Beachy Head; but being of a
different composition, viz. sandstone, intermixed with large lumps of a
stone appearing to bear a great resemblance to clay slate, they were
worth seeing even after those which were so much finer in themselves.
The vegetation is, of course, of a character very different from that of
the South Downs and so many rare plants are set down in the
neighbourhood of Hastings, that we expected a rich harvest. We found the
Sedum anglicum on sand rocks in the dell already spoken of, and the
Crithmum maritimum (samphire) on the second cliff, together with a tall
grass probably the Festuca rubra; but could find none of the plants
peculiarly attributed to Hastings. I should however state that the
cliffs are absolutely covered with Statice armeria and Linum
angustifolium; but these we had found previously and they were therefore
of less value to us. From Hastings (at the Swan Inn) we proceeded by one
of the London coaches to Lamberhurst, on the border of Kent, through a
very hilly and sandy country, rather pretty but containing nothing
extraordinary and differing in nothing from any other sand hills except
in the multitude of hop gardens which we met with as we approached Kent.
From Lamberhurst we walked across, through the same sort of country to
Tunbridge Wells, continually looking for Waterdown forest in a part of
the country where it was laid down in our map of Sussex, but Edition:
current; Page: [471] where it really is not and passing through some
pretty woods in the domain of Bayham Abbey belonging to Lord Camden,17
which woods we took for Waterdown forest until we were informed of the
contrary.

27th

We employed the greater part of this day in seeing the country and the
various sights in the neighbourhod of Tunbridge Wells. This place,
though nearly as large as Dorking, has no church, being in three
different parishes and in two counties, Kent and Sussex. It is a
straggling place scattered about on the two slopes and in the bottom of
a broad sandy dell. One side (the north side) of the dell constitutes
the common, on the top of which, as we are informed by the guide book,
there are magnificent rocks, containing caverns which remind one of that
of the robbers in Gil Blas.18 We walked to those rocks in the morning,
and found that there were some tolerably large blocks of sandstone lying
about on the top of the hill, out of the bottom of some of which a
little sand had been dug. After amusing ourselves for some time with
this piece of humbug, we returned to breakfast at the Royal Kentish
Hotel and after breakfast proceeded to the westward up the valley in
which Tunbridge Wells is situated. The country about Tunbridge Wells is
composed of sandy ridges and dells, tolerably well wooded, and on the
whole decidedly pretty, though by no means striking to any one who has
seen the beautiful parts of Surrey. This valley we found to be among the
prettiest parts of it. We followed the valley for about a mile, till we
arrived at what are called the High Rocks, that is to say a long ledge
of perpendicular sand stone rocks intersected by natural fissures, and
from forty to seventy feet high. These rocks, being ornamented and in
some measure shrouded by trees, have very much the appearance of real
mountain scenery, and appeared to us worthy of the praise which they
copiously received in the guide book.19 This spot belongs to the Earl of
Abergavenny, and has been somewhat altered from its native wildness by
artificial ornaments, but sparingly, and in good taste. On the damp and
shady parts of the rocks we found the celebrated Tunbridge fern or
Hymenophyllum tunbridgense; and in the cornfields above them as well as
in some other places included in this day’s walk we found a beautiful
purple variety of the Viola tricolor, or heart’s ease, which Forster in
his Flora Tunbridgensis conjectures to be a peculiar species.20 After
inspecting these Edition: current; Page: [472] rocks in some detail, we
looked at some other rocks in the same valley—for large blocks of
sandstone lie about, sometimes scattered and sometimes in ledges, in
various places about Tunbridge Wells, and we then reascended the north
side of the valley to Rusthall common, on the top of the hill, where a
number of curiously shaped blocks lie about, one of them called the Toad
Rock, because in shape it somewhat resembles a toad sitting on a stone.
We now kept on the top of the hill for some distance towards the west,
in the direction of East Grinstead, but left that road at Langton Green,
whence we redescended into the valley, here spread out into a plain,
crossed a large open warren belonging to Lord Abergavenny in the low and
boggy parts of which we found the Abama ossifraga (Narthecium ossifragum
of Smith)21 in great abundance, and entered into Waterdown forest. This
forest belongs to Lord Abergavenny, and is beautifully laid out almost
in the stile of a pleasure ground. It is intersected in all directions
by broad grassy drives, one of them extending for nearly a mile along
the base of a ledge of rocks, almost as pretty though not so high as the
High Rocks already described. A large portion of this forest consists
entirely of birch. We wandered through almost every part of it, (for it
is much reduced in extent since it was a royal chase), enjoying the
beauty of the spot and searching for some of the numerous rare plants
said by Forster in his Flora Tunbridgensis to grow there: but though we
purchased the book on purpose to assist us we met with no success in our
search for the plants. On leaving the forest by the eastern side, we
experienced another disappointment by finding that Eridge Castle and
Park, belonging to the same nobleman, and mentioned in the Guide Book as
a great shewplace, was not to be shewn.22 We were now on the direct road
from Lewes to Tunbridge Wells, and by this road we returned to the
latter place, where we took a cold bath in the chalybeate water of the
place. The baths are situated close to the Parade, which is well
furnished with shops, and, for a watering place, tolerably pretty and
cheerful. The rest of the town, village, or hamlet (call it which you
will) is dull and watering-place-like enough. After dinner we walked six
miles across the country to Tunbridge23 an ugly old town consisting of
one street, about a mile in length, situated on the Medway and
contriving two bridges over as many branches of that river (two of them
considerable streams) from which multitude of bridges it derives it name
Town of bridges, or Tunbridge. We stopped at the Crown Inn.

28th

We commenced the operations of this day by seeing the Castle, one of the
best preserved and most curious specimens of that sort of building which
we had seen in our tour. Of the outer enceinte a very small portion is
preserved, but the high part, Edition: current; Page: [473] or citadel,
remains almost entire and consists of a high quadrangular tower, with
circular turrets at the four corners, nearly equalling in diameter the
breadth of the building. Figure 1 exhibits the base of the building,
Figure 2 its appearance when seen on its broad side, Figure 3 when seen
on the narrow.

[lf0223-27_figure_002.jpg]
Figure 1

[lf0223-27_figure_003.jpg]
Figure 2

[lf0223-27_figure_004.jpg]
Figure 3

It is now joined to a more modern, and inhabited mansion, but continues
to be exhibited to those who visit the place. On leaving Tunbridge, we
pursued the Maidstone road, through an uninteresting country enough, as
far as Hadlow, where we turned off to the left, crossed several fields,
and a park of no particular beauty, and then came to the range of sand
hills which begins at Reigate and runs parallel to the chalk hills of
Surrey and Kent. From these beautifully wooded hills we discovered the
chalky range of which Box hill and the Ranmer hills form a part: It now
lay directly before us and we could perceive that it does not stop at
Wrotham but merely opens into a gap similar to that at Dorking and lets
through the Medway just as the other lets through the Mole. Our distance
from Rochester through this gap would appear not to have been great.
After allowing the Medway to pass through it, the range of chalk hills
rises again, but changes its direction: instead of running from west to
east, as it does from Guildford to Wrotham, it turns into a direction
considerably south of east, and we could perceive it slanting away to so
great a distance, that on comparing the face of the country as we
perceived it with the map of Kent, we had no doubt that it runs a little
north of Ashford, leaves Romney marsh to the south, and joins the sea
about Folkestone; and that the chalk cliffs from Folkestone to Dover,
and even those north of Dover, are formed by these hills, as those of
Seaford and Beachy Head are formed by the South Downs.—Having viewed
this interesting range of hills for some time, we crossed the valley,
and began ascending the chalk hills, taking in our way the ugly village
of Wrotham. The view from the summit of the chalk hills is extensive,
but far less diversified and interesting than that which may be
perceived from the parts of this range nearest to Dorking, or even to
Godstone and Reigate. We however proceeded by field paths along the
summit of the hill, and did not redescend into the valley until we came
nearly opposite to Sevenoaks, which, as we could not see it from the
hill, we had some difficulty in finding. It lies a little way up the
range of sand hills which still continues to run parallel, or nearly
parallel, with the great chalky range: and the town is situated near the
head of the Darent, and almost Edition: current; Page: [474] opposite to
another gap in the range of chalk hills, through which that river flows
to empty itself into the Thames. In the little that we could perceive of
the declivity of the chalk hills towards the north, it appeared gradual,
but not spreading out into Downs as between Dorking and Reigate, or as
the range of the South Downs does between Shoreham and Newhaven. The
width of the ridge, at this point, seemed about equal to what it is near
Oxted. In beauty of appearance, whether at the summit, or as seen from
the plain, it was somewhat inferior to the part above Godstone, still
more to that above Dorking. We stopped at the Rose and Crown, Sevenoaks,
and while dinner was preparing, we inspected Knole Castle and Park, the
old residence of the Dorset family.24 The park is one of the very best
which I have seen, the beauty of the trees, and the disposition of the
ground, being taken together: though I have perhaps seen others which
excel it in either of those qualities considered separately. The castle
seems of an age posterior to that in which castles were built for
defence; I should say somewhat older than Herstmonceux. The internal
arrangement and the furniture, of a great part of it, is carefully kept
in the same state as formerly: two miles of rooms, which were fitted up
for James I and II respectively when on certain occasions they honoured
Knole Castle with their presence are still retained precisely in the
same state in which they were left by those monarchs.25 The old
bedroom-furniture is curious because it is old, and this is one of the
principal curiosities of the place. Another is a large collection of
pottery etc. from Herculaneum, in a state of preservation, both as to
the vessels themselves and the designs upon them, which is truly
surprising. There is also a collection of very ancient china. But the
most interesting, to many spectators, of all the sights to be seen at
this place, is the extensive and fine collection of pictures, both by
the ancients and modern masters. I am so indifferent a judge of
painting, that I will not venture to say any thing of their merits,
though I was greatly struck with several pictures. A rarer and to me a
more interesting characteristic of this collection was, its containing
portraits of almost all persons who have distinguished themselves in
English history, whether as public or literary characters, whether as
statesmen, poets, orators or philosophers.—In the evening, we walked
along the valley to Westerham through the large villages of Riverhead,
Sundridge and Brasted, and here, at the King’s Arms, we remained for the
night.

Edition: current; Page: [475]
29th

This day we concluded our tour by walking from Westerham to Dorking,
through Godstone (where we breakfasted), Bletchingly, Nutfield and
Reigate. Our course lay between the chalky and the sandy ranges during
the whole of our course, and we were now upon ground which was familiar
to me. We remained at Dorking the rest of the day.

30th

My two friends returned to town this morning and I myself in the
afternoon. I subjoin an account of the expenses of our tour for the
information of myself and others on future occasions:

  --------------------------------------------------------------- ---- ---- ----
                                                                  £    s    d
  Our fare by the coach from London to Chichester                 2    5    -
  Coachman and Guard (3s.6d + 1s)                                      4    6
  Dinner and waiter at Chichester                                      11   6
  Bill, waiter, chambermaid and boots at Bognor                   1    4    -
  Seeing the church at Arundel                                         1    -
  Boy for directing us to the park                                     -    6
  Bill etc. at Arundel                                            1    14   2
  Luncheon at Houghton                                                 1    3
  Bill etc. at Steyning                                           1    2    10
  Luncheon at Dyke House near Poynings                                 1    3
  Bill etc. at Lewes                                              1    11   7
  Luncheon at Seaford                                                  2    9
  Seeing the Castle and Infant School at Lewes                         1    6
  Bill etc. at East Bourne                                        1    13   2
  Seeing Hurstmonceux                                                  1    -
  Luncheon at Wartling                                                 2    2
  Dinner at Battel                                                     14   6
  Bill etc. at Hastings                                           1    7    6
  Fare to Lamberhurst by the Hastings coach, including coachman   1    6    -
  Luncheon at Lamberhurst                                              -    10
  Bill etc. at Tunbridge Wells                                    2    19   3
  Seeing the High Rocks                                                1    -
  Baths at Tunbridge Wells                                             7    6
  Bill etc. at Tunbridge                                          1    0    6
  Seeing Tunbridge Castle                                              1    -
  Luncheon at Wrotham                                                  1    4
  Seeing Knole Castle                                                  2    6
  Bill etc. at Sevenoaks                                               10   2
  Bill etc. at Westerham                                               11   4
  Breakfast at Godstone                                                6    -
                                                                  20   7    7
  --------------------------------------------------------------- ---- ---- ----

Edition: current; Page: [476]
[lf0223-27_figure_005.jpg]

Edition: current; Page: [477]


30.: Walking Tour of Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, and Surrey
 3-15 JULY, 1828

MS, Yale University Library, John Stuart Mill Papers, Box 2, MS 350. On
this tour Mill’s companions, in addition to Horace Grant, who had also
accompanied him on the previous tour (see No. 29), were Francis Edward
Crawley (1803-32), and Edwin Chadwick (1800-90), the latter a close
associate of Mill’s from this time throughout life. Chadwick and Grant
left Mill and Crawley on 14 July to return to London. As not published
in Mill’s lifetime, not listed in his bibliography.

Thursday 3rd July 1828

Set out from town this morning with Crawley, Chadwick, and Grant, on a
tour to the Stoken-Church and Chiltern Hills. We set off from the Black
Lion, Water Lane, by a Reading coach, which leaves that inn at half past
eight, and which we chose as well for its early hour, as because it
possesses the privilege of driving through Windsor Great Park. The road
as far as Staines Bridge is tame and common place enough but becomes
interesting immediately on entering Surrey. The river to the right, St.
Ann’s Hill to the left, Cooper’s Hill and the high ground of Windsor
Park in front, compose a pretty enough ensemble. Shortly after passing
through the neat town of Egham, we left the great western road, and
ascending a hill to the right, came upon some high flat ground
intersected by waste and plantations, not like any thing which I ever
remember to have seen. We passed through Englefield Green, a pretty
village surrounding a common, and composed chiefly of gentlemen’s houses
and gardens, and we shortly after entered the Great Park. This is
composed of a large tract of sand hill, gradually sloping down toward
the Castle and Town, and forming in its descent some exceedingly fine
broken ground, the whole (with the exception of some copse and shrubbery
about the Royal Cottage of which we could but just see the chimnies over
the trees) beautifully laid out in the forest stile with large trees and
glades. Our road led us along the brow of the hill, and afforded us
numerous shifting views of the castle and town, which are situated on a
hill at the northern extremity of the Great Park. The castle is at the
top of the hill; the town on its side, and like all towns so situated,
very striking. We saw it, first by occasional glimpses through the
trees, then in full view, then down the fine avenue called the Long
Walk, of which it formed a magnificent termination. The Park, with the
exception of this Walk and some other avenues, has completely the air of
a forest, with the common deer and the red deer with their noble antlers
moving about it or reposing themselves. When we left the Edition:
current; Page: [478] Park, we descended the hill, and found ourselves in
a corn country the greater part of which was to appearance newly
inclosed, and had indeed been taken in from Bagshot Heath at no very
long interval. It appeared to yield tolerably good corn, and there were
some fir plantations on it, but these were less good, the quantity of
other trees intermixed and profiting by their shelter not being
sufficient. We left Ascot Race Course to our left, within sight, and
rejoined the Bath Road at the village of Bracknel, a place on a hill,
which, as we observed in most of the places which we passed through,
resembled more a town in the West of England, than those near London,
the houses being smaller and less ornamented, and the general appearance
of the place not so neat. The truth is that we were now out of the range
of the houses and white cottages of persons living in London and passing
a day or two days of the week in the country. The ground near us
continued for some distance further, to be nearly of the same character
as before, but it gradually became more woody, and at the approach to
Oakingham a fine view opened to the left. Bagshot Heath appeared to form
a fine long ridge dropping suddenly down at its western extremity near
Sandhurst, and two round hills appeared between it and Oakingham, one of
them nearly bare, the other with a large tree or clump of trees at the
top, bearing a considerable resemblance in shape to the round volcanic
hills of Cette and Agde on the coast of Languedoc.1 One of these hills I
remember is called Edgeborough Hill—and from one of them, but I forget
which I have when living near Sandhurst College,2 looked down upon
Oakingham.—The town of Wokingham or Oakingham, like the village of
Bracknel, has more the appearance of a West of England town than of one
in the south eastern counties. In the outskirts, the houses are shabby
enough: in the centre there is a large open market place, on which
several good houses look out, although rather in the old stile, and one
of them (that of the surgeon) so like an inn, that we looked about us
for the sign. From Oakingham to Reading it is a common-place corn
country, not ugly, nor very beautiful. We crossed the Loddon, celebrated
in Pope’s Windsor Forest,3 and about three o’clock arrived at Reading,
seeing to our right the valley of the Thames, and the beautiful chalk
hills beyond. Reading is an exceedingly large country town, with a
considerable number of long wide streets, neatly built, and apparently
of rapidly increasing size, long rows of new houses in the London stile
appearing on the different avenues to the town. We here met M.
d’Eichtal, the friend of Eyton Tooke,4 who being at Newbury had ridden
over to meet us, and who guided us over the town. We went down to the
old bridge at Caversham about Edition: current; Page: [479] a mile from
the town, and explored the chalk pits and hills on the other side of the
river: We found no plants, but had a magnificent view of the river and
its valley. The valley is filled with beautiful meadows very like those
at Marlow: a range of chalk hills cultivated at the top comes close to
the river on the north side; on the south the hills are lower and more
remote. We found near the bridge a plant which I believe is the Myagrum
sativum.—We dined at the Horse and Jockey an inn quite at the extremity
of the town in the road towards Pangbourn5 and Wallingford:—and after
dinner we took our leave of M. d’Eichtal, and descending to the bridge,
followed the towing path to Pangbourn. The meadows, as I have already
observed, are exactly like those at Marlow, and the hay is just cut, in
some places not yet carried. The immediate fringe of the river is just
beginning to come into its highest beauty; the towing path is nothing
more than a pretty footpath through a meadow, and therefore takes away
nothing from the beauty of the scene. The river is broad, but quiet, and
not very deep, as is proved by the rushes and other weeds from which in
some places no part of the channel is free. The valley becomes presently
deeper and closer; the hills on the left approach to the river, leaving
at last only a small strip of meadow between. The side of the hill on
our left is covered with a beautiful wood, and the chalk hills on the
right become woody instead of cultivated. The river first approaches to
the road, and comes so near that we could see at the top of the hill, a
house on the road, and could hear and see carriages on it. The river
then makes a bend to the right, and the towing path crosses for a short
time to the Oxfordshire side in order to avoid a pretty house and
pleasure ground on the declivity of the hill. At Mapledurham lock, one
of the most beautiful spots on the river, it again bends to the left,
and the valley widens, being still filled with meadows. The ridge of
high chalk hills to the right now changes its character, becoming bare
and irregular, and resembling less the chalk hills of Surry6 than the
descent from Salisbury plain. It was almost dark when we arrived at
Pangbourn, where we stopped for the night, at the “George.”

4th

Having seen yesterday that there was much ground worth exploring on the
north side of the river, and wishing to pass another entire day in the
vicinity of so beautiful an object, we resolved to dine at Pangbourn and
not proceed further than Streatley tonight. We accordingly crossed the
river by the wooden bridge which connects Pangbourn with Whitchurch, and
after passing through some meadows by the river side, we commenced
ascending the first woody hill in the direction of Reading. We crossed
the wood by a very beautiful path, and came to a deep dell, filled with
corn fields and woods, which with one or two fallow fields composed a
mixture of light green, dark green, and red, of extreme beauty. We found
the corn Edition: current; Page: [480] fields quite full of the Iberis
amara, or candy tuft, which is here one of the commonest of all weeds.
Having crossed this dell, another small wood, and a beautiful sandy
green, we came out upon a high range of corn fields on the ridge of the
hill, overlooking not immediately the valley of the Thames though turned
towards it, but a dell, the bottom of which was mostly filled with wood,
which ascended from the valley of the river near Mapledurham, and turned
round to the left. Over the declivity of this dell, which was covered
with fine wavy corn fields, we saw the chalk hills of Berkshire sloping
away to the south and beyond them a high range of bold sand hills shaped
like those of Leith Hill, which on enquiry we found to be called in this
neighbourhood the Hampshire hills, and the highest of them Scoddington
Hill. We descended to Mapledurham, a neat little village with a church,
like all in this neighbourhood, furnished with a square tower, of a
tesselated appearance. We loitered for some time in the beautiful
meadows about the river, explored another woody hill something like the
wood of Denbies near Dorking, and returned by the bottom of the woody
dell before mentioned. After dining at Pangbourn, we proceeded to
Streatley, for the first two miles by water as the towing path crosses
the river about half way, and it was doubtful whether the ferry boat
would be on the right side for us to push ourselves over by the chain.
On leaving Pangbourn we had to the left a fine steep bare chalk hill,
like those formed by the refuse of the chalk pits. The road from
Pangbourn to Streatley was close to the river, and at the foot of this
hill. It is a road considerably frequented, as we had reason to observe,
having seen several stage coaches stop at Pangbourn which go from
Brighton to Oxford and Cheltenham through Reading and Wallingford. To
the right there were rich meadows and gentlemen’s houses between the
river and the hills. This continued for some time, with the exception
that the hills on the left approached the river, and then receded when
the hills on the right approached it, forming a fine line of beech wood,
to which the last gleams of the setting sun gave a rich yellow colour.
We here left the punt in which we had ascended thus far, and took the
towing path on the Oxfordshire side. The hills on the right now receded
and appeared gradually to drop down, while on the left they grew high
and steep, and came close to the river, leaving scarcely room for a
pretty house and small pleasure ground between the river and the steep
part of the ascent. Near the end of these hills are the villages of
Goring and Streatley, the former on the north, the latter on the south
side of the river: we crossed by a ferry, and took up our abode at the
upper extremity of Streatley, which is a very neat village, and the main
street of which, by a gentle declivity, ascends the chalk hill.

5th

Before leaving Streatley, we climbed the hill above it, by an old road
commanding a magnificent view of the valley of the Thames down to
Pangbourn and up almost to Wallingford, as well as of the sloping sides
of the Stoken Church Hills, on the other side of the river, which
commence at Chinnor and end here. The Edition: current; Page: [481]
river in this place runs nearly north and south. To the north of us on
the Berkshire side we could perceive no more than one elevated slope,
with wood at the top and down on the side next us, which joins a little
higher up, the hill which we were upon. To our left, at the top of the
hill, was an extensive wood which covers the entire top of the hill
overhanging Streatley: We found a path which led us directly through it,
and to the edge of a dell running up from the valley of the river,
filled with corn fields, and the opposite side of it covered with a
thick and extensive wood. In a field in this dell we found a rare plant,
the Bupleurum rotundifolium. We returned into the first wood, and
crossing it in another direction, came out on the crest of the hill
directly above Streatley, on what is called the High Down, a fine chalky
and grassy slope like that of Brockham Hill.—After breakfasting at the
Bull, Streatley, we recrossed the river, passed through the village of
Goring, and commenced ascending the Stoken Church hills, taking a fine
view of the hills on the Berkshire side of the valley, as we ascended.
Turning off to the right from the direct road to Woodcote on the top of
the hill, we got into another of the woody dells which so beautifully
run up from the valley of the Thames into the chalk hills on both sides.
By following this dell we reached the top of the hill, and had a fine
view to the east, in several places, seeing the Hampshire hills in the
distance, and the plain of Oxfordshire and Berkshire between, with some
hills which we imagined from their position to be those of Henley. We
pursued our course through corn fields and woods to Nettlebed, along the
top of the hill, which runs from S.S.W. to N.N.E. The summit of the
range is tame enough, like most table land, and it had even lost the
character of chalk, being covered with clay to a considerable depth. In
ascending the hills, all the woods we had passed through were of beech:
but as we advanced they were of oak and beech, or oak alone. The woods
are the great beauty of this country. They are real woods, not copse,
that is, they are not cut down for fire wood, but allowed to grow into
timber, though not to any great age, nor are there as far as we could
perceive, many very large or fine trees among them. Towards Nettlebed,
we had to cross some deep dells, which appear to run up into the hills
on the eastern side: which was the cause of our seeing Nettlebed (which
lies high on the top of the hill) long before we came near it. In one of
the woods we found that elegant and rare plant, the Pyrola media. We
passed through the hamlet of Woodcote and the village of Checkendon,7
but the last is the only place which can be mentioned as having any
beauty, either in itself or its vicinity. We stopped at the White Hart,
Nettlebed, for the night, and in the evening walked down the hill by the
Oxford road towards Henley. It passes through a fine forest-like beech
wood, and on the whole the ascent to Nettlebed from Henley is far more
beautiful than any thing else which we have seen in its vicinity.

Edition: current; Page: [482]
6th

On leaving Nettlebed, we still kept the line of the hills, crossing over
occasionally from one side of the ridge to the other, but in general
keeping close to the side next Oxfordshire, and descending as often as
we could into the woods which skirt that side of the hill. The summit of
all these hills is clay, the foundation chalk, the sides are
consequently chalk, and the woods mostly of beech. We only had an
occasional peep of the plain until we came out upon the brow of the hill
just above Watlington, a large market town which does not appear to lie
on any thoroughfare from London. The plain as seen from this point,
appeared a flat tract of corn land, with scarcely any hedgerows, but
studded with numerous villages surrounded by trees; like some parts of
France, particularly the Haute Normandie. There is on this part of the
hill a park of some extent, called Watlington Park, one corner of which
we cut off by a footpath. Here for the first time the sides of the chalk
hill seemed to be bare and grassy, and the plain to come quite up to the
foot of the hill; a small range of low hills having appeared at the last
place where we observed the plain, to intervene between it and the great
range of hills. Just before we met the other Oxford road, by
Beconsfield8 and Wycombe, we passed above a projecting elbow of the
hill, sloping gradually down into the plain in a manner which need not
be described to any person who has seen chalk hills. On meeting the
Oxford road we turned to the right, and followed it to Stoken Church, a
little village on the top of the hill, where we dined at the King’s
Arms. Before proceeding farther on our route I left my three companions
at Stoken Church, and went in quest of a place of some botanical
celebrity called Penley Hangings.9 I took the road towards Great Marlow,
which passes through a most delightful forest-like beech wood, by far
the finest which I had yet seen on these hills. By enquiring of the
woman who keeps the first turnpike, I discovered that it was necessary
here to leave the road, and crossing a part of the above-mentioned wood,
and an extremely green and beautiful meadow to enter another and thicker
wood, on the side of a deep dell, one of the most secluded and romantic
spots which I had seen even in this country, and of which I had taken a
fine view from the meadow through which I had previously passed.
Descending through this wood, which was enriched with the finest
vegetable productions of a chalky soil, by a path so steep as to be
almost precipitous, I came into a grass field less fertile than the
other, but completely embosomed in woods, and full of the Chlora
perfoliata and other beautiful creataceous plants. At the lower end of
this field, which was still on the declivity was the wood called Penley
Hangings, which I was in search of, and Edition: current; Page: [483]
which must be of very considerable length, since I followed a path which
led through it along the bottom of the dell, for nearly a mile. I here
found the Paris quadrifolia; and this with the Linaria monspessulana (or
repens) which I had found near Nettlebed in the morning, formed all the
botanical acquisitions of this day. The wood called Penley Hangings
appeared to cover one declivity of the dell entirely, and a small part
of the other, and is one of the finest beech woods in this country. I
returned to Stoken Church nearly by the way I came from it, and we
reached the brow of the hill by so beautiful a path through fields and
woods, that we may readily pronounce the environs of Stoken Church to be
very delightful. From one part of this path we had a distinct view of
what we had only seen by glimpses in our way from Goring; that the range
of the Stoken Church hills is a double range, having a valley in the
midst, and a narrower at first a lower line of chalk hills parallel to
the other on the side next to Henley. When we attained the summit, we
had a splendid view of this immense plain, illuminated by the horizontal
sun, by which alone this country should be surveyed as it casts long
shadows, and by the contrast between gleams of bright yellow, and deep
shade; gives to the large expanse that variety which it would otherwise
want. Another and smaller elbow, feathered with wood to a considerable
depth, here runs out into the plain: this we crossed, keeping as near
the edge as possible, and obtained in one part a glorious peep of the
fields close under the foot of the hill, through a very romantic spot in
the wood, where the trees being not so close together, left room for us
to see through them, and allowed gleams of sunshine to penetrate the
leaves and illuminate the fine chalky turf at their feet. We then issued
out upon the bare top of the hill, and came to the edge of it, where the
range of the Stoken Church hills nearly drops down to the ground, and
the low hills which succeed it after forming a semicircular basin, rise
again into the higher and more beautiful range of the Chiltern Hills.
Here we stopped and surveyed on the one hand, the line of hills which we
had passed, and which formed a segment of a circle with the concave side
turned towards the plain, the elbow of the hill on the other side of the
Oxford road being the other extreme point: on the other hand, the
beautiful jutting out elbows of the part of the hill we were upon called
Chinnor Hill, and the hill which follows it called Wain Hill, or as the
people of the country pronounce it Wynle Hill, a woody hill which
recedes from the other hills, and ends the Stoken Church range. The
plain below us was the rich vale of Aylesbury, bounded in the right half
of the prospect by a series of low hills, near the foot of which was
Aylesbury itself: while a line of villages at the foot of the hill,
Rowant, Aston, Crowell, Chinnor, and Henton, running parallel with the
hills, and surrounded by trees, gave to this country something of the
appearance of the plain of the Garonne seen from the Frontin and
Pompignan hills, with trees marking the course of the river across it.
We descended the hill, admiring the beautiful woods on Wain Hill to our
right, and a tongue of land which descends from it gradually and to a
great length, leaving the side towards us as nearly perpendicular as the
Devil’s Dyke near Brighton. It was Edition: current; Page: [484] now
becoming dark, and we saw little in the remainder of our route. We
however crossed the brook which separates Oxfordshire from
Buckinghamshire, and passed through several villages in the semicircular
basin of which I have spoken already. The generality of the houses
appeared far less neat and elegant than at Pangbourn and Whitchurch,
where every cottage had its pretty and well-kept strip of flower garden,
and had an appearance of neatness and modernness about the whole
building. Here, on the contrary, the cottages were hovels, and appeared
to be almost falling down. The churches are extremely large, for such
insignificant places, and in a very superior style of Gothic
architecture: every church which we saw, in this evening’s walk and that
of the following day, with one exception, were on the same model, having
a Gothic, generally a square tower and a large aisle, terminated by a
smaller aisle. In every village, or close to it there was one, and but
one, very large house and grounds which reminded us of a French village
and the château of its seigneur, and no doubt originated the same way.
We put up for the night at the old decayed town of Prince’s Risborough,
at the foot of the first hill in the Chiltern range, which hill is
distinguished by an immense cross which is formed on it by taking off
the turf and leaving the chalk bare. We stopped at the Cross Keys.

7th

We walked to Wendover before breakfast, along the foot of the Chiltern
hills, which present to the plain a singularly irregular and diversified
edge, shaped in some places very oddly. We passed through or near a
multitude of villages, each with its church after the fashion of those
mentioned yesterday. Many dells run up into the line of hills, but of
these I shall have occasion to speak more fully hereafter. Having
arrived at Wendover, we took up our headquarters there (at the Red Lion)
for two or three days. Wendover is an old town, situated at the northern
entrance of a long valley which intersects the Chiltern Hills from
Amersham or “Agmondesham” on the other side. It is of tolerable
dimensions, though appearing very small when seen from the high ground
above it. The people seem poor and miserable, as is usually the case
where the British lace manufacture (as it is termed) exists—and here it
exists universally every female having her pillow and bobbins. We
breakfasted at Wendover, and then ascended Combe Hill, being the first
hill of the range towards Prince’s Risborough, and extending out into
the plain, with a fine bare chalky down on the declivity; and a beech
wood on the top. Beyond this hill a dell runs up from the plain, in the
middle of which are the house and park of Chequers, formerly belonging
to Oliver Cromwell, now to Russell, the member of parliament for (I
believe) Bletchingly, who is descended from Cromwell in a female line.10
We went over the house, which is in the stile of the Edition: current;
Page: [485] period, both externally and internally—with triangular
roofs, battlements, strong sided window frames without sashes, cornices
in the same stile, oak floors and staircases, etc. Of the park we saw
only the part next the house reserving the lower and most celebrated
part for another day. It contains fine trees, and being surrounded by
woody hills, it is pretty, although finer when seen from Combe Hill than
from the valley. Viewed from above the trees of the park being prettily
grouped, and backed by a rather thick wood of the same large trees, had
a fine effect. We ascended the dell, which above Chequers continues well
wooded and pretty but without anything very striking, to Hampden, the
estate and house of the celebrated John Hampden, and of his descendant
the present Viscount Hampden.11 This is a very large old house, without
much pretension to beauty, on the further side of the dell. The ground
about it is in the usual character of these hills, which in the interior
much resemble any other chalk hills, their peculiar beauty consisting in
the edge. We returned over Combe Hill, and in the evening ascended
Halton Hill beyond Wendover which projects from the range to a very
great length towards the plain. It is steep, with fine turf on the sides
and beech woods on the top, commanding a fine view of the plain, of the
valley of Wendover, and of a dell which intersects the hills, from the
valley of Wendover towards Tring in Hertfordshire. I found no plants in
this day’s walks, although all the common vegetation of a chalky soil
was most abundant.

8th

We set out from Wendover this morning to explore that part of the
Chiltern Hills which is beyond it. We took the road to Tring, which goes
round the foot of Halton Hill (the further side of which is called Aston
Hill). The bare part of this hill I have described: Beyond the most
projecting point it recedes and forms itself into a magnificent
amphitheatre of wood, at the other extremity of which it again projects
forward into the plain, and we here left the road, crossed a field or
two, and climbing the hill at the edge of the amphitheatre, found that
it became again bare on the sides and woody at and near the top. We
skirted the wood to its further extremity and then ascended to the top
of the hill, from which we had an entirely new prospect. The direction
of the hills here changes—and as the elbow near Stoken Church had once
been the boundary of our prospect, and Chinnor Hill and Edition:
current; Page: [486] Wain Hill afterwards, so now Aston Hill became, as
long as we continued on this side of it, the limit of our view. The view
from the top of this hill was the noblest we had yet seen. Another
valley here opens through the hills, and beyond this valley a long line
of them again projected forward into the plain, still further into it
indeed than Aston Hill. The two last of these were bare, steep, and
sinuous, like the South Downs, and were terminated by the Beacon Hill
above Ivinghoe which was destined to be the extreme point of our this
day’s walk. We could distinctly perceive, at the foot of the last
mentioned hill, the little town of Ivinghoe and a great number of
villages with their churches together with several considerable pieces
of water serving as feeders to the Grand Junction Canal which passes
through these hills by Tring and Berk Hampstead. There is a Navigable
Feeder which runs from Wendover to this canal, and conveys thither a
large quantity of water which rises from beneath the chalk. The low
range of hills which we had seen beyond Aylesbury, here comes nearer to
the chalk hills, and we perceived several little hills which seemed to
possess considerable beauty, particularly two bare round ones between
Ivinghoe and Aylesbury. Having enjoyed this view for some time, we
quitted Aston Hill, an arm of which descends to a prodigious length and
with a very curious shape into the plain; and taking a footpath to the
right through the wood, we came out on one side of the woody dell
described in my yesterday’s journal as intersecting the hills from the
valley of Wendover towards Tring. This dell was extremely irregular and
beautiful, covered with corn fields and woods with occasional patches of
bare open corn fields in the midst of the wood, and surrounded by it on
all sides. This opened into the valley of Tring, at which place we
speedily arrived. Tring is a considerable town, situate on the high road
from London to Aylesbury, in the gap of the hills above spoken of and in
a long strip or tongue of Hertfordshire which here runs up into
Buckinghamshire from Berkhampstead almost to Wingrave. The high hills
about Tring form a sort of natural basin, overlooking that town and its
valley. We crossed the valley, the canal, and a fine large clear brook
which runs close to it, and crossing several fields and slight
elevations, ascended a chalk hill of considerable height, which, seen
from Tring or from Aston Hill, appears to be one of the range of hills
projecting towards Ivinghoe but which in reality stands out from them an
insulated hill in the midst of this very wide gap or valley.—We ascended
this hill through a wood, one of its sides being wooded—we had seen no
hill as yet which had not an extensive beech wood somewhere; and
skirting the ridge of it, which projects as usual a considerable
distance into the plain, we crossed the gap which separates it from the
two bare hills which we had seen from Aston Hill, and ascended the first
of these. I have called it bare and so indeed it was on the side next
us, and at the top being an extremely fine chalky turf, resembling the
edge of the South Downs toward the plain of Sussex—Its shape too
resembled that of the South Down range, in its sinuosities—but when we
reached the top we found, that besides a large clump of trees in one
spot, which serves as a landmark to a distance, the other side of the
hill Edition: current; Page: [487] was covered with a noble wood of full
grown trees, the first which we had yet seen of that character. Here for
the first time on these hills we found box growing. On the declivity
turned towards the wood, was a thicket of box—and we could perceive
other similar thickets lower down. Beyond this hill was another gap or
valley, after which the range of chalk hills rose again, and pushed
itself forward to a great distance into the plain as before. These are
in Bedfordshire, and are called the Dunstable hills, from the town of
Dunstable at the foot of them on the other side—the vicinity of which
was also indicated by the appearance of straw plaiting in the cottages
instead of the manufacture of “British lace.” These hills, at the end
next us, appeared somewhat triste, but those which projected farthest
out into the plain were bare, turfy, and shaped like Brockham hill,
having much of the same sort of beauty, and we should have desired to
explore them, but that we probably saw them to greater advantage from
the opposite hill than if we had been upon them. We now crossed a little
bottom, much like those of the South Downs, which separated us from the
Beacon Hill, the highest and most projecting of all. Through this gap
the Icknield Way, an ancient British road which had run along the foot
of the hills almost if not entirely from Goring to this place, now cuts
over the hill towards Dunstable. We ascended the Beacon Hill or rather
its higher summit, for it has two summits connected by a waving line,
and is the only absolutely bare hill which we had seen. From this we saw
not only over the descending arm of Aston Hill quite to Wain Hill and
Chinnor Hill beyond Prince’s Risborough, but far eastward into
Bedfordshire, and the considerable town of Leighton Buzzard in that
county, due north of us at no great distance. There is much beauty at
this point in the plain itself, which besides the open corn fields and
villages surrounded by trees, offered a considerable variety of gentle
eminences, which although insignificant when seen from the high chalk
hills, must be sufficient to give no inconsiderable beauty to the
details of the country. We descended the Beacon Hill in order to return
to Wendover by the foot of the hills; and passed close to the town of
Ivinghoe, the church of which though bearing a general resemblance to
the ordinary Gothic stile of the village churches in this neighbourhood
is still more beautiful, being in the cathedral stile, with two aisles
crossing one another in the middle and a steeple rising from the point
of intersection. The road to Wendover from this place, and the footpaths
with which we occasionally varied it, are extremely beautiful. Towards
the foot of any range of high hills it is usually found that the ground
gradually rises to a considerable height, before the hills can be said
to commence; and this road, being an old road now very little used, was
carried over these eminences in order to avoid the plain, which must
formerly have been a marsh incapable of being crossed except on
causeways. We had thus the pleasure of overlooking the plain, and at the
same time observing closely the beautiful and often singular shape of
the hills; and our satisfaction would have been unalloyed had not an
extremely heavy rain come on, accompanied with thunder, which had just
time to soak us thoroughly to the skin before we arrived at Wendover.

Edition: current; Page: [488]
9th

We had intended this day to explore the line of hills between Wendover
and Prince’s Risborough, but were prevented by the rain, which continued
all night and with very slight intervals all day. This however did not
altogether prevent us from taking exercise, though it induced us to
confine ourselves to the roads. We took the road towards London, which
runs along a valley intersecting the hills in their widest part. Two
lines of hills, sometimes gradually sloping, sometimes precipitously
ascending, were on the right and left, and were not hid even by the
thick clouds which covered the whole sky. Rather more than three miles
from Wendover on this road, is a village, as it is termed, though it is
fully as large as Wendover, called Great Missenden. It is the prettiest
village we had as yet seen in this district. A short distance before
arriving at this town, there rises in the valley a clear stream or brook
of considerable size such as is rarely seen in a valley bounded on both
sides by chalk hills. Beyond Missenden to the left a portion of the side
of the hill, as well as of the valley, is inclosed, and forms a park, in
which stands a place called the Abbey, which could be seen from the
fields adjoining the road, and appears a handsome but not very large
building. The brook, or little river, the Misbourne as it is called,
runs by the side of the road, constantly increasing in size. It runs
into the Coln some miles further. Had we continued in the valley, we
should have shortly reached the old town of Amersham or Agmondesham, a
place of considerable dimensions: But we turned off to the right a short
way before arriving at the village of Little Missenden, and entered into
a pretty lane, which winds over the hill. The soil, we here found to be
sandy, and we were led over a great variety of grounds over little
commons and deep woody dells, never seeing more than a hundred yards
before us till we came out upon Wycombe Heath, a piece of sandy table
land, of no particular beauty of situation, about three miles from High
Wycombe. We returned by the way we came, and the rain now coming on
violently we were again soaked.—This road, being a high road (except the
lane to Wycombe Heath) is well made, as is the great Aylesbury road by
Berkhampstead and Tring: All the other roads which we have seen in this
country are extremely bad. On this account it is perhaps to be desired
that the district should be a place of more resort. Cockneys, though
they destroy seclusion, have this advantage that they cause increased
traffic and consequently improved communications.—At the entrance of the
town on this side we passed to the right, the house and pleasuregrounds
of Lord Carrington, the patron of the borough.12 They are small and
insignificant, and probably are only valued by him because they happen
to be combined with and situated on the borough property. Missenden
fortunately for itself is not a borough, and therefore looks thriving
and increasing in size. In Missenden there are new houses, in Wendover
none, or next to none; all appears old and decaying. There is but one
inn and one or two public houses in the place; a Edition: current; Page:
[489] large house at the bottom of the hill on which the town stands,
was once an inn but is now deserted. A great quantity of beautiful water
comes up in different places close to the town, from under the chalk,
and supplies the navigable feeder

10th

We left Wendover finally this morning, and set out on the most
delightful day’s walk which we had hitherto experienced in this tour;
whether the beauty of the country, or the agreeable temperature produced
by the bright sun and high wind, be considered. Before proceeding
further on our journey we resolved to explore the hills between Wendover
and Prince’s Risborough, and the dells which run up into the range of
hills within this space. I have already intimated that Chequers stands
in one of these dells, which is bounded towards Wendover by Combe Hill,
towards Risborough by another long and high hill, which descends very
gradually into the plain. I had not however previously mentioned that at
the embouchure of the dell, between these two hills rises another hill,
round and insulated, presenting a mount-like form to the plain, which
like the hill over Ivinghoe and no doubt for the same reason, is called
Beacon Hill. This, which is covered with the finest and most mossy turf
I have ever beheld, we ascended from the village of Ellesborough at its
foot, one of the numerous villages on the road from Wendover to Prince’s
Risborough. Between this hill and the furthermost of the two hills
between which it stands, we now perceived the finest hollow which we had
yet seen. It is a little ravine, flat at the bottom, and running up
between two hill sides, until stopped by the almost perpendicular
ascent. I have known several such in the Surrey chalk hills, especially
about Box Hill, but never one so deep, and so long, or with three of its
sides so precipitous. The whole of the further declivity of this
beautiful hollow is covered with box, as thick as in the thickest part
of Box Hill, and interspersed with beech. On the other side, and at the
extremity, the box and other wood was not so thick, but left several
spaces nearly bare and chalky. At the foot, and in the flat part of the
bottom, lay a fine green turfy lawn, which has received the well merited
name of Velvet Lawn. After going nearly round this beautiful hollow, we
descended into it, by a path through the box, and enjoyed it in its
whole extent. We then reascended the further side. That side of the
hollow which is formed by the Beacon Hill, descends to a flat grassy
table, which gently rises at the further extremity and forms a low
grassy steep hill, on which there is an old Roman camp. The opposite
side forms itself into a variety of fantastic shapes, and slopes in
several lines down to the plain leaving several deep ravines between.
The first of these is thickly wooded with box and other wood; this is
only separated by a single ridge from the Velvet Lawn. Above it is a
flat down of some extent spangled with flowers, which we crossed and
went down the side of the dell to some distance, and then crossing
another ridge, came to a ravine of a very different character. This is
extremely bare and stony both at the bottom and on the sides, although
with occasional thickets here and there. It is extremely deep, but rises
rapidly, and Edition: current; Page: [490] divides itself, about the
middle, into two parts, leaving a round bare hill between them. A chalky
path is practised in the side of the hill we were upon, looking towards
the ravine. We followed this path until we came to the place where the
ravine divides itself and forms a fork: Some distance above this point
we crossed one of the two divisions of the ravine, climbed the
intermediate bare hill, went round the other prong of the fork, and went
down the opposite ridge, which is covered with a mossy turf, to a round
insulated eminence which it forms at its extremity overlooking the
plain. At this point we rested some time, and took our last view of the
Vale of Aylesbury, previously to departing for the south. As this was
the part of these hills in which I had observed the greatest variety of
plants, although none which to me, who have explored the Surrey chalk
hills, were rare or curious, I will enumerate the plants which a young
botanist may expect to find here: Buxus sempervirens, the staple of the
county, Sedum acre, Hyosciamus niger, Atropa belladonna, Reseda luteola
and lutea, Conium maculatum (which I mention, because though common in
most places I have never seen it in the Surrey chalk hills) these in the
bare parts of the hill. In the turfy parts are the Orchis pyramidalis,
Epipactis ovata, Ophrys apifera, etc. In the woods, Hypericum hirsutum
in immense quantity, Valeriana officinalis, Cornus mas, etc.—From this
point we saw the hill so often mentioned, Chinnor Hill or Wain Hill,
stretching out into the plain, with the valley of Risborough passing
through the hills on this side of it, bounded by the high and long hill
called Risborough Hill, and between which and the hill we were on, was
another deep valley. We followed the edge of the hill we were on, cut
off the corner of a wood, and came out on one side of this last
mentioned valley; which is deep, and extremely diversified and
beautiful. Directly opposite to us lay Risborough Hill, the same which,
on its side next the plain, has inscribed on it the large white cross
which has been mentioned in a previous part of this journal. On the side
next to us, it is an irregularly wooded hill, with all the sinuosities
of ridges and hollows, so common in chalk hills—with tongues of land
covered only with down, projecting out from the wood, while the
intervening dells, the side of the hill and even the declivity of these
tongues are covered with wood. The general effect of this is extremely
beautiful—while in the valley there was on a smaller scale as much
diversity of hill and dale as would have sufficed to form a prettily
diversified country if the larger hills had been taken away. We here met
a road, which, after winding along the side of the hill, and through a
wood, conducted us to the bottom of the valley; which we found in due
time to be the same which we had crossed three days ago, in going from
Wendover to Hampden: and in fact it is a valley which intersects the
hills, and divides itself near Hampden into two parts, one of which is
the valley of Chequers, and the other, that into which we had now
descended. In taking the field path to High Wycombe, we now had an
opportunity of again passing Hampden House, to which we ascended by the
path which we had before taken in descending from it, and which I am
thus enabled further to describe. The house stands on the top of the
ridge on the right hand, that Edition: current; Page: [491] is, west,
and south, of the valley in which we were. There is no immediate beauty
of prospect from the house: Its ornament is a number of fine trees, and
some very rich meadows. We ascended the hill along a line of stately
beeches; and going round the further side of the house, saw some very
fine cedars and limes. The church of Great Hampden is close to the
house, or rather to the solid and old looking stables, which are in full
view of the windows but shrouded by a belt of high trees. Passing
between the house and the stables, and between the house and the church,
we came out into a sort of park-like meadow: for park properly so called
this house does not possess: but in this meadow, which is one of the
finest whether for beauty or pasture which I ever beheld, is a long
irregular avenue of the most magnificent limes. We crossed this field
and several others and coming to the edge of the hill, beheld another
deep valley: it was not however that of Risborough, but one which either
branches out of it, or does not go entirely through the hills but ends
near Hampden. We were now on the sand, and there was consequently a
brook in the valley, which in this high part was covered with brushwood
and fern on both sides to the very top, like the valley of Broadmoor on
Leith Hill, to which it bears a great resemblance. We could see the
valley for the length of miles before us, winding down towards the
plain, among cornfields and woods, until stopped and closed by the high
chalk hill beyond Wycombe. We kept for some time the top of the hill
which bounds this valley on the left, and which forms part of Wycombe
Heath. We then followed the side of this same hill, by field paths and
roads, and at last got into a road which runs along the bottom, close to
the brook before mentioned, which has here attained a considerable size.
In this manner we reached High Wycombe, a town embosomed in hills, and
decidedly larger and more thriving than any we had seen except Reading.
It is indeed a large and handsome place. It is bounded on the north by
the hills which we had now descended; on the south by the high chalk
hill called Wycombe Hill, the greater part of which is inclosed to form
a beautiful park about a fantastic looking building called Wycombe
Abbey. We dined at Wycombe (at the Crown) and within sight of the
church, with the beauty of which we were much struck. It is in a very
superior stile of Gothic architecture, containing many of the beauties
peculiar to that stile, without any frippery or meretricious ornament
whatever. The steeple especially—which is high, square and pointed like
those of Westminster Abbey—is a model which it were much to be wished
that our stupid race of London architects had consulted before they had
deformed the capital with a race of new churches, the ugliest surely
which ever were built by man. This church is extremely old, but they
have restored two large windows and are repairing some other parts in a
taste entirely conformable to the original. We now took the direct road
to Great Marlow, crossing the chalk hill, and the table land at its
summit, and descending gradually into the valley. I was now upon ground
familiar to me, and have therefore the less occasion to be extremely
particular in the description.

Edition: current; Page: [492]
11th

Marlow is a considerable town containing some good houses and one very
broad and neat street, with another long and somewhat ugly one
perpendicular to it at the extremity. It lies upon the Thames, which is
here a broad and clear but not a rapid river. No part of the valley of
the Thames, except that from Streatley to Reading, can be compared in
beauty to the valley of Marlow: but as the hills are much less bold and
high than those which we had recently seen, we were not so much struck
with this country as I had been in 1821, or as it is probable we all
should have been, if we had taken it in an earlier part of our walk. The
south side of the valley is formed by a very long and steep, though not
very high hill, which for about a mile is entirely covered with wood
saving in two places in each of which a field of oats peeps out. The
river, in a part of this line, runs immediately under this hill; in the
remainder, it winds away from it, having some fine meadows, and the
little village of Bisham, between. These meadows we crossed and reached
the wood, which, as seen from the meadows, is one of the finest objects
in the neighbourhood. A broad excellent path is practised in the hill
very little above its foot, and runs along the whole line, until it
joins a road which comes over the hill and unites itself to the road
from Marlow to Maidenhead and London at Bisham. We here struck into the
said road, which slopes up the hill, and from one point (where one of
the corn fields intervenes) commands a fine view of the valley and the
opposite hills from considerably east of Marlow, to a sudden bend of the
valley and river at a place called Newlock above Marlow, above which
place the hills bounding the river still higher up can be seen forming a
fine and somewhat bold line, over the tops of the gentler eminences near
Newlock. Having reached the top of the hill, we turned back, and
explored the other extremity of Bisham wood, striking into a path which
runs between the river and the base of the hill under an old quarry, and
climbing to the top where it becomes bare, and takes the name of Winter
Hill. From the two views which we had taken of the opposite hills from
these two elevated points it appeared that, although ascending gradually
and gently, they rise to no mean height, and had, or, when seen from the
opposite hill appeared to have, sufficient boldness, to be endurable
even after the Chiltern hills. The hill on which we were, as it
gradually descends towards Maidenhead, turns round to the right, the
river here making so great a bend, as to run in a retrograde direction
almost parallel to itself. We went down to the edge of this hill, (which
abounds in that pretty plant the Dianthus armeria) from whence we saw
the village of Cookham on the river, and beyond it the long and fine
line of wood appertaining to Hedsor and Clifden,13 which skirts the
river for a considerable distance, rising suddenly from it to some
height. We crossed the river at Cookham ferry, and followed the towing
path as far as we could: for, after passing directly under the foot of
the beautiful hill and wood for a considerable space—which from the
beautiful bends in the wood, the Edition: current; Page: [493] clearness
and tranquillity of the river itself and two pretty houses and grounds
on the opposite side, may be justly held the finest spot on the Thames
(and where I found the Helleborus foetidus and Dipsacus pilosus)—it is
at last stopped by the Clifden inclosure. Some of our party however
climbed over the palings, and explored several walks which are made in
the wood along the side of the hill, affording now and then a fine peep
of the river, meadows, and opposite hill: we then got over the palings
at the other side, and rejoining those of our friends who had remained
without, struck into the lane which leads up and along the hill to
Clifden gate. In a chalky and grassy thicket by the side of this lane,
on the brow of the hill I found the Astralagalus glyciphyllos. We peeped
in at the gate, but could see little except the house, which consists
oddly enough of wings without a body, the centre part having been burnt
down and not rebuilt. We returned to Marlow by the villages of Woburn14
and Little Marlow, finding the Borago officinalis by the way. In the
road there is nothing remarkable; but we took a path from Little Marlow
which led us by the side of Westrop, a house and grounds belonging to
Sir George Nugent,15 with some very fine trees and particularly some
cedars, one of them the largest I think I ever saw.—In the evening we
went up the river by the towing path through beautiful meadows and
passed Bisham Abbey on the other side of the river (a place belonging at
least in 1821 to Mr. Vansittart uncle of Lord Bexley),16 and somewhat
small considering its name, but Abbey is no uncommon name for a country
house in this part of England. We crossed the river near the copper
mills and somewhat commonplace but immense dwelling house of Owen
Williams, Mr. Grenfell’s partner and the patron of the borough of Great
Marlow.17 A little above this is Harleyford, belonging to Sir William
Clayton,18 a handsome old English brick house, with a very pretty park
and woods, and a lawn coming down close to the river, or rather to a
non-navigated arm of it, which forms a handsome appendage to the park
and estate. A large willowy island intervenes between this and the
navigated arm, on which stands a house of a very different appearance,
called Lady-place, near Hurley, an extremely old and old looking
manor-house, with which some historical recollections are connected, as
a vault or cellar under it was the place of the secret meetings of the
men who called over Edition: current; Page: [494] William III from
Holland.19 Just above these two houses is the bend of the river at
Newlock; chiefly beautiful from a sort of chalk cliff of some length and
height, sprinkled with trees which occasionally hide it, and skirted
with them almost all along the summit or edge. At the foot of this
cliff, close to the river, is a cottage, to which it is fashionable
among the Marlow people to come up by water and drink tea. We crossed
the river, ascended the cliff, and returned to Marlow by the Henley
road, which passes through a wood of full grown trees belonging to
Harleyford, and descends several rather steep declivities to Marlow.
Rain came on in the evening, and we reached Marlow somewhat wet.

12th

We went to Newlock by the route by which we returned from it on the
previous evening, finding the Thlaspi arvense, or perfoliatum, in the
way. We here crossed the river and took the opportunity of a shower
which rendered a place of shelter desirable, to go over Lady-place and
see it. This ancient priory (for such it was, having been founded about
the time of the Norman Conquest) is now, and has been for the last ten
years, entirely uninhabited, and is so much out of repair that it
probably will never be inhabited again—although indeed it is just about
to be sold. There are an immense number of rooms in it, most of them
small, others very large and handsome, with oak wainscots and floors,
the walls and roofs often painted, in several different stiles and
tastes, with a very fine entrance hall and staircase. In a vault under
the house, we saw an inscription on the wall, to the effect stated in my
journal of yesterday. Leaving this place, we followed the winding of the
river, and soon arrived at Medmenham Abbey, the place where Wilkes and
his Hell-fire Club held their celebrated orgies20—it is a very small
place, not much larger than a large cottage, but a part of the wall
formerly belonged (as we were told on the spot) to an Abbey and the
remainder which is modern was built of the old materials. It is situated
in an extremely beautiful part of the river, and the hills round it,
particularly on the Buckinghamshire side, come closer to the river and
are bolder and steeper and of a more beautiful shape than on the other
side of Newlock. At this place it is usual for parties to dine, and a
room looking out upon the river is kept on purpose for their
accommodation—the place being uninhabited, except by the woman who keeps
it. From Medmenham we crossed the river, and followed a very beautiful
path, which keeps the side of the river for some distance, and then
crosses Edition: current; Page: [495] the hills on the Berkshire side in
order to save a bend of the river. We crossed Culham Court Park, passed
the house, a large regular brick mansion, and after passing through
several fields amidst the rain, which pursued us the greater part of the
day, we struck into the London and Maidenhead road just before it
descends the steep chalk hill to Henley. On the declivity we found (as
it is set down in the books)21 the Linaria repens; but this is a common
plant here, as I found it in several places about Streatley and
Baseldon. We crossed Henley bridge and took the towing path on the
Oxfordshire side, to get a full view of the chalk hills on the other,
which here descend very precipitously towards the river, forming the
grounds of the celebrated Park Place—which consists of two elbows
descending very steeply from the hill to the river, with trees of many
kinds very handsomely grouped thereon, and the hollow between them
covered with chalky turf. Beyond the furthest of these elbows the side
of the hill formed a wood chiefly composed of large trees, hanging
directly over the Thames, and skirted on the water’s edge by some very
large white looking trees which seemed to be willow, poplar and ash. We
soon arrived at a place where the towing path is stopped on the
Oxfordshire side by the very pretty grounds of an old house, which seven
years before, when I was last there needed to be propped up by
buttresses, but we did not however approach near enough to it to see
whether it had made any further progress to decay. We now made the best
of our way to the turnpike road from Henley to Reading, which led us
along the heights over the valley of the Thames, with occasional
glimpses of the river, and one fine view of Park Place behind us, but no
particular beauty of any other kind, and keeping along this road we
arrived at Reading, where the doubtfulness of the weather induced us to
remain for the evening.

13th

Having a day to spare, and that day being very fine, we resolved to pay
another visit to Pangbourne and Streatley. We accordingly walked to the
former place by the towing path, as before described. The beauty of the
scenery lost nothing by repetition; on the contrary, we had never
thought it so beautiful as now when we came to it from the bolder
scenery of the Chiltern Hills. At Pangbourne instead of going up to
Baseldon by water as before, we ascended the bare chalk hill, resembling
those formed by the refuse of the chalk pits, which as I formerly
mentioned, overlooks the river, with only the Oxford road between. Its
summit forms a narrow strip of chalk down: and if we had thought this
hill fine when seen from the river, we thought the river and adjacent
objects still finer when seen from the hill. We could see not only the
country on the other side of the river up to the tops of the hills, but
(by the aid of a bend in the river and valley) the whole range of hills
on the side where we were, first woody, then bare, as far as Streatley
High Edition: current; Page: [496] Down, to which we now directed our
course: We struck into a path in the side of the next hill, a thickly
wooded one: the path, near the lower edge of the wood, just overlooking
the Oxford road, and commanding a view through a narrow belt of trees
into the valley, reminded us of the long walks at Wotton. Beyond this
hill we took one of the dells which run up into the range of hills, and
came out upon the table land, which is as uninteresting as any other
table land we had been on—but intersected by several woody dells, which
we crossed and at length came into the most beautiful of them all, the
winding dell into which we had looked down from the edge of the wood on
Streatley Hill. We ascended this dell, first at the bottom and next on
its right-hand hill, till we came to the spot at which we had issued out
into the wood; commanding all the way, a continually changing prospect
of this beautiful dell, which from its depth, the frequent bends in its
course, the quantity of wood, and the beauty with which the wood is
disposed in it, well rewarded the time we spent in it and would be
worthy of a more minute exploration. We here entered the wood and came
out as before on Streatley High Down, from whence we descended not to
the village but to the Oxford road, and went to Pangbourne by that road,
which passes through the pretty village of Baseldon, between Baseldon
Park and the river, which it constantly overlooks except where it is
obliged to turn the house and pleasureground of the right bank of the
river mentioned in a former part of this journal. We dined at
Pangbourne, and returned to Reading in the evening, partly by the towing
path and partly by the road.

14th

This morning at five Grant left us for London and it may be as well to
remark that a coach leaves Reading at that hour, from Williams’s coach
office, which reaches the White Horse Cellar at ½ past 9 and the city at
ten. We breakfasted at Reading, and proceeded at nine o’clock by one of
the London coaches to Oakingham,22 where Chadwick also left us, going on
to London. The remainder of our party, which was now reduced to two,
being Crawley and myself, resolved to take this opportunity of exploring
Bagshot Heath, and the range of high heathy hills between it and
Farnham, before he returned to London and I proceeded to join my family
at Walton-upon-Thames. We therefore left the coach, and took the road to
Finchampstead, through a flat commonplace country, and when we had
arrived within sight of that place, turned to the left and soon came
upon Bagshot Heath, which in this part wears the most dreary and
desolate aspect conceivable. The immense tract of country called Bagshot
Heath, is situated in three counties, Berkshire, Hampshire, and Surry:
the Berkshire part of it consists chiefly of wild irregular heathy
hills, without any cultivated spots, and consisting entirely of bog and
waste, new planted here and there with small groves of stunted Scotch
firs. We soon came in sight of the two round hills mentioned in my first
day’s journal: The Edition: current; Page: [497] smallest of the two has
a clump of trees on the top, and is called, as I believe from
recollection, Edgeborough Hill: this lies close to our route, and we
ascended it: from the summit we could see on two sides nothing but
waste, on a third (being that from whence we came) waste near at hand,
and a tame cultivated country beyond, bounded at a considerable distance
by the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire hills, of which, lying due north,
we could easily distinguish those of Marlow. On the remaining side,
which was the west, we saw the valley of the Blackwater river, which
intersects the Bagshot heath hills from south to north, forming a strip
of cultivated land chiefly meadow, across this unprofitable waste.—Some
trees of no great size, scattered over it, contributed to render it not
absolutely ugly, which is the utmost that could be said for any part of
our present prospect. In this valley we saw the village of Yateley, and
the valley almost to Eversley, beyond which the western part of
Berkshire towards Newbury seemed gradually though tamely to rise to a
considerable height. To the east, amid a dreary waste, and sandhills of
no very remarkable shape or appearance, was the other of the two round
hills before alluded to: This which I believe to be Crowthorn hill, is
considerably larger than Edgeborough, though not much higher. This also
has a clump of trees on the top but much smaller and less conspicuous
than those on Edgeborough—the sides also appear to be almost entirely
bare, with no vegetation or any thing except the gravelly sand, whereas
the sides of Edgeborough are covered with heath and furze, and various
other of the plants commonly growing in the less barren parts of this
immense waste. We descended the hill, and continuing on our former road,
which here skirting the edge of the cultivated country, becomes a lane
bordered by very high hedges, we passed through the little village or
hamlet of Sandhurst, and soon came to the Military College, where I
revived my old recollections by wandering about the semi-cultivated
ground in front of the College, about the Governor’s house,23 and on the
margin of the first lake—for the ponds on the heath at this point are
sufficiently large, and their banks sufficiently ornamented, to deserve
that name. We here came out upon the great Western Road, and struck into
it towards London. After passing the College, this road gradually
ascends a long heathy hill, passing to the right a knoll planted with
wood, at the top of which there is an old obelisk, a conspicuous
landmark to the surrounding country. This hill forms part of the long
line of heathy hills called here Chobham Ridges, and subsequently
assuming the name of Romping Downs, which extends from a little to the
north of this place, to Ash between Guildford and Farnham, and which we
now designed to explore. At the top of this hill is the public house
called the Jolly Farmer, better known by its old name of the Golden
Farmer. Here one of the Southampton roads, by Farnham, separates itself
from the Western road. Looking eastward, we could not see Bagshot, which
was hid by a corner of the hill, but could see an extensive portion of
the heath beyond it towards Egham with a high Edition: current; Page:
[498] healthy hill (probably Virginia Water Hill) in front of us, and
the cultivated country to the left towards Windsor. On the other side we
saw down into the Hampshire part of Bagshot Heath on the other side of
the Blackwater: into the valley of which, we now gradually descended by
the Southampton road, leaving the Chobham ridges to our left, which have
here a somewhat irregular and varied edge. We quitted this road at the
village of Frimley, near the Blackwater. This place contains some pretty
ornamented houses, and though not very beautiful, may be considered as
one of the prettiest spots in this dreary country. We crossed the
Basingstoke canal, and ascending the Romping Downs, kept on the top of
them for two or three miles further. On the left we could see down into
the valley of Woking and Pirbright, almost the only ugly and commonplace
district in Surrey: but the healthy sandhill, at this edge, assumed a
variety of pretty shapes, like St. George’s Hill at the extremity
adjoining Cobham.24 On the other side the hill descends very gradually
to the valley of the Blackwater, with long ugly heathy dells running up
through the hill to the very top: Of the valley itself we could see
little or nothing, and the hills beyond it in Hampshire were a mere
barren heathy waste, without any of that beauty of form which in some
parts St. George’s Hill and even the Romping Downs possess. To the
south, however, as we approached the southern extremity of the Downs, we
could perceive the long chalky ridge called the Hog’s Back, which
extends from Guildford to Farnham, and which our present course would
nearly have bisected at right angles: and beyond it the ridge of sandy
hill ending with several irregular peaks, which is north of Hindhead,
and which seen from St. George’s Hill appears directly in the gap where
Guildford stands. To the left of this we saw the Guildford gap, and the
line of Merrow and Effingham downs, with part of the great Surrey sand
hills (the Leith hill range) beyond them. The Romping Downs are perhaps
the barrenest tract in all Surrey (except Blackheath near Albury). It
produces scarcely any thing but heath—no fern grows there, and even in
the boggy parts there is not soil enough for any of the usual bog
plants; nothing is to be seen in the water but the bare black peat
earth. Near the end of the hill we descended towards the east, and
passed through some miles of the tame common place country forming the
valley of Woking, Worplesdon, and Pirbright. There was nothing worthy of
notice in this space until we arrived within a mile of Guildford, where
the declivity of the Hog’s Back and other hills to the right, and Merrow
Downs to the left, are interesting enough. We remained at Guildford for
the night.

15th

When we ascended the chalk hill above Guildford this morning, and still
more when we reached the top of Martha’s Chapel, although the view was
not new to me, and although I had recently come from the fine country
described in this journal, the valley of Godalming and the surrounding
hills appeared to me more Edition: current; Page: [499] beautiful than
ever. There is so much variety in the arrangement of the hills one
behind another, and so much richness in the appearance of the country,
studded with large full grown trees instead of the woods of Oxfordshire
and Buckinghamshire, with the bold ridges of Hindhead and the peaked
hill forming the background to the right, and the Leith Hill range to
the left, that the Chiltern hills are entirely eclipsed by it. I shall
not describe the vale of Albury, as it was familiar to me before. We
dined at Dorking, whence Crawley proceeded by coach to London: I
accompanied him as far as Leatherhead, when the chalky edge of the
Norbury Park Hill appeared to me much finer than the finest specimen I
had seen in the Chiltern hills even of this which is the peculiar stile
of scenery of those hills. From Leatherhead I walked to Walton by
Claremont Land, and Esher. And here “ends this strange eventful
history.”25

I shall insert an account of our expenses in case we or any others
should wish to go this journey hereafter.

26I.e., from the previous page.
£
s
d
Reading.
Coach to Reading
1
12
—
Coachman
—
4
—
Bill, Waiters, etc.
—
14
6
Pangbourne.
Bill, Waiters, etc.
2
1
—
Waterman to Baseldon
—
3
—
Streatley.
Bill, Waiters, etc.
1
—
—
Ferry (twice)
—
—
8
Nettlebed.
Bill, Waiters, etc.
1
10
6
Stoken Church
Bill, Waiters, etc.
—
12
6
Prince’s Risborough.
Bill, Waiters, etc.
—
13
—
8
11
2
Brought over26
8
11
2
Wendover.
Seeing Chequers.
—
2
6
Bill, Waiters, etc.
5
11
—
Marlow
Different ferries
—
2
2
Bill, Waiters, etc.
3
3
6
Seeing Lady-Place
—
1
—
Lunch at Medmenham Abbey
—
2
—
Wycombe.
Bill, Waiters, etc.
—
14
6
Pangbourne.
Bill, Waiters, etc.
—
19
—
Waterman at Purley
—
1
—
Reading.
Bill, Waiters, etc.
1
7
6
Oakingham.
Fare from Reading
—
3
6
Lunch at the Jolly Farmer
—
1
6
Guildford.
Bill, Waiters, etc.
1
1
6
Dorking.
Bill, Waiters, etc.
6
6
Leatherhead.
Fare from Dorking.
—
1
—
23
9
4

Edition: current; Page: [500] Edition: current; Page: [501]


31.: Walking Tour of Yorkshire and the Lake District
 JULY-AUGUST 1831

MS, Bodleian Library, MS Don.d.26. The entries are undated, but external
evidence, including the diaries of Dorothy Wordsworth and Henry Cole
(1808-82), yet another of Mill’s close friends at this time, makes it
almost certain that Mill reached Leeds from London on 8 July, and ended
the tour at Kendal on 8 August. The inferred dates are added in square
brackets. Mill’s companion was Horace Grant, who had accompanied Mill on
his earlier walking tours (see Nos. 29 and 30). They were joined on 30
July at the Queen’s Head Inn in Keswick by Henry Cole. Cole’s diary (MS,
Victoria and Albert Museum) of his part of the tour supplies information
that adds to Mill’s account; extracts are given in footnotes. Mill also
gave Cole guiding instructions for his continuation of his tour after
Mill and Grant left him; these (also in the Victoria and Albert) are
given in the concluding footnote. As not published in Mill’s lifetime,
not listed in his bibliography.

[8 July, 1831]

It would be useless to attempt describing even the general features of a
country which was seen only through the windows of a mail coach. I was
able to obtain a place on the outside for an hour or two, during which I
could perceive that the north of England very much resembles any other
country of gentle slopes, covered with corn and pasture, and in which a
very slight elevation enables you to see for many miles round. It is not
destitute of wood; but there is nowhere enough, either of timber or even
of coppice, to give a character to the landscape, except for very short
distances. When you enter Yorkshire, you are in a country of higher
hills, and deeper valleys; but the hills are in ridges, which rise and
decline gradually, and usually support more or less of that most insipid
of all natural objects, table land. Here, too, you cannot see very far
in any direction without seeing smoke; and the towns, which are usually,
when seen from a distance, especially from an eminence, the finest
points in a landscape, were here nothing but foci of black smoke poured
forth from lofty chimnies rising like the masts of the ships in a
well-filled dock. The towns, indeed, when you passed through them, were
well worth seeing. I had never before seen a town three fourths of which
consisted of manufactories, built in a stile half way between a barrack
and gaol. All the remainder of every town seemed to consist of little
ill-looking houses of artisans, with a few shops—few at least when
compared with the towns of equal size in the south of England. And every
object was blackened with smoke beyond what can be conceived by a person
who has seen only London: with the difference that in London the smoke
is visible chiefly as one indivisible mass of cloud or haze, but in
these manufacturing places you could discern each separate volcano
boiling forth Edition: current; Page: [502] Edition: current; Page:
[503] Edition: current; Page: [504] its odious contents, which continued
distinguishable from the rest for a considerable space. Nor was the town
only infected by this plague; the whole of the environs were thickly
sown with manufactories, each of which contributed its share towards
darkening the sky and giving noisomeness to the breath which you inhale.
There is generally in each town a quarter in which the houses are better
looking and are occupied apparently by the manufacturers, professional
people, and so forth: they usually have the good taste to chuse the
upper part of the town (for these towns are mostly upon a hill) but they
cannot prevent the smoke from reaching them and deforming their houses
whether built of brick, as at Nottingham, or of stone as in some of the
Yorkshire towns. The only fine objects in these places are the churches.
In most of the towns there is one lofty edifice, built in the cathedral
style, and considerably ornamented, but with the ornaments kept in due
subordination to the general plan of the building which is simple. The
taste of the neighbouring architects seems to have been early formed on
good models. The manufacturing towns which we passed through were
Nottingham, Mansfield, Chesterfield, Sheffield, Barnsley, Wakefield, and
finally Leeds. The general description already given will serve for them
all; the differences, whether in degree or in kind, are inconsiderable:
but as Leeds is the largest, and as the effect of its sooty atmosphere
was aided by rather a thick haze which met us there (the air having till
then been delightfully clear) it was there that we were enabled to
study, under most favorable circumstances, the effect, pictorially
considered, of that imposing feature in a landscape, darkness.

[lf0223-27_figure_006.jpg]

[9th]

Having determined to take Bolton Priory and its beautiful neighbourhood
in our way to the Lakes, we were desirous of taking the stage coach
which goes into Craven through Otley and up Wharfedale, but as this did
not set off till the afternoon, we chose to go in the morning by the
other road, to Steeton, which is the nearest point on that road to the
place of our destination. Before we were well out of the smoke of Leeds
and its environs, we came unawares upon a celebrated ruin, Kirkstall
Abbey. There is nothing striking in the situation; as a mere ruin it
seemed fine, but the coach carried us past it too rapidly to enable us
to judge of any thing but the first appearance. We proceeded up the
valley of the Aire, and entered among hills which gradually increased in
height, and were tolerably steep, but made little figure in the
landscape; partly because there was nothing picturesque in their forms,
and partly perhaps because the valley was too wide in proportion to the
height of the hills. Still, we felt that we were approaching to a
mountainous country, and the details were frequently pretty. We passed
through three more manufacturing towns; Bradford, Bingley, and Keighley:
all these are of stone, a coarse-grained sandstone, the millstone grit
of geologists, a most serviceable material certainly, since of it are
made houses, roofs, the inclosures of the fields, and the pavement of
the streets. I cannot compliment it with the possession of Edition:
current; Page: [505] beauty proportional to the multitude of its uses:
it is like many men and women homely without being rustic: it takes away
the charm from the idea of a stone house, just as the baby-house rocks
at Tunbridge Wells robbed my imagination of a rich fund of enjoyment,1
by breaking the association which made me never look at a drawing of a
rock without fancying myself in the midst of lofty mountains. I have a
special spite against this millstone grit. Not one of the hills, so far
as I could see, which were composed of it, was bold and precipitous in
form, or had the air of anything much above an overgrown molehill: to
see even ledges of rock, or projecting masses jutting out of a hill
side, we had to wait till we came into the limestone country. It is a
great quality in a mountain as in a woman, to carry herself well and to
seem conscious of her whole height. These mountains, for some of them
might have claimed that rank if mere elevation could give it, seemed to
lie on their backs; stretched out at their lazy length, with their heads
barely higher than a long ugly ridge. Still this was far from an
unpleasant journey, and the smaller manufacturing places had an uncouth
air, and afforded a contrast to the surrounding scenery, which was not
without its effect upon the imagination. At the little village of
Steeton we left the coach, as we had intended, and crossed over from the
valley of the Aire to that of the Wharfe. This we did by a long steep
road, winding over the corner of a long ridge called Rumble Moor. I say
a ridge, but that which takes up the whole space between these two
valleys should rather be called two ridges, supporting between them a
dark, bleak, barren moorland. From the highest point of this road, we
saw over into Wharfedale, where the first object that struck us was a
high prominent hill, called Beamsley Haugh, which forms the eastern
boundary of the valley to a considerable distance, and is the most like
a mountain of any elevation we had seen or afterwards saw in this part
of Craven. It had something like a peaked top, and did not seem afraid
to shew it, but overtopped and overlooked the adjacent hills with an air
of dignity. We descended into Wharfedale, and, by a very pretty rural
lane among fields and trees, reached Bolton Bridge where we put up at an
excellent inn, kept by excellent people, whom every person who likes to
forget that he pays for his entertainment, should make a point of
visiting.

[10th]

In order to understand and feel what Wharfedale is, it is necessary to
forget what is at the top of the hills which form it, and to consider
them merely as the walls of a valley. Let the visitor beware of climbing
any of the hills. He will find nothing but bleakness and barrenness
there, and will see nothing but bleakness and barrenness all around: for
the meadows, the woods, the winding hill sides, which are the charm of
the valley when you are in it, appear insignificant to one who looks
down upon them from above, and are then but a speck of fertility in an
extensive waste, Edition: current; Page: [506] the desolate aspect of
which is for the most part unredeemed by anything imposing in form.

The lower part of the valley is closed, (as every fine valley should be
closed by something) by the above-mentioned Rumble Moor, which looks
dark and steep, and affords great variety of shade according to the
position of the sun. Looking towards it, you are overtopped to the left
by Beamsley Haugh, with its sharp bold summit: to the right the hills
are tamer in themselves, but the lower part of them is clothed with wood
over which you see the green summits. If you now turn round, you see
before you the eminences which bound the valley gradually approaching to
each other, but in proportion as it narrows it becomes winding so that
you cannot without ascending some of the smaller eminences, see far into
the narrow part of the valley. At the entrance there is a kind of
natural amphitheatre, in which is situated the noble ruin called Bolton
Abbey, or more properly Bolton Priory, equally beautiful in itself and
in its situation.

The Wharfe, a mountain stream which rushes impetuously over a bed filled
with large masses of rock rounded by the waters, here winds round the
base of a precipitous declivity, of almost a pink colour, concave
towards the river, and down which a rivulet falls from a considerable
height into the stream. The river may be crossed here when the water is
low, by about twenty blocks of stone arranged as stepping stones. On the
other side, or within the folds of the river, is a rich meadow scattered
here and there with stately trees, chiefly ash, sometimes in groups and
sometimes single. In this meadow, at about fifty or sixty feet from the
river, stands the Priory: the extremity of the nave pointing to the
cliff, and stream. Behind the ruin, is another woody bank, sufficiently
high to shut out all the rest of the world, and give a feeling of the
most complete seclusion. Above, the hills approach nearer and nearer
till they almost meet, and both sides become more and more wooded; the
lofty summits on the right shewing themselves as a prominent part of
every view until the woods become too thick and lofty to allow them to
be visible. This is the position of the Abbey: but it is itself so
prominent an object in all the finest views that for this reason if for
no other it would require a description. Fortunately it is easily
described. Fancy a long Gothic cathedral of the simplest kind, with
nothing but the roof taken off; all the arches which contained the
windows being perfect; even the tracery, in many of them, little or not
at all injured; and the arch of the window at the farther extremity
(that next the river) towering above the rest, and shewing exactly what
was the height of the roof: one little turret-like ornament remaining on
the right hand of this lofty arch, but the corresponding one on the
other side being wanting. The top of the wall on which the roof rested
is covered with brown grass and other weeds; some of the external
buttresses are overgrown with ivy, but the ruin is not hidden in it as
is often the case. In the interior of this part nothing seems wanting
except the stone pillars carved in the wall, the tops of which only are
remaining. On the other side of the cross aisle, (of which there are
considerable remains) the ruin has been newly Edition: current; Page:
[507] roofed, and is now used as a church. We did not see the inside of
this, but looked in at the entrance, which is at the extremity furthest
from the river. There is a double front; the inner one could be seen,
through the open doorway of the outer. Both are fine, but the carving of
the interior one is extremely delicate and in the most perfect
preservation: it is well delineated in Davis’s lithographic Views of
Bolton Abbey.2 The old gateway (a separate building) has been enlarged
into a habitable house, and is used as a hunting box by the Duke of
Devonshire,3 to whom the Abbey and the adjacent woods (Bolton Park, as
it is very inappropriately termed) belong. Near the ruin are two very
pretty cottages, having an air of rustic seclusion, with their faces,
however, very judiciously averted from the ruin, which would suffer in
appearance from the proximity, and from which they are shut out by
trees. One of them is the vicarage; the other is used by friends of the
Duke who come here to hunt or shoot.

It is impossible by any description, to give a just idea of the immense
variety of aspects, under which the ruin and its surrounding trees are
seen from different points in the adjacent woody hills on both sides,
with striking and ever varying effect. The present, or some former
proprietor of the woods, has selected, with singular judgment and taste,
all the most striking points of view, has kept the trees from growing up
in front so as to hide the prospect, and has placed seats, of the most
artless and unobtrusive kind, at every place where the passer-by would
desire to halt for a few moments and look about him. This remark applies
not only to the woods immediately round the Abbey, but to the higher and
narrower parts of the valley of the Wharfe.

The stream rushes down between two high and moor-like eminences, one of
which, called Barden Fell, appears to close the valley at that end. It
then enters a narrow glen, clothed with thick woods on both sides, and
leaving little space at the bottom beyond what is occupied by the bed of
the river. This bed, of which the greater part is now empty from the
dryness of the season, is filled with masses and slabs of sandstone
rocks, which sometimes stand out as eminences far above the present
level of the river, and many of them must when it is higher be insulated
by its waters. In tumbling over these rocks the Wharfe forms miniature
cascades, and every imaginable form of rapids; and there is one spot,
perhaps the most sequestered, and the most completely closed in with
woods and rocks, of them all, in which the stream flows rapidly down in
a sort of trough, four or five feet wide, which it has (apparently) cut
for itself to a considerable depth in the very substance of the rock. At
several points in this space, it would be easy to jump over the river:
from which circumstance the spot has derived the name of the Strid. It
is related, that the catastrophe of a youth, the last scion of the
family to whom this property Edition: current; Page: [508] belonged, and
who lost his life by attempting to jump the Strid with a greyhound in a
leash, was the circumstance which led to the foundation of Bolton
Priory, or, at least, its removal to this spot. Wordsworth has made this
legend the subject of one of his smaller poems; and Rogers has
commemorated it in his.4 It is also alluded to in Wordsworth’s “White
Doe of Rylstone,”5 the scene of which is laid in this neighbourhood.
Rylstone is a small place higher up the valley, at the foot of Barden
Fell, which is also known by the name of Rylstone Fell.

As the valley or glen winds round and round between its woody sides, the
paths which are judiciously cut through the wood along the sides of the
hills afford an immense variety of views; some extremely confined and
secluded, nothing being seen except part of the opposite hill and wood,
and the bed of the torrent below: others allowing a sight of a
considerable portion of the valley, closed by so much of the great
eminence, Barden Fell, as the intervening woody hill would suffer to be
visible. In these last, or larger views, a prominent object is Barden
Tower, the ruin of a building as little like a tower as can well be
conceived, which was formerly the residence of various noble personages
chiefly Cliffords, and among others, of the celebrated Anne countess of
Pembroke:6 parts of it I believe are still habitable; it is visible from
a great distance, if you are high enough; it is seated at the foot of
Barden Fell, just where the wood ends and the moor begins, and marks, as
it were, the boundary between verdure and desolation. The woods
themselves would not be without great beauty, even if the surrounding
scenery were in no way remarkable. They have the beauty which uneven
rocky declivities planted with wood cannot fail to possess. The rocks
occasionally assume picturesque forms, and one in particular which
stands close to the path bears a close resemblance to a ruined turret
and we at first imagined it to be one. Paths and drives are cut through
various parts of the wood: but we kept that which immediately overhangs
the torrent, and from which branches off to every point on the water’s
edge, which is in any peculiar degree remarkable. I have spoken
principally of the right bank of the stream, that on which Barden Tower
and the Priory stand. On the other side the paths are all at a
considerably greater elevation, and the river is rarely visible from
them, at least in the narrow part of the valley. A beautiful path on
this side the river Edition: current; Page: [509] leads up Posforth
Ghyll. Ghyll is the name given in this country to a narrow ravine in the
side of a mountain. Both sides of this gorge are thickly wooded. In one
place the brook, or mountain stream, falls over an amphitheatre of rock
and forms a pretty, though not a very lofty waterfall, which people
usually go to see. With the rustic bridge immediately below, it
certainly forms a pretty object for the painter. The higher part of this
ghyll, above the waterfall, is called the Valley of Desolation, from the
barren, uninviting aspect of the moor, no longer wooded, which it
intersects and in which it is finally lost. We did not track the stream
up this valley, but contented ourselves with looking down upon it from
one of the heights which command both the ravine and the vale. In this
desolate tract which still forms part of what is called Bolton Park, we
were told (for we did not see it) that the indigenous red deer of the
country still survives; though now appropriated, and cooped up within
inclosures. There are other ghylls, or gorges, mostly clothed with wood,
and which, with the brooks they contain and by which probably they were
originally hollowed out, debouche into the valley of the Wharfe. All
these seem pretty; one of them, near Bolton Bridge, on the left bank of
the river, we ascended for some distance and were much pleased with.

The trees of Wharfedale are chiefly the ash, which abounds and is most
healthy and luxuriant; the oak; some sycamores (planted); and the wych
elm, which is here very abundant and fine, growing in all situations,
and giving to the banks and roadsides a peculiar character by its large
and luxuriant foliage. There is some birch in the woods of the narrow
valley. A remarkable feature in the country is the immense abundance and
luxuriance of the wild roses, of which there are some rather uncommon
species; this however we observed throughout Yorkshire; but what we saw
nowhere except in Wharfedale was the profusion of honeysuckle, which
grows every where, sometimes climbing to the tops of very high trees,
sometimes gracefully clustering round bushes or near the stone
inclosures, and covered with flowers which, especially in the evening,
positively perfume the air.

[11th]

Having staid at Bolton the remainder of the day on which we arrived, and
the whole of the succeeding day and night, we crossed the country the
day after to Skipton to meet the same coach by which we had come from
Leeds. At Skipton we saw the exterior of the castle; which is kept in
repair, and inhabited. As far as a castle, and an abbey, can resemble,
its stile reminded me of Ford Abbey.7 These places strike the
imagination more (mine at least) when inhabited, than they do when in
ruins; the notion of living in a building a thousand years old, and
built externally and internally as they built in those days, heightens
and vivifies one’s Edition: current; Page: [510] conceptions of the
peculiarities of the place. This castle is no sham antique, it was
evidently built for defence, and the parts which I think must have been
added after the mode of warfare which made a private house defensible
had ceased, are in good keeping with the rest. The building bulges out
into two noble semicircular towers, and the remainder of the front
projects forward at short intervals into a series of angles, and is
terminated by a kind of small wing. On the other side of the cylindrical
projections is another small wing, not separated from the towers by an
intervening line of front: but this seems to be uninhabited; the stone
steps up to it have an untrodden air, being overgrown with weeds. The
whole is not more than one story high. The gateway, also old, has been
much repaired, though in the same stile, and the word Desormais is cut
out, or built in stone, over it: you see light between the letters. What
was once the court yard is now a very pretty grass plot, overlooking the
town and the surrounding country.—We here met our coach, and proceeded
through Craven to Kendal. From Airedale where we were, we first crossed
over into Ribblesdale and then into the district through which the
rivers Wenning, Greta, and Lune, issue from the mountains. We can hardly
be said to have been among the mountains of Craven, (though we crossed
some considerable eminences); but we certainly passed under their bases,
having several of the highest of them very near to us on the right. They
disappointed me much. They possess neither grandeur, nor beauty. Even
Ingleborough, the highest of them can only be called a high hill, not a
mountain. There is little of sharpness or boldness in their outline:
their summits rise so little above the rest of the ridge, and are thrown
so far apart by its immense length and breadth, that each hill seems a
separate mass; they are never clustered, nor crowded together, as in a
really mountainous country. At Settle, the entrance into Ribblesdale, we
came upon limestone, which afforded us some precipitous hill sides, and
ledges of rock; but the upper part of the hills was still composed of
the millstone grit, and had the tameness which belongs to it. Not being
able to consider this district in the light of mountains, we could not
help looking at it in the light of moor: and as such, connecting it with
the unpleasant notions of cold, wet, barrenness, sameness, long tiresome
journeys and losing our way. But if the view towards the mountains was
uninteresting, that towards the plains was far worse. The descending
ranges which formed the valleys of the different rivers, expand at the
foot of the hills into the tamest openings that you can possibly
conceive: two lines of eminences, never at the best remarkably bold, and
now not even high, spread out their arms, and embrace a little plain,
cultivated indeed, but seeming to have been but lately redeemed from
moorland, retaining its pristine air and character of barrenness, and
sloping up and down and round about in every possible form of insipidity
but none of beauty or even prettiness. As we were passing Ingleborough
it began to rain violently, and for the remainder of the journey we saw
little or nothing. We could however perceive that after leaving Craven,
the country remained hilly and became much prettier; the eminences being
not much less lofty, rather bolder in form, and the country Edition:
current; Page: [511] intermixed among them being far more richly
cultivated and wooded. We slept at Kendal which is a long, rather
cheerful looking town, and started on foot the next morning for the
banks of Windermere.

[12th]

We took the direction of Bowness, a little village on the east bank of
the lake, and about the middle of it. Our road passed over gentle, and
tolerably well wooded declivities, frequently allowing a view into a
broad valley on the right hand, the valley of the Kent, or Kendal river:
bounded again, on the further side, by the low, but gradually
heightening mountains of Kentdale and Long Sleddale. At other times, we
saw down to the left between heathy and craggy hills, towards the mouth
of the same river. The stone inclosures began to be clothed with mosses,
and mountain plants, but in no great variety: and the limestone rock,
alternating with clay-slate frequently shewed itself in slabs and
pointed masses on both sides of the road. At length, after winding up a
gentle woody ascent, we caught a first view of the mountains of Coniston
and Langdale: and from this moment we felt that we were at length in a
real mountainous country. Two or three bold high pointed mountains
overlapping one another with broad bases, commenced the chain on the
left; to the right of these we beheld a perfect sea of mountains,
crowded together, yet distinctly individualized, resembling some of the
panoramic views of the Alps; all deeply shaded, and from the position of
the sun and the character of the fine light in which we saw them,
wearing that peculiar cloud-like appearance which makes it so difficult,
in looking at distant mountains, to believe that they belong to this
earth. More bold, peak-like, and precipitous than the rest, stood out
the twin mountains called the Langdale Pikes, the outline of which,
extremely sharp and abrupt, and their position, which made us see them
distinctly separated from the mountains that seemed nearest to them,
rendered them the most commanding objects in a prospect which contained
several elevations higher than they. Nothing can be more various than
the aspect of these mountains as seen from different points. Their bases
are united; the lower of the summits, which as usually seen, appears on
the left, is a real peak, that is a sharp triangular summit descending
rapidly on both sides. The higher of the two is not a perfect peak,
being broader, and looking as if the extreme top had been cut off; and
it declines suddenly indeed—not however to the valley at once, but to a
ridge of considerable height and some length. From the form of these two
mountains, they sometimes seem to bend over into the valley; at times
the remoter and more perfect peak seems double: from other points they
look like two lions couchant, side by side, the two peaks being the
heads, the ridge of the higher mountain seeming the body of the nearer
animal and being supposed to hide that of the more distant: from other
situations you fancy them elephants, and you positively imagine that you
distinguish their tusks: and I have seen them when the nearer, and
higher summit appeared of itself like a lion, but a lion coiled up.
These however were subsequent discoveries. From Edition: current; Page:
[512] the Kendal road they seemed nothing but two peaks, and noble ones
of their kind; and as every fine prospect should have some points more
conspicuous than others, these were the most conspicuous. We did not yet
see the lake: but by going in at a gate to the right and ascending a
little above the road we caught a first view of a very small portion of
it, which then appeared dingy brown; but we saw it of at least twenty
colours before the day was at an end. Our journey now lay down hill; we
were descending into the valley of the lake, and before we had gone far,
a turn of the road brought into view its finest part. The bold lofty
mountains of Coniston, which overtopped every thing intervening, formed
the background of the landscape: but in front of these, and strikingly
contrasted with them, was a high ridge or bank richly wooded with thick
plantations, which rose immediately from the margin of the lake. The
space between these and the hill on which we were was completely filled
up by the beautiful Windermere, or Winandermere, which stretched itself
out to right and left, further than we could see; terminated to the
right, by the noble mountains of Langdale; embosomed in hills which in
any other district would have been thought bold and striking, but which
here, by their verdure and repose, set off the more sublime scenery of
the high mountains, which in turn added a new charm to their graceful
elegance. The lake, at the first glance, but at the first glance only,
disappointed me in point of width. Seen from above, it looked like a
magnificent river. Its length is certainly more remarkable than its
breadth, and the point at which we first saw it, was the narrowest
point. Yet on descending lower down, when the view threw off its
map-like and bird’s eye character, the distinctness with which we could
discern the outlines of the beautiful objects on the opposite bank of
the lake, seemed to us an advantage in point of beauty which we should
have grudged to sacrifice for the effect of a more imposing width. Lower
down, and (still more) higher up, the lake widens, as it follows the
graceful sinuosities of the valley. Beautiful bays and recesses, and
numerous headlands projecting from the shore, deprive it of its
river-like appearance and make it look like what it really is, one of
the finest of lakes. Bowness is a pretty little village close to the
bank, containing a large and well-appointed inn (where we put up for the
night) and several cottages surrounded with little gardens full of
beautiful flowers: this does not appear to be common in these parts, and
we afterwards learnt from Miss Wordsworth8 that it was all the work of
one lady,9 who had not only introduced this taste into the village but
had inspired the people of the neighbourhood with such a respect for it
that they never meddle with a single flower, though they might easily
pluck them as they pass: a forbearance, which has not always been
observed where the taste for flowers is new. We passed the evening in
sauntering about the margin of the lake, bathing ourselves in the quiet
enjoyment which tranquil water, but above all a large mass of tranquil
water in the Edition: current; Page: [513] midst of mountains, always
pours over the mind. At a point about the middle of the lake, a little
below Bowness, where it is narrowed by a promontory on the east bank
which projects far into the water, that promontory is connected by a
ferry with the opposite side of the lake. We had been advised to cross
the ferry, and see the woods and the Station House, a little building
erected by Mr. Curwen10 on the further side of the lake and commanding a
beautiful prospect. This we should have done, but a haze coming over the
Langdale mountains, we resolved to wait till the morrow for a finer
view: the morrow came and with it a much thicker haze, so that the
mountains at the head of the lake were for a time completely invisible:
and not thinking it worth while to lose a day in waiting for a single
view, we resolved to proceed onward. Both in the evening and morning,
however, but especially in the evening, the home views of the lake with
its wooded islands, which most abound in this part of it, and the rich
green of the opposite woody banks which in any other neighbourhood might
have passed for high hills, sufficed for our enjoyment. We desired no
more; and could have staid here a week with pleasure under the certainty
of seeing this, and nothing but this, every day.

[13th]

The road from Bowness to Ambleside lies, not on the margin of the lake,
which is in a great measure taken up by a succession of little parks and
pleasure grounds; but a little way up the adjacent hill, commanding
occasional fine views of the lake and opposite mountains, but more
frequently traversing woods, or coppices. The banks of Windermere are
extremely well wooded, but mostly with planted wood: on the further
side, it seems to be chiefly fir: on the near side, the sycamore, not an
indigenous tree, and also the Scotch fir, so often occur in the woods
which would otherwise seem to be native, as to excite suspicion that the
whole wood is an artificial plantation. Yet it is said, and is probable,
that formerly the banks of all the Lakes were thickly clothed with
indigenous timber trees.—About a mile, or somewhat more, from Bowness,
we left the road by a gate on the left which opens upon Rayrigg bank, a
little green eminence immediately overlooking the lake, and commanding a
fine view both upward and downward. The haze was now sufficiently
cleared off the mountains, to enable us to see them tolerably well. The
lake, in that direction, appeared a broad sheet of water, while to the
south we were struck by the air of perfect flatness and smoothness,
which a valley completely filled by a lake, necessarily possesses, and
which contrast so finely with the hills which rise immediately from the
water’s edge. These hills grow less elevated, and of a less marked
character as they approach the foot of the lake, but they are all
graceful, and lofty enough not to appear insignificant even in such
noble company. At the extremity, or what seems such (for in reality the
lake makes another and Edition: current; Page: [514] final bend as it
passes this point) the valley seemed to be closed by a roundish hill,
with something on the top of it which was probably one of those piles of
stones, not uncommonly erected on the summits of these mountains, and
known in the dialect of the country by the term Man. Whatever it was, no
one could have resisted the temptation of imagining it to be the abode
of some unfortunate being, placed as sentinel at the entrance of the
mountain scenery; condemned eternally to view the fair prospect to which
he might never approach nearer, and overlooking nothing on the opposite
side but a dull and tame flat. Having proceeded two or three miles
further, and crossed the little stream called the Troutbeck, which runs
down from a steep ravine on the right, and falls into the lake, we
diverged from the road a little before reaching Low-wood Inn, to ascend
a steep lane which crosses a portion of the base of the adjoining
eminence, into the same ravine. As we ascended, we gradually attained
the most glorious view of the mountains at the head of Windermere, which
we had yet enjoyed, or which can be had from any other point. The haze
had now entirely cleared off, and the bright sunshine in a cloudy sky,
which afforded constantly varying lights, produced effects which a
painter would vainly strive to imitate, and which no one, who has not
seen a mountainous country, can conceive. When the sky is favorable, the
view is never the same for two minutes together. Sometimes the whole
were confounded in one delicate grey tint, far softer than any even of
our best landscape painters ever succeeds in producing. At other times
gleams of sunshine illuminated the side of a mountain, and brought out
the light green colour of the fern with which it was clothed. At times
some of the mountains were in so deep a shade, that no part of their
contour was distinguishable except the broadly marked lines and angles
of the summit, while others were brought into bold relief by the
sunshine on one side of them, and their own shadow enveloping the other.
We were now near enough to discern each separate mountain: the cluster
or group which I compared to a sea, was now resolved into its separate
waves: we saw the lower and greener mountains in front, the higher and
darker ones gradually rising behind them, and finally the loftier
summits forming the background of the whole. The Langdale pikes still
maintained their preeminence over the rest, by their abrupt bold ascent,
their sharp summits, their distincter outline and the greater variety of
light and shadow, arising from their shape. Clouds were continually
skimming over the whole group, and sometimes one, sometimes another, had
his head for a short time capped with mist and concealed. Below was the
upper end of Windermere, skirted with green meadows and plantations and
closed by the village of Clappersgate, an appendage of Ambleside. To our
right, on the same side of the lake, was a green mountain with a
sharpish top covered with fern and well furnished with wood. After we
had climbed some distance higher, we came out upon a sort of terrace,
high enough to clear all the intervening high ground; and here how
different yet how splendid a view met our eyes. We now could not see a
single high mountain, but in lieu of it the whole length of Windermere
lay beneath our feet, quite down to the foot, or at Edition: current;
Page: [515] least beyond the last bend: there it lay with all its
gentle, graceful windings, flowing round its numerous islands, and
embosomed in the cheerful, happylooking green hills forming the basin or
valley which contains it. We at once recognized the view of Windermere
which we had oftenest seen in paintings. And indeed the great length of
the lake, and of the vista of hills by which it was inclosed, every part
of it being nevertheless visible from the extreme gentleness of its
windings, affords effects of perspective most valuable to a painter,
both for their effect and the facility of imitating them.—We proceeded
still a little further, and descended sufficiently far towards the
village of Troutbeck, to perceive the general character of Troutbeck
vale; it rises rapidly and is lined on the further side by bare steep
eminences with well defined summits rapidly succeeding one another, and
on the whole it well represents on a small scale, some of the valleys of
the Pyrenees. We were afterwards told by Miss Wordsworth, that we should
have descended quite into the valley and seen more of it. However, we
returned by the same road, and stopt to dine at Low-wood Inn. This is
the only inn of the whole Lake district (Coniston excepted) which looks
out directly upon the water: there is only a road between, and two or
three straight tall firs which divide the prospect. The lake is here
broad, but has somewhat more of a confined and inland appearance from
our being so near its head. The view of the mountains is substantially
the same as that from the lane above with only the disadvantage of a
lower position. Here, as elsewhere, we were struck with the variety of
colour given to the lake at different times, and to different parts of
the lake at the same time, by the state of the sky, the reflection of
the adjoining objects, and the wind. We did not see Windermere in the
state of glassy smoothness in which these lakes are sometimes seen,
reflecting the mountains with so mirror-like a purity that it is
difficult to know where the object ends and the image begins. But we saw
it alternately of a deep lead colour; a beautiful iron-grey; a lightish
blue; a glittering white sparkling with the rays of the sun; alternate
streaks of brown and white; and not unfrequently, in spite of its
beautiful clearness and transparency, a dingy mud-colour, from the
reflection of dingy clouds, unalloyed by any illumination derived
directly from the sun. From Low-wood it is not more than a mile to the
end of the lake. Ambleside is a little further on, immediately under the
foot of the low range of scars, or precipitous rocky eminences, which
front the lofty mountains. One of the loftiest, however, though not the
boldest (Kirkstone) touches the town. The two mountain streams which
feed Windermere, the Brathay and the Rotha, run down, the first from
Langdale, which lies to the west; the other from Grasmere and Rydal, by
a narrow valley which winds exceedingly, but the immediate direction of
which, reckoning from the head of Windermere, is to the east. Ambleside
lies in this valley, not far from its entrance. After leaving the head
of the lake, you must turn to the right, and doubling the pointed
mountain already mentioned, you come in front of Kirkstone, find
yourself for the first time in a narrow vale, and see immediately above
you to the left the range of scars, which Edition: current; Page: [516]
though low, have a most wild and mountain-like character, being mere
masses of rock standing erect, and half made up of crags with bushes
growing out of their clefts.

We took up our quarters at the Salutation Inn at Ambleside, intending to
stay there for several days, as it is the most convenient centre for
making excursions to the whole southern part of this mountain region.
Here I found an acquaintance, Mr. Madge, the Unitarian clergyman,11 who
had arrived at Ambleside the very same day.

[14th]

The next morning we set out on an excursion to the head of Coniston
water, a lake about two thirds the size of Windermere, and running
parallel to it at a distance of a few miles. We followed for a short way
the course of the Brathay, which runs down from Langdale to the head of
Windermere; but soon diverged, and took a shady lane which crosses the
moderately high ground, that bounds this valley on the south side, at
its commencement. These eminences are rocky, but not high and bold
enough to make amends for their bareness; they however command some good
views of Windermere head, and the mountains behind Ambleside. Through
the pass at the head of Grasmere vale, we even discerned one of the
shoulders of Skiddaw. Having reached the summit of this little range, we
passed to the left the little lake of Easthwaite,12 with the small old
town of Hawkshead at its upper end. This lake runs parallel to
Windermere, from which it is separated by a single range of hills. It is
of moderate size, but would be highly prized in any other neighbourhood;
and the hills which form its basin, though here somewhat tame, would
elsewhere be thought fine; it is true that elsewhere much greater
advantage would be taken of their capabilities; they would be laid out
in parks, and planted down to the water’s edge: this would give them the
sort of beauty of which they are capable, for their forms do not admit
of grandeur. Pursuing our route, we crossed the line of high ground
which separates the basin of Easthwaite from that of Coniston lake, and
presently caught a view of the mountains at the head of Coniston, as we
had seen them (though at a greater distance) from Bowness, over
Windermere; but when the road with much winding, at last descended to
the other side of the hill, and immediately overlooked the upper end of
Coniston water, we then came upon a view to which, for grandeur and
wildness, we had yet seen no parallel in our journey. Placed at a
moderate height on the hills which bound the lake on its east side, we
looked across the water, which at this short distance from its head is
not very wide, and beheld facing us, two of the loftiest mountains,
Coniston Fell (often called the Old Man) 2577 feet in height, and its
neighbour Edition: current; Page: [517] Wetherlam, whose base, for some
distance, overlapped that of the former mountain. In a hollow in the
left side of Coniston Fell, a torrent rushed down the almost precipitous
steep into the lake. A winding ghyll, or steep narrow ravine, ascended
between Coniston Fell and Weatherlam; this also contains a torrent,
which seemed to tumble over the rocks, making various waterfalls. No
mountains of equal height closed up the valley at the water’s head; but
a line of rocky eminences (between which and Weatherlam runs a little
narrow dell) crossed from one side to the other; fronted by two
beautiful round hills slanting obliquely across the valley, covered with
verdure, the one completely planted over, the other laid out in a
pleasing intermixture of park-like meadow and trees, being in fact an
appendage to a pretty little residence placed within a stone’s throw of
the lake. Between the last mentioned hill and the place where we stood,
the head of the vale was filled up with some fine waving ground, richly
covered with pasture and corn fields (almost wholly oats—for we saw
little other grain in all this country). The bareness of the mountains
required to be relieved by richness of verdure in the valleys, and I
nowhere saw so fine a combination of the two as at Coniston Vale-head.
On the other side of the water, immediately under the high mountains,
stood the pretty village of Coniston. The view down the lake, though
beautiful, was inferior to the views on Windermere. The lake lies too
regularly between its banks: unlike Windermere, which, without ever
changing its general direction, contrives to produce all the effect of
the most graceful windings. The hills, too, which surround Coniston
water towards its lower end, are lower and less interesting than those
about Windermere. The lake was smoother, at least towards its head, I
suppose from being more shut in by high mountains in that part. It
afforded some tolerable reflexions of the fields and trees immediately
bordering on it. From the light by which we happened to see this lake,
it seemed of a much deeper blue than Windermere, though in parts it
seemed almost yellow from some accidental reflexion. We did not proceed
far down the valley towards the foot of the lake, but sat down at the
water’s edge to look at the mountains, and hear the waves (for the wind
had meanwhile risen) dash against the shore. This may seem too strong an
expression, but I have seen waves, particularly in Windermere lake,
rolling in long lines of surf, exactly similar to breakers in miniature,
and with a sound bearing some distant resemblance to the breaking of the
sea on the shore. We stopped at a little inn at the head of the lake, to
take shelter from a thunderstorm. When the storm was over and when we
had dined, we took our leave of Coniston water and crossing the green
hills which give so rich an appearance to the vale-head, entered the
narrow dale, which separates the great Weatherlam from the rocky
eminences fronting the water-head. This little valley is called Yewdale:
there may have been many yews in it formerly, but we could not see one
at present. I have since learned, however, that there are some. The
little river which is the principal feeder of Coniston lake, runs down
this vale. Like all the other brooks, it was now full, from the rain of
the previous night and the storm of Edition: current; Page: [518] today.
Lower Yewdale is rich with verdure: Weatherlam overtops it to the left;
to the right the eminences which bound it are not high, but in front it
is very soon stopt by something, which you may term rock, crag, scar, or
mountain, it is all four at once: it is a mass of rock, rising up by
itself to a considerable height (though far inferior to Weatherlam) and
of which the massiveness and the fantastically uneven summit, rising
into points and knobs, gives it some resemblance to a castle. Between
this and Weatherlam, at a considerably greater elevation, lies Upper
Yewdale, a far narrower dell, not flat at the bottom like the other, but
keeled like a boat, with the brook running impetuously in the bottom,
and water rushing from all the hollows of all the hills to join it: a
complete Alpine valley. Here too for the first time we saw some alpine
plants, particularly the bright yellow Saxifrage, one of the most
beautiful of our mountain plants whose golden flowers grow in tufts up
the moist sides of this dell. Beyond the little hamlet of Tilberthwaite,
this beautifully wild glen rises into a mountain pass: at the highest
point in the pass, and on the sides of the adjacent mountains are some
slate quarries, which appear to be now deserted, but must formerly have
been worked to a considerable extent. The pass contains much boggy
ground, which is completely covered with that delightful shrub, the
sweet gale, also called the Dutch myrtle, from its myrtle like
appearance and smell: here and in Langdale, whole acres are covered with
it, and the air is perfumed by it to a great distance. Mixed with its
little bushes, a more delicate plant the Lancashire bog asphodel raises
its bright yellow spikes. We descended among moist woods into Little
Langdale, and found ourselves again on the banks of the Brathay: the
course of which we followed, though at some height above it, in
proceeding down the valley to Ambleside. Though it was now too nearly
dark to discern minute objects with distinctness, the mountains before
us which were the continuation of the range of scars immediately behind
Ambleside, were rendered more imposing by the apparent loftiness which
they derived from the imperfect light: behind them the Langdale Pikes
reared their majestic heads: and we were astonished to perceive how
brightly and sharply, even at ten in the evening, in this northern
country the outlines of the mountains, delineated themselves against the
sky. The Brathay, now full to the very brim, and in one part of its
course, extremely smooth, afforded even at that late hour a most
distinct and beautiful reflexion of the line of mountains and the sky.
The evening star, immediately over the summit of a mountain far to the
west, had the appearance of a small bright yellow flower growing out of
the mountain-top. We passed on the left, below us, the little lake
called Elter Water, at the junction of Great and Little Langdale, and
passing along the side of a well wooded line of hills, arrived at
Ambleside rather late in the evening.

I omitted to mention in the proper place, that before setting out for
Coniston, we climbed the hill above Ambleside to see the waterfall
called Stock-ghyll Force. The mountain, already more than once
mentioned, at the foot of which on the north side Ambleside stands, and
which I find is named Wansfell Pike, is separated from Edition: current;
Page: [519] the adjacent mountain of Kirkstone (with which it is
connected by a ridge) by a steep narrow ravine, called in the language
of the country a ghyll. This ghyll like all other ghylls has its
torrent, or beck (German, bach) and this beck like all other becks has
its waterfalls or forces, but where waterfalls are common, people only
go to see the finest, of which this is one. The ravine is thickly
wooded, as is usual in the neighbourhood of Windermere but unusual among
most of the other lakes. The falls are of considerable height, and their
beauty is greatly increased by their being completely shut in by trees.

[15th]

We had abstained from calling on Mr. Wordsworth immediately on our
arrival, having learnt from Mr. Madge that he was absent from home.
Having reason to believe however that he might now have returned, we set
out for Rydal Mount the day after our excursion to Coniston. Leaving
Ambleside and turning your face towards the north east, you are in a
sort of narrow basin, filled with rich meadows now newly mown, and
interspersed with trees. To your right, this basin is formed by Long
Wansfell Pike, succeeded by Kirkstone on your left, by the line of scars
already mentioned, of which the nearest is Loughrigg, more remarkable
for its boldness than its height, backed by Knab Scar,13 a more
considerable eminence. Directly in front, and filling up the whole
interval between Knab Scar and the high but rounded Kirkstone, is the
lofty Fairfield, looking like several mountains in one; it would appear
to bar up the valley, rendering further progress impossible did it not
seem to be intersected by two long deep glens; these, however, are in
reality mere ghylls, scooped out in the mountain itself, and the real
egress from the valley lies where no one would expect it, sharp round to
the left between the mountains Knab Scar and Loughrigg. This is the
narrow outlet of the vale of Grasmere: through this the Rotha,14 a
beautiful mountain stream, issues into the basin of Ambleside and runs
down to lose itself in Windermere, almost washing, as it passes, several
ornamented cottages of great beauty, surrounded by their little
flower-gardens, along the foot of Loughrigg. At the opening of the
narrow outlet, and along the base of Knab Scar and Fairfield, are the
house and woody park of Lady Fleming, widow of the late Sir Michael le
Fleming.15 Exactly in the outlet lies the valley of Rydal, composed in
great part of cottage residences ornamented with great taste: passing
through a kind of strait, along the banks of the Rotha, you enter the
valley, which expands immediately into a narrow basin, containing the
little lake of Rydal, or Rydal-water out of which the Rotha flows. It is
surrounded by craggy mountains, though of no great elevation; they are
tolerably well wooded, though not so well as the banks of Windermere:
and the cluster of tasteful cottages at its entrance gives it an air of
snugness and comfort highly pleasing. I Edition: current; Page: [520]
have always observed that as in the bustling neighbourhood of a city we
always seek for the appearance of the completest solitude, so on the
other hand nothing is more pleasing to us in the midst of a wild, than
some slight admixture of the signs of human life, and human enjoyment.
Overlooking the opening; placed a little way up the base of Knab Scar,
and commanding, from different points, a view both of Rydal and
Windermere, lies Mr. Wordsworth’s cottage and grounds. I called there
with Mr. Madge: he had not returned; but we saw his sister, Miss
Wordsworth, and his wife’s sister, Miss Hutchinson,16 two elderly maiden
ladies, with whom we had some conversation and of whom I formed a very
favorable opinion. Miss Wordsworth is the sister so often alluded to,
and with so strong an affection, in his poetry, and is also the author
of three little poems published in his works, and ascribed to a “female
friend.”17 He calls her in his verses, his sister Emmeline:18 but this
is euphoniae gratia, her real name being Dorothy. His daughter,19 of
whom Mr. Madge spoke very favorably, and whom I afterwards saw on my way
back from Keswick and Patterdale was christened Dorothy after the
example of her aunt, but is called Dora. It is not surprising that
people should resort to twists and devices to evade so unpoetical a
name. Yet perhaps a poet, if he durst, might succeed in rendering it
interesting, since there is nothing unmelodious in the name itself, and
in the original Greek it is extremely fine. It sounds trivial only
because it is a name rarely worn by any person above the degree of a
cookmaid. But why not?

The day, which had threatened rain from the first, became so decidedly
unfavorable, that we were not disposed to walk much further, but went to
see the waterfalls at Lady Fleming’s. A waterfall, in itself gives me
little pleasure: I value it only as one of the incidents of a mountain
torrent, which as it bounces down over huge fragments of rock, must make
numbers of little falls, and now and then precipitating itself over a
crag, produces one of the cascades that people go to see. But the beck,
or torrent, which makes the Rydal falls, is the finest specimen of its
kind which I ever saw. The bed, or trough down which it rushes, seems as
if it had been chiselled several feet deep in the living rock: the sides
of the ghyll are green, and richly wooded, but over the stream the rock
is laid bare, and shews itself in crags above, and slabs and fragments
below, superior in wildness to every thing I have seen of this class.
The falls are only, in a stream of this character, like the most most
brilliant passages in a fine piece of music. The stream is all
waterfalls. We had gone to Rydal by the field-path; we returned by the
road: they are on opposite sides of the basin, and I hardly know which
is the finest.

The weather prevented any further walking this day except a run in the
evening a Edition: current; Page: [521] little way up the steep road
which leads over Kirkstone to Ulleswater20 and Penrith. The succeeding
day, which was exceedingly fine, we devoted to Langdale.

[16th]

Langdale divides itself at about two miles from its commencement into
two forks, called Great and Little Langdale, the becks of which meet in
a little lake called Elter Water out of which flows the river Brathay.
We walked up Little Langdale exactly reversing the course by which we
returned two evenings before from Coniston and Yewdale. The rains had
swelled the Brathay, and it was now a fine mountain stream; one of the
peculiarities of this country is that the rivers and brooks are only
swelled by the rains, without being rendered turbid, the water coming
over the living rock instead of mouldering heath and bog-earth. The
banks of the Brathay were full; no part of the stony bed was visible,
except the larger fragments of rock, some bare, some carpeted with moss,
round which the river played and over parts of which it continually
fell. But no river is so changeable in its character, as a mountain
stream. Below, and for a considerable space, it was rocky, foaming, and
impetuous; above, for an equal distance, it was smooth as glass: its
banks assumed a character suitable to its own diversities; below, it was
overhung and sometimes almost hidden by bushes and trees; above, it
washed and seemed on the point of overflowing open and verdant meadows.
The eminences on the left, though not very high, were steep, and woody:
the road winds through the woods, allowing occasional views, but we
found a field path which more continuously overlooked the vale. Whole
acres of wet ground are here covered with the Dutch myrtle, which
diffuses its fragrance widely through the air. We crossed the Brathay at
Colwith bridge, a little above which, concealed among trees, is a pretty
waterfall; it is audible from the road, but not visible, you descend to
it by a shady path. Instead of a fall, I should have called it a series
of falls, in various directions, some of them lateral; some high, others
low, connected by rapids; this description applies to most of the
waterfalls made by these mountain torrents. We soon passed, on the left,
the way over from Coniston by Yewdale, and winding up the side of the
hill on the right, saw below us a piece of water called Little Langdale
Tarn. The proper meaning of Tarn, is a piece of water contained in a
hollow, high up the sides of a mountain: such small tarns have peculiar,
and characteristic features, unlike any other lakes or ponds: but here
all ponds which are not large enough to be called lakes, seem to receive
the name of tarns, although, like the one in question, they be reedy,
fen-like, and low in a valley. We were now drawing near to a pass in the
high mountains. To the left we had Weatherlam, and its neighbour
Fairfield (not the same Fairfield which I mentioned as being near
Ambleside); and directly before us, the high irregular mountain or
Edition: current; Page: [522] rather range, called Wrynose, the point of
which is visible from Mr. Wordsworth’s terrace, and over which an old
packhorse road winds slowly and heavily towards Whitehaven. Presently we
perceived on our right the pass which was to lead us from the head of
Little to that of Great Langdale: but before entering into it we
ascended high enough on the face of Wrynose, to perceive the shape of
the mountain, the length, and character of the inlets into it from the
valley, and the torrents rushing down their channelled sides. By
scrambling over rocks and the beds of brooks, we regained the pass, from
which these bare treeless mountains, green with fern to a great height,
but shewing little else save rock, had a very wild appearance. The pass
is not very long, but it widens and descends in the middle, and incloses
a little narrow vale, mostly too wet to be cultivated but containing one
or two old, cottages and two or three patches of cultivation. Here also
is another pond, called Blea Tarn; but neither is this properly a Tarn,
being in the hollow between two mountains, not in the bosom of one. This
wild place is that selected by Wordsworth, in the Excursion, as the
dwelling-place of his Solitary;21 and every thing combines to fit it for
such a purpose, except some small groves of young larch which false
taste has planted on both sides of the dell. The country is filled with
these ugly plantations, intended no doubt to alleviate the desert-like
appearance given to many of these mountains by their extreme bareness;
but no tree can be so ill fitted for this purpose as the larch, which is
formal, pale-coloured, has no boughs, and but little foliage. I cannot
remember any one spot where these plantations have been laid out with
taste, nor have I found that they any where improved the landscape,
except where the shade being thrown directly upon them, lent to them a
depth of colour which they possess not of themselves. These perverse
improvers might have taken a lesson from the sycamore; there are a few
of these trees in every valley, and though it never was a favorite with
me, I have taken a fancy to it from the extreme richness of its deep
green foliage, a quality precious in these valleys because they possess
it not in any other tree. Oaks there are few or none except in the state
of coppice; I have seen no fine oaks except a few (very fine ones
certainly) in Lady Fleming’s grounds. The ash is indigenous here, but
generally pollarded, and seldom very fine: besides, this tree never has
many leaves in proportion to its wood, nor is their colour bright.
Beeches there are none, and scarcely any elms. The sycamore therefore is
the great vegetable ornament of these vales: it is almost the only tree
which is allowed to grow high and to conceive how necessary it is, it
must be seen growing in these situations.—In descending the pass, we
came upon a scene wholly unlike any other we had yet beheld. We were now
at the head of Great Langdale, and we might have fancied ourselves at
the wall of the world: huge mountains rose in front, we might walk up to
them, but there we needs must stop. The valley is closed by Bow Fell,
one of the highest mountains in the country. It is scooped out into
natural amphitheatres, and its bare sides Edition: current; Page: [523]
displayed every torrent and every waterfall glittering in the sun. The
valley which remains perfectly flat up to the very foot of the mountains
which terminate it, sent up still another arm in front of us, between
the furthest point of Bow Fell and the Langdale Pikes. This also was
soon stopped by precipitous heights, out of which must issue somewhere,
I could not see where, the brook which forms the principal source of the
river Brathay, and which even so high up as this, is considerable. The
Pikes, as seen from the pass, appeared with their accustomed
magnificence, but when we reached the bottom, they seemed a confused
mass of rock, the general outline being lost in the proximity, and in
the multitude, of the details, and each Pike having immediately before
it, a lower summit, not high enough, nor standing out sufficiently from
the mass of the mountain, to be visible at a distance. Between the two
Pikes is a deep and narrow ravine, or rather groove, called
Dungeon-Ghyll: in this is a waterfall, to see which we ascended the
green turfy sides of the mountain, covered with fern. The rocks forming
the sides of the ghyll approach in one place so near together and are so
perpendicular, that if you were standing between them you could see as
little of the sky as if you were at the bottom of a well: hence the
name, Dungeon-Ghyll. At the further end of this narrow pass it is
crossed by a rock as high and as perpendicular as its sides; over which
in consequence the torrent precipitates itself into the bottom of the
dungeon. If you are on the height above, it seems to fall to an
indefinite depth; your eye follows it very far and then loses it. You
can see the whole fall from below, by looking in at the bottom of the
pass. A mass of rock has by some accident lodged itself between the two
walls of rock, somewhat below the top of the fall, and forms a natural
bridge. Higher up the mountain there are two or three other falls, all
of them pretty; and there are others in the hollows of the very next
mountain, and so on through the whole country. Descending Great
Langdale, we passed some slate quarries which are in full activity, and
which explained to us the appearances we saw, of some considerable
population. The houses of the peasantry in these valleys are not
pleasing. There seems to be much of the reality of comfort about them,
but there is little of the appearance. They have none of the flowers
round about them, or the creepers on the walls, which are so general in
the south of England; there is little neatness about the outsides, which
are coated with an ugly whitewash, to hide the rough stones with which
they are built. I should like their houses much better if they would but
leave them as they leave their barns. These are built of the same
material, but there is no attempt to hide it; and the masses of solid
slate, some blue, some red with iron, intermixed with masses of the
greenstone, or trachytic amygdaloid of the country, have a singular, and
not unpleasing effect. To see these villages to advantage, you must look
down upon them from above. There, the whitewashed sides are so
foreshortened as not to be conspicuous, while you have a full view of
the cheerful slate roofs and the little, square, unpretending, yet not
ungraceful chimnies.—We passed Elter Water, which was now on our right;
it seems green and reedy, and like a swamp: it is not much more
interesting than a Edition: current; Page: [524] pond. But the Brathay,
running out of it, which was still as clear and smooth as glass, made
ample amends. The road being here lifted considerably above it, allowed
us to embrace at one view its graceful windings to a considerable
distance. We also had full enjoyment of the woody sides of the opposite
hills. Soon after, in a little dell to the left, between us and the
mountain Loughrigg, we perceived Loughrigg Tarn. Even this does not come
within the proper idea of a tarn, but it has much of the beauty not of a
tarn but of a little lake: its form and situation are pretty; there is
some wood on its banks, and its smooth surface reflected the image of
the mountain beyond with the minutest accuracy and in all the colours of
nature. Were it not for the inverted trees, we should never have
suspected that what we saw was water, instead of the continuation of the
green hill-side.—We kept the left bank of the Brathay all the rest of
the way, and arrived at Ambleside without seeing anything further worthy
of notice.

[17th]

The next day we walked to Grasmere. We might have taken the road by
Rydal-water, directly up the valley, avoiding all hills, but we
preferred to reverse the road by which we returned from Langdale the day
before, and we struck off a little beyond Loughrigg Tarn, into one of
the roads which lead across (or through passes in) the range of heights
which separates Great Langdale from the vale of Grasmere. The distance
is not great, and we soon arrived at a point which commanded the valley
and the lake. We were less struck by them, at the first view, than we
expected; and on the whole this lake and valley, though fine, seem to me
to be surpassed by many spots among these mountains. The vale in which
Grasmere is situated is a roundish basin: the mountains forming it are
but of second-rate magnitude, but are green to the top with fern, and
partly with coppice, of which there is more, in proportion to the
extent, than in any other place we had come to except the banks of
Windermere. The eminences on the east side are, I think, the highest,
and are intersected by two long steep ghylls, one of them finely bent:
this I believe is Green-head Ghyll, so finely described by Wordsworth in
the poem of “Michael.”22 A bent ghyll is much finer than any other: a
ghyll which descends at once from the top to the bottom of the mountain
is a mere channel cut in its sides, but if it runs up into the mountain
laterally, then alters its direction, and reaches the peak or ridge
after two or three more turnings, it forms elbows overlapping one
another; projecting angles, which break the uniformity of the hill-side;
and the ghyll being seen laterally, is always covered by one of its
walls, so that you cannot see into it, but merely see a hollow, which
you may suppose to be of any depth you please. It is also a great
advantage if the ghyll instead of growing narrower as it ascends the
mountain, grows wider, and opens into a kind of circular hollow scooped
out of the mountainside, resembling the amphitheatre of mountains which
Edition: current; Page: [525] terminates a broad valley. This is the
case with many of the finest ghylls in these mountains, and renders the
mountains themselves much more striking, when seen from any place whence
you can command their entire height. When ever you read of a high
mountain as seen directly in front, from its base or from an opposite
hill, you are safe in imagining that some considerable part of its top
is scooped out into one of these hollows, out of which a torrent runs
and forces its way down the rocky sides, making either a mere channel or
a deep ghyll.—The entrance into Grasmere vale from Rydal is completely
closed up and concealed, being lateral, like the outlet from Rydal into
the valley of Ambleside. The lake would therefore appear completely
enclosed in mountains, were it not that a broad and visible outlet is
formed at the north-east corner, by a low pass which leads to the
opposite, or Keswick side of the mountains, down the vale of St. John’s.
This is somewhat unfortunate for the picturesque effect of Grasmere
lake. This, like the other lakes, has several islands, one of them of
larger size than common, and less wooded: there is however a handsome
clump of Scotch firs upon it, a tree which is as ornamental here as the
larch is the reverse. In the valleys there frequently rise little
roundish knolls, on many of which, clusters of five or six firs have
been planted with considerable picturesque effect: this tree has boughs,
which most of the fir tribe have not; its blue, or purple tint at this
season, harmonizes well with the mountain scenery, and the bark is here
of that peculiar red, which is often given to it in paintings but which
I have not generally found it to wear in nature, at least not so finely
as in this district.—At the head of the lake is the little village of
Grasmere; the church was open, the day being Sunday, and rushing-day, as
I believe it is called, that is, the day for laying fresh rushes on the
floor of the church: it is very small, and by far the most rustic and
unsophisticated building of its kind I ever saw. The roof consists of
naked slates, whitewashed internally, but shewing all the junctures; and
nothing else except the old bare rafters. There is a sort of a wall
which divides the church, or part of it, down the middle, but this wall
does not reach to the roof, it reaches only to the principal cross
rafters, and supports them. There are only one or two pews, and those of
the simplest and most unpretending kind: in lieu of others, rows of
benches, are placed down both sides of the church, with rushes (fresh
ones) under them instead of a carpet; and the pulpit was not more
ostentatious than the other apparatus of the place. Every thing however
that admitted of it was hung with bouquets and festoons of fresh
flowers, intermixed with some quaint bunches of feathers; the rustic
character of these ornaments harmonized as much as their gaudy colours
contrasted, with the homely appearance of the building and its
paraphernalia. In the little room containing the clergyman’s23
pontificals, (which they perhaps presume to call a vestry-room) were a
(I suppose I might say the) bible and prayer-book, both of them I should
Edition: current; Page: [526] think the first edition: the bible was in
black letter, published in 1617,24 and I suppose no other has been used
in this church from that time. In the church-yard, washed by the brook
which feeds Grasmere lake, are the graves of two of Wordsworth’s
children who died young.25 There is a little school-house at the further
gate of the church-yard; this also was open, but contained nothing
except two or three boys’ hats, and sundry copies of Mrs. Trimmer’s
abridgment of the New Testament.26—The head of the little lake is
separated from the mountains which bound the vale on that side, by a
space considerable for the size of the valley, of fields and trees:
this, together with the green banks and the green fern and coppice on
the sides of the hills, gives to this valley a more verdant appearance
than is usual here, from which, no doubt, the lake and village derived
their name.—The only mountain at the head of Grasmere which is
remarkable in form, or stands strikingly individualized, is a pyramidal
eminence, called Helm-Crag: green to the top, or rather greenish—for
that is the utmost you can ever say of the Westmoreland mountains, the
Cumberland ones are far greener. At the top of this height, but more
distinctly visible from the pass into St. John’s vale, are some curious
rocks, which I likened first to a monkey feeding her cub, next to a bear
devouring some small animal: I found by looking afterwards into a
guide-book, that I was not singular in finding odd resemblances for this
cluster of rocks, and that my two comparisons, which seem so unlike one
another, were but a type of the diversity of the images which the
objects have suggested to different observers. “Mr. Gray” says the
guide-book (meaning the poet Gray) “likens it to ‘some gigantic building
demolished’; Mr. West to ‘a mass of antediluvian ruins’; Mr. Green to
the figures of a ‘lion and a lamb’; and Mr. Wordsworth to an ‘astrologer
and old woman’; and the traveller” (adds the author of the guide-book,
venturing to swell from the stores of his own fancy, the list of odd
similies) “who views it from Dunmail Raise, may think that a mortar
elevated for throwing shells into the valley, would be no unapt
comparison.”27

Edition: current; Page: [527]
To the left of Helm Crag, the principal feeder of Grasmere-water issues
out of a winding valley called Easedale, the opening into which, as seen
from Grasmerevale, is nearly covered by hills. It is a sort of Langdale
on a smaller scale. There is a neat little house built at the corner of
a hill, in a situation something like that of Mr. Wordsworth’s cottage,
commanding both Grasmere and Easedale:28 I have since learned that this
was once occupied by Wordsworth: from a road belonging to this house,
you have an excellent view into the little mountain valley, and can see
to great advantage the knobbed and rocky eminences forming the boundary
of the valley on the left hand. These look as if knots of rock had been
dropped all over their sides. The valley at first is green with fields
and trees; higher up it becomes bare and wild, and is soon closed by
mountains furrowed with torrents. We walked up it till we could see the
end, then returned by the further bank of Grasmere lake, along which
passes the road from Keswick to Ambleside. The lake appears finest from
this bank, where as you are not lifted very high above it, you are not
made so sensible of its small extent. We returned to Ambleside by Rydal
water, and the field path along the banks of the Rotha. In the evening
we walked to the banks of Windermere, passed Low-wood, ascended
Troutbeck lane, and again enjoyed, in the twilight, the view down the
lake: in the opposite direction, the mountains were too much hid in
clouds to shew us much of their beauty. We this time descended by Miss
Wordsworth’s advice, to the long straggling village of Troutbeck, in
which are several substantial-looking houses: but here too the heads of
the mountains were involved in clouds and we saw little more of
Troutbeck vale than we had seen previously.

[18th]

The next day we shifted our quarters, and proceeded to Keswick. Our
route lay by the side of Rydal and Grasmere lakes: in passing I called
upon Miss Wordsworth, and saw her: Mr. Wordsworth had not yet returned;
but I afterwards met him on the road, by the side of Thirlmere lake: he
was on the top of a stage coach, I was on foot, but he stopped the coach
and we exchanged a few words: he asked me to call upon him in
returning.—We kept the high road, which is perhaps the most beautiful in
England; and issued out of the vale of Grasmere by the low broad pass
which I mentioned in describing that lake. The head of the pass, or the
parting of the waters, is marked by a heap of stones called Dunmail
Raise, supposed to be the cairn of Dunmail the last king of Cumberland,
who is said to have been defeated and slain at this place by one of the
kings of the Anglo-Saxons.29 A wall which crosses the cairn here
separates Westmoreland from Cumberland, and the vale terminating in
Windermere from that which issues Edition: current; Page: [528] into the
plain by Bassenthwaite lake. This point, and the whole of the road from
Rydal to Keswick, are familiar to those who are acquainted with
Wordsworth’s poem of “The Waggoner.”

To understand the face of the country one should bear in mind the
comparison so aptly employed by Mr. Wordsworth in his little work
published separately as a description of the lakes.30 There is in the
centre of this mountainous region a cluster or knot of very high
mountains, consisting of Sca or Scaw Fell, Great Gable, Bow Fell, and
one or two others: this may be considered as the nave or centre of a
wheel, and the valleys, most of which terminate at this point, may be
regarded as the spokes; due allowance being made for their not being
absolutely straight. Langdale, which afterwards is prolonged into the
valley of Windermere, is the first spoke; turning round towards the
west, we come first to Coniston Vale, which as it does not quite reach
to the nave, may be considered as a broken spoke; further on,
Donnerdale, Eskdale, Wastdale, Ennerdale, and the vale of Buttermere and
Crummock, are perfect spokes; as well as Borrowdale which runs due
north, opening upon the beautiful Derwentwater or Keswick lake, and
closed by the majestic Skiddaw, who stands apart, wholly unconnected
with the general plan of the other mountains. In like manner,
Legberthwaite dale, or the vale of St. John’s, is closed to the north by
Blencathra, otherwise called Saddleback, which though separated by a
deep ravine, is a sort of continuation of Skiddaw. At the foot of
Saddleback, St. John’s vale turns off to the west, debouches into the
basin of Keswick lake, and from thence issues out into the plain by
Bassenthwaite, at the opening between Skiddaw and the mountains of
Newlands and Buttermere. St. John’s vale does not run up quite to the
nave of the wheel, but meets Grasmere vale, its counterpart on the south
side, at the pass of Dunmail Raise. There is yet another valley to the
east, Patterdale, which contains Ulleswater; this terminates still
further from the centre, so that on the whole the resemblance to a wheel
is by no means so perfect on the east side of the mountains as on the
west.

From the top of the pass we came immediately in sight of Thirlmere, or
Leathes Water; a narrow, winding lake out of which, bare, and almost
precipitous mountains rise almost at once, leaving a very narrow margin,
enlarged however by numerous long headlands, partially clothed with
trees. Though we first saw this beautiful lake at its head, we were no
losers, as, unlike most of the lakes, it is best seen from upwards,
becoming as it descends inclosed in higher mountains, and terminated not
by an opening into the plain, but by the lofty Saddleback, concealed
from us as yet by intermediate eminences, although we saw, through a
pass in the western range, one of the beautiful shoulders of Skiddaw,
thus shaped. Edition: current; Page: [529] The mountains which form the
western boundary of the vale became more and more precipitous, and
finally took the form of a black perpendicular cliff called Raven Crag.
(Crag, in this country, means any perpendicular rock.) On the right, the
mountains above us were perfectly bare and rocky; every part of the
torrents which furrowed their sides was therefore fully visible. These
mountains form part of the base of the great Helvellyn, the summits of
which were concealed from us by proximity and also by clouds. The day
was rainy; scarcely half an hour was free from rain, but as the views in
this valley are not extensive, our enjoyment of them was very little
impaired by the rain, which generally was rather a drizzle than any
thing like a heavy shower.—The road was lifted somewhat above the lake,
and afforded beautiful views of it and of the opposite mountains, but on
the whole the road naturally descended with the valley; until we came to
a point nearly opposite to Armboth, where the lake either contracts to a
strait or is divided by an isthmus, and forms two lakes, an upper and a
lower one. The road here diverges from the lake, and ascends one of the
lateral eminences, from which, on looking back, we had a noble view of a
precipitous crag on the other side, with a torrent pouring down it.
Having crossed this eminence we unexpectedly perceived before us another
line of low mountains rising up in the middle of the valley and dividing
it into two parts: that to the left contained the lower half of
Thirlmere, and was invisible to us: the other, called more emphatically
the vale of St. John’s, or Legberthwaite dale is extremely narrow;
bounded on the east by the long steep range which has collectively
received the name of Helvellyn; on the west by the lower range of
mountains just mentioned, and closed up to the north by Saddleback, or
Blencathara,31 a mountain vastly superior both in beauty and apparent
elevation, to any which we had seen. The line of its summit, as seen
from this point, consists or appears to consist of two beautiful curve
lines, like small segments of very great circles, with the concave side
turned towards us, and ending in three sharp points. The ridge, thus
formed, had the appearance of being so narrow and angular, that it would
be impossible to walk upon it. This we supposed to be an ocular
deception but it was irresistible. To the concavity of the two circular
arcs, answer corresponding hollows scooped out in the body of the
mountain; and these beautiful hollows are bounded by three long turfy
arms or sloping lines thrown forward into the vale. The mountain was
happily free from clouds; and we had a gleam of sunshine, which lighted
up some of the adjacent objects, leaving Blencathara in a deep purple
shade. The effect of this noble mountain seen at the end of a deep
hollow dale, cannot easily be described. The foreground was well
calculated to set it off. The first of the range of intermediate
mountains, a conical eminence which must, from its position and
character, be that known to readers of Wordsworth by the name of Great
How,32 is wooded almost to Edition: current; Page: [530] the summit,
with indigenous wood, the rocky sides peeping out only where they were
so completely perpendicular, that trees would not grow upon them:
resembling, therefore, in every respect, what I have been told is the
general character of the rocky sides of Dovedale. Beyond this, another
bulky mountain rises steeply from the narrow vale. Raven Crag, on the
other side of Thirlmere, peered occasionally over the intervening
heights, and nearly opposite to it, on the Helvellyn side, another I was
about to say a finer crag (called Green Crag, or the Enchanted Castle of
St. John’s) stood out boldly from the mountain side. The waters of
Thirlmere discharge themselves through this narrow vale, by the river
Greta (now a classical name),33 which flows through the gap between
Great How and the next mountain of its series, and flows down, more
quietly than could be expected, but at a great depth below the road,
into the glen. The road does precisely the reverse, it crosses, by the
same pass, from St. John’s vale to the other valley, which, as to its
direction, seems a continuation of the vale of Thirlmere, though on a
considerably higher level; at this point it is filled with a bog,
covered with the Dutch myrtle and called Shoulthwaite moss. When we had
proceeded for some space along the road which crosses this moss, we
obtained gradually a full view of Skiddaw; which we at once admitted to
be a mountain of a character immensely above all which we had seen on
the opposite side of the mountainous country. Skiddaw, though on a scale
of comparative minuteness, reminded me of the conception I had formed of
Aetna, from its extensive base, its insulated position, and the
descending arms which it stretches out into the plain. It consists
mainly of two high roundish summits, not far from each other, and two
long shoulders which sink at once to a considerable depth below the
summits, but are still of a great height, and stretch out on the right
and left to a very great distance. Towards the valley in front, the
descent on the contrary is rapid, though not by crags but long turfy
slopes, separated by ravines chiselled out as deeply, and with the same
nicety, as those of Blencathara. We could not take off our eyes from
these two mountains. Dwelling apart from the rest and towering above
them, Skiddaw seems the king and Blencathara the queen of this mountain
region. Justice is hardly done to the beauty of this last mountain; for
when it is seen from Keswick, the lateral view hides entirely the
character of the beautiful ridge, and hollow sides, and makes it seem an
insignificant appendage to Skiddaw. From this spot, however, we were
unable to decide which of them was the finest. From Blencathara we
learned, how very slight a deviation from a straight line is sufficient,
under some circumstances, to give boldness and impressiveness to the
long ridge of an eminence. Skiddaw, again, satisfied us, that the most
gentle and elegant of mountains,—totally destitute of cliffs, or bare
rocks, and meeting the plain with grassy slopes like those of a chalk
hill, might yet give a stronger impression of magnitude and grandeur,
than any of the others, even those which Edition: current; Page: [531]
surpass it in height. This we ascribed, partly to its insulated
position; partly to the large space it covers, being nevertheless itself
commanded and towered over by its own summits; but most to this, that it
consists of a very small number of features, each of which may therefore
be in itself broad and conspicuous, and which are boldly and decisively
marked out. Its outline might be correctly conveyed by a much smaller
number of lines than even the little mountains near Ambleside; and this
is eminently favorable to imposingness of effect as we see in a Greek
temple.—Turning our eyes backwards, we could now see the highest point
of Helvellyn, at last freed from clouds. This mountain at least this
side of it, is in every respect the opposite of Skiddaw: its highest
summits are only a little higher than those of a whole row of mountains
connected at the base, which together bear the name of Helvellyn: its
forms are neither graceful nor dignified, it never takes credit for its
whole height, and is chiefly conspicuous because it seems to turn its
back to you, and its highest points, which are curiously notched or
indented, seem to be peering over at something on its opposite side. We
passed on, gaining a better view of Skiddaw and losing the fine one of
Blencathara every instant. We soon found that the waters of this valley
run out not towards Thirlmere nor St. John’s but towards Skiddaw and
Blencathara, so that the vale may be considered as a tributary of that
which separates those two mountains from the others. The lower part of
the valley is green, and richly cultivated. The road winds over the
heights on the left hand and presently when we began to descend the
glorious vale of Keswick burst at once upon our sight.

[lf0223-27_figure_008.jpg]

We looked down upon this splendid valley from a hill named Castlerigg.
Close under our feet, though a little to the left, was the lake of
Derwentwater, completely inclosed in a basin of high mountains. It
washed their bases on every side except that of Skiddaw, from which it
was separated by a considerable extent of wavy green fields, among which
the little town of Keswick shewed its cheerful blue roofs. Beyond
Skiddaw, and in the opening between it and the mountains on the further
side of the valley, was the commencement of another lake, that of
Bassenthwaite. Looking next across the valley, we beheld mountain rise
behind mountain, so thickly sown and in such forms that I can only
compare them to waves in a tempestuous sea. Turning now towards the
left, and looking up the lake, we saw the opening into Borrowdale,
almost closed by a black fir-clad rock, named, and appropriately named,
Castle Crag: it seemed impossible to imagine any greater opening there
than a narrow gorge; the high mountains at the head of Borrowdale were
so veiled in clouds that we could not see more than their bases, and it
seemed as if something dark and dismal opposed all attempt to penetrate
further in that direction. The heights on the side where we were, rose
immediately into a high cliff called Walla or Wallow Crag; and formed
little else but a series of crags from that point to the head of the
lake. The banks on all sides, and even the mountains to a certain
height, were thickly wooded, (a sight very uncommon in this country),
and numerous islands, completely cloathed with trees, were spread
Edition: current; Page: [532] over the surface of the lake. This
magnificent prospect was closed at the extremity by Skiddaw. We
descended to Keswick; and having taken up our quarters there, we
strolled down to Friar’s Crag, a promontory covered with trees, looking
out across the lake to the mountains beyond, and the path to which, is
the public walk of the town. At Keswick we again encountered Mr. Madge.

[19th]

The next morning we again strolled out before breakfast to Friar’s Crag,
from which, and from a field adjoining, we had delightful views of the
lake; and crossed from thence to a higher eminence named Castle-head
Hill, which in fact would be an excellent situation for a castle, and
from which you see the whole lake spread out under your feet, with the
circumjacent mountains. We now distinguished, on the western side of the
lake, the high Grisedale Pike with its two summits; one greatly above
the other, and its long arm stretched out towards Bassenthwaite and
Skiddaw; Causey Pike, shaped like a small paper copy of the former;
Catbells, a little mountain, green to the top, immediately overhanging
the lake, and consisting of a ridge folding itself once round and
terminating in the last of two bell-shaped eminences; High Stile, and
the other mountains of Buttermere and Crummock beyond these and
overtopping them; and Manesty Crags, walling in the lake towards its
head. To the left, not far from the extremity of the lake, we could
partly see the great waterfall of Lowdore, pouring down the chasm
between two perpendicular cliffs of immense height. After breakfasting
at Keswick, we attempted to reach Lowdore by the road along the east
side of the lake, but the weather settled into steady rain, and forced
us to return. We went to see Mr. Crosthwaite’s Museum,34 where among
many soi-disant curiosities, all that interested us were a number of
very fine specimens of the minerals and rocks of the country. In the
evening we took advantage of a short interval between the showers, to
walk down the town to Crossthwaite church, the parish church of Keswick,
and standing a little way from it: there is an engraving of this spot in
Southey’s Colloquies:35 the church, though ugly in itself, and covered
with the disagreeable whitewash of the country, is prettier than most
that we had recently seen. Although the head of Skiddaw was covered with
clouds just upon the point of discharging their moisture he was still
magnificent, and we were much struck with the deep purple colour, under
this light, of the neatly chiselled and almost bare interior of the
ravines or hollows which are scooped out of his sides. The evening was
thoroughly rainy, and we could go no further. The Greta, which runs at
the foot of Edition: current; Page: [533] the town to join the Derwent
just issuing from the lake, was swelled with the rains, and, unlike the
Ambleside rivers, considerably discoloured. There seems indeed to be
about Keswick, and especially in the interval between the two lakes, a
considerable extent of alluvial soil.

[20th ]

The next day was on the whole rainy, but not so much so as to prevent
short walks. We went from Keswick to a village called Ormathwaite, close
to the foot of Skiddaw: from the front of a gentleman’s house close to
the hamlet, and from a road which runs along the side of the mountain at
a slight elevation above the valley, we had several admirable views of
the lake and mountains; and we were sometimes surprised to find how
great a variety in the view was made by a very trifling change in our
position. The highest mountains of Borrowdale, Scawfell and Great Gable,
were still, however, concealed from us by clouds. After returning from
this little walk, Mr. Madge and I called upon Mr. Southey, which we had
not done sooner because we were aware that he had not returned from an
excursion to Ulleswater. We were both of us acquainted with him, though
but slightly. He received us very kindly, conversed with us for some
time very agreeably, and invited us to tea the same evening: we accepted
his invitation, and spent the evening very pleasantly. His house is
close to the town, and lifted a little above it, though at the lower
end. It looks up the lake, like all the gentlemen’s houses hereabouts;
though it does not command quite the best view. The rooms are filled
with books, and the appearance of the house is like the conversation of
the man, which is an admirable mixture of the book-student, the man of
elegance and taste, and the man of the world.—Between our two visits to
Southey, we took advantage of an interval of fine weather to
circumnavigate the lake. It was very high from the late rains; and we
readily believed what the boatman told us, that it had risen four feet
in the two preceding days. It also covered a considerably greater
surface than before, having encroached upon its grassy banks wherever
there was room for it to spread itself out. It is an indispensable part
of viewing this country to go upon Derwent Lake: the face of the lake
affords the finest positions for seeing in perfection, the mountains
which immediately surround it; and you obtain a juster notion of its own
magnitude, for without experience it is impossible to imagine how
falsely one estimates distance and size in mountainous countries: the
objects being all magnified in nearly an equal proportion, no one of
them affords a scale to measure the greatness of the others. When I
first saw Windermere I could by no means persuade myself that in some
places it is a mile across; and I could as little conceive that Keswick
Lake is in length three miles and in breadth a mile and a half; but I
easily believed it after going on the water, for I found that an island,
which from the Lowdore side appeared almost close to the opposite shore,
was really near the middle of the lake.—The right bank as you ascend
towards the Edition: current; Page: [534] water-head, is thickly clothed
with the fine woods belonging to the late Lord William Gordon;36 these
fill up the small space between the lake and the mountains, and cover
some promontories which project finely into the water, inclosing
delightful little bays. On the other side, Walla Crag and other crags
the continuation of it, mostly well wooded at the base and to a
considerable height, except where they are completely perpendicular;
formed the boundary of the vale. One of the islands, near the bottom of
the lake, belongs to General Peachy, lately member of parliament for
Taunton;37 it is, like the other islands, covered with trees, but it
also contains a house, his only country residence: it seems prettily
laid out and ornamented. We landed at Lowdore, which is not a waterfall,
but a cataract, and perhaps the most striking single object in the vale
of Keswick. It lies between two cliffs of immense height; the one, which
bears a striking resemblance to a ruined castle upon a rock, is affirmed
to be near 500 feet high, and may possibly be so: the other is nearly,
if not quite, as high: both are wooded at the top, and on the sides
wherever trees will grow, that is to say in the clefts, for the rock
itself is completely perpendicular. The narrow ravine between the two
cliffs is also thickly wooded, and immense blocks of stone are scattered
all over it; these have evidently fallen from the cliffs, either
dislodged by tempests or frost, or by the torrent gradually undermining
more and more. In the ravine a brook almost amounting (after the rain)
to a small mountain river, tumbles down from a height of, it is said,
360 feet, but of this not more than one-half is visible from below: it
does not form one fall, but many, its channel being broad and heaped up
with blocks of stone, over which the water precipitates itself; there
are many streams falling like one. In our way back we saw what is called
the Floating Island, which appears at considerable intervals and is now
visible. It does not change its position (it is said however that there
is a real floating island on Esthwaite Water); it only rises
occasionally to the surface, and sinks again, without any visible cause:
it seems a kind of bog, barely above the level of the water and covered
with the vegetation that grows in the shallow parts of the lake. It is
ascertained that what keeps the island afloat is gas, generated probably
by peat at the bottom of the lake. Professor Sedgwick38 let out some of
the gas by making a hole in the island, which immediately sunk several
inches, with him upon it. His theory, as we learned from Southey, is
that a brook which runs into the lake just opposite to the island (it is
not far from the shore) penetrates between the peat, and the clay which
is below it, and prevents the peat from adhering to the clay, so that it
is easily blown up by the gas which is generated in its own
substance.—Although the evening had every appearance of being fine when
we set out on the water, we did not get back to Keswick without being
caught in a shower; an example of the uncertainty of the Edition:
current; Page: [535] climate of these mountains; the ordinary English
climate is steadiness itself in comparison.

[21st]

The next day we set out from Keswick with a full determination to
explore Borrowdale, but were again driven back by the rain: less from
fear of getting wet, than apprehension of not being able to see. In the
interval between two showers (in which interval you are to include one
intermediate shower) we went to see a Druidical circle of stones, on a
point of Castlerigg Hill a little to the right of the old Penrith road,
about a mile and a half from Keswick, commanding a fine view of Skiddaw
and Saddleback, of Helvellyn and the intermediate mountains across
Shoulthwaite Moss, and of the tops of the mountains of Newlands on the
other side of Derwent Lake. The stones, which are placed on end, and
some of which are about the height of a man, form a complete circuit,
though not a correct circle; and there is a much smaller circle touching
the larger one internally, which was a possibly a kind of sanctum
sanctorum, a place distinguished in holiness above the rest. The road to
this place, (as well as to Penrith) lies along the foot of Skiddaw, or
rather of Latrigg, which Gray, the poet, called Skiddaw’s cub;39 this
mountain is apparently about 800 or 900 feet high, that is, about the
height of Leith Hill, but really two or three hundred feet more, and
seems to lie under the feet of Skiddaw, or to grow out of it, as is the
fact, for it is a sort of excresence, connected at the base with the
greater mountain. It is rounded in its forms, almost like a chalk hill;
it is also artificially planted, and (an exception to the general rule)
with real taste: woods, corn fields and bare turf or brown heath, are in
this instance mixed with very agreeable effect. At the foot of it, and
between it and the road, the Greta runs with its usual violence, on its
way from St. John’s vale to Keswick: it was now much swelled with the
rain, but, in this place at least, was clear. Its bed is large, and
strewed with lumps of rock probably brought down from the foot of
Helvellyn: it foams over these lumps or turns round them, in a manner
which reminded me much of the Adour near Bagnères de Bigorre, in the
Pyrenees, a river which this resembles more than any other of the
mountain streams about Ambleside or Keswick.—The afternoon proving fine,
we walked through some rich meadows on the banks of the Derwent, which
carries the waters of Keswick lake into Bassenthwaite, in a stream of no
contemptible rapidity and depth. The occasional, and even habitual
violence of this stream is attested by the labour and expence, with
which whole rows of little breakwaters have been constructed at every
one of its numerous windings, to prevent it from changing its bed by
cutting through and carrying off the alluvial soil on the bank against
which the current sets. We crossed the river to the pretty cheerful
village of Portingscale,40 and took the road up the Edition: current;
Page: [536] west side of the lake, but soon quitted it to enter Lord or
rather Lady William Gordon’s woods.41 In these there are a variety of
tall trees of various kinds, which not being common in this country,
were the more agreeable: there are many walks cut out in the woods, all
very pretty, but rarely allowing more than a momentary glimpse of the
surrounding scenery, until we arrive at the house. This is almost
deserted by its owner, who has never visited it since she was a widow:
accordingly all other persons may go all round it and enjoy every one of
the beautiful views which are abundant and various in its immediate
neighbourhood. It stands fronting the lake, at the bottom of a little
bay, formed by two richly wooded promontories: and the lake may be
enjoyed in perfection either from the terrace walk in front of the
house, or from various points of view selected with great taste on the
shore of the promontories. The objects seen across the Lake have been
already described. The noise of the Lodore falls may be distinctly
heard, though this is the broadest part of the lake and though they are
far from directly opposite: we heard it so loud as to mix with all other
sounds, forming a deep, sonorous, though low, accompaniment to the
ripple of the lake, which ever and anon drowned the more distant sound
in its nearer, though comparatively insignificant, noise.—This day my
friend Henry Taylor, of the Colonial Office,42 an intimate friend of
Southey’s and to whom I am indebted for the little acquaintance I have
both with him and with Wordsworth, arrived at Keswick, to stay there
about the same length of time as ourselves. Mr. Southey had told me that
he was coming, but did not expect him so soon. His father with whom I
was not previously acquainted, accompanied him.

[22nd]

The next day we set out (that is, my companion and myself—Mr. Madge
returning to Ambleside) with a firm resolution to see Borrowdale,
whether it rained or not. And we were rewarded, for although we got wet
more than once in our way to Borrowdale, we had scarcely entered the
valley when the wind, which had been south-west, shifted to a few points
north of west, and the weather completely changed. The shower from which
we took shelter under the Bowder Stone was the last shower of the rainy
weather. This stone is an enormous mass of rock, the largest of many
which have fallen, in the course of ages, from the crags by which the
narrow entrance into Borrowdale is hemmed in, and almost closed up. The
mass has accidentally fallen in such a manner as to rest upon a very
narrow base, slanting upwards like the inside of a roof on both sides;
but it does not vibrate, like some other stones in similar situations.
The valley in this place, which would be very narrow at any rate, is
still further narrowed by Castle Crag, already mentioned as forming part
of all views of Derwent Lake from the neighbourhood of Keswick; and two
or three other rocky heights, most of them more or less Edition:
current; Page: [537] wooded, which seem designed to block up the valley
and among which the river or brook which feeds the lake, finds its way
not without apparent difficulty, at a very great depth below the road,
forming a striking picture. This is certainly the finest part of
Borrowdale. When we descended into the open and broad part of the
valley, we found it rather less striking than I expected. Like all the
other valleys it is a narrow plain, flat to the very edge of the
mountains: it is green and rich, and was now soaked with wet; the road
in some places being overflowed. The brooks, and especially the main
stream, or river, were now very full, and beautiful. They are crossed by
numerous bridges, built of lumps of slate put upon their ends; these
have a highly picturesque effect; which indeed may be said of all the
bridges over these mountain streams. The valley winds, and has two or
three reaches, as they would be called in a river. Between the villages
of Rossthwaite and Seatoller, it divides itself into two forks, nearly
equal in breadth; both appear interesting; the shortest we passed on the
left, and took the longest, which retains the name of Borrowdale; at
Seatoller, this branch turns round to the left, having on the right the
pass of Gatesgarth, leading to Buttermere vale. This is now the final
reach, terminated by one of the bases of Scaw Fell, and bounded to the
right and left by Gable and Bow Fell; yet we did not seem to be among
very high mountains; the tops of some of them were hid, and others were
foreshortened: the head of Great Langdale is finer. The mountains are
here clothed in many places with turf and fern, and in others with
trees, but the upper parts are universally craggy and bare. We went as
far as Seathwaite, the last village, near which are the celebrated
black-lead mines of Borrowdale: the entrance to them is at a
considerable elevation, in the sides of the mountain on the right. Not
far from thence, though lower down, among other trees, are the
Borrowdale yew-trees celebrated by Wordsworth:43 these, and the single
yew in Lorton vale mentioned by him in the same little poem, are, I
suspect, the only fine yew-trees in the whole country of the Lakes, and
on the whole, any trees of the kind, indeed any indigenous trees of
great or even moderate size, are wonderfully uncommon here. The country
of yews is not Cumberland, but the Dorking Chalk hills.—There is a pass
over a very high part of the mountains, at the very end of Borrowdale,
called the Sty-head, and leading into Wastdale: we did not climb up to
it, but approached very near to its foot, and then returned to Keswick
by the way by which we came.—In the evening we walked once more to
Castlerigg Hill.

[23rd]

The next day was one of the finest of the season, and we resolved to
employ it in ascending Skiddaw. This we easily accomplished without a
guide, by the aid of the directions given in Otley’s Description of the
Lakes:44 indeed this mountain both Edition: current; Page: [538] is, and
appears, very easy of ascent, and we might have climbed it in any of
several other directions. The sides, where they are sufficiently sloping
(which is the case every where except in the hollows) are covered with
the richest and greenest sward: it is only near the top that the bare
rocks, or rather fragments of slate, begin to peep out, and even there
the intermixture of vegetation is generally sufficient to render the
bareness imperceptible from below. I have already given a general idea
of the form of this mountain. I mentioned that it has two summits,
visible from Keswick: they are separated by not a very deep ravine; the
highest of them forms the lower extremity of a short, slightly ascending
ridge, of which consequently, the opposite end is the extreme summit of
the mountain, and is not visible from Keswick, though it is from
Newlands and the mountains adjacent. This highest point was one of the
stations for the Trigonometrical Survey,45 and a pole raised on that
occasion five years ago still remains, as well as a cabin of loose
stones, probably constructed about the same time as a shelter to the
operators. As we ascended, we gradually left below us, first Latrigg,
which our path began by winding round; then Catbells, Causey Pike,
Castlerigg Fell, and all the mountains immediately surrounding the lake;
at last even Grisedale Pike, which for a long time seemed to tower above
us; but Scaw Fell, Great Gable, and the other high mountains in the
centre of the wheel,46 rose more and more as we rose; and we did not
seem to overtop the Helvellyn range, the whole length of which we could
now see, together with the mountains of Grasmere and Ambleside, beyond,
which seemed mere hillocks. Black Combe, a mountain joining the sea, at
a great distance from the other high mountains, and which commands the
most extensive view in England, according to Colonel Mudge who had an
ample range of comparison,47 was also seen over one of the passes among
the high summits; and the Coniston mountains were visible, though, to
us, not very accurately distinguishable. There were no clouds today on
the high mountains, so that we saw them in all their glory. Derwent Lake
seemed dwindled to a mere pond. Turning now the opposite way, we saw at
the foot of Skiddaw, and of Saddleback (now considerably below us) a
small number of lower elevations, green to the tops, and separated by a
large tract of turfy sloping moors, of a cheerful character, not of the
sombre cast of the Yorkshire moors; beyond these an immense plain,
bounded on one side by the hills of Northumberland and Durham, a long
range in the middle of which Cross Fell raised its dome-like summit; to
the north there was no boundary but the haze of the distant horizon: to
the west and north west, the sea, with the Scottish coast sloping away
to an immense distance beyond the narrow seas, forming broad bays and
long projecting headlands. The atmosphere was not very Edition: current;
Page: [539] clear when we were on the extreme summit; but we descended
by a part of the mountain called Ullock, of much inferior elevation,
from which, the air having greatly cleared, we saw the hills of
Kirkcudbright rising one behind another with the greatest distinctness,
the opening of Wigton bay, and the Mull of Galloway protruding its great
length into the waters; then the open sea, and beyond that the Isle of
Man, with its high hills and a long promontory stretching out towards
Scotland. Between us and the coast was the town of Cockermouth, and
further north were several other towns which we were not quite certain
that we could recognize from their position, but we thought that
Carlisle was one of them; to the east we distinctly saw Penrith and
something looking like a large castle due south of it. The country to
the north seemed well watered, but very flat, until, to the north-east,
the eye reached the Cheviot Hills. To the south we saw the estuary of
the Kent near Milnthorp, which has probably been mistaken for Windermere
by those who have professed to see that lake from Skiddaw: they both lie
in the same direction but Windermere is concealed by mountains.

We were so little fatigued by this excursion (though we descended by a
much rougher, and steeper line, quite off the regular paths) that we
took another long walk the same evening: across Shoulthwaite Moss to the
bridge of the Greta, at the foot of Great How, and then down St. John’s
Vale. We were obliged to ford the Greta to avoid a circuit, (the
stepping stones being now under water) and we found the road completely
flooded in several places; it lies close to the river, and seems even
worse than the ordinary mountain roads, although it lies at the bottom
of the valley. This is the narrowest vale of all: the Helvellyn range on
one side, is separated by a very narrow space from a lower, but
precipitous mountain on the other, which at one point even projects
beyond its natural line on purpose to hem in the valley. In front, we
had the fine view of Saddleback which I first described. As we approach
Saddleback the valley widens and becomes more common-place in its
features: at last you meet the Penrith road, which conducts you to
Keswick along the Greta at the foot of Latrigg, as already mentioned.

[24th]

The next day, being somewhat tired, we abridged our excursion, and
contented ourselves with ascending Causey Pike, a mountain with two
summits, one of them greatly above the other, at an hour’s walk from
Keswick, west of the lake, and adjacent to the valley of Newlands. This
green and richly cultivated valley runs up like the vale of Keswick,
from the base of Skiddaw, but in a slightly different direction;
south-west instead of south: it is separated from Keswick vale by the
mountains Catbells, Hindsgarth,48 and others, and stretches for a length
of seven or eight miles, to meet the valley of Buttermere, from which it
is only separated by a low pass. We crossed this valley by field paths,
and tempted by the small Edition: current; Page: [540] apparent
elevation of the mountain, ascended it without making any enquiry about
the easiest way up; but this we had reason to repent, as we had an hour
and a half of very hard climbing, first over green turf, then among
heath, and lastly among the clefts of the rocks, to reach the highest
summit. A deep ravine or ghyll separates the mountain from an almost
precipitous height, north of it, consisting of what in this district is
called Screes, that is, small fragments of stone lying on the steepest
elevation on which they can remain, and dislodged at once by any attempt
to tread on them. From the top, we saw nearly the same objects as from
Skiddaw, except those which Skiddaw itself intercepted from us; and we
had, in addition, a nearer and better view of the red sienitic mountains
of Buttermere; High Stile, Red Pike, and Grasmoor with its long line of
summits of which the highest is or seems a broad segment of a
hemisphere. It is sometimes said, that the best views of mountains are
from the valleys: this is true when you are in the midst of the highest
mountains, and we so found it afterwards: but at Keswick, where the high
mountains are at a considerable distance, they can only be viewed to
advantage from high places, for there alone are they sufficiently
conspicuous, and seem to tower above the lower elevations in front.—This
day I dined with Taylor: his mother, and a cousin of his,49 apparently a
clever, sensible woman, had joined him, and Mr. Southey with part of his
family came in the evening.

[25th]

The weather being now completely settled, we left Keswick for a three
days excursion to Buttermere and Wastwater. There are two roads to
Buttermere from Keswick; one of nine miles, by the vale of Newlands,
passable for wheels all the way; the other a horse path merely, of
fourteen miles, by Borrowdale and the pass of Gatesgarth, under Honistar
Crag.—We took the latter route, lengthening it still further by a
circuitous entry into Borrowdale. We turned to the left from the banks
of Derwent Lake just before passing Mr. Pocklington’s house (Barrow
House) on the way to Lodore;50 and ascended into a sort of pass, or
elevated narrow vale, running parallel with, and above, the valley of
Keswick Lake, and occasionally affording fine views of it. The rocks on
both sides are wild and craggy, and the space between them is filled up
by a considerable quantity of coppice wood. This pleased us much more
than any part of Borrowdale except the entrance, which from the marks of
ruin and destruction that it exhibits, is grander than any defile in the
whole district. After a time this woody and elevated gorge conducted us
into a valley of some depth along which the stream, which forms the
cataract of Lodoar,51 flows on towards its destination. The valley is
here more commonplace; Edition: current; Page: [541] green at the bottom
and bare on the mountain-sides like Borrowdale. We followed it up to the
village of Watendlath; here it flows through a tarn, which, however,
like all the others which we had hitherto seen, was a tarn only in name;
in reality a reedy pond, bordered by a swamp. Higher up the stream there
is another tarn which may possibly deserve a better character, and a
little further on are the sources of this little river, in the fells
which separate Borrowdale from Legberthwaite vale. We however saw
nothing of all this, as our path here crossed over the fell on the
contrary side, and descended through a thick coppice into Borrowdale, of
which we had a fuller, and a more interesting view from this eminence
than from any other point. The place at which we entered the valley was
not far beyond the Bowder Stone, and considerably short of Rossthwaite,
the first village. We were now on known ground: we left the eastern fork
of the valley, with its village and little chapel of Stonethwaite, on
our left hand, and when we reached Seatoller, began to ascend the high
and steep pass, which connects Borrowdale with the head of Buttermere
vale. We followed the course of the brook, (or beck as the people of
this country would call it,) which is to be found in every valley, pass,
or ghyll, and of course indicates its lowest line. As we ascended, the
mountains which bounded the pass became drearier and drearier; on
looking back, we had lost sight of the green bottom of Borrowdale, and
saw only the dreary tops of the fells on its further side, and the still
more dreary summits of the Helvellyn range over them. The prospect on
the whole was one of mere desolation, enlivened only by the rapids and
continual miniature waterfalls of the little brook, and by the sheep who
wandered and found a tolerable subsistence on the moors. But we had
scarcely reached the top of the pass, when, by a sudden turn, the
majestic Honistar Crag came in sight; a cliff almost eight-hundred feet
in height, nearly or entirely perpendicular, under which as under a
wall, the mountain path descends to the hamlet of Gatesgarth: in the
bottom of course is a foaming brook; on the other side another cliff,
less bold but nearly as high; and enormous blocks of stone, which have
fallen from one or the other cliff, are scattered through the narrow
glen. The extremity of Honistar Crag joins to the head of Buttermere
water, along the bank of which we proceeded to the village of
Buttermere, lying at the foot of the lake bearing the same name, between
it and a larger lake named Crummock water, which fills the lower part of
the vale.

The scenery of this valley is infinitely more striking, and makes a
deeper impression of that kind, which lofty and precipitous mountains
are peculiarly fitted to give, than any other part of the mountainous
country that we had yet seen, though even this, perhaps, was excelled by
what we saw afterwards. The breadth of the valley is barely sufficient
to hold the two lakes: on the eastern side, or the right hand in
descending from the vale-head, it is only here and there that there is
room for any thing but the road between the lake and the mountains: on
this side however the ascent of the mountains themselves is not, in all
parts, alike abrupt and sudden: but all along the western side of the
valley, mountains nearly as lofty Edition: current; Page: [542] as
Skiddaw and Saddleback and far steeper in most parts, grow up, like a
tree, out of the lake itself; not leaving room for even a path; and no
doubt, they continue to descend as precipitously to an immense depth
under the water. These mountains are, in most lights, of a strong red
colour, arising from a rock of a sienitic character, sometimes called
granite, of which they are chiefly composed and the basis of which is
red felspar. The most remarkable summits in this line of mountains, (all
of which are connected at the base) are High Crag, High Stile, and Red
Pike. Between High Stile and Red Pike you can plainly see (inclosed by
two ridges connecting, by fine waving lines, the lofty summits) a
conical hollow, containing a considerable tarn known by the name of
Bleaberry Tarn. The brook which carries off the water of the tarn,
thunders down the wall of rock which supports alike the craggy tops and
the recess between them: it falls into the lake underneath, and the
little hollow which it has cut for itself in its passage down, is called
in the neighbourhood, from the frothy appearance of the falling water,
Sour-milk Ghyll. These mountains are individualized by the marked
diversity of their summits: two of them have high craggy tops, while Red
Pike is, as the name imports, peaked, but the peak predominates over the
ridge only as the head over the shoulders. Between these and the
mountain Melbreak,52 which forms the western boundary of the lower, and
larger lake, there is a ghyll with a wider opening, and a considerable
recess, but Melbreak, again, immediately overhangs the lake: it is a
long, ridge-like mountain but its summit does seem a ridge, and not a
flat piece of table land, and it rises precipitously like its nearest
neighbours. On the other side, Crummock lake is nobly hemmed in and
surmounted by the extreme points of Grasmoor, and its dependencies:
Grasmoor, the loftiest of the north-western mountains, consisting of a
long line of mountain with huge broad summits; mostly segments of
circles, interspersed or alternated with pikes; and joining on so
closely to other lines of mountain-top, that they seem part of itself:
from the heights about Keswick, this mountain with its broad imposing
front, is seen overtopping the pointed summits of Grisedale Pike, Causey
Pike, and all the neighbouring eminences, and eclipsing even the other
Buttermere mountains: as seen from nearer its foot, it appears, like
these last, of a bright red, and its sides seem to consist of red
screes, in most places hardly possible to be climbed.—If we now turn our
face to the head of Buttermere vale, we find it closed by Honistar Crag,
which in height almost rivals the mountains which bound the west side of
the vale; it is here seen in profile, but is still wonderfully bold and
grand; it presents towards the vale, something like one of the faces of
a triangular pyramid, greatly truncated at one of the angles of its
base. The opening of Gatesgarth pass is rather too much seen, and is
rather too low; this, in some of the views, though not in all, prevents
the vale from appearing so completely closed up, at its head, as would
be Edition: current; Page: [543] desirable. Between Honistar Crag and
the mountains High Crag and High Stile, the space is completely filled
by a precipitous knotty eminence called Hay Stacks, from an imaginary
resemblance between the rocks forming its summit and the hay-stacks of
the country which in shape are most like the corn-ricks of the south of
England. Between Hay Stacks and Honistar Crag there is a cove, coomb, or
scooped out hollow, over which goes or seems to go, an alpine path, but
the opening is not sufficient to break the continuity.

Such are the outlines of this delightful valley; which, as it lies pent
up in its den of mountains, gives for the first time in our present
journey, a feeling of perfect separation from the world and all its
concerns; while the rich meadows, with two or three fine fields of corn
and a considerable mixture of trees, which fill the short space of dry
land between the two lakes of Buttermere and Crummock superadd to the
feeling of seclusion, that of life and rural enjoyment, and render the
spot one of those, among all I ever saw, which excited in the
imagination the most vivid sense of the delight of living there for
one’s whole life. Through these fields a little river flows out of the
upper lake into the lower; and this is not a foaming mountain torrent,
roaring boisterously over a rocky bed; it is of another and a more
engaging character; its bed consists of fragments of rock pounded so
fine, as not sensibly to agitate its surface, and over this bed it
rushes with arrowy swiftness, yet with that deep repose and silence
which excites far stronger feeling of power, than is raised by a noisy
torrent. Not a breath of wind disturbed the surface of the water; but
the centre of the current, the point where the stream was swiftest,
might be traced along its course by a faint undulation, the effect of
its extreme rapidity. Near where it issues into Crummock lake, two
little knolls composed of rock and covered with wood, the one a
peninsula, the other an island, afford a beautiful prospect of the lake.

Notwithstanding the suddenness with which the mountains rise out of the
water, neither of the lakes is destitute of those projecting headlands
which are so great an ornament of the lake scenery of these parts. Such
promontories are sometimes formed by a turn in the mountain itself; and
every brook which flows into the water carries down the materials from
which a great or small projecting point is gradually produced, and the
margin of the lakes diversified by capes and land-locked bays. One of
the largest promontories, on the east side of Buttermere water, is
occupied by a pretty little residence shut in by trees; and to avoid
this the road from Gatesgarth makes a sudden turn to the right, which
exhibits through a vista of trees, a high mountain directly in front and
towering immediately over the traveller’s head before he dreams of its
existence.

Buttermere itself is a very small village, with a church which might
hold four inside, and ten out, if churches were licensed to carry
passengers to heaven in this latter method. Not to exaggerate its
smallness, it is about the size of a large omnibus: and the parson, I
understand wears the dress and speaks the dialect of a Edition: current;
Page: [544] Cumberland farmer, as he is.53 The houses in the village
wear an appearance of comfort and comparative affluence; but this is not
peculiar to them, it is the general character of the habitations of the
peasantry in these mountains. No traces of penury have shewn themselves
to us anywhere.

[26th]

The following morning we set off for Wastdale by a wild rough path
through the passes of the mountains. We walked to the head of Buttermere
water, and there ascended the mountain ridge on our right to a narrow
pass on a great elevation, called Scarf Gap, between the mountains
called Hay Stacks and High Crag. We frequently turned round to look down
upon Buttermere Vale and its adjacent mountains: the view had nothing of
that desolation which struck us so forcibly in the backward view from
the ascent to Gatesgarth pass: the mountains were very nearly as bare,
but their forms were so much grander that their bareness no longer
suggested unpleasing ideas. From the top of the pass, however, the
forward view was still more striking. Below us lay the narrow vale of
Ennerdale, bounded on the opposite side by three immense mountains,
Great Gable, Kirkfell, and the Pillar: about the middle of this last
enormous pile of rock, a projecting cliff, from which the mountain
derives its name, and the summit of which, until a few years ago, was
deemed inaccessible, stood out magnificently. The head of the valley is
formed by lofty summits and steep craggy sides, forming an impenetrable
barrier. Not a human being nor a habitation was visible; the rapid
mountain stream called the Leesa alone divided, with a few straggling
sheep, the possession of this wild, uncultivated, but not uncheerful
valley, down the middle of which it curled in and out with an uneasy
writhing motion. Brooks, of course, from every nook and hollow in the
mountains, plunged into the valley; which, in its upper part, was
strewed with little green hillocks, covered with sward, always dry and
fresh, not the deep swampy, rushy green of the moister bog-grass which
occupied the hollows between them. From most points, this upper end of
the valley appeared a mere basin, of great depth, inaccessible but by
crossing the lofty mountains which bounded it; but from one point in the
descent, looking through the narrow gap between the Pillar-mountain and
the back of High Stile, we caught a partial view of Ennerdale Water
filling up the hollow vale, its lower end encircled by smaller and tamer
hills, but the upper part built up by mountains like walls, and a
precipitous mountain-end actually jutting out with a bold long cape into
the water. This striking scenery is little known to tourists, who seldom
visit Ennerdale, and if they go to Wastdale, pass over the Sty-head pass
from Borrowdale, or else travel up the valley from its opening near the
town of Gosforth and the sea.

Having crossed the narrow upper end of Ennerdale, we ascended a still
higher, Edition: current; Page: [545] and steeper pass, called Black
Sail, between Kirkfell and the Pillar; though indeed it was rather a
part of those two mountains and not much inferior to them in height.
When we had crossed this and began to descend, we saw before us a narrow
basin like the head of Langdale, but formed by still steeper, and still
more lofty mountains. Facing us was one of the finest of all, Yewbarrow,
the sides of which were rendered inaccessible by screes; the summit was
a bold ridge, rising to the left into a lofty peak. To the right, and
all round to the place where we were descending, the back of the
mountains of Ennerdale formed a high, impenetrable amphitheatre. To the
left, Kirkfell, one of the most solid and massive as well as highest of
the mountains so thrust forward its immense bulk that we could only
imagine, but could not see, the opening between it and Yewbarrow,
through which we afterwards descended into Wastdale. This basin opens
laterally from Wastdale head, and is in one respect finer, that it is a
complete circuit of almost impassable mountains; while the proper
Wastdale head, though formed by still loftier summits, leaves between
them a broad opening called the Sty-head, which travellers usually pass
over from Borrowdale, and which though as high as the tops of many
mountains, breaks the continuity of this immense mountain-ridge. As we
gradually wound round the sides of Kirkfell, we obtained a peep of the
upper end of Wastwater, and the mountains of its head began to shew
themselves. Gable was now completely hid from us by Kirkfell, but the
Pikes of Scawfell began to shew themselves over the top of a ridge which
mounts up to the summit of another part of the same mountain, called
more properly Scawfell. To the right of this, over another and lower
part of the mountain range, the road to Eskdale slanted away to the
south-west. The head of Wastdale is rich with meadows and fields; five
or six prosperous-looking farmhouses are grouped together, and comprise
all its inhabitants: lower down there is no room for cultivation, so
immediately do the mountains rise out of the lake. On the left side as
you look downward a long ridge called the Screes forms the impassable
wall of the valley and lake; you see that were you to set your foot on
its side you would come down, carrying with you an avalanche of loose
stones, and would fall at once into the water. On the other side also
the mountains rise immediately from the water, though a very little more
gradually, leaving here and there a small headland. A road here follows
the margin of the lake, close to it yet in most places considerably
above it.

The valley of Buttermere and Crummock gave the idea of seclusion, but
Wastdale gives that of absolute solitude. You may look down the valley
for hours and see no trace of humanity: for though you see the opening
towards the level country which separates the mountains from the sea,
this opening is not quite flat, but marked by sharp angular lines, and
seems as wild as the mountains themselves. One solitary spot of green
meadow, exactly at the foot of the lake, alone distinguishes the
prospect before you from a mere desert; but a desert of cheerful aspect;
you see nothing of man, but you do not seek him; the forms of the
mountains, and the bright sparkling water which fills the vale, and
breaks upon the Edition: current; Page: [546] shore at your feet,
supplies the place of every thing else. It is fortunate that this lake
is not accessible but by steep climbing or a long circuit. Were there a
single house on its banks, its peculiar charm would be gone; it would be
beautiful, but no longer Wastwater. This peculiar feeling of happy
solitude makes the view down the lake more pleasing and striking to me,
than the backward view towards the water-head, though this is the more
generally admired, and is in fact the noblest mountain view in the whole
country. At the head of the vale stand the two highest and grandest
mountains of the district; Gable, and Scaw Fell. Gable lifts up his
pyramidal summit high above the mountain passes on his right and left,
and seems one, individual, tall, solitary object: Scaw Fell seems a heap
of mountains, consisting of three principal parts, with craggy ridges,
points, and descending lines or neeses as they are here called; one
point termed Scaw Fell Pike, the highest land in England, asserting its
preeminence only by a small superiority of height. Between these
mountains and connecting them, is the waving line of Sty-head Pass. To
the left of Gable, and separated from it by a far loftier pass, is the
massive globose mountain, Kirkfell: next to that the broad gap between
them being masked, stood Yewbarrow, which turns towards the valley a
tall roundish point, cleft like the mitre of a bishop. Other high
mountains succeeded to this, while on the other side the whole bank of
the lake was occupied and shut in by the Screes,—the mountain itself
receiving this name from one of its most marked characters—until the
ridge declines away, at the foot of the lake, almost into the plain.
There are no islands on Wastwater, as there are on the other lakes; they
would destroy its wildness.—We stayed some time on the edge of the lake,
looking alternately up and down; having first gone far enough down to
command the finest view in both directions. But of all the lakes, this
perhaps is the one of which any idea, which can be formed from
description, is least like the reality. The objects may be described,
but the character of cheerful loneliness which belongs to the whole
picture when you look down the lake leaving its upper end behind you,
must be felt to be understood.

We dined at a farm-house, one of the small group already mentioned; and
were exceedingly well treated and much pleased. We then returned to
Buttermere by exactly the same way by which we came; road there was
none, and often scarcely a path: and arrived about night fall.

[27th]

The next day we employed in seeing the lower part of Buttermere Vale,
before returning to Keswick. We walked down the road by the side of
Crummock water, at the foot of Grasmire, or Grasmoor; at one projecting
point, jutting out into the water, the road is excavated in the living
rock, and the cliff above you is continued beneath your feet, till it
sinks under the lake below. Further on, the mountains recede somewhat
from the lake, and leave room for a few corn fields, and meadows, which
the road crosses without hedges, between two flowery and bushy
roadsides. We turned, soon after, into a field-path which almost
immediately Edition: current; Page: [547] entered a wood, and conducted
us through it (immediately above, and almost close to, the water,) to
meet the road which crosses the valley at the lake-foot. From this road,
the view of the mountains of Buttermere was unequalled. The projecting
point, already adverted to, was seen to form part of a knotty little
mountain, which protruded itself into the valley where it had properly
no business, but where it created a pleasing variety; behind it the
lofty mountains round the head of the lake of Buttermere were seen in a
splendid series, clearly individualized, and adorned by brilliant lights
and deep shades, while exactly over the top of Haystacks we dimly saw,
amid the clouds which partly veiled its pyramidal summit, the noble
mountain Gable. The mountains nearer to us were not less striking,
though very different: Melbreak with its long ridge and steep declivity
overhanging the water on the right, Grasmoor with its vast bulk and
graceful forms on the left, fronted by Whiteside, a mountain which we
had not seen from any other point; well-named, and contrasting most
effectively by its colour, with the red sides of Grasmoor and the
mountains opposite. In front of all this was Crummock Lake, more
beautiful from this point than from all others; and were it no otherwise
beautiful, it is water, and therefore an unequalled foreground to hill
or mountain scenery. Behind, the valley finds its way, I cannot tell
exactly how, among lower mountains, to the plain. But there is an
opening to the right, which lets out into the valley of Crummock Lake,
another valley and another lake; smaller indeed, and of a less
magnificent character, but highly and pleasingly beautiful: this was
Loweswater. We walked along the road, already mentioned, till we found a
gate into a field sufficiently high and open to overlook the whole of
the lake. Loweswater, unlike the other lakes, has its head among tamer
hills and its outlet among bold high mountains. There is nothing
sufficiently individualizing in its circumstances to render a
description interesting. We returned to Buttermere by the west side of
Crummock water, along the side of Melbreak, seeing by the way the
celebrated waterfall Scale Force, which is situated in a deepish opening
between Melbreak and Red Pike, the only place where the mountain range
recedes on this side from the water’s edge. This is the highest single
fall in the country, being about 150 feet in height; a thin but adequate
stream dropping down like a ribbon of foam, at the end of a defile of
rock. You climb up some fragments of rock to get into the defile; you
then find yourself between two walls, as high as the fall itself, once
no doubt joined in a single mass, but gradually worn away by the
waterfall, which, every century, will form the termination of a deeper
recess. The two opposite faces of rock are interspersed with bushes,
where clefts permit; and to a considerable distance from the fall, they
are wet with the spray, as you will be, if you approach as near to the
fall as you will certainly be inclined to do. The end of the chasm is a
solid rock, crossed from its summit to its base by a single streak of
falling water.

The same evening we walked back to Keswick by the valley of Newlands.
The pass to this valley, (the Hawse, it should be called in the local
language) lies exactly over against the village of Buttermere, or that
village, I should rather say Edition: current; Page: [548] lies at the
foot of the pass; to which you ascend by a short valley, remarkable for
the turf and bright green fern with which its mountains are clothed to
their very tops. The pass is not high, and when we had crossed it, the
vale of Newlands lay straight and open before us: Skiddaw and Saddleback
soon came in sight, and the view would have been more complete had not a
cluster of mountains, Hindsgarth and its dependencies, narrowed the
valley near its outlet, over against Causey Pike. This vale from its
head is green and cheerful, though uncultivated, and in time, groups of
cottages multiply; with their sycamore and pollard ash, and their little
thickets of smaller wood about them. The road becomes more and more
beautiful at every step, and beyond Causey Pike it lies wholly among
hedge-rows and thickets, and finally through a wood. Here however you
must cross the valley, or you will reach Whitehaven instead of Keswick;
and after skirting a little furze-clad mountain, we found ourselves in
the road along the west side of Derwent Lake, near Lady William Gordon’s
woods, from whence, passing through Portingscale, we reached Keswick by
the track with which we were already familiar.

[28th]

After this little tour, we contented ourselves the following day with
short excursions. Among others, we went to see the waterfalls at Mr.
Pocklington’s, on the way to Lodore: they are pretty, and pleasingly
situated among trees, but inferior on the whole to any of the other
falls. We also climbed up to a height just above the top of Lodore
cataract, in hopes of seeing more of the previous course of the stream
which forms it, but could see little of what we sought, though a fine
view of the lake fully rewarded us for our labour. This evening I went
with the Taylor family to drink tea with Southey.

[29th]

We were desirous of ascending Scawfell the next day, it being the
highest, and by the account of all who have climbed it, the finest of
the mountains. The easiest mode of reaching it is from Borrowdale, and
we therefore set out early and breakfasted at Rossthwaite, after which
we lingered in the valley hoping that the clouds which at present
covered the tops of the highest mountains (although in other respects it
was a clear, beautiful day) might dissipate themselves. But although
they did clear off very much, a cap of clouds remained upon Scawfell and
Gable, and most of the other summits at the head of the vale were only
occasionally free. We employed the day first in exploring the eastern
fork of Borrowdale, from Stonethwaite up to the pass into Langdale; it
bears a general resemblance to the other fork, but is rather more
interesting; then in climbing from the narrow wild upper end of this
vale, over part of the mountain Glaramara which separates it from
Borrowdale proper. From this elevation we saw the backs of the Langdale
Pikes and Bowfell and over them the mountains of Little Langdale and
Coniston; occasionally we could see the long vista of Great Langdale,
almost to Ambleside; Edition: current; Page: [549] but oftener, we could
see nothing but clouds scudding over the summits at the head of the
vale, and rolling down the centre of the valley, at a level somewhat
below us, though we were free from them. And we observed, that though
the clouds were congregated about the knot of high mountains from which
the valleys diverge, yet the smaller fragments of cloud which were
continually disengaging themselves from the larger masses, (detachments
which never diminished the main body) always took the direction of the
valleys and never adhered to the heights which bounded them. From the
top of the mountain we looked down Borrowdale upon Keswick lake, which
was spread out in all its loveliness, as it might have been seen by an
eagle in his highest flight; while the view was closed by Skiddaw and
Saddleback, perfectly clear of cloud and mist. We looked down into the
narrow vale at the head of Borrowdale, somewhat above Seathwaite and the
black lead mines; and sat a considerable time watching the clouds on the
summits of Scawfell, as they occasionally opened and afforded us a
momentary view of some point or other of the mountain. But finding a
complete dispersion of the mist to be entirely hopeless, we returned to
Keswick by the Bowder Stone, and by the road on the west side of the
lake, which is a terrace road, a little way up the mountain, commanding
the whole of Lady William Gordon’s woods (a delightful foreground to the
lake) and affording by far the finest views we had ever had, of the lake
itself. The islands, which from some points appear too much clustered
together, or confined too exclusively to one part of the lake, here
placed themselves in graceful array, and no one of them hid or injured
the effect of any other.

[30th]

The next day, which was the last of our stay at Keswick, we employed in
climbing the delightful mountain Blencathara, or Saddleback; and no day,
of our whole excursion, was more delightfully spent, although the
weather was hazy, and did not allow a clear view of distant objects. We
walked five miles and upwards towards Penrith, almost round the base of
the mountain, in order to ascend it by the way of Threlkeld Tarn, so
beautifully figured and described in Southey’s Colloquies.54 We quitted
the Penrith road a little beyond the village of Threlkeld, and took a
little road which winds round the base of the mountain; until, after
turning round the last neese or descending ridge which is visible from
Shoulthwaite Moss, we arrived at a broad but bold recess or ghyll along
the side of which a good horsepath winds up towards a mine that lies
high up the mountain. When we reached the top of this ghyll we saw in
front of us from right to left a long deep ravine, with steep turfy
hills (of indescribable but beautiful shape and grouping), on the other
side of it; our path turned to the left along the side of the mountain
overlooking the ravine: far up the hollow at a point where it winds
round Edition: current; Page: [550] towards the north, is the mine,
immediately overhung by one of the horns of Saddleback; by horns I mean
the sharp points which form the extremities, and intermediate angles of
the sharp wedge-like but bent ridge formerly mentioned in describing the
top of the mountain as seen from St. John’s Vale. The beautiful
mountain-brook which afterwards runs at the bottom of the ravine, is
seen flowing into it laterally between two points of the mountain on the
left, and by its course, guides the exploring traveller to the Tarn of
which it is the outlet. We however finding that the path conducted us
round one of these points and not between them, followed it in hopes of
an easier ascent; but were merely conducted to the foot of a lofty crag,
surmounted by one of the summits of Saddleback; and we had to scale the
grassy height which we had thought to turn. When we reached its top, we
saw below us, in a nook, surrounded on three sides by heights as
precipitous as turf will grow on, the beautiful tarn; we descended to
its brink: it was the first genuine tarn that we had seen in these
mountains (I had seen others in the Pyrenees), and we could not take our
eyes off it. The water, which is of the deepest blue, seems hid, out of
the reach of man; no trees or shrubs, nor even the smallest herb,
overshadow it, yet one wonders at having found it, and deems it a
prodigy that it should not have been overlooked. It is beautifully
clear; a part of it is shallow, but it deepens suddenly; some light
green moss-like weeds shew themselves at the bottom, but it is said to
contain no fish. Its situation, and its little extent compared with the
heights that overlook it, remind one of the pure crystalline water which
collects in the basin formed by the united leaves of the teazle, or
other perfoliate plants. But the comparison is too humble, and does it
injustice. At the outlet of the tarn, where the mountain brook issues
out of it, the break in the side of the basin allows a distant, bird’s
eye view of part of the vale of Penrith, with a part of the range of
Cross Fell in the distance. When we had satiated ourselves with gazing
at the tarn, we climbed the side of the turfy hollow where it lies and
reached one, and the highest, of the three sharp points, which are the
angles of the sharp ridge. Wedge-like as the ridge appears from below,
it seems not less so from above; it is an angular line, formed by the
intersection of a steep green slope and a series of steep bare coves,
combes, or recesses: separated from one another by long ridges or neeses
equally angular and equally bold. The view is still finer than that from
Skiddaw: you see but little towards the sea; but you see Skiddaw himself
in a long profile, as fine as his immense front (for in profile he has
an immense advantage over Blencathara); the remaining smaller mountains
of the Skiddaw group are seen much more advantageously from the less
lofty elevation of Saddleback; and to the south, Helvellyn, and St.
John’s Vale are better seen: of the latter we had, I should think, the
best possible view, with Great How and the lower part of Thirlmere
(invisible from Skiddaw) to terminate it, and beyond the mountains of
Grasmere and Ambleside. We went successively to each of the three sharp
points, and then descended to the mountain foot by a turfy declivity,
affording an easier descent than any other mountain we had climbed.
Between Saddleback on the one side, Edition: current; Page: [551] and
Latrigg and the horn of Skiddaw on the other, is one of the loveliest
little vales conceivable, with the little mountain river Glenderamakin
at its bottom, running into the Greta: we crossed this vale by winding
field-paths and cart-roads as we best could, and then struck into a
terrace road along the sides of Latrigg, through the wood which covers a
great part of that mountain, within hearing, and occasional sight, of
the beautiful Greta winding round the hill foot, and returned to Keswick
by the most lovely and enjoyable path, perhaps, of which its
neighbourhood, delightful as it is, has to boast.

[31st]

The next morning, I took leave of Southey and his family, and we set off
(three of us—for a third companion55 had joined us the evening before)
to walk to Ulleswater. We left the Penrith road near the second
milestone, and crossing St. John’s Vale, ascended the opposite
hill-side, round which a winding road brought us out into an extensive
moor, differing little from those in the flat country. The mountains of
the range terminating in Helvellyn, were on our right, but their sloping
side was turned towards us, and we could see but little of their height:
the vale, which opened before us towards Penrith, was terminated in the
distance by the Cross Fell range, which is a continuation of the Craven
mountains, and the highest elevation of which is formed by the round
convex summit of Cross Fell itself. One round ugly little hill stood by
itself in the midst of the valley, not far from us. All this was not
very interesting; but on the left the beautiful Blencathra, which is to
my taste the finest of all the mountains, presented a constantly
varying, and perpetually interesting and remarkable front. Our road, or
horsepath, followed for some distance the base of a low ridge, then
climbed over it, and entered into Matterdale, one of the smaller valleys
tributary to the Ulleswater vale. The scenery here began to grow
interesting: the brook, a beautiful mountain rivulet, was at the bottom
of a deep narrow ravine; the dell and the brook kept company with each
other in eternal twistings and turns, and the sides of the brook,
sometimes very rocky and precipitous, were clothed all the way with
trees and shrubs. We passed the village of Dockray, and rapidly
descending, came presently in sight of Ulleswater close beneath us,
bathing the feet of the steep mountains beyond: we walked down to its
bank through a rich forest-like wood of native oak, ash, and thorn,
forming part of what is now called Gowbarrow Park. Here, in the midst of
the indigenous woods which still survive about Ulleswater though
unhappily extinct in the neighbourhood of the other lakes, the Duke of
Norfolk has a hunting box close upon the lake, called Lyulph’s Tower,
built in the stile of the gateway of an ancient castle, and adapted with
rare felicity to harmonize with the surrounding Edition: current; Page:
[552] scene. Close to this place the brook already mentioned forms, not
the highest or fullest, but the prettiest waterfall in the country. The
spot itself, and the narrow ghyll both above and below it, are so hidden
by fine trees that you might seek long for it without finding it; and
the waterfall (it is called Airey Force) is one of the spots where one
would go in a hot summer-day to conceal oneself from the sun, and
refresh oneself by the sight of water and rocks, shut up in a leafy
nook, and the feeling of the cool moist air.

It is scarcely possible to describe Ulleswater. No description can give
the slightest notion of what it is. The beauty of the other lakes
consists in a few grand features, but the charm of this lies in the
immense variety of the details. What can be said, is said very shortly.
The form of the lake bears some resemblance to the letter Z, or rather,
consisting of three distinct reaches; and the first two are imbedded in
lofty mountains. On the left, looking towards the head of the lake, the
mountains grow at once out of the water: on the right, Helvellyn and its
numberless dependant heights, form the boundary of the basin, while the
immediate edge of the lake is overhung by wooded hills of every variety
of form and steepness; sometimes close to the water, sometimes receding
a little, sometimes opening to receive a stream from a tributary vale
running up into the recesses of Helvellyn. The margin of the water
itself is crowded with trees, among which the fern rises to a height and
luxuriance seldom met with; and the headlands are numerous and varied
beyond what any description could render conceivable: the bays which
they inclose participate in their beauty.56

[lf0223-27_figure_009.jpg]

[1st August]

We passed the remainder of this day, and the whole of the next, on the
shores or on the bosom of this delightful lake; wandering at times
sufficiently far up the tributary vales, to catch finer views of the
main valley, and the water which fills it. These vales (Grisedale,
Glenridden Vale, Glencoin, etc.) are wooded in their lower part; in the
upper they become more bare, and resemble more the narrow vales of the
other lakes. The weather was singularly favourable; the lake, in
consequence, was of the most brilliant blue: and though it is narrower
than the other large lakes, yet the absence of islands (except three
little islets in the upper and narrowest reach) and the bends in the
lake itself, allow the spectator when in particular positions to see a
large expanse of water, having the effect of an inlet of the sea. The
finest view of this sort, I think, is the view down the lake from its
first bend, near the outlet of Glencoin. But it is difficult to make a
choice amidst such astonishing variety of beauty. Several elegant
residences have been pitched on or Edition: current; Page: [553] near
this lake, and do not injure the soft and verdant character of its
beauty: the most delightful of these is the cottage and grounds of the
Rev. Mr. Askew,57 whose shrubbery or rather wood, occupies a very narrow
space along the bank of the lake, between it and the road, comprising
several of the most beautiful of the headlands and some of the most
interesting home-views of the lake: his gates are left open, and nothing
hinders any one from walking in, or even through, the grounds.—To see
the higher and more rugged mountains which separate this valley from
that of Thirlmere, or Legberthwaite, you must either be on the lake
itself, or at some of the many delightful stations on the opposite, or
steep and bare side of the valley. You then see a wall of uneven height,
bounded at the top by a long crooked line—not a curve, but a series of
short straight lines, continually varying its direction, and forming,
among various obtuse angles, two decided peaks, of which the highest is,
I believe, the summit of Helvellyn. These may also be seen from the
western side of the lake below Gowbarrow Park, near Halsteads, the
beautiful house and grounds of Mr. Marshall,58 occupying a promontory of
the lake, from whence you see up the second reach, and from whence,
also, the jutting-out point of the mountain which stands between the
second and the first reach, has a particularly bold and striking
appearance.59

[2nd]

On the third day of our stay at Patterdale (counting the day of our
arrival as the first) we made an excursion to Hawes Water, the only one
of the lakes which we had not seen. We went up Patterdale (the upper
part of the Ulleswater vale, beyond the lake itself) for about two
miles: it is much finer than the other broad green valleys, such as
Borrowdale and Langdale: yet it would not be easy to say in what its
superiority consists: the mountains are not so high; they are hardly
even steeper, but there seems to be more among them of what a painter
would call, harmony of composition: there are no striking contrasts, or
bold reliefs, but one mountain seems to glide naturally into another,
every one seems in his place, and you feel at every point, that his
shape is just what it should be. The secret, I suspect, is, variety
without tameness: in the other valleys, there is either too great a
uniformity of character, or the variety is purchased by some sacrifice
of the beauty or boldness of the individual features.—At a little lake
called Brother’s Water, two miles from the head of Ulleswater, and
formed by the same stream which afterwards feeds the larger lake, we
turned up a valley to the left, which shortly narrows; and following the
bed of one of the most interesting mountain brooks I ever saw, arrived
at a large Tarn known by the name of Hays Tarn, surrounded on all sides
(except the outlet) Edition: current; Page: [554] by steep ridges
without even a pass. We had to scramble over the summit of the ridge,
from which, had the day been clearer, we should have enjoyed a very
extensive and beautiful view: as it was we saw the mountains at the head
of Patterdale, with some of the Ambleside mountains beyond them, and in
another direction we looked down Martindale, a tributary valley of
Ulleswater, and caught, at its foot, a peep of the lower part of the
lake. As we advanced further along the height, we saw the mountains at
the head of Kentmere and Troutbeck vales, and below us in the midst of
bare ridge-like mountains, the green head of Mardale, the valley
containing Hawes Water. The character of these mountains pleases me
somewhat less, than that of most of the others. There is little
individuality in them; you might almost imagine them to be a long reel
of mountain, broken here and there, and thrown about, as chance might
direct. While you see but a little of them they are fine; and they are
fine, too, when you see much of them, but not so fine, nor does their
aspect vary sufficiently, as your own position changes. We did not see
the lake till we had descended quite into the valley and turned a
corner: it is about three miles long, of unequal but nowhere of great
width, and contracted in the middle almost to a strait. As seen from its
shore, the mountains are not unlike in their shape to those of
Ulleswater; and when you have descended nearly to the foot of the lake,
where its banks are a good deal wooded and where it forms numerous
headlands and bays, the view upwards really reminds one of Ulleswater,
of which it seems the younger and homelier sister. We crossed from the
foot of Hawes Water to the foot of Ulleswater through a tame moorland
country, quite out of the mountain region: but the first view of
Ulleswater from the high ground near Pooley Bridge is singularly fine. A
round wooded hill called Dunmallet stands sentinel at the end of the
lake; and the country and views grow finer and finer at every step, from
this point to the inn at Patterdale.60

[3rd]

We had intended to climb Helvellyn the succeeding day, but the hazy
state of the atmosphere prevented it; and we lingered the greater part
of the day on the banks of Ulleswater. The haze did not at all diminish
the beauty of the home views: this country contains scenery for all
weathers, and he who has not seen mountains in the very worst state of
the weather is far from knowing what beauty they are capable of. The
slightest change in the state of the atmosphere has such an effect on
the mountains, that on such days as most of our summer days are, the
same mountain scarcely seems the same object for three minutes together.
Today we witnessed some of the most interesting of the atmospheric
phenomena of Edition: current; Page: [555] mountainous countries: the
lake, so blue two days before, was of a deep slate colour which was
absolutely unearthly, and as we lost sight of it all at once under the
thick haze which hung over its lower end, we might have taken it for the
waters of oblivion.—In the evening we left this delightful
neighbourhood, and walked up Patterdale to the pass at its head, in the
mountain Kirkstone, noticed in a former part of this journal. A carriage
road, though a difficult one, ascends this pass, from the higher parts
of which, on looking back, nothing is visible but the sky, the wild
sides of the pass, and a glimpse of Brother’s Water at its foot. The
descent to Ambleside by the side of Stock Ghyll is less striking; but
still very fine: the scenery of Ambleside, considered as grand
mountain-scenery, will scarcely bear examination after the more striking
scenes which I had witnessed since I left it, but the beauty of the
home-scenes and of the more rich and graceful Windermere is even more
delightful from the contrast.61

[4th to 7th]

We remained four whole days at Ambleside, chiefly for the purpose of
seeing Wordsworth, with whom we passed as much of that time as we could,
and were amply repaid both in pleasure, intellectual excitement, and
instruction. Our walks were chiefly short ones; Wordsworth conducted us
to several beautiful spots, and his own grounds contain in a very
limited extent, so great a variety of prospects that they are almost a
compendium of the whole Westmoreland mountains. We walked again to
Troutbeck, and employed a considerable part of one day in going down the
west side of Windermere (which we had not seen) to the Station House,
built by Mr. Curwen at a point commanding a fine view both up and down
the lake; we were then ferried over, and returned by Bowness and Lowood:
in this walk, the first part of which was chiefly among wood, we had
many new and delightful views of the lake; and in the latter half, we
refreshed our recollection of many of the old ones.62

Edition: current; Page: [556]
[8th]

On the fifth day we were forced to quit the neighbourhood; and the
delightful afternoon in which we travelled, outside the stage-coach,
from Ambleside to Kendal by way of Bowness, made the last farewel look
of the lovely Windermere so delightful, that our departure had something
of the melancholy character of parting from a beloved friend; and the
image of the lake and mountains remained impressed upon the internal
eye, long after the physical organs could see them no more.

Edition: current; Page: [557]


32.: Walking Tour of Hampshire, West Sussex, and the Isle of Wight
 19 JULY-6 AUGUST, 1832

MS, Mount Holyoake College, MS BE.M61ya3. Henry Cole was Mill’s
companion on this trip, as he had been for part of the previous one (see
No. 31). Cole’s diary provides additional information, given in
footnotes. As not published in Mill’s lifetime, not listed in his
bibliography.

19th July 1832

Set out with Henry Cole on a tour in Hampshire, West Sussex, and the
Isle of Wight. We started outside a Southampton coach, and proceeded
through Kingston, Esher, Cobham, and Ripley, to Guildford: thus far the
road was familiar to me, and I need not describe it. At Guildford the
road turned sharp round to the right, and gradually slanted up the side
of the chalk range which here, from the rapid dip of the strata, forms
only a very narrow ridge, called the Hog’s Back. When the road has
reached the top of this ridge, it runs along the summit for six or seven
miles, commanding an equally rapid declivity on both sides, and
affording one of the most lovely views in England both to north and
south. On the right, the whole of Surrey to Bagshot and Chertsey, with
St. Ann’s Hill, Cooper’s Vale and Windsor Forest in the distance, and
the long bold range of Chobham Ridges and Romping Downs running north
and south at right angles to the direction of the road. These ridges
though barren and repulsive when near at hand, have a fine effect from a
distance, especially when seen across an intermediate plain, and under a
glorious sky, as today. On our left hand were Hindhead and Blackdown,
the former in its most picturesque aspect, with its long ascending ridge
terminated by its sharp peak-like angles. Beyond these were the South
Downs in the distance, and other chalk hills to the west, similar to
them in form and character. To the foot of Hindhead a wildish country
gradually ascended; leaving along the base of the Hog’s Back a deep
valley, diversified by cultivation, wood, and sandy commons, and marked
at one point by an irregular and picturesque planted eminence. After a
time the ridge gradually descended so as to be almost level with the
plain, and the chalk stratum went I know not whither; our road left it,
and turned southwest across the green sand formation, among cornfields
and hop plantations to the pretty old town of Farnham: which in addition
to its reputation as an English town, may boast of classic fame, being
at present inhabited by Alexander, Caesar, and Edition: current; Page:
[558] Edition: current; Page: [559] Xerxes:1 whether these were the
ancient worthies I know not, but Xerxes keeps a hosier’s shop, and the
other two appear to be gaining their living at length in an honest way.
From Farnham to Alton the road lies through country prettily diversified
but not very remarkable: about half way between those places we passed
close to the Wey, here a most diminutive stream. At Alton we left the
coach, and proceeded on foot to Selborne, a place to which ever since I
read White’s delightful book,2 I have had a strong desire to perform a
pilgrimage. We worked our way thither by lanes and field paths,
sometimes without either, making for a fine hill which we thought was on
the way to Selborne but which turned out to be the very Selborne Hanger
immortalized by White,3 and we came on the village of Selborne before we
were aware that it was the place we were in search of.4 Long before we
reached Alton we had again come upon the chalk, and the way from Alton
to Selborne lay across flat chalky fields, having nothing beautiful in
themselves, and which seemed bounded (at a considerable distance) on
three sides, by a round of chalk hills. But when we reached Selborne, we
were at once struck with its beauty. It is but a small village with the
houses arranged pretty close to each other along the two sides of a
rather winding street: the Church stands a little to the left, with an
open space before it, (called by White the Plastoe)5 in which stands a
handsome sycamore, and one of the few May-poles left in England: hard by
is the parsonage, a neat house with a pretty piece of inclosed ground
and close to that again the only shop, and a neat and well furnished one
it is. Mr. White’s house is not the parsonage house, but larger and
apparently older; with the appearance also of older planting about it:
he was a native of Selborne, and when he was parson of the parish,
continued no doubt to live in his patrimonial house, where Miss White,
his sister, still lives.6 It stands on the right side of the little
street, and a most cheerful and happy looking residence it is: his
laurels and other evergreens of which he speaks in his book7 are still
there, at least some such trees are visible in front. A little further,
and on the left side of the street, is the neat little inn or public
house, where we were very agreeably and comfortably entertained.
Edition: current; Page: [560] After tea, we climbed the Hanger:8 it is a
long ridge: on the side next Selborne it is covered with wood, chiefly
beech, except at the southern extremity: like the village itself, it
lies nearly north west and south east. The top is a beautiful chalky and
sandy table land; skirted on one side by the irregular forest-like edge
of the hanging wood; interspersed with many beautiful trees in other
parts, and forming with fern and bushes a most beautiful common, except
one wide open place in the highest part where there had been cricketing
in the afternoon, which was not yet entirely over. At the extremity of
the hill we came unexpectedly upon a lovely meadow of great extent,
which it seems is called the Park, at the end of which stands the pretty
church and small village of Newton Valence, and an elegant house with a
dressed lawn and shrubbery, to which I suppose the park belongs.
Edition: current; Page: [561] Beyond this the hill appears to drop down.
We returned through the hanging wood which contains some handsome though
not very old beech and ash trees: a fine broad winding path is cut
through it, and by the taste either of Mr. White or some other person,
various openings have been cut which afford beautiful home views of the
village and its immediate environs. On this side of the hill the home
views are the finest: especially Selborne, surrounded with trees and
backed by a pretty retiring green dell which we purpose exploring
tomorrow. On the other side of the hill the out-look is much more
picturesque, embracing by far the finest part of the outline of the
South Downs, another almost equally beautiful line of chalk hills
perpendicular to it, the bearings of which we do not yet very clearly
understand, and several intermediate insulated hills. From the southern
extremity of the Hanger, we see another planted chalk hill, of smaller
size, and not so ridge-shaped, at no great distance from it; this is the
Nore hill mentioned by White:9 beyond is Woolmer Forest, a tract of
waste without a tree, very accurately described by White,10 which
extends apparently for many miles in length from north to south,
occupying no small portion of the eastern boundary of Hampshire. Beyond
the Forest, and nearly due east of us, we saw the long ridge of
Hindhead: its sharp points were not visible, it appeared to terminate by
dropping down abruptly. South of it lay Blackdown and other hills of
which if we execute our plans I shall have occasion to speak more
largely hereafter. After surveying almost every part of the Hanger, we
strolled in and about the beautiful village. I have seldom seen a scene
of more perfect and yet more cheerful seclusion. The people seemed all
comfortable, and the place and neighbourhood was full of young men and
especially young women, neatly dressed, who were making holiday that
evening; they either belonged to the village or had been drawn thither
by an archery meeting held on the top of the hill yesterday, or by the
cricketing today. The people of the neighbourhood are a peculiar race in
appearance; with the darkest eyes and the blackest hair, and a ruddy
complexion shining through a transparent dark skin. Many of the women we
saw were remarkably handsome, and both men and women seemed overflowing
with animal spirits. The cricketing or something else had excited them,
and they were full of mirth and a pleasant freedom of manner.11

[lf0223-27_figure_010.jpg]

[lf0223-27_figure_011.jpg]
White’s House, Selborne, 1832, by Henry Cole Victoria and Albert Museum

20th

Before breakfast we sallied out to explore the little dell which, as I
mentioned yesterday, runs from Selborne in an opposite direction to that
of the Hanger. This (which I conjecture to be what White calls the
Lith,)12 abounds in beauty. It is formed by a little rivulet running
down through a line of rich green meadows, Edition: current; Page: [562]
between two woody slopes of no great elevation. On both slopes the wood,
chiefly beech, amounts to timber, and shuts in the valley, excluding all
sight or imagination of the tame country beyond. It is on a small scale
what Wharfedale, and some of the Cornish valleys, are on a great one. At
first the valley is narrow; higher up it widens into a somewhat larger
expanse of meadow, and sends out a short arm on each side. There are
beautiful sequestered paths through the wood on both sides. A line of
trees and bushes marks the course of the rivulet, and great profusion
and luxuriance of vegetation distinguishes the whole valley. If I lived
at Selborne this dell should be my daily resort; the more striking but
less winning beauties of the Hanger should be reserved for occasional
visits.—We returned to Selborne, from which we speedily took our final
departure, and of which we shall retain many pleasant recollections. The
only object of magnitude in the neighbourhood which we had not yet seen
being the other chalk hill, (the Nore) which lies south of the Hanger,
we resolved to visit this on our way to the place of our destination. We
accordingly crossed the corn fields and slopes which separate the two
hills and ascended the turfy declivity of the Nore, on which in this
place there are few trees; but to our left they began to appear, in a
scattered and forest-like distribution, beyond which we could see that
they became a regular hanging wood of timber trees. This hill is perhaps
not quite so lofty as the Hanger; but commands nearly the same view
towards the South. What is not common, it is crowned with a chalk pit on
the very summit: if that can be called a crown which is not visible from
below. We saw plainly on looking from this eminence at that which we
ascended the previous evening, that the latter is not a ridge but a kind
of triangular hill; the line from Selborne to Newton Valence, the whole
of which was now visible to us, diverging considerably from the line of
the hanging wood, which faces the village of Selborne. We afterwards
found that we had been as much mistaken at first sight in the form of
the second hill. Leaving the open space near the chalk pit, we struck
into the hanging wood; the beeches are well-grown trees; and there is a
broad path through them, keeping near the top of the hill, from which
whenever there is an opening in the wood, you have beautiful glimpses of
the country below. After a short time (for the wood is of no great
extent), we came out upon a commanding point, where the trees are more
thinly scattered; and from which, besides the beauty of the chalky
declivity itself, we had the finest and most extensive view of the
country we were about to traverse, which had yet offered itself to us.
To the north, we must have seen indistinctly almost to Guildford: on the
east side, and from north to south, the vast heath called Wolmer-forest,
formerly a royal chase, and beyond it, Hindhead and Blackdown. At the
southern extremity of the forest, and perhaps forming part of it, was a
heathy hill of considerable elevation and extent, with a line of firs
along the top, which bounded the prospect. To the south were the South
Downs, and all that we could see to the west and south west was the same
long line of chalk hills perpendicular to the former, which we had seen
from the Hanger, and which are tolerably shaped and Edition: current;
Page: [563] well wooded. We had now to determine what should be our
subsequent course. We had thoughts of crossing the Forest to Haslemere,
and exploring Hindhead and Blackdown; but the Forest, however fine in a
distant view, seemed as if it would be dreary to cross; and the country
in the direction of Midhurst seemed so much more varied and beautiful,
that as Hindhead and Blackdown could be seen from London at any time, we
resolved to take the other direction. Our way to Midhurst seemed to lie
directly over the fir-clad eminence already mentioned: between which and
the place where we stood there also lay, nearly at the foot of the chalk
hill, a beautiful little sand hill covered with meadows and woods in the
greatest richness of vegetation, which was a temptation we could not
resist. We accordingly descended the chalk hill, which is here extremely
steep and bare, almost precipitous indeed; but we found a sloping path
down; and then we crossed a large corn field to the sand hill, on which
is the little village of Empshot.13 Here we had one or two beautiful
home views; the little hill and its woods and green meadows in front,
the background being alternatively the chalk hill and another rather
high hill to the south which projects into the plain, having an
ascending ridge which terminates abruptly and presents its steep
extremity to the open country. This hill, which is covered with wood,
must I think from its general appearance and position as far as we could
judge of these from our various points of view, be not one of the chalk
hills, but of the sand which accompanies the chalk in its whole line.
From the other declivity of Empshot hill we had again a most beautiful
view towards the South Downs, and saw the heathy hill topped with the
line of firs, directly before us: and plainly in the direction in which
we had to travel. We found our way to it as we best could, sometimes by
lanes and sometimes through fields and meadows; approximating very near
to the foot of the supposed sand hill clothed with woods, and gradually
nearing one after another of the chalk hills on the west; for though we
were journeying eastward, and therefore away from them, we were also
going southward, and therefore facing them one after another. Soon after
passing the village of Liss, we reached the foot of the heathy hill;
which forms the continuation of Wolmer Forest. It is of a sand like that
of Bagshot Heath, but with rather more soil, and therefore a richer
growth of fern. The Portsmouth road crosses the very summit, on its way
to Petersfield; just on the border which separates Sussex from
Hampshire. From this point we had another panoramic view. Behind us, the
chalk hill near Selborne seemed to be only a projecting point jutting
out from the general line of the western chalk hills. This however we
knew it was not: but we could see that it formed part of the circuit of
chalk composing the North and South Downs. The fact appears to be that
the elevated chalk district of Wiltshire, Hampshire, and Berkshire,
including Marlborough Downs and Salisbury Plain, which is the patria of
all the chalk hills of England, terminates here: the chalky escarpment
running north and south, is its edge; the two hills of Selborne,
outliers, connected with it; Edition: current; Page: [564] while north
and south the North and South Downs jut out from it in long strait
lines, the South already very high, the North at first extremely low.
Looking now in the opposite direction, we could see the whole line of
the South Downs as far as the point at which the road from Petworth to
Chichester crosses them, which is marked by a chalk pit and is the
termination of one sweep of hills. We crossed the Portsmouth road at a
public house with a brilliant painted new sign-board which we were
unable to decypher; and kept along the summit of the heathy hill on
which we were; which on this side is one of the most beautiful of
fern-clad commons, with a horse-road over it which it would be
delightful to canter over. To our right was the range of the South Downs
in all the beauty of its varied and wavy lines; between it and our
position, a rich and verdant valley, containing the villages of Rogate
and Terwick, and various low sandy and heathy hills beyond them. On the
other side were various high heathy hills similar to Hindhead; perhaps
one of them might be Hindhead but the apparent forms of hills are so
deceptious that I would not presume to affirm it: all were more or less
fine, but the objects were rather too far apart to produce great beauty
of detail. We descended by a gradual slope, and then crossed some rich
cornfields to the village of Trotton in the valley of Rogate: this is on
the main road from Petersfield to Midhurst, and stands on the clear
little river Rother, which rises some miles higher up, and after a
course of perhaps four and twenty miles, falls into the Arun. We kept
the main road for the remaining three miles of our day’s journey; it
passed through a country presenting no great features (except the South
Downs; which were generally visible), but prettily varied with
undulation and roughness, heath and cornfields, to Midhurst, where we
stopped at the Angel (an excellent inn).14

In the evening, we strolled about the town, which has one long rather
wide street and one or two other streets; it is neat and rural, with
some old houses and a general appearance of not being of very modern
date. The Reform Bill15 has made a great change in this town, giving it
one member elected by the inhabitants, instead of two chosen in a corner
by nobody knows who. The borough will however be still under influence,
but under different influence, that of Mr. Poyntz.16 We strolled out in
the evening to the north, or London end of the town; the immediate
environs are made beautiful by the great number of old trees which are
scattered about it. Mr. Poyntz’s park, called Cowdry Park,17 comes down
close to the town: it contains fine trees and some inequalities of
ground, but the planting has not been so managed as to produce much
beauty. At the entrance of the Park close to the town are the remains of
a large house, which stood here when the Park belonged to Edition:
current; Page: [565] the Montague family.18 It was partly destroyed by
fire between thirty and forty years ago, and never repaired, but the
walls are mostly still standing, and are so clothed with ivy both inside
and out as to be highly ornamental. From a clump of trees in the Park
not far from the ruin, the view of the South Downs with the ruin and
large trees as a foreground, is highly beautiful.

21st

The road from Midhurst to Petworth passes directly across Cowdry Park,
from which it is not separated on either side by a hedge or fence. We
therefore had a full view of all that the Park afforded, and it appeared
to us a rare example of the degree in which natural advantages may be
thrown away. The park is full of fine full grown trees, and gentle
inequalities of ground: yet so little judgment and taste have been shewn
in planting the trees that very little beauty is produced. They are
either in dense masses, regular and yet shapeless, or they are merely
scattered in greater or smaller numbers, indiscriminately, neither the
trees nor the open spaces having any particular reference to the
character of the ground. The inequalities, though sufficient to have
produced beauty if duly improved by planting, (for they are as great as
those in Betchworth Park, or even Pain’s Hill) were not considerable
enough or bold enough to be beautiful in themselves. After leaving the
Park, we kept in or near the Petworth road, which runs parallel to the
line of the South Downs, affording occasional views of their beautiful
outline. On the other side and about us the country was only tolerably
pretty; waving corn fields, little eminences, and those hollow shady
lanes so frequent in a sandy soil. Before reaching Petworth we turned
off to see Lord Egremont’s house. It is a long mansion with tall windows
and massive windowframes in the stile of a hundred years ago: the great
ornaments of it are the statues and pictures. The old Earl, who is a
great patron of sculptors and painters, has collected here many old, and
some of the best of the new, productions of those arts: some fine
antiques from Rome, along with Flaxman’s St. Michael and some of the
best works of Carew and Rossi; many Vandykes, in particular one of his
unrivalled children, and a portrait of the Earl of Northumberland in the
Tower,19 a perfect model of expression; many excellent Lely’s and
Kneller’s: Titian’s Jupiter and Antiope, with two or three portraits by
him; two Claudes; a fine Salvator Rosa; some good specimens of Cuyp,
Both, and Vander Meulem; two Canaletti’s; several stiff old pictures by
Albrecht Durer and his contemporaries; many portraits by Reynolds, and
several of his ghastly historical pictures; various pictures by
Gainsborough, Northcote, Edition: current; Page: [566] Opie, Romney,
West, Phillips, and Turner before and after he adopted his gamboge
stile.20 The Park did not strike us as particularly fine, and we had not
time to do more than peep into it. The Earl’s house joins the town of
Petworth, a pretty little town on a hill, with a street which twists
round and round like a worm, and a lofty spire (rebuilt I believe by the
present Lord Egremont) modelled after the towers of some of our Gothic
cathedrals. On leaving Petworth we took the Chichester road, as that
which led most directly to the South Downs: and the remainder of our
day’s journey has been described in one of my former tours:21 we crossed
some pretty uneven country of heath and woods with the noble wall of the
chalk hills directly before us, and then climbed the Downs through a
rich wood full of flowers: when we reached the top we left the road and
exspatiated like young horses over the turfy slopes and eminences; but
the air was so hazy that not only the noble view to the north was
greatly obscured, but to the south the sea, which occupied so large a
space in the prospect when I formerly crossed these hills, was actually
invisible. We however enjoyed extremely our gradual descent through a
fine wood, full of even a richer vegetation and more abundant in flowers
than the chalk hills near Dorking. We dined at the little inn or public
house of a hamlet called Halnaker, at the foot of the hills: in this
pretty little place every cottager seems comfortable and every house
neat and cheerful—After dinner we walked to Chichester, which is about
3½ miles further on, and where we stopped for the night.

22nd

Finding that there was a coach to Portsmouth in the afternoon (on its
way from Brighton) we spent the early part of the day in seeing
Goodwood, the park of the Duke of Richmond,22 on the slope of the Downs
about three miles from Chichester. The ground to the very entrance of
the Park is a dead flat, like all the rest of Sussex south of the Downs.
But it is now covered with fine corn, and intersected by hedge rows of
well-grown unclipt trees, and is on the whole not uninviting. Goodwood
occupies several turfy arms, of the chalk range, with the intervening
dells; it is full of fine trees, well disposed, singly, in groups, and
in considerable woods. The house is built of the common chalk flints:
another house Edition: current; Page: [567] as large as itself stands
close to it, and there are several other buildings of various kinds in
the Park, all of the same material; it has neither the wildness of
rusticity nor the elegance of refinement and is on the whole decidedly
ugly. The house hardly stands high enough to command any extensive view,
and seems placed precisely in that part of the Park where there are
fewest fine objects within sight of the windows. It is near the edge of
the Park, facing the flat, and there is a sort of opening in the Park
trees before it. From the rest of the Park it is cut off by a large but
apparently altogether neglected flower garden, studiously walled in, and
as if that was not enough, planted round with a thick double or treble
row of ilexes, with scarcely any other tree. But from the higher parts
of the Park the view is delightful. A kind of garden-house on the slope
of the hill marks the finest point: from it we saw the flat of South
Sussex looking like a narrow slip of land, the sea beyond it, Chichester
spire rising conspicuously and making a figure in the middle ground of
the landscape in which were several other villages, and Spithead harbour
with the Isle of Wight forming a long line behind, terminated by the
heights near St. Helen’s. The single trees and groups of trees in the
Park were so placed as to form a delightful foreground and frame to this
picture, which my companion sketched on the spot. I cannot give any
minute description of the Park. Some of its beauties are at once
suggested by the mention of chalk downs planted with wood: the remainder
are undescribable. At the summit of the hill beyond the Park, on the
side which overlooks the main range of the South Downs, is the stand
which the Duke has erected for the convenience of those who visit his
Goodwood races.23 After perambulating the greater part of the Park, we
returned to Chichester, and took our departure for Portsmouth by the
coach. The road lay along the narrow slip of exceedingly flat ground,
between the chalk hills and the sea: particularly narrow it was here, as
we came immediately upon the first of a series of inlets of the sea,
which continue quite to Portsmouth, and we had thus no continued dry
land to our left the whole way. On our right the interval was much
greater. But after a time the range of the South Downs seemed to
terminate: and a woody tract began, which approached very near to our
road, and seemed to connect with the Forest of Bere. At last Portsdown
Hill, which we had seen before us for a great distance, overlooked us on
the right, and we again saw chalk close to us: Portsdown Hill is a very
long low chalky ridge, woody towards the eastern extremity, bare and
turfy elsewhere, which fronts Portsea Island and is crossed by the road
from London immediately before descending to Portsmouth: We were struck
with the appearance of population along this road: it was, it is true,
Sunday evening, and all the people were out: they are altogether a
different race from the people about Selborne, and far from handsome or
prepossessing; the women instead of being merely free and lively, as at
Selborne, seemed impudent. We passed through several neat pretty towns,
of some size, particularly Emsworth and Havant. In and Edition: current;
Page: [568] about these towns, and in every part of the road, we were
surprized at the great number of villas with little garden shrubberies
about them as near London. I suppose these are the country boxes of the
Dockyard and Ordnance people. At Cosham, under Portsdown Hill, we turned
short to the left, and crossed a bridge into Portsea Island, which bears
a striking resemblance to some of the thickly peopled environs of
London, such as the country about Queen’s Elm and Brompton. Portsea
itself is something like Preston, in Lancashire, from the old red brick
houses and the broad streets. Portsmouth is a fortified place, and the
ramparts, which are planted with trees, are the public promenade, now
covered with people, all well dressed, and all ugly, with broad squat
faces. The town is neat, and rather handsome, but the narrow winding
streets, which I fancy always accompany fortified towns, give it the
character of a continental rather than an English town. We walked out to
the sands, if such they can be called, towards Southsea Point: they seem
to be one of the public promenades of the place. The beach is shingly,
but there is tolerable walking ground at a short distance from it. The
narrow seas however are not comparable in point of interest to the open
sea; the beauty of the sea is almost solely in its grandeur, and arises
from the boundless expanse.

23rd

In the morning we went over the dockyard, and saw the storehouses of
masts and anchors; the process of converting copper from a thick square
plate to the sheathing of a vessel; a man of war rated at 120 guns, on
the stocks; and a vast steam engine which supplies the force for a saw
mill and for the whole process of making blocks and pullies: all the
various operations were performed before us, and most interesting they
were. After this we started by the steam packet for Ryde, which we
reached in about half an hour. From the channel or Solent as it is
called, Ryde has something of the air of an Italian town, or perhaps of
Scutari in the Panorama of Constantinople.24 It stands upon the side of
a hill directly facing the water; its white houses look at a distance
like stone, and are partly built of a loose sandstone; they are
intermingled in every part with trees. There is now a pier; previous to
its erection the shallow sandy approaches rendered it difficult to land.
Ryde has two main streets, both of which run directly up the hill; and
two, or more, new streets running parallel to them to right and left,
for it is a rapidly increasing town; with the necessary number of cross
communications. The town has the cheerful air which a town on a hill
always has, especially when mixed with trees; it is neat and clean, and
has little of the watering place pretension about it; but almost every
house of whatever quality has its little planted garden, and it is
encircled by numbers of elegant villas with pleasure-grounds,
particularly along the coast on both sides. The country enjoys the rare
advantage of being richly wooded down to Edition: current; Page: [569]
the water’s edge: the wood is chiefly oak, with some ash, this side of
the island being a stiff clay, which, from the dry weather, is now open
in cracks into which you might almost put your foot. Overlooking the
Solent about a mile east of Ryde is Simeon’s Place, belonging to Sir
Richard Simeon,25 one of the chief landholders of the island. We
trespassed upon the grounds, and reached a beautiful terrace, parallel
to the beach, and overlooking it, the Solent, and the opposite shore. We
returned by the beach, where I found various maritime plants: it is
sandy, and a common covered with furze joins on to it, very pleasant to
look upon and to cross. In the evening I strolled out in the opposite
direction towards Binstead, a village close down by the shore: first
following the road, which though separated from the sea by a series of
beautiful residences, commands at different points delightful views of
it; then turning off to the right by a broad field path, which as it
slopes down towards the sea, (crossing in its way a hollow dell) shews
the Solent directly in front with the northern promontory of the island
near Cowes projecting into it, backed by the Lymington and Exbury coast,
and beyond that by the clear and ruddy evening sky. Binstead church yard
commands no view, but the Parsonage and its views are celebrated: the
public are admitted, according to the Guide-book, on Mondays before ten
and on Fridays after five;26 but not having the fortune to go there
during either of those favoured intervals, we saw it not. An
unfrequented path leads down to the sea-side, hard by a pretty, little,
gentleman’s cottage, though separated by what, if the tide did not enter
it, I should term a ditch. There is no track along the beach, but I
nevertheless followed it, threading my way between the water and the oak
copse woods which come down to high water mark and almost dip into the
sea: the wood flowers which will grow on a clay soil, grew down to the
water’s edge in amazing luxuriance and profusion, mixing with the
maritime plants. As I walked along the solitary and sequestered beach,
shut in by wood and water, I was forcibly reminded of the shores of
Ulleswater and Windermere. The Solent was not bluer; it was somewhat
wider; the opposite coast was not lofty and mountainous; but the long
projecting headlands jutted out into the water much in the same manner.
In this respect however the resemblance was still greater to the south
coast of Cornwall. In this twilight walk along a part of the beach where
few persons resort, I found a still closer resemblance to the Cumberland
lakes in one or two quiet landlocked bays. When I got near Ryde I was
stopped by the wall of the grounds of one of the marine villas, and was
forced to commit a trespass in order to get back to the road.

24th

We walked towards Binstead and to the beach and back before breakfast,
as my companion had not seen it and I was desirous to take a second view
of what had Edition: current; Page: [570] pleased me so much. We left
Ryde well pleased with our accommodation at the Star Inn, which is at
the very summit of the town, and though not the most showy of the inns,
is very neat and well managed. I here separated from my companion, who
being indisposed and unable to walk, proceeded to Newport by the
coach.27 For, (laugh who will) there are coaches between Ryde and
Newport, and between Newport and Cowes. I made directly for the sea-mark
on the top of the range of chalk hills which crosses the middle of the
island from east to west. The geological composition of the Isle of
Wight has often been remarked as curious and interesting: all the
tertiary formations of Great Britain being crowded into this narrow
spot. The chalk range which crosses the island through the middle, is
part of the circuit of a chalk basin bounded in part by the Downs of
Sussex and Hampshire, and broken through by the Solent sea. This basin
being exactly similar to the London basin, of course the northern part
of the Isle of Wight is composed of the strata ordinarily superincumbent
upon the chalk, viz. the plastic clay and the London clay:—On the other
side of the chalk hills again, their course is followed by the green
sand and the other formations which accompany the English chalk in its
whole extent: but on the south coast of the island appears
superincumbent upon these, another line of chalk hills still higher than
the former; the continuation of the range which crosses the isle of
Purbeck; and these form the cliffs of Niton, St. Boniface, Bonchurch,
etc. This crowding of all the formations into a small space throws the
hills close together, and is therefore very favorable to beauty of
scenery. All the inland views near Ryde are backed by the central chalk
range, towards which I was now proceeding. Though I was confined between
two hedges, and had my back to the Solent, the only part of the sea then
visible; yet owing to the elevation of the ground, every gate, or gap in
the hedge, on either side afforded a fine sea view at the price of
merely turning round to behold it. The finest of these was, I think, the
view from the windmill at Aldermoor, the highest point, I suppose, of
the clay hills immediately adjoining the coast. This view is the finest
solely because it is the most extensive, and comprehends all that is
contained in all the others taken together: for a view is fine here
nearly in proportion to its extent, the variety of beautiful objects
being such that they set off each other’s beauty, and the monotony and
sameness which so frequently takes off the effect of extensive views are
altogether absent. Even at this distance from Ryde I was astonished at
the number of elegant cottage residences with gardens. From the
Aldermoor windmill, the ground begins to descend; and I crossed a rather
wide, and deepish valley, first keeping the road, and afterwards
striking into corn fields, by footpaths which cut off a very great bend
of the road. By these footpaths I believe I might have gone straight to
the sea-mark, that is, to the foot of the down immediately below it; but
I preferred keeping a path which slanted gradually up the hill to the
Edition: current; Page: [571] right of the sea-mark, though corn fields
(for this upper side of the down is, in this part, cultivated) and so
enjoying the view of the Solent channel and the varied and well wooded
country between; for I know no prospect from a hill so enjoyable as that
obtained by walking along the side of it. I presently reached the road
which goes over these downs in their whole length; and turning to the
left, came out upon Ashey Down, the top of which I soon reached. It is
pointed out by the sea-mark already alluded to, which is the frustum of
a triangular pyramid, erected, as an inscription states, in 1735, and
formed apparently of no more solid material than chalk; much of which
has been cut or has mouldered away, and the remainder as far as arm can
reach, is scribbled over with the names of sundry John Browns and Dick
Smiths, who with that aspiring desire so general among Englishmen, that
something of them though it be but a thumb-nail shall survive them, have
taken the trouble of informing posterity of the name of the Norton or
Sutton or Greatham or Littleham which they inhabited: This point
commands a truly magnificent view. I could now see quite to the east end
of the island, and the sea beyond, with the inlet called Brading
Harbour;28 then round on the south, Sandown Bay and the immensity of the
boundless ocean beyond. Further on, the sea was concealed by the other
range of chalk hills, still higher than this, consisting of three great
hills connected into a range, Wroxall, Week, and St. Catherine’s. On the
two latter were lofty sea-marks. St. Catherine’s, the highest eminence
in the island, is called a Hill; the other two like all the other chalk
hills in the island (however perfectly insulated,) are called Downs.
Other chalk hills less bold in appearance, and more connected together,
trended away near the coast on the south-west, out of the reach of
sight. These belonged to the central range of chalk hills, not to the
southern range. But the immediate continuation of the chalk down on
which I stood, consisted westward of Arreton Down, a fine long ridge
sloping gradually up to a considerable height, and eastward of Brading
Down and Bembridge Down, the last of which terminating in the sea and
forming Culver Cliffs, is the boundary of Sandown Bay. All these hills
are not part of the same ridge, but are separated from each other;
Bembridge Down still more completely than the rest, as a little river
runs between it and Brading Down, to disembogue itself into Brading
Harbour. An excellent road goes along the summit of Arreton Down, skirts
the side of Ashey Down, then crosses Brading Down over the top and
descends to the river side to join the road which leads from Ryde and
Brading to Sandown and Shanklin. I struck into this road, which crosses
the deep hollow between Ashey Down and Brading Down by a kind of isthmus
elevated high above the adjoining valleys though depressed considerably
below the summit of either hill. The southerly slope of Ashey Down and
Arreton Down is mostly in sheepwalk, but Brading Down is mostly
cultivated: there is however on the south side of the road at the
further point of the hill, a kind of open common. The hedges which
previously hid Edition: current; Page: [572] from the pedestrian part of
the splendid view below him, enhance his enjoyment when they now
disappear all at once. The sweep of Sandown Bay is now immediately below
him: bounded at one extremity by the hills about Shanklin, at the other
by Bembridge Down: I do not say by Culver Cliffs, for the side of the
hill which fronts the sea was not, from the landside, visible. Within
the concavity of its gentle curve, this bay embraces boundless space.
Here for the first time the eye swept round, and perceived in an ample
sector of the horizon nothing of the earth, except one small vessel. The
curve was just sufficient to take off the monotonous regularity of a
rectilineal shore, while it did not greatly diminish the extent of the
watery horizon. Inland this bay is bordered by a greater extent of level
or almost level ground, than is often to be found in the southern part
of the Isle of Wight; and has no very marked hills to form its boundary,
being backed by some wild heathy uneven country but by no elevations of
a boldness or height to match those at and near its extremities: this
certainly diminishes its beauty, and to some, it might appear less
interesting than many other parts of the southern coast; but to me it
was consecrated by the touch of genius: it had been the subject of one
of the most beautiful sketches in our recent literature, which, though
it appeared in a fugitive publication (the Monthly Repository) will, I
trust, some time or other be reprinted, and will hold a distinguished
place among the works of its author, be he even the person he is
suspected to be.29 To the left of Bembridge Down lay Brading Harbour:
the tide unluckily was out, and the harbour dry, with scarcely any
appearance of water but the course of the river through it to the sea:
at other times it must appear an inland lake. The village of Brading,
between the Down and the harbour was under my feet, and beyond it, the
road of St. Helen’s, with the coast of Hampshire and Sussex behind;
Goodwood included, from which we had seen these hills two days before.
After surveying this delightful prospect to satiety, dressed out in all
the splendour of a sunny sky, I retraced my steps to the beginning of
Ashey Down and then by taking the inside of a hedge instead of the
outside, enjoyed my favorite walk along the turfy sides of a hill,
directly overlooking the valley at its base. The green sand formation,
to which the southern counties of England are indebted for so much of
their most beautiful scenery, is here not unworthy of its reputation: it
fills up the space between the two ranges of chalk hills, with much
broken ground of various beauty, the raggedness of which contrasts
gracefully with the smooth surface and waving lines of the chalk. The
north side of the chalk hills on the coast has also in some degree the
character of sand hills, the lower part of them probably consisting of
the various sand formations. The inequalities of ground in the broad
valley were something like those between the chalk and the Leith hill
ranges in Surrey; the valley betwixt is not Edition: current; Page:
[573] quite so wide, nor the intervening eminences quite so high, but as
the two ranges themselves are also a little inferior in height, the
proportions are well preserved. To give any idea of the variety of
beauty created by the combinations of these large and small hills with
one another and with the sea, would be impossible. I will merely mention
one of the finest. I was standing on the steep turfy side of a chalk
hill: under my feet was a deep narrow bottom: facing me, the long side
of a sand hill completely clothed in copse, with a great number of oaks
of larger size and more scanty foliage rising among the copsewood,
apparently of great age: over the tops of these the waters of Sandown
Bay, but without the shores; with Brading and Bembridge Downs in a
continued line to the left, and the chalk hills of the southern coast,
higher, but more distant, on the right. It is pleasant to observe the
great variety of field paths by which this beautiful scenery is
intersected, allowing easy access from all sides to the finest points,
and facility of crossing by the most direct route, from one to another.
I now traversed the hollow between Ashey and Arreton Down, which are
separated rather by the length of slope on both sides of the dell than
by its boldness or depth; and ascended Arreton Down in the line of the
road, which follows the summit of the hill, open always on the south
side and generally on both. The scenery of Sandown Bay is gradually left
behind; so are one after another of the high chalk hills which bound the
island on the south: and the road gradually nears the more thickly
scattered and less boldly marked chalk hills of the south-western part
of the isle. These are connected with the range of Arreton Down by St.
George’s Down, an insulated chalk hill which stands between Arreton Down
and the beginning of the south-western hills, at no great distance from
either but nearer to the former. This like most of the other chalk hills
of the isle, is considerably more long than broad, forming a kind of
ridge. The little village of Arreton with its church stands near the
foot of both hills and makes no inelegant figure in the landscape. As we
approach the end of Arreton Down a new and fine prospect gradually
discloses itself in front and on the right hand. Ryde and Binstead with
their woody tract and even Wootton with its creek are left behind. The
whole estuary of the Medina shews itself, from Newport down to the sea;
with the town of West Cowes glittering with its white houses in the sun,
on the left bank, and Cowes harbour, an expansion of the estuary,
included between two promontories, the most northern points of the
island. Several vessels were entering this harbour or at anchor in it.
Directly in front the only object of any considerable size between us
and the Solent is an insulated wild hill, of moderate height, all which
now remains of the once extensive waste called Parkhurst, which formerly
ranked as a royal forest: it is well placed where it is, as it fills up
respectably what would otherwise be a blank in the prospect. At its foot
or rather (so far as could be judged at a distance) a little way up its
slope, is an immense barrack, which at a distance might be taken for a
small town or a village: To the left of this, and nearer, in the valley
of the Medina river, just where it ceases to be a river and becomes an
estuary, lay stretched out the town of Newport, a place of considerable
size, and Edition: current; Page: [574] the capital of the island.
Directly in a line beyond it, at a considerable distance, I could see
the little town of Newtown (one of the contemptible boroughs in Schedule
A)30 with its river or harbour and the coast beyond it trending away
almost to Yarmouth. The western half of the Solent was all spread out
before me, with the opposite Hampshire coast from almost the entrance of
the Southampton water, nearly to Hurst castle itself. This magnificent
prospect did not all come into view at once; and I am not sure that the
whole of it is visible from any part of Arreton Down itself, but from
another long hill, along the summit of which, the road passes on leaving
Arreton Down. This hill is not of chalk but of the clay which is over
the chalk: (I speak only now of the surface, for I did not narrowly
inspect it): and lies a very little out of the straight line of the
other downs, deviating from it about as much to the north as the
neighbouring St. George’s Down does to the south. It is the last of the
hills; beyond it there is no other hill in this direction except
Parkhurst. On coming to the end of it the road turns round a little to
the left, descends through some wild heathy ground, and enters Newport
by a bridge over the Medina, which here looks like nothing but what it
in fact is, a mill pond. This is probably the only ugly part of it.
Above, it is, no doubt, a brook; below, it is an estuary; a large tide
river, navigable up to the town.

Newport is a place of some size, having several long streets crossing
one another at right angles, and covering a considerable extent of
ground. There are many handsome shops, and the streets are broad and
tolerably regular, with good foot-pavements. This place is now like all
others a focus of electioneering: it retains its two members and Mr.
Hawkins is standing on the Reform Interest and Sir Willoughby Gordon on
no particular interest nominally, through really on the Conservative.31
Col. Torrens was here with Hawkins, but the reformers of the place have
dropt him, because he is as the Irishman said “Bethwixt thwo minds,” is
standing for Bolton in Lancashire and does not know how to give up
either place: so William Ord is coming, with a strong recommendation
from Hawkins.32 The walls and shop windows are full of placards from
both parties as well as the electioneering addresses and placards of the
two candidates for the new county of the Isle of Wight, Sir Richard
Simeon of St. John’s, who is an admirer of the great statesmen to whom
we owe the restoration of the ancient principles of our Constitution,33
and Mr. Campbell, of Gatcombe, who is averse to those violent Edition:
current; Page: [575] innovations and changes which some call for.34 Our
landlord at the Wheatsheaf, who is a radical, shewed us a great quantity
of electioneering correspondence.35 A weekly penny paper in the radical
interest, has been produced by this contest, and we saw the first two
numbers. They are very tolerably written and in a good spirit enough. We
had much conversation with our landlord, who is a reading man, and
something of an artist, and takes great interest in natural curiosities.

We walked in the afternoon to see Carisbrook castle, which is about a
mile S.E. from the town, as nearly as possible in the centre of the
island. It is situated on an insulate chalk hill, the first of the
south-western chalk hills; looking round upon the other chalk hills, and
upon Parkhurst, between which and itself, in rather a deep dell, is the
pretty village of Carisbrook. The remains of the castle are more
considerable than usual: the portals are complete, the wall is a
complete circuit, and the keep towers above the rest to a great height;
you ascend it by a long rude flight of steps. There is a habitable house
within the inclosure, constructed by the late Governor of the Island:
the present, and let us hope the last, Governor, Lord Malmesbury, never
inhabits it.36 The late Governor also planted a number of trees within
and without the inclosure, which mix well with the ivy which has
overgrown the ruin. The panoramic view from the keep is fine, but not
equal to that from Arreton Down. The immediate environs struck me much
more, and particularly the aspect of the ruin itself from the Newport
side, which, aided by a particular state of the atmosphere, appeared of
the deepest and richest green. In the interior there is a well which
goes quite through the chalk, being 210 feet down to the water and 90
feet below. Its depth was exhibited to us in two ways, by throwing down
water, which after about five seconds sent up a thundering noise; and by
letting down a bucket containing a lamp. The water is drawn up from it
by an ass: and the asses thus employed have usually lived to a great
age, but the present incumbent is a youth.

25th

Being for the present disqualified for long walks by the continued
indisposition of my companion, we hired a vehicle to carry us to the
southern extremity of the island. Our road lay for a considerable space
among chalk hills, up the valley of the Medina: St. George’s Down with
its chalky sides and fern-clad summit to our left, and a succession of
chalk hills on our right, sometimes bare, sometimes wooded, and most
elegantly shaped. This early part of our morning’s journey was Edition:
current; Page: [576] exceedingly sequestered and beautiful. As we
advanced we came first upon the green sand, and next upon the Weald
Clay; and though we continued to pass over eminences, it was clear that
we had left the central range of chalk hills completely behind us: the
question was now settled about the continuity of the south western downs
with the central range, for a deep and broad valley, mostly level,
separates those downs from the higher hills which we were approaching
and which we reached by crossing the strata below the chalk. We soon
entered into the valley which separates two of these hills, Week Down
and St. Catherine’s Hill: we found it much longer than we expected, the
hills stretching far away lengthwise to the south. The range consists
mainly of three hills, Wroxall Down, Week Down and St. Catherine’s: the
northermost point of Week Down is marked by an obelisk, and there is
another and higher one on a smaller chalk hill connected with it which
fronts it to the north: on this last and between the two is the
celebrated Appuldercombe Park. On St. Catherine’s Hill there are three
beacons; that on the highest point is the sea-mark, a truncated pyramid
somewhat like that on Ashey Down; it is comparatively little seen from
the land side. Near the end of the valley between these two hills, but
nearer to St. Catherine’s Hill, is the village of Niton; a common-place
rustic village: but beyond this, quite down to the sea, has grown up a
village of quite a different character, one of the most elegant cottages
of which is the Sandrock Spring Hotel, where we stopped. This is not the
least like an inn; it is a long cottage with a long veranda covered with
ivy and clematis, standing on a lawn surrounded by a border filled with
choice flowers and directly overlooking the sea, across an irregular
descent of waste and cultivated ground. It is a cottage very much in the
stile, and about the size, of Polvellen, Mr. Buller’s place, near Looe,
in Cornwall.37 It derives its name from a spring, impregnated with
sulphate of iron-and-alumina, which a medical man has found out here,
and recommends as possessing great virtues; I suppose it is neither
better nor worse than the Tunbridge-wells water, or any other strong
solution of any salt of iron.

This place is near one of the extremities of the Undercliff, one of the
curiosities of the island. The range of high hills along the coast,
which I have termed chalk hills, are chalk only at the summits: the far
greater portion of their height consists of green sand, or sandstone,
and Weald Clay. Owing to the softness of the material, and the great
number of land-springs, this stuff is constantly falling down, and has
been known to fall in landslips of several acres. By this process a
quantity of material has accumulated on the beach, forming a cliff below
a cliff; and on this houses have been built, gardens laid out, fields
sown and reaped. This Undercliff as it is called extends seven or eight
miles in length, and is generally of the breadth of several corn fields:
it consists of earthy matter from the hills above Edition: current;
Page: [577] with large masses of the sandstone, and of the conglomerates
of pebbles and various other masses of stone formerly imbedded in the
Weald Clay, scattered about and mixed with the softer matter in a manner
which defies description. Above is the line of the original cliff,
composed of sandstone and whitish clay; the chalky summit not being
visible. Below, a beach coloured by an infinite quantity of minute red
pebbles; and forming a succession of beautiful little headlands and
coves. In general, the Undercliff terminates towards the sea in a sort
of low cliff (indeed this is indicated by its name). This cliff is of
loose clay. At low water the quantity of seaweed displayed is
prodigious; it adheres to the blocks of stone of various degrees of
hardness which have fallen not upon the Undercliff but beyond it into
the sea.

Immediately after our arrival we found our way down to the shore, not
without some difficulties arising from cornfields, hedges, etc., and I
searched for maritime plants, of which I succeeded in finding the rare
Mentha rotundifolia. We walked for a short distance along the beach,
which though better than one formed of larger and sharper stones, is on
the whole not very pleasant footing. At a little bay called Puckaster
Cove, we reascended the low clay cliff, and looked along the Undercliff
to the east, on which were visible two houses with pleasure-gardens; up
at the bolder cliff overhanging the lower one; and round at the sea.
Here for the first time we felt really on the seashore; half our horizon
was of ocean. There is no spot in this vicinity which does not afford a
fine view; the differences are all in degree: from every place you can
view more or less of the sea, can descry the summit of some lofty hill,
or the precipitous side of a cliff; and a greater or less extent of the
wild rugged slip of land between the high cliffs and the sea. But the
palm must be given to the series of views which we saw in our evening’s
walk, along the summit of the high cliff, west from the Sandrock. The
Undercliff being here near its termination, is very narrow and is
composed chiefly of a considerable landslip which fell in 1799, and
which lies in the most grotesque shapes: it consists of two long
hillocks of considerable height, though from the summit of the cliff
they appear but insignificant. The cliff forms part of St. Catherine’s,
the highest hill in the island; and, at its point of greatest elevation,
seems not very far below the summit. The sea views from the various
points of this cliff are glorious: sea views from a high cliff always
are so; but on this occasion we were favoured by the hour (evening) and
the state of the atmosphere, which on the west side covered the sea with
a dun haze, not so unearthly and Avernus-like as what I once saw on
Ulleswater,38 but sufficiently thick to invest the prospect with an
indefinite and mysterious gloom; yet with occasional streaks of light:
while on the opposite side, far to the east, the clouds were drawn off,
leaving the sky clear and serene, and a bright light falling on the
sails of the few vessels made them look like dazzling white specks in a
field of bright blue. The sea in both directions was as smooth as
Edition: current; Page: [578] the surface of an inland lake; and on the
bright side presented as calm and seductive a face as it did to the
shepherd in the fable, who having ruined himself as a mariner and gone
back to tend for wages the flock which had once been his own, looked out
upon the smooth glassy surface of the deceitful element, and exclaimed,
No, smiling traitress, thou shalt never deceive me again.39 In the front
of this cheerful prospect was the Undercliff, coasting away to the east;
from our high station we saw it in its larger features, the smaller
details not concealing them, as is very much the case when you are on
the very spot; we saw it as it really is, a cliff beneath a cliff,
backed by a higher precipice, but itself also boldly fronting the ocean.
At the top of the cliff along which we walked, were cornfields; but the
summit of St. Catherine’s Hill is chalk down. As we advanced to the end
of the cliff, we came in view of the whole line of the western half of
the central chalk range quite to its junction with the sea, where it
forms the celebrated Freshwater Cliffs: these bold white precipices
extend in a long promontory far out into the sea, and two insulated
masses of chalk surrounded by the waves prolong the line into the ocean
itself. All this we could distinctly see from the top of the cliff; and
either from thence, or from another point lower down, we saw the entire
sweep of the coast; a hollow segment of a circle, of which our own cliff
and the extremity of Freshwater Cliffs were the crescent horns; yet
varied by a succession of smaller bays, and projecting headlands
betwixt; the bays of Chale, Brixton, and Freshwater. The village of
Chale, at the foot of St. Catherine’s Hill, we saw directly below us.
The descent of our hill at its extremity was gradual, and it had other
smaller eminences clustered about it: beyond which was a broad level,
quite to the foot of the chalk hills. In the base of one of these
smaller eminences is the celebrated Black-gang Chine, which we descended
in order to see. What are called Chines in the Isle of Wight are the
clefts in the line of hill or cliff, where a spring or rivulet forces
its way out: these are very numerous owing to the nature of the hills,
which consisting of chalk or sand at the top, allow the rains to filter
through and they are stopped by the clay below. We found a little boy on
the Downs, who waits there to shew the Chine to persons coming in this
direction. He took us round by what seemed rather a circuitous course
and struck into the rough path which leads from Chale to the chine,
across the broken ground which lies at the foot of the hill, just above
the sea: this ground, in some places is clad in fern and the sea with
the cliffs shews well from it in the one direction, as the line of coast
to Freshwater Cliffs does on the other. At last we reached the Chine,
which is a kind of semicircular cavity, scooped out of the perpendicular
rock over the middle of which drips a scanty rivulet, which after rains
may make a considerable waterfall: if the water were more abundant it
would Edition: current; Page: [579] be very fine, as the stream does not
run down but falls over the cliff. To this, indeed, it is probably to be
ascribed that the cliff is not worn away; composed as all the cliffs
hereabouts are of loose earth, which easily yields to the action of
running water, and which the landsprings are in fact perpetually washing
down; but here the round cavity preserves its regularity, and even looks
like hard stone. It is of rather a deep black colour, whether owing to
some incrustation, to some vegetable substance, or to the action of the
air: if it were liable to be washed away, the fresh white clay would be
perpetually uncovered. We returned by the pebbly beach, immediately
under the loose cliffs, which are here entirely composed of Weald Clay;
thus proving that this is the lowest formation of the island. The
guide-book, by a man named Albin, certainly one of the best guide-books
I have seen, and which has been of much use to us on various occasions,
says that these strata rest on schistus:40 but he has here been misled
by a smattering of geology; what he calls schistus is the clay itself,
drying into very loose friable blue shale, just as pieces of this same
Weald Clay, taken from the roadside at Den Park near Horsham, in Sussex,
have hardened into shale of the very same kind in my pocket. Here we saw
the clay in lumps of various size and hardness, in all the intermediate
stages of drying into this shale, much of which broken into very small
fragments lies about the side of the cliffs: it will not hold together
in masses of any size. The red pebbly beach, which by the way is a very
beautiful object in all the views from the heights above, is here
strewed with masses of hard stone which have fallen out of the clay:
they are mostly conglomerates of mere pebbles, with fossil impressions.
I think this would be the most favorable situation a geologist could
have, for studying the Weald Clay; a large vertical surface being
exposed, and the beach strewed with the debris of the formation. We
arrived at a little shed used by fishermen for keeping their nets and
tackle, and from which there was a path over the argillaceous cliff;
this we struck into, and crossed the landslip; we were surprised at the
height of its more elevated points, which seemed so insignificant from
the heights above. We presently reached the plantation which surrounds
the aluminous chalybeate spring; the road which passes the Sandrock inn
comes down to this point, and we soon reached home, after the most
delightful evening stroll we had yet had.

26th

My companion finding himself somewhat recovered and able to venture upon
the walk to Shanklin, we set out this morning, and I have now to give an
account of the most delightful day we have yet spent. It began as many
hot summer days do with a fog, and from our windows we at one time could
not see the high cliff at all; but it cleared off, and though it never
became a very clear day, so that we could see far seaward, it became
perfectly cloudless, and gave us all the beauty of sunny seas. We took
the road along the Undercliff, which we saw from one end to the Edition:
current; Page: [580] other. I say the road, because we really did keep
the road; and in this narrow slip of land, much could not be gained by
any deviation from the carriage road: it affords as fine a line of
positions as any other direction would, unless we either ascended the
downs above the cliff on the left, or descended the Undercliff to the
beach below; and had we done either of these we might have seen fine
scenery but it would not have been the scenery of the Undercliff, which
is of quite peculiar character. The ground is rough and broken in the
extreme studded with high points mostly topped with masses of rock or
intersected, again, by little dells: the road winds over this, sometimes
passing across wild ragged ground, sometimes crossing plantations of
trees surrounding the little shrubberies of little pleasant houses
overlooking the sea. The lower cliff, and the beach, afford a succession
of projecting points and little coves: and these headlands rising into
the sea, with woods, plantations, heathy commons, single trees,
flag-staff stations, and the cliff above, combine with the sea in an
inconceivable variety of harmonious pictures, which change at every
step. Among the most delightful parts of the Undercliff is the village
of St. Lawrence. The church, which may almost vie with that of
Buttermere in its pretensions to being the smallest church in England,41
stands on one of the highest points of the Undercliff; it commands one
of the finest sea views as well as fine views of the Undercliff itself,
both backward and forward. The little church itself is a pretty
object—one side of it which in the character of a belfry, has
pretensions to being rather loftier than the rest, is completely covered
with ivy. The village of St. Lawrence lies a little further on in a
hollow below; it is shrouded in trees; the cottages which compose it,
even common labourers’ cottages, are surrounded by greater quantities of
flowers than I think I ever saw in similar situations. We saw myrtles
growing in the ground up the walls of cottages both here and at
Bonchurch; they are known to stand the winter in this part of the
island, and indeed if there were any place where one would attempt to
naturalize the plants of a better climate, it is on this Undercliff,
which is open to the south, and hot with the sun’s rays reflected from
the white cliff, while it is sheltered from the northerly and easterly
winds. After passing St. Lawrence, and Steephill, where a new house has
been built with a strange round tower, the character of the cliff began
to change; the chalk down above now immediately overtopped us, forming
what is called St. Boniface Down; and at the foot of it the Ventnor inn,
standing at the edge of the chalk and above a narrow undercliff composed
almost entirely of the sand, overlooked immediately a beautiful little
inlet of the sea called Ventnor Cove. The village of Ventnor is further
on. Here the Undercliff is more fertile, and more richly cultivated, but
less woody, less irregular in its forms, and more open towards the sea.
The line of coast is terminated by the beautiful village of Bonchurch,
in which the houses are mixed with well-grown trees. Here the abundance
of water is still greater than along the other parts of the Undercliff,
and Edition: current; Page: [581] the clear limpid springs form a little
lake similar to those at Wendover and at Carshalton, though smaller.
Here the Undercliff ends and the chalk down slopes down irregularly to
the sea, separated from it only by another considerable landslip covered
with wood. The road here slants upwards and winds round the chalk hill,
which forms a hollow or sinus, round the hamlet of Luccombe, which has,
as usual, its rivulet and chine. Here the character of the views at once
changes. Sandown Bay bursts upon us, separated only by part of the
irregular declivity of the chalk hill: beyond the bay, Culver Cliffs
rise boldly out of the sea, to a great height, terminating the shore of
Sandown Bay, and with it, the line of coast. The hollow before us, and
the opposite side of the hollow, with scattered trees, formed a fine
foreground to the bay and cliffs. In winding round the hollow of
Luccombe chine, and descending to the other side of the opposite edge of
the hollow, towards the village of Shanklin, we found more fine points
of view than it is possible to enumerate. The blue sea, the fine sweep
of Sandown Bay, the brown cliffs which bound it at the foot of Bembridge
Down, terminating in the taller white cliffs of Culver, formed as many
beautiful combinations with the foreground of grass, cornfields, trees
and cottages, as we had seen formed out of rather different elements on
the Undercliff all the morning: and looking back, the chalk down which
we had partly ascended, and which points far north towards the centre of
the island, afforded home views of a different but still a beautiful
character. From some points we could also see the line of the central
chalk downs, which I had traversed two days before; including Arreton,
Ashey, and Brading Downs with Bembridge Down and its white Culver Cliffs
for the termination. The village of Shanklin, one of the prettiest
villages in the Isle of Wight, straggles down a part of the gentle
declivity almost to the sea side; and joins the extreme boundary of
Sandown Bay; which terminates with the very first headland of Wroxall
(otherwise called St. Boniface) Down. The village consists of a
considerable number of cottages, with every appearance of comfort,
intermixed with elms and other trees: it does not seem to be so much
inhabited by people of the rank of gentlemen, as the Undercliff; there
are however a few gentlemen’s cottages, and apparently several places
where people are boarded and lodged. We met with many such places also
on the Undercliff, especially at Sandrock, Ventnor and Bonchurch. There
is at Shanklin an excellent inn, called the Hotel, where we stopped for
the night, my companion not being equal to a longer journey.

In the evening I sallied out alone for an excursion round Sandown bay,
partly in the hopes of finding rare botanical specimens, for which the
place is celebrated; in this however I had small success: but I was
amply rewarded by the beauty of the scene, enhanced as it was to me by
the charm which true poetry whether metrical or not gives to all which
it has touched, endowing it with beauties not its own. The descent from
Shanklin to the beach is wonderfully fine, though it is difficult to say
in what its beauty consists, except in having before you a bay of the
blue sea with the sun shining on it, and its winding shore backed by
tall white cliffs. Culver Cliff Edition: current; Page: [582] seems
terminated by a kind of ledge; that is, where the top of the cliff
breaks off by an abrupt nearly perpendicular line, the lower half of it
seems to prolong itself a little farther towards the sea in the form of
a ledge. Perhaps this ledge adjoins the Hermit’s Hole, a small cave in
the perpendicular side of the cliff, inaccessible from below and
accessible with difficulty from above, by a path in which once engaged
you cannot turn round till you have accomplished the perilous descent.
This cave, as any one may learn from the sketch of Sandown Bay to which
I have already more than once alluded,42 is believed to have been once
tenanted by a recluse: and a more suitable abode for one who shuns the
face of man cannot be contrived; halfway down the side of a wall rising
directly out of the sea, where nothing can be seen but the blue waves,
nothing heard but the screaming of seagulls and cormorants; floating in
the air about their rocky dwellings suspended like his between ocean and
heaven. The curve of Sandown Bay is considerable, much more so than it
appeared when I viewed it from Brading Down. The village of Sandown is
situated about the middle of it, and is, I think, the least interesting
village I have yet seen in the island, though not without some kind of
beauty too. From Shanklin to Sandown the shore is skirted by a line of
sand cliffs (the green sand formation) which though they look
inconsiderable from any of the numerous heights by which they are
commanded, seem lofty when you look up at them from the shore. Between
these cliffs and the waves is one of the finest and broadest sandy
beaches I ever saw. I mean, the broadest at low water; for at high water
I suppose the sea everywhere comes up nearly to the foot of the cliffs
where there are cliffs: but as the shore slopes less rapidly than in
most places, the sea recedes at low water to a considerable distance,
and leaves a fine hard beach so ridged by long deep furrows almost close
to one another, that I seemed to have never before known the meaning of
the lines which Wordsworth lent to Coleridge for the “Ancient Mariner,”
“For thou art long, and lank, and brown, As is the ribbed sea-sand.”43
The edge of the moist sand, which was the softest part of it, and not
much ribbed was punctured with innumerable little holes by a very small
kind of shrimps or prawns, not larger than woodlice, who jumped as if
they could fly, and swarmed in such myriads that it was impossible to
walk without crushing some of them. I never saw such a lively fish, or
one that could jump so high for his size. He may be very common for
aught I know, but I never observed him before, and certainly never can
have seen him in such numbers.—On the other side of Sandown village the
ground is flat, and indeed part of it is marsh, and below the level of
the sea, which is shut out by an embankment. To protect this accessible
part of the coast, there is a fort about the middle of it, which looks
like a small gentleman’s house, surrounded by a rampart and ditch. I
should think half a dozen Edition: current; Page: [583] shot from a
second-rate man of war would blow it down, but I suppose no ship of any
size could get near enough, and it may be a good position for firing at
anybody who attempted to effect a landing by means of boats. This flat
shore is not of much length; the sand cliff soon rises again, and
rapidly attains a considerable height till it joins the white Culver
Cliff which is still higher. There is a foot path from the beach quite
along the edge of the cliff, affording noble views of the bay, and of
St. Boniface Hill which terminates it at the other extremity—as for
Culver Cliff it looks much shorter than it is, being44 seen sideways
from part of its own line. I ascended this path till I actually set foot
upon the chalk, and heard the sea-birds shrieking in the cliff; I did
not like to turn back sooner, and it was too late in the evening to go
further on towards the extremity of Culver Cliff. The beach at the foot
of these cliffs seems much narrower; and under the chalk cliff, though
the sea was far from high tide, it was only for a short distance that
there was any dry land at all; the shore dwindled into less and less
till it disappeared and the white cliff rose majestically out of the
very sea. From this eminence the range of chalk downs towards Newport,
and of the long side of Wroxall Down stretching out and presenting its
northern extremity to face them, formed a beautiful picture under the
evening sky, though inferior to the sea views on the left. I returned to
Sandown village by the same footpath and along the beach; at the village
I turned into the carriage-road to Shanklin, which (after passing a long
building which looks like a row of almshouses and which I suppose has
something to do with soldiers and Sandown Fort) becomes comparatively
tame and uninteresting, or at least seemed so in the dusk of evening.
There are fewer trees about Sandown Bay than anywhere between Shanklin
and Niton. But one does not miss them. The island altogether is well
wooded; wonderfully so, for a maritime district; nor do the trees seem
to suffer at all, in any part of it, from the vicinity of the sea.

27th

I went down before breakfast to the beach, and coasted it to the western
extremity of the bay, or as nearly so as I could; for it was high water,
and the sea came up nearly to the foot of the cliff. Though this cliff
is formed by what I have termed a chalk hill, it is composed of the
lower strata which are of the green sand formation. By the way, this
would never have been called green sand if it had everywhere resembled
what it is here; I have not been able to detect anywhere in the island
the smallest vestige of that green earth which gives its name to the
formation. The sand is intensely ferruginous sometimes red with iron,
sometimes black, and colours deeply most of the streams which issue from
it; while those which come out immediately under the chalk are, on the
contrary, here as everywhere, exquisitely crystalline and limpid. The
sand also abounds in those plate-like veins of silicated oxide of iron
which is characteristic of this particular Edition: current; Page: [584]
formation. I likewise ascended to the top of the low cliffs which bound
the bay between Shanklin and Sandown: here also there is a path along
the edge of the cliff; and the morning view of the bay and its opposite
shore exceeded, if possible, in beauty, the evening view of the
preceding day. After breakfast we walked down to Shanklin Chine. This is
simply the hollow made in the sand hill and cliff, by a rivulet of some
size which has excavated it by lapse of years: the hollow begins at the
village and ends at the sea, and being deep, of course makes high walls
of sand on both sides, about the majestic character of which the
guide-books rave, and quote the descriptions of puffing tourists. The
chine certainly winds prettily, and at the top of it next the village
there is a waterfall of some height, which, for a cockney cataract, is
really not so much unlike a mountain waterfall as might be expected,
though the poorest of the Forces in Cumberland and Westmoreland is much
superior to it. So much for Shanklin Chine, its fall, and its
“tremendious shasm” as Stock-ghyll Force45 or some other waterfall in
the Lake District was termed by somebody at the Ambleside Inn,46 who
having come into the neighbourhood I suppose with specimens of leather
or rope-yarn, had deviated thus far from his route, and familiar habits,
in order to be a wondering spectator of the glories of nature, and gave
vent in these characteristic and appropriate terms, to the enthusiasm
which had been kindled in his breast. For my part, ever since I heard
the words, I have inwardly determined to hold them sacred for describing
scenes similar to Shanklin Chine.—We then set off to walk back to
Sandrock. Under the direction of the guide-book, we returned to
Bonchurch by a most beautiful path.47 Instead of winding round the
hollow of Luccombe Chine, we crossed it, and walked to Bonchurch under
the cliff; through a fine piece of broken ground, covered with oaks and
underwood, which is also a landslip, and fell down from the heights
about the same time with the landslip formerly noticed: it is covered
with fragments of the cliff, of all sizes and forms, and is altogether
one of the wildest wood scenes I ever saw,48 being at the same time
sufficiently high to command fine views of the sea, both westward, and
to the east, including Sandown Bay and Culver Cliffs. The wood is full
of the finest flowers of the island, among others the Lathyrus
sylvestris, or smaller everlasting pea, which covers the bushes and
abounds even on the steepest sides of the cliffs. This, with the Mentha
already noticed, and the Rubia peregrina or madder which covers the
hedges like the white bedstraw, are the most characteristic and
conspicuous of the rare plants which we found on the Undercliff. After
conducting us through the wood, the footpath led us across two little
but rich meadows immediately Edition: current; Page: [585] overhanging
the sea, to the prettily situated little church of the village of
Bonchurch, which being at some distance from the road and among trees we
had not seen in our walk in the opposite direction. It is said to be as
old as the Saxon times, but we saw nothing remarkable in it externally
except its situation. We now struck into our former road, near the
bright clear pond or lake which I formerly mentioned as being formed
here by the water issuing out under the chalk. It swarms with perch,
which we could see in perfect shoals sporting in the clear water. We
stopped at Ventnor to dine;49 I walked down to the shore of Ventnor
Cove, which does not afford a very good beach for walking, and the heaps
of seaweed are rather offensive in the bright sun; but it is interesting
geologically, as there is here an evident derangement in the strata. The
chalk comes quite down to the seaside, which it does not in any other
part of the Undercliff, before or after; but at the very foot of the
chalk, quite on the beach the Weald Clay just shews itself, with its
friable shale, without any intervening green sand. We walked a
considerable way up a road which leads first along the side of the chalk
hill (St. Boniface Down) and then over it, and which immediately
overlooks Ventnor, with its cove, and the Undercliff for a large space
east and west: the mixture of the finest scenery of a chalk country with
the finest sea views would have rewarded us for a longer stay. In the
whole line of the Undercliff we experienced I think still greater
pleasure in this second view of it than even in the first: we seemed to
discover many fine points of view which we had before overlooked, and
the same spots appeared finer than before. The sky was not so cloudless
as the preceding day, which in some respects was an improvement: and the
air was clearer. In passing the little church of St. Lawrence we this
time found an old man who had stationed himself there to shew the church
to strangers: its interior was of a simplicity corresponding to its
minute dimensions: he told us it was twenty-five feet long. I regret
that I contented myself last year with viewing only the outside of the
little church at Buttermere, since I should have been better able to
compare the size of the two. The old man told us that the proprietor of
the whole parish is Lord Yarborough;50 that the population at the late
census was 36 males and 42 females; that they had not a single burial in
the year 1831, and only eight marriages in the last eleven years. I was
surprised to hear him say that even here the population is extremely
fluctuating, and that very few of the families which were here in his
youth, are here still.

28th

This morning we took our final departure from the Sandrock, and
proceeded to Yarmouth to see the western part of the island, having
hired a little light vehicle Edition: current; Page: [586] to carry us
thither, on account of my companion’s indisposition and the
comparatively uninteresting character of the route. The first village
that we passed through was Chale; and the road which led us thither,
passed over a rather elevated part of St. Catherine’s Hill. We availed
ourselves of this circumstance to leave the carriage, and ascend to the
summit of the hill, the highest ground in the island. From this we saw
clean over the tops of the central chalk hills, to the Solent, which we
saw in nearly its whole extent, and the Hampshire coast beyond. Towards
the east, our prospect was bounded by the long line of Week Down, which
extends from the Undercliff to Appledurcombe: but to the west, besides
seeing the line of coast to Freshwater Gate, and the lofty white cliffs
of Freshwater Bay beyond, all of which we had seen from the top of the
cliff just below our present position, on the evening of our arrival at
Sandrock; we saw, rather from the greater clearness of the air than from
our higher elevation, not only the entire Hampshire coast from Lymington
to Christchurch and far beyond, but the line of the Dorsetshire coast
trending away far south and the chalk cliffs of the peninsula of
Purbeck, of which the chalk hills on the southern coast of the Isle of
Wight are considered by geologists to be the continuation. The view,
however, on the whole, is not, I think, superior, scarcely even equal,
to that from Ashey sea-mark or Brading Down. The tower on St.
Catherine’s Hill is round, tapering a little towards the top, and though
now a bare wall, it would appear to have been originally the habitation
of man. There is another tower apparently of older date; on another
point a little lower down the hill, which looks more like a tall
pigeon-house than any other object in heaven or earth. The guide-book
says that one of the two is a light-house, and the other “an ancient
tower of unknown date” which “appears to have been the tower of a chapel
or oratory.”51—After leaving Chale, we crossed the comparatively level
country which lies between the two ranges of chalk hills; and we crossed
it in a coasting direction, not far from the sea; but by a very zig zag
route, there being no direct road to the place of our destination but
various roads connecting the villages with one another. We passed
through the pretty and prettily placed village of Shorwell, at the foot
of the central chalk hills; and the villages of Brixton or Brightston,
and Brook. In this part of the island as in all others, we were struck
by the beauty of the cottages. The soil is sandy, the green sand
formation; its little elevations allowed us an occasional view of the
sea, especially near Brook, but these views made little impression upon
us after the Undercliff: the sea is but little in landscape, except
where there is a bold coast. At Brook we turned to the right and passed
through the chalk hills by one of the cuts or gaps in the range (though
not without some climbing) leaving on our left hand a beautiful open
road over Compton Downs to Freshwater Gate. We now came again upon the
clay above the chalk, and looked out across the north of the island to
the Solent. The country was more open, and contained fewer houses, than
any part of the Isle of Wight which Edition: current; Page: [587] we had
seen. We passed through the village of Thorley, and so came upon the
beach, which at low water is muddy, as on the opposite side, this being
the shallow part of the Solent. They even suppose that till the sea
broke in, it was a lagoon, in the New Forest, from the number of fine
oaks which are found buried in it, with their roots firmly fixed in the
bottom. The road now turns to the left, and runs for a quarter of a mile
parallel to the beach, at a sufficient elevation above it to afford a
good view across, and we then entered Yarmouth.

This ancient borough, now happily disfranchised, is a very small place,
not larger than a village, but, being so old, it is compacted together
like a town, not scattered like a place in the country, and the houses
are joined together in streets. It has not therefore the cheerful
appearance of a more modern country place. The George Inn, where we put
up, (and were, par parenthèse, very well entertained) had evidently been
a private house for a long time: the staircase is of old oak, and the
walls are wainscotted to the top. The beach about the place is oozy, and
there is an inlet of the sea called the Yar river, (for I cannot give
that name to the little brook of fresh water which runs into it) which
at low water is a mass of mud. This neighbourhood, consequently, is the
only place in the island (except it is said, Brading harbour,) where
there is any abundance of the plants which grow in salt marshes. Of
these I found a great multitude, about the mouth and banks of the
Yar,—and in the salt marshes higher up, towards its head. We walked
about the town and its immediate neighbourhood, which is far from
agreeable on the side next the harbour, and I should think cannot be
healthy. I have never understood how people can persuade themselves to
come for health among salt marshes and the muddy mouths of tide rivers,
merely because they are near the sea. But even from this disagreeable
place there are good views of the line of chalk downs which form
Freshwater Bay, and which are at a very short distance, this being the
narrowest part of the island. And towards the east the road by which we
had entered, and a path which continues in the same direction, are very
beautiful. The coast is formed by a line of gentle eminences clothed
with wood, as at Ryde; and the woods descending the hill to the water’s
edge would form a walk between wood and water exactly similar to that
between Binstead and Ryde if the different nature of the beach did not
render it impossible to walk upon it without wet feet.

29th

We set off this morning to make our last excursion in the island, for
the purpose of seeing the curious cliff scenery at this extremity of the
island. We reached Freshwater Bay before breakfast, having crossed the
entire width of the island, which in this place is not more than an
hour’s walk. The country is pretty: we left the village of Freshwater to
our right, about half way across, and reached the line of chalk hills,
which is not of any very great height, but forms in this place a long
nearly straight ridge, with wavy sides and covered with a smooth turf.
We stopped to breakfast at a neat inn in the hamlet of Freshwater Gate,
which stands in an Edition: current; Page: [588] opening in the range of
chalk hills between the long down I have mentioned (called Compton
Downs) and the High Down, as it is called, which forms the high cliffs
of the bay, visible from so great a distance. There is here almost a
perfect level from the one coast to the other, and not much above the
level of the sea. Freshwater Bay is a pretty little cove, not a fourth
of the size of Sandown Bay, bounded on both sides by chalk cliffs. The
beach itself is all shingle, though we were told that it was not so
until what they call in the neighbourhood the “November Storm,”52 which
they say was all over England five or six years ago, (I wonder if it was
that which injured the Plymouth Breakwater) and which among various
other changes which it made on this coast, drove the sea up to the inn
itself, and on retiring, left the beach covered with shingle. We climbed
Compton Down, which is of no great height; and walked along the top of
the cliffs for a short distance; the cliff is chalk, but the top of the
down is overlaid with a sandy clay like Ranmer common. The opposite
cliffs rose with a commanding air from beyond the bay, which glittered
with the brightest blue as we looked down at it from between it and the
sun. The Dorsetshire coast in the distance, also a chalky coast, was
seen sufficiently distinctly to be even beautiful, and St. Catherine’s
Hill with its tower bounded the view on the opposite side. In the
inaccessible parts of the cliff over the sea grew a great quantity of
one of our common garden stocks, apparently the Matthiola incana; but
quite impossible to be got at; which I regretted, though I had reaped an
abundant harvest of plants in a marsh at Easton between Freshwater
Village and Freshwater Gate; a place mentioned with honour in Albin’s
Flora of the Island,53 and deservedly, as it contains the Ranunculus
lingua, Oenanthe pimpinelloides, Epipactis palustris, Cladium mariscus,
Comarum palustre, Menyanthes trifoliata, Scirpus maritimus, various
Potamogetons, Genista tinctoria, Eriophorum angustifolium, and various
other interesting plants, all of which I collected in a very small
space, by about half an hour’s search. I may also mention that I found
the Inula helenium by the road side near Freshwater village growing
plentifully, and that there is a sandy beach near Yarmouth, on the
opposite side of the Yar river, which contains in great plenty the
Convolvulus soldanella, Eryngium maritimum, and Asparagus officinalis:
near the same place the Statice limonium also grows abundantly, in
places occasionally covered by the tide: and the Althaea officinalis,
Juncus maritimus, Triglochin maritimum, Plantago maritima, Salicornia
herbacea, Aster tripolium, and various kinds of Atriplex and Chenopodium
(with that universal tenant of our coasts the Beta maritima) abound in
the neighbourhood. I have also found near Yarmouth the Borago
officinalis, I think certainly wild, and the Tamarix gallica, apparently
so: nor is this improbable, as it is known to grow at Hurst castle on
the opposite coast, and Albin has put it down as growing wild in the
Edition: current; Page: [589] Isle of Wight.54 While mentioning Albin’s
Flora Vectiana, it is but just to say that I found it highly useful, and
that it is almost the only local Flora I ever saw, which was really
useful to me: when I have gone to the places indicated by him, I have
generally found all or most of his plants.55—Leaving Compton Down, we
returned to Freshwater Gate, and hired a boat to take us round the
extreme point of the island, as it is hardly to be seen with advantage
except from the sea. We coasted the high cliffs of Freshwater Bay, the
highest point of which, our boatman told us, is 617 feet perpendicular
above the sea. The cliffs are nearly perpendicular, in some places very
nearly, and continue of little less height for a considerable distance,
than at the point which he told us was the highest. They look
surprisingly mauled, as if the waves had been beating about them twice
as long as about any of the other cliffs. They are undermined by a
multitude of caves, some very long and large, others smaller; into one
of these our boat entered, and went a little way in.56 Of course many
large pieces of chalk have fallen off the cliff into the sea (there is
no beach, the sea washing the foot of the cliffs). One immense solid
mass looked as if it had not fallen off, but had been left standing
while the cliff farther inland wasted away; and such, the boatman told
us, is the fact. I omitted to mention that there also stand in the sea,
at many yards distance from Compton Cliff, two tall masses of chalk,
nearly as high as that part of the cliff itself, and even retaining on
their summits a portion of the turf which had rested on them when
perhaps centuries ago, they were part of the continuous mass of Compton
Down. One of these masses is curiously perforated and arched, and makes
a very picturesque appearance from the cliff. The sides both of Compton
Cliffs and Freshwater Cliffs are covered with samphire, and the noise of
sea-gulls about Freshwater Cliffs was incessant; though nothing, we were
told, to what it is in April, May, and June, the breeding season. We saw
many young gulls swimming; they are brown like cygnets: along with some
solitary specimens of a bird which the boatman called a shag, who seems
quite black at a distance, and swims with his whole body under water
except a long erect neck. The old gulls do not seem to swim, but they
are perpetually flying, with that beautiful smooth flight, superior to
all our common English birds except the swallow tribe, their extended
wings seeming to float over the air without the slightest motion. We saw
some ravens, who frequently build in these cliffs, and as we reached the
extreme point of the cliff, we raised a flight of Edition: current;
Page: [590] cormorants. We did not see the puffin, whose eggs are often
sought and found in the cliffs by adventurous persons, and are much
prized for their beauty, and are also eaten. Notwithstanding the height
and steepness of the cliffs it seems that smugglers frequently succeed
in landing goods there; they sometimes let down ropes, but sometimes
also they manage, God knows how, to scramble up the cliff with a cask of
brandy attached to their bodies. Two fishing boats with smuggled goods
had been seized the day before, and the revenue cutter which had
effected the seizure was towing away the empty boats at the very time we
were in the bay;57 we saw her again the same evening at anchor in the
Solent with the boats at her stern.—After turning the corner of the
cliff, we came in sight of the Needles, from which however we were still
separated by another bay of no great size but great beauty, called
Scratchell’s Bay. This inlet, which forms a considerable curve, looks
about south-west, and is exactly at the turn of the coast. It is
entirely bounded by high chalk cliffs, which are curiously marked by
lines of flints at a very little distance from one another, looking like
the dotted lines on a map; these lines are not quite vertical, but
nearly so; the strata of this bay partaking in a great degree of the
derangement of those of the neighbouring Alum Bay. In one part of
Scratchell’s Bay the cliff is curiously scooped out into a convex
recess, with a vaulted roof: it is curious, as the work of nature and
accident, though I think not quite so perfect a circular arch as Mr.
Brannon has made it in his otherwise accurate and interesting Views.58
We landed on the pebbly beach of this bay, which is inaccessible except
from the sea. We then sailed up to the Needles, which are two large
masses of chalk which have been left insulated as the sea has broken its
way across the long narrow promontory of chalk cliff of which they once
formed part. They are in a direct line with the promontory, which is
called the Needles Point, and to which they exactly correspond in
height; the lines of stratification also exactly tally. There was once
in the same line of cliff a high pillar of chalk, which was thrown down
sixty-four years ago by a tempest.59 The Edition: current; Page: [591]
remaining two needles will some day perish in the same manner, or be
worn away by the sea: but other needles may be formed to succeed them,
for the line of cliff for some distance, which exactly resembles them,
may again give way as it must have done before, at some other point than
its extremity. Both it, and they, are of perfectly white chalk, quite
free from turf, and bristling with all kinds of sharp points: a flight
of cormorants, seated on the points of the furthest Needle, had a very
curious effect. The lower strata of the chalk seemed uncommonly hard—and
indeed if it were not, it would I suppose have worn away gradually
instead of being broken into these curious solid fragments so unlike any
thing which is commonly afforded by chalk cliffs. Of its hardness,
indeed, there is complete proof, for on the other side of Needles Point,
in Alum Bay, the fissures in this very cliff give out water, copiously,
in a number of springs, which I have never seen any where else in chalk
hills: the porous nature of the chalk commonly allows the water either
to be absorbed or to filter through and come out beautifully clear and
pure from underneath. Having passed through the Needles, we turned about
round, and Alum Bay was before us. This singular bay is familiar to
geologists, from the perfectly vertical stratification, which exhibits a
great number of strata all at once. The cliffs which bound it form as it
were the two sides of a right angle; the one (which is the cliff of
Needles Point) faces the north; the other, or coloured cliff, faces the
west. The chalk cliff is massive and majestic, and the stratification,
as evidenced by the lines of flints, becomes, as it approaches the
angle, vertical, or nearly so. But the greatest singularity is that of
the other cliff, which is composed of numerous thin beds of variously
coloured sand, clay, and marl, standing so perfectly erect as to present
a series of perpendicular stripes, of the most gorgeous colours;
sometimes a deep pink, sometimes a bright, almost saffron, yellow;
sometimes a strong brick colour; sometimes brown, sometimes a kind of
blue: with countless slight shades and varieties; altogether the most
brilliant specimen of nature’s colouring, except an occasional sunset;
more beautiful by much than the rainbow. It comes upon you at once after
passing through the Needles, and increases in beauty as you approach it.
Of course it is not a uniform surface, but very irregular in its outline
when you are near it, from the unequally perishable nature of the
strata; and furrowed by various miniature chines and hollows; but in the
main it is nearly perpendicular. The continuation of the high ground to
the left of it is the common clay of the Isle of Wight basin, and is
stratified in the ordinary manner. Our boatman landed us in Alum Bay,
and we spent a considerable time on its beach, making a collection of
fragments of the different beds, and picking fossil shells and shark’s
teeth out of the cliff. Some of the beds are so full of fossils that you
cannot take a handful of the soil without finding some small shells, and
if you Edition: current; Page: [592] take up a large lump which sticks
together, and pull it asunder, you are pretty sure to find a shell of
some dimensions in the place where it breaks. At least such was our
experience, and we collected a great number of specimens. Native sulphur
also effloresces on the side of the cliff, in such quantities as not
only to tinge it with many bright yellow spots, which add to the
diversity of its colouring, but in one place actually to give an odour
of brimstone to the air. As far as respects colour, however, its effect
is much aided by a vegetable substance of a colour very like its own,
which I never saw anywhere else, and which here adheres to the cliff in
great quantities. The cliff is also quite full of little bright acicular
crystals of something, probably sulphate of lime: they were not alum,
nor did we find any of that substance, though the bay is named from it,
and it is said to exude from the cliff.—When we left Alum Bay, we
ascended to the adjoining clay eminence, the top of which as well as of
the coloured cliff forms an extremely pretty verdant ferny heath,
abounding in rabbits. On the border of this, adjoining the chalk down,
an inn has been recently established, and must be a very convenient
station for those who wish to explore Alum Bay at greater length than we
have done. We proceeded to Yarmouth through the hilly country of the
coast, which is well wooded, and altogether much prettier than the
comparatively level country which we crossed in the morning in our way
to Freshwater Gate. It also commands various good views of that level
country, of the chalk hills behind, of the Solent and of the opposite
coast, with Hurst Castle in the very centre of the picture, nearer to
the island than to its own coast, placed at the very extremity of a long
line of shore or spit as it is here called, projecting far into the sea
and narrowing the channel to not more than a mile in width. On the
northern coast of the island there are here two very pretty gentlemen’s
seats with wooded pleasure-grounds. We returned to Yarmouth by being
ferried across the mouth of the Yar, in a fisherman’s boat. Here we
concluded our tour of the island, and having dined, took boat for
Lymington. Before leaving Yarmouth, I ought to mention its Castle, which
is a tall but little old fortified building immediately overlooking the
sea and the entrance of the harbour: the walls are covered with red
valerian and wall-flower, growing, according to Albin, spontaneously:60
there is a little garden on the roof, with flowers and culinary
vegetables, for the use, I suppose, of a family which resides in the
building and takes care of it: on the roof are several small cannon,
which look as if they were still intended to be used, though I hardly
think an enemy would attempt a landing here, unless as formerly some
English nobleman should be crowned king of Wight,61 and the
island-monarch should go to war with the continent of England.

In leaving the Isle of Wight I must remark generally that nowhere in so
small a space have I seen collected together so great a quantity and
variety of all the Edition: current; Page: [593] beauties of scenery of
which this part of England is susceptible. The country about Dorking is
indeed superior to it in some respects, but is wanting in perpendicular
cliffs and sea views. I am not so ardent an admirer of the sea as some
are, to whom it compensates for the absence of all other beautiful or
striking objects: Such a coast as that of Bognor or even of Yarmouth in
Norfolk, has small attractions for me; one straight, monotonous line of
low beach, bounding a dead flat, or a marsh below high water mark. But
the sea with a bold line of coast, stretching into headlands and
receding into bays, clothed with trees down to the water’s edge, or
frowning over it in lofty cliffs, is the most striking of all
combinations of natural scenery, except lofty mountains: and in this the
Isle of Wight is surpassed by nothing, which I have ever seen, except
the south coast of Cornwall; if even by that. The beauty of the cottages
in the Isle of Wight is as great as in any part of England; they are
surrounded by flowers, the people who inhabit them shew no symptoms of
poverty, and the children are often extremely beautiful; you constantly
see them, as they are always running out to open the gates which cross
the roads at short distances all over the island. We found much less
neatness in the cottages, in the part of Hampshire to which we next
proceeded: they were often of mud, and had but few flowers, though
generally some potatoes and other garden produce about them. The
children however seemed generally healthy and well fed, though scarcely
so handsome as in the island.—The attractions of the Isle of Wight to
the geologist are well known; to the botanist they are scarcely less.
Besides the plants I have already mentioned, the shores abound with the
Cakile maritima, Chelidonium luteum, Arundo arenaria, Salsola Kali,
Apium graveolens; Absinthium vulgare; in Alum Bay we found (I think) the
Poa bulbosa, and about Sandrock that rare mint, the Mentha rotundifolia.
The island abounds with the Linum angustifolium, Eupatorium cannabinum
and with an Iris, which was not in flower, but which is said to be the
foetidissima. The Chlora perfoliata and Chirinia centaurium grow in all
situations and on all soils, in such profusion as I have never seen. At
Freshwater Gate the Samolus valerandi, and Hyoscyamus niger, abound. The
common trefoil of the island is that elegant species, the Trifolium
fragiferum, and on the sandy soils the arvense is not unfrequent. We
also saw the Androsaemum officinale, the Cnicus eriophorus, and Erigeron
acre. All the fields, hedges, and banks are covered with the Equisetum
arvense, growing so luxuriantly and profusely as to be an object in the
landscape.

We crossed to Lymington in a wherry, the steamboat going only one day
out of three, though on that one day it goes and returns several times.
The island, with its backbone of chalk, the cliffs of Needle Point, and
the Needles, had a fine appearance from the water, as had also Hurst
Castle and the long slip of land at the extremity of which it is
situated. This indeed is the only place in the visible part of the
Hampshire Coast, where the sea and land come immediately in contact:
except at high water, there lies between the sea and the beach, all
along this coast, a broad zone of deep mud, partly green with the plants
which grow in salt marshes but Edition: current; Page: [594] mostly
bare, or with nothing but seaweed adhering to it. As it was about low
water when we arrived, we had to journey up a narrow creek between these
mud banks; and when we entered into Lymington river we found it
precisely similar, a little stream trickling to the sea down the middle
of a vale of mud.62 The entrance to the creek is marked by a high post
with cross bars or something of that sort on the top, which is known by
the name of Jack in the basket, and is so laid down in the maps, and
even alluded to by that name in the public notices which are stuck up
for the guidance of mariners. The town of Lymington is rather
considerable; it is on the top and side of a hill, which hill is, to use
a French expression, the côteau of the Bolder, or Lymington river. One
broad street runs up the hill, and along it for a considerable distance,
and there are some cross streets. It has a cheerful aspect, particularly
the part of it which is on the side of the hill; it is clean, and has
the appearance of a real country town, looking very little like a
watering place. There are some very pretty houses on the side next the
sea, with their sides covered with myrtles (which appear to thrive here
in the open ground as well as in the Isle of Wight) and other flowers.
But there seems no great number of houses of any size. Electioneering is
as rife here as elsewhere: there are three candidates; Admiral Sir Harry
Burrard Neale, Bart.63 who appears to be sure of his election; I suppose
he will have the second votes of both parties; for he appears to stand
on local interests, having a large house and park at Walhampton, just on
the other side of Lymington river. The contest is between Hyde Villiers
and a Mr. Stewart, who hoists the “Independent” flag,64 not having
volunteered any declaration of principles, and is therefore supposed to
be a Tory at heart, and supported by the Tories; yet he now makes
professions of a very popular kind, having been challenged thereunto.
The animosity seems very great, and poor Villiers has been abused and
calumniated without mercy: but the great bitterness seems to be always
against the heads of the local parties; the cry of Nomination is raised
against those who have brought forward Villiers, and they are
individually nicknamed and collectively reviled in Edition: current;
Page: [595] many a placard. It is good to see that the people engage
with earnestness in the exercise of their new rights, but all this
bitterness of contest if it is to continue for four or five months
longer, till the election, will be a little more than enough.

30th

We set out this morning to commence our exploration of the New Forest.
We took the course of the Bolder, (that is the name of the Lymington
stream) which, as soon as you get out of the reach of the tide, is not
much more than a brook. The forest can not properly be said to begin
till you reach Brockenhurst, about half way between Lymington and
Lyndhurst: and the main road from Lymington to Brockenhurst keeps at a
considerable distance from the river: but we, for the sake of a more
agreeable walk, quitted the road, struck into a shady lane which keeps
the valley of the Bolder, and so found our way by lanes and paths into a
wild country, a mixture of heath and wood, which may be considered part
of the forest. Through this our walk was very pleasant, and we presently
struck into the park of Brockenhurst House, in which there are fine
trees, and, from the gentle slope on which the house stands, various
good views of the forest beyond. The park joins the road into which we
now returned, and passing through the village of Brockenhurst, crossed
the Bolder. We were here struck by seeing a prodigious quantity of
horned cattle pattering about in the river and in a pond formed by its
overflowing: it seemed as if the entire bovine population of the
neighbouring forest had been driven down at once to drink at this place:
and indeed the result resembled the stories we read in Herodotus of the
army of Xerxes, which drank river after river quite dry;65 for on
repassing this place the same evening, we found, not indeed the river,
but the pond, almost dry. Here also we for the first time saw the breed
of forest ponies, mentioned by Gilpin in his description of the New
Forest,66 and which run about and graze all over it. The road here
enters the Forest, and shoots directly across it for about four miles,
to Lyndhurst, in nearly a straight line; making what would be a noble
vista, if the trees were closer together and of greater magnitude, and
is even now fine. We left the road, and found our way to Lyndhurst
chiefly by the paths and green drives among the trees. This part of the
forest is certainly fine, but yet, perhaps scarcely so fine as I
expected. It did not disappoint me, but it certainly did not astonish
me. It is a wild tract covered with furze and fern of most luxuriant
growth, and thickly scattered with trees, chiefly oak, with some beech.
The trees appeared mostly old, and past the full vigour of their
vegetation; yet of no remarkable size; as if all the finest timber had
(which is Edition: current; Page: [596] probably the fact) been cut out
for shipbuilding long ago. The underwood is chiefly holly, particularly
near the road; and many, indeed most, of the hollies seemed to have
attained an immense age; the majority were decidedly descending into the
vale of years, and falling not indeed into the sere and yellow but into
the thin and scanty leaf,67 while the trunks were acquiring that sure
sign of decay, a bark covered with the white lichen. We scarcely saw a
single tree in the forest this day which could be of any value in
shipbuilding except for knee timber: I have no doubt that the forest was
much finer formerly than now, and that the last war has made deplorable
havoc among the noblest trees. I recollect that even in Gilpin’s time,
after describing one piece of forest scenery with great enthusiasm, he
mentions that it was marked out for destruction and that in two or three
years from that time it would have ceased to exist.68 Still, renovation
somewhere must be compensating for this destruction, or there will soon
be no timber for shipbuilding. The country here has no very marked
feature except the trees; there are no commanding eminences and deep
dells; very little inequality of ground at all. So that it will easily
be understood why we were not very much struck with this first specimen
of forest scenery. Still it was beautiful, though inferior to many woods
I have seen, and though the seclusion, and the feeling of indefinite
extent, which no woody scenery on a small scale can produce, is greatly
injured by the occasional intrusion of enclosures and trumpery fir
plantations. As we approached Lyndhurst, which, though in the heart of
the forest, has a little circle of open country round it, we passed
various houses and gardens of some beauty; but Lyndhurst itself is a
little dull-looking place with no beauty at all, unless the situation of
its church and churchyard, on a small eminence, commanding however no
view of any great interest, be so considered. We dined at Lyndhurst, and
returned to Lymington on the top of one of the coaches, by which means
we were carried down the vista which I before mentioned, and through
some rather pretty country between Brockenhurst and Lymington. On the
whole this country is better adapted for riding or driving through than
for walking. You require to get over the ground rather quick. In the
evening we walked down to the muddy beach, where we found an artificial
salt lake scooped out in the land, for the purpose of bathing, and
various square ponds cut for salt works. There are among these
salt-pits, about the banks of the river, what seem to be the skeletons
of windmills, or windmills hanged in chains; but I suppose they are in
reality draining-mills, to pump up the water from the marshes, and empty
it into the river. I remember draining-mills down the Norwich river as
you approach the coast; and very odd it was to be scudding down a river
supported by embankments like walls, the drainage of the fens on both
sides (which would otherwise stagnate) being forced up by the wind and
thrown into the river: but I do not recollect that these mills looked so
like the Edition: current; Page: [597] dry bones of a windmill. We here
saw the first corn actually cut: it seems generally ripe in this
neighbourhood, which being far south, and not so far west as to partake
of its humidity, must I should think be the earliest part of England. A
proof that notwithstanding the recent hot weather, this is still a
backward season.—The botanical results of this walk were the Drosera
longifolia, in a heathy bog before we came to Brockenhurst (which also
contained in great abundance, the Myrica gale, Abama ossifraga and
Rhynchospora alba); that rare and newly discovered thistle, the Cnicus
Forsteri in a sandy heath near the same place; the Fumaria capreolata,
in a green lane; (this we also found in great abundance the next day,
between Lymington and Exbury) and the Atriplex portulacoides, which I
gathered in the salt marshes, along with the Atriplex littoralis, Aster
tripolium, Plantago maritima, and other plants suited to the situation.

31st

The following day was dedicated to a visit to Beaulieu Abbey (pronounced
Bewley) and the river scenery of the neighbourhood. We crossed the river
by a causeway and bridge; it was again at low water, neither have we
ever seen it otherwise. No part of the road from Lymington to Beaulieu
passes through the forest: it winds in and out among houses and parks,
and then crosses an extensive and open heath. But as our object was to
ascend Beaulieu river from near its mouth, we quitted the road before we
reached the beginning of the heath, and took the direction of Exbury.
There being no direct road, we wound our way from lane to lane, through
a country of fields and hedgerows, on a sandy and gravelly soil; the
walk was agreeable, without presenting any very marked features of
beauty. We passed an inland lake or pond, mentioned by Gilpin,69 very
much resembling one of the Broads (as they are called) in Norfolk: the
water and the trees about it gave some considerable beauty to this
particular point of our walk. Soon after, we arrived at the ruins of an
old priory (St. Leonard’s) which formerly depended upon Beaulieu Abbey;
it is now a farm yard, and part of it after having a wooden roof put
upon it, is converted into a barn. We presently descended the côteau of
the Exe, or as it is more commonly called, the Beaulieu river, and
reached its banks at a little village named Buckler’s Hard. This river,
which is a very little stream running through a vale of mud, like the
other river, when the water is low (except that the mud is more
overgrown with green water-plants) is a fine river similar to the Tamar
though considerably smaller, at or near high-water; it is hemmed in on
both sides by gentle elevations covered with thick copse, which at high
water is washed by the stream, so that wood and water are alone visible,
and through this the river winds as no rivers do but those which flow
through a nearly flat country, making the most beautiful bays, and
producing continually the effect of a lake wholly surrounded by land.
There is an excellent path through the wood from Buckler’s Edition:
current; Page: [598] Hard to Beaulieu, as straight as an arrow, and a
stone’s throw from the river, but unhappily the river cannot be seen
from it, the view being intercepted by trees. We regretted not having
taken a boat at Buckler’s Hard to ascend the river; and made ourselves
all the amends we could by going down to the river wherever we found an
avenue to it. A little way from Beaulieu the country becomes more open:
on the western side, two or three cornfields and beautiful green meadows
appear, the copse continuing on the eastern side; till beyond the copse
on that same side, the church and ruins appear, and on the other side
the village, partly covered with trees: where we stopped at an excellent
inn, to dine. Our walk had yielded us two very interesting plants, the
Bartsia viscosa in a shady lane early in the day, and the Euphorbia
platyphyllos in a corn field near Beaulieu. While dinner was preparing
we sallied out to see the Abbey. Out of a part of it there has been
formed a large church: there is also an old-looking dwelling-house now
inhabited by Lord Montague,70 which must have been built long ago either
out of the materials of the Abbey or in imitation of it. There are
however still remaining, considerable ruins: what seem to have been the
cloisters, have been built up into four walls and now inclose an
orchard. Of the outer wall considerable portions are remaining at
intervals, and shew how extensive a space was once included in the Abbey
inclosure. The situation, like those commonly chosen for monasteries, is
extremely fine. It is at the point where the tide ends and fresh water
begins, the two being separated by heavy floodgates keeping up a
mill-pond. The Abbey immediately adjoins and looks out upon the most
beautiful reach of the river, which we had the advantage of seeing at
high water, and which forms one of the smoothest and loveliest of lakes,
with green fields on one side and wood on the other, the wood growing
quite down to the water’s edge, covering the promontories and lining the
bays. The wood here too is not all copse; there are some timber trees:
through the wood an excellent road leads to a wood-cutting station a
little lower down the river, and from this road and various paths there
are for so small a distance a great number of fine views of the lake and
its banks, all different from each other. After dinner we went out on
the river in a boat, which enabled us to see somewhat more of the
winding course of the river:71 and the Edition: current; Page: [599]
mode I should recommend of seeing Beaulieu is to come to it by water
quite from the river’s mouth, attending however to the time of the tide,
for there is scarcely any water here when the tide is out, and before we
left Beaulieu the lake which we had admired had wholly disappeared.
Beaulieu would be a pleasant place to stay two or three days in. We have
seen nothing a quarter so fine on this coast. We returned to Lymington
by the road, across the long heath I have already mentioned. Its perfect
flatness and moistness, with its freedom from trees, assimilate it to
the heaths in Norfolk; and it resembles them also in containing a large
pond, or Broad. The ground is table land, though not very elevated: it
commands a good view of Compton and Freshwater Downs, and the Needles
Point; which, in spite of all that Mr. Gilpin may say,72 to my judgment
shew well from all points in this part of the country, and close many
views which would otherwise be incomplete and tame. As it grew dusk we
saw the light-house on the Needles Point blazing away, and the top of
the down looking by the imperfect light very much like a wood.

1st August

This morning we set out for Christchurch, the extreme point of our
journey towards the west. The intervening country not being very
interesting, we were not disposed to walk, and as the coach was full, we
availed ourselves of the offer of a Christchurch man, a nursery and
seedsman, and fruiterer who was returning home from Lymington, to take
us in his cart; a taxed cart I cannot call it, as it was without
springs.73 With this personage, whose name was Hatchard,74 we had much
conversation on the road: we found that he was an enthusiastic reformer,
and he Edition: current; Page: [600] told us many particulars about the
history of reform at Christchurch, which was a close corporation with no
more than eight or ten burgesses in the hands of Sir George Rose75
before the passing of the Reform Bill, but is now an open borough
returning one member. The only candidate in the field is Captain Tapps
(Captain I think he called him) the son of the Whig proprietor,76 and
rival of Sir George Rose, in the neighbourhood: he professes to be a
reformer, and our friend says that the Christchurch people would not
return anybody who was not: but he seemed to think that the reformers
had been too hasty in taking him up; there was somebody, I forget who,
that he would have preferred, but who would not stand when he heard that
Captain Tapps was in the field. Sir George Rose it seems was applied to,
but when he saw the small number of names to the requisition, he would
not stand. Sir George he told us was liked as a magistrate but not as a
member; his son appears to be liked still less.77 Our friend talked
repeatedly of the number of enlightened men there now are, and how much
more parliamentary questions are understood: he says he did not know, a
twelvemonth ago, what reform was, and a newspaper was scarcely ever read
in Christchurch, but now they are very much read, and he says he has
often sat up to read the debates as late as his eyes would allow him. He
is a great enemy to tithes, and seems to have thought a little both on
that subject and the corn laws.78 On the whole he talked very sensibly,
and in a manner we were pleased to see nor did he express one
objectionable opinion. He was a little puzzled to understand how all
these changes had been brought about; he had heard of Cobbett, and
supposed that much was to be ascribed to him, but did not seem to know
much about the Political Register; though he had read Cobbett’s Sermons
and his works on agriculture.79 He seemed to regret Sir James
Macdonald’s death very much, but had scarcely heard of Sir Thomas
Baring.80 He says that Swing Edition: current; Page: [601] has never
been in that district,81 but there were letters written threatening
outrages on his part, in consequence of which a great number of special
constables were sworn in, and the Preventive Service put in requisition,
of which circumstance the smugglers, who were the real authors of the
letters, availed themselves to effect the landing of a great quantity of
smuggled goods.—The country between Lymington and Christchurch admits of
no particular description. We passed the house and grounds of Lord
Stuart de Rothesay82 who is building a castle overlooking the sea;
making his own bricks and mortar, importing his own lime and Portland
stone. We also passed a house and grounds belonging to the lately
celebrated Madame de Feuchères,83 of whose history our acquaintance
seemed to have some notion, I know not exactly how much. Sir George Rose
has his house and grounds close to the sea, at Mudeford or Muddiford,
the watering place of Christchurch, which we passed through before
entering the latter place: it may indeed be said to be part of the town,
as the series of houses between the two is nearly as uninterrupted as in
Mudeford itself. During our journey there was some rain; and it rained
at intervals during the rest of the day: this was the first rain we had
had since we started from town. It was not, however, such as to prevent
us from sallying out in the evening, and seeing a great deal of the
neighbourhood.

Christchurch is situated about a mile and a half (I should think) from
the real sea-shore, but the sea comes in by a narrow inlet or break and
spreads out into an ample basin, along the edge of which is Mudeford,
and Christchurch is not far from its extreme point. Two rivers of
considerable size for this part of the country, the Avon and the Stour,
empty themselves into this harbour, very near to one another:
Christchurch is upon the Avon, which is divided into two branches over
both of which there are bridges: the Stour, a more considerable river,
lies beyond. The harbour is bounded on the further side by a long black
ridge-like sand-hill, which projects into the sea and forms Christchurch
Head. On the other side the coast is for some distance tolerably flat,
but soon after turns round towards the south, and rises into a long line
of tall loose sand cliffs, continued quite to the slip of land on which
Hurst Castle stands. Between this line of cliffs and the cliffs of
Christchurch Head, there is included an ample bay: across which the
downs of Edition: current; Page: [602] Compton and Freshwater, the
Needles Point, and the Needles themselves, look bold and lofty, and
almost close at hand. Inland the country is rather flat, with the
exception of one bare sand hill called St. Catherine’s Hill, which
stands two or three miles to the north. Christchurch is quite beyond the
verge of the forest, and several miles from its nearest point. The
harbour is mostly bounded by salt marshes, but the true beach when you
reach it is a fine sand, sloping so gradually that the moist and hard
part of it is very broad and pleasant to walk upon, though not furrowed
as in Sandown Bay. I speak particularly of the part between Sir George
Rose’s inclosure and the shore. Sir George has planted a quantity of
Scotch firs to shelter his grounds from the sea winds, but a part of his
house comes down almost to the beach, and is open towards it; looking
like a pavilion. When you have quite passed his inclosure the cliffs
begin to rise; they are at first low, and insignificant; afterwards, as
I have already mentioned, they rise to a respectable height. There has
been an extremely good and agreeable path along the edge of the cliffs;
the path still remains, but by the obstructions placed across, it is
evident that the public have been deprived of it by sentence of
magistrates, in order I suppose to enable Lord Stuart de Rothesay to
carry his shrubbery to the edge of the cliff. I can with difficulty
conceive any greater public injury to a neighbourhood like this; such a
walk was quite invaluable; there is not, I am well convinced, any other
in the whole surrounding country that can serve as a substitute for it.
We, trespassers as we are, defied all notices and overcame all
obstructions, and had our walk along the cliff as far as we listed,
which was no inconsiderable distance; enjoying the view of the bay and
the Needles and the open sea beyond Needle Point and Christchurch Head.

2nd

The first business of this morning (before breakfast) was to walk about
the town. It is rather a good specimen of a quiet old town in the
altenglische stile, not stirred into bustle or activity by manufactures,
commerce, or even by being much of a thoroughfare to any other place,
though some Weymouth coaches pass through it. The harbour of Poole, the
next place on the coast, is so much superior, that vessels resort
thither rather than to Christchurch: and the latter place seems to be
almost exclusively an agricultural and fishing town. But the great
ornament of Christchurch is its very ancient and beautiful church, as
large as several of our cathedrals, and built in the cathedral stile,
except that, as in the case of Westminster Abbey, the tower is no longer
in its proper place, in the centre of the building, but having fallen
into ruin has been rebuilt at one extremity, and from that and its
comparatively modern date is not in keeping with the rest of the
building. I must leave it to those who better understand the subject, to
describe this beautiful building in detail.84 I will however say of it,
that although it has been Edition: current; Page: [603] much patched at
different times, in the stiles of various ages of cathedral
architecture, the greater part of it is in the very oldest Saxon stile,
with the perfectly round arches, which are also traced on the outside of
one part of the building as mere ornaments, intersecting one another and
shewing the origin of the pointed or Gothic arch. The ornaments both in
the inside and outside are as profuse, yet as perfectly subdued, and
kept as completely in subordination to the main design, as in the best
specimens of our Gothic buildings: almost the only stile of architecture
which by the observance of that simple principle, has been enabled to
unite the most barbaric splendour and often the most barbaric quaintness
and even grotesqueness in the details, with the greatest purity and
chasteness and the most striking grandeur in the general effect. There
are here in particular two magnificent screens, one of them much
mutilated but having still enough remaining to shew what it once was.
This was originally the church of a richly endowed Priory. Close to it
there are ruins of what is believed to have been a castle, and also of
what is believed to have been the house of the governor of the castle.
From the nearer of the bridges these ivy-covered ruins have a fine
effect, particularly with the noble church for a background. This
church, which is of a magnitude quite out of proportion to the town, is
a most conspicuous object from every situation from Edition: current;
Page: [604] which Christchurch is visible.—After breakfast, while my
companion remained to make a sketch of the church and of the ruins, I
took a walk to Christchurch head. After going down to the Stour, which
is a little beyond the town, and which is crossed by a ferry, I struck
into a path across several corn-fields overlooking the harbour, and at
last reached the hill, which though bold, is far from high. My reward
was even greater than I expected. It is a long and broad sand-hill,
flattish though irregular at the top, and covered with heath now just
starting into flower: it is bounded on three sides by the sea, forming
the boundary between two bays, Christchurch Bay and Poole Bay. Towards
Poole Bay and towards the open sea it forms loose sandy cliffs; and
belongs, I have no doubt, to the green sand formation. Landwards the
town of Christchurch, backed by St. Catherine’s Hill, (which is seen to
greater advantage than from any other point) has a good effect. The line
of cliffs drops down very low where the hill ends, but seems still to
continue as a low range, round Poole Bay; of which, partly from its
extent and partly from a rather hazy state of the atmosphere, I could
not see the inmost recesses; but across the mouth of the bay the Purbeck
coast, with its chalk cliffs, seemed close at hand, as did also the
cliffs about Needles Point, and the Needles themselves. The haze
prevented me from distinguishing the coloured cliff of Alum Bay, of a
part of which we had a side view from the cliffs on the other side of
the harbour the preceding evening.—I gazed my fill, and took my last
parting look, as far as this tour is concerned, of the open sea; then
returned to Christchurch, and we set off for Lyndhurst, having resolved
to shift our quarters to that place, as the central point of the Forest.
Our walk, which was of about fourteen miles, consisted of three
distinguishable parts: about five miles of rather common-place
hedgerows, lanes, and inclosures, before we reached the bounds of the
Forest: about five miles more of what is termed the Forest, and is
really a part of the royal chase, and full of deer, but is nothing but
dreary barren heath; and four miles of real forest, forest of fine
trees, far superior to what we had seen between Brockenhurst and
Lyndhurst, though not equal to what we saw afterwards. The only defect
of it was that it was broken into little bits, intersected by large
broad heathy openings, and was rather a rapid alternation of wood and
waste, than one continued forest of trees. What there was of it however
was exceedingly fine. A large majority indeed of the trees seemed to
have past their full health and vigour; and many were actually dying.
But most were still extremely fine; they were finely grouped in all
degrees of closeness and all varieties of edge: and the stately green
fern at their feet, with a multitude of thorns and hollies to fill up
the interval between the fern and the forest trees, left little to be
regretted except that such scenery was not more continuous, but was so
often interrupted as to destroy that character of vast extent which we
are accustomed to associate with a forest. The weather all day was hot
and clear, with thick massive summer clouds which seemed never to move,
though a wind was blowing beneath: reminding us of Wordsworth’s lines,

[lf0223-27_figure_012.jpg]
Christchurch, Hampshire, 1832, by Henry Cole Victoria and Albert Museum

Edition: current; Page: [605]
-   

    Motionless as a cloud . . . .
-   

    Which heareth not the loud winds when they call,
-   

    And moveth altogether, if it move at all.85

The rain was entirely gone, and visited us no more. We even found the
heat of the sun inconvenient on the bare heath. The ground was
sufficiently unequal to add greatly to the beauty of the forest, but not
to give any interest to the dreary heath; which derived all the little
beauty it had from the tall furze here and there, the herds of deer
scattered about, and the numerous little streams which intersect it, all
of which, where they spread out into anything like a pond, were filled
with forest ponies and horned cattle pattering about in the water for
coolness, and ready access to drink. We arrived at Lyndhurst to a late
dinner, and went out no more that evening.

3rd

We set out this morning to make a circuit of the finest parts of the
forest. We turned our course westward in the direction of Boldrewood
Lodge; our way lying wholly through the forest; in which we here found
still finer, and considerably younger trees, with fine forest glades
passing through them and without the large patches of open heath which
in our yesterday’s journey had filled as much space as the woody part of
the forest. The trees however were chiefly beeches; yesterday there was
a larger proportion of oak. After between three and four miles of this
fine scenery, we reached Boldrewood Lodge, which stands in the middle of
an eminence that divides two vallies; and commands a more extensive view
than is common in the forest. The view however is in a great degree
barren: the forest lying rather behind than before, and what is visible
from the windows being mostly heath, though not of a gloomy or dreary
character. Behind, a number of fine park trees, cribbed I suppose
originally from the forest (but with the addition of some noble
chestnuts) were included within the inclosure. Our road now ran
north-west across the heath, till it joined the post road from Ringwood
to Southampton; striking into this road we turned into a north-easterly
course, and after a mile or two along the top of a heathy eminence,
reached a part of the forest far surpassing every thing which we had yet
seen. The road went along a ridge commanding on the left a magnificent
view of a finely wooded and richly diversified country, towards
Salisbury, with the thickest and finest part of the New Forest as a
foreground. To the right, again, the view was more interrupted, but from
time to time an opening allowed us to look strait down a far deeper and
longer valley than is usual in the Forest, thickly clothed with wood on
both sides, and having in it a large house, somewhat indistinctly
visible, which we supposed to be Castle Malwood. As we proceeded onward,
keeping the ridge of the hill, and passing a little hamlet and inn
Edition: current; Page: [606] called Stony Cross, the view to the left
varied every instant, but it was decidedly the finest at a point where
our road began to descend through a long vista of fine trees; where
another road goes off to the right, leading to the village of Minsted;
and the view to the left, from the brow of the hill, discloses the
valley below set as it were in trees, the trees about us forming the
boundary on the right, and a part of the forest, much thicker than any
we had seen and forming a gradual ascent towards Bramshaw on the road to
Salisbury limiting the prospect on the left. We staid here for some
time, exploring the different avenues, and enjoying the views: nowhere
were the trees finer, or a larger proportion of them young and
vigorously healthy. I think the finest oaks that we saw in the Forest
are those which are visible from the descent towards Minsted. When we
had seen enough of this fine eminence, we descended the long vista, and
after crossing somewhat more of the forest, arrived at a place on its
borders where five roads meet; the road to Ringwood (the way we came),
to Salisbury, Romsey, Southampton and Lyndhurst. Here also we lingered
for some time; going some distance up the Bramshaw or Salisbury road,
and striking into several of the forest glades, which are finer
hereabouts than any where else. We returned to Lyndhurst partly by the
grassy drives and paths, partly by the road, which is the finest of all
those that cross the forest: one point of it, on a little eminence,
commands a fine vista on each side, varied beautifully by ups and downs,
and including a fine view of Lyndhurst at the end of one of the avenues.
We went out no more this evening except to a yewtree on a little
eminence, just out of the town.

The aspect of the New Forest generally is much less forest-like in the
popular sense of the word, than I was prepared to expect: and I know not
any one spot in it which might not easily be equalled in every respect
by wood scenes in the very limited extent of the timber woods and parks
of Surrey. In those woods and parks there is even one feature of beauty
in a far higher degree than in the New Forest; the trees are much more
uniformly healthy and fine. Yet there are many very fine forest
landscapes in various parts of the forest, especially in the
neighbourhood of Stony Cross and Castle Malwood, where the trees are
finest, the inequalities of ground most considerable, and where the wood
is least interrupted by those large open spaces which, in many parts,
convert the forest into a succession of little woods, deriving from its
great extent only monotony, not vastness. The large plantations of fir
with which the forest is studded in all directions, are the nurseries
for young forest trees: in some of the oldest of them the firs have been
partially cut out, and disclose thick groves of thriving young beeches
and oaks. In the old parts of the forest the beech is decidedly the
predominant tree: among the oaks I suppose great havoc must have been
made by the war: there are fewer of them than of beeches, and the fine
ones are fewer in a still greater proportion: in the finer parts of the
forest there are many noble beeches, equal to almost any I ever saw; but
not many first-rate oaks. There are some birches, but not a great many;
scarcely any ash: the underwood if it can be called so, is chiefly thorn
and holly: the hollies, as I Edition: current; Page: [607] have already
remarked, in some parts of the forest, seem to be weighed down with
years; but in others they are comparatively youthful, thriving, and
vigorous, and attain the greatest beauty of which that tree is
susceptible. I saw but one white beam tree. In general the trees are
dispersed sufficiently widely to allow the ground to be covered and
overgrown with fern of the greatest luxuriance. There are parts of the
forest however, especially in the northern portion, where the beeches
occasionally grow so close as to admit of no vegetation under their
shade. But this never continues for any considerable distance. I should
think much more than one half of the legal extent of the Forest is mere
heath, with no trees at all, except one here and there, stunted and
weather-worn. Over this the deer range freely as over all the rest: and
we twice saw a fox cross our path. These wild heaths are covered with
forest ponies, horned cattle, and geese, but we saw no sheep; and of
course where the deer range there can be no cultivation. Fine as the
forest undoubtedly is, I see nothing in it to excite the enthusiasm of a
writer on the picturesque; and unless the forest was very much finer in
Gilpin’s time (which I suspect it was) I think he has overrated it.
Gilpin however was full of crotchets, witness his disparaging estimate
of the beech as an ornamental tree,86 and his notion that the line of
the Isle of Wight looks tame in the New Forest views, whereas I have not
seen a single view in which it was visible, the beauty of which did not
seem to me exceedingly increased by it.—I should like to ride over the
forest on a forest pony, and immerse myself more completely in its green
and grassy glades. It is a sort of scenery to which one could often
return, but which if continued for a long time together, would become a
little wearisome from its uniformity.

4th

This was the day appointed for our quitting the forest; which we did on
foot, our way lying across a part of the forest scenery which we had not
yet traversed. It was chiefly over heath, intermixed with bogs covered
in the most luxuriant manner with the Hypericum elodes, Alisma
ranunculoides and Anagallis tenella; which abound throughout the forest,
but especially in this part. The bogs followed the courses of the little
streams, and were of no great extent; but this was a peculiarly dry
season. In one of them we found the Triglochin palustre; and the Juncus
lampocarpus grows in the moist places generally, though in no great
profusion. The ground is covered with the two Drosera’s—the longifolia
and rotundifolia. We had to find our way by such tracks as we could
find; for instead of keeping the Southampton road, we determined to
cross the wild country to Hythe, and be ferried over the Southampton
Water, either to Southampton itself or to Netley Abbey. Our course lay
mostly near the edge of the woody, or true forest, which however is
considerably interrupted here, but what we saw of it was extremely fine;
the hollies here were more beautiful than anywhere else, and the beeches
Edition: current; Page: [608] often not only fine but very closely set.
We scrambled over one green fern-clad hill, on which stands a house
called Ashurst Lodge; and we were delighted at finding the beautiful
Campanula hederacea growing amongst the fern: I had gathered it in the
Pyrenees, but never in England till now. After about three hours walk,
which was a longer time than we had any occasion to expend if we had
known our way, we reached the extreme verge of the forest, and again
entered the cultivated country. We crossed some corn fields and
presently came in sight of the Southampton Water, with a peep of its
richly wooded and cultivated banks, and the town of Southampton, with
its three spires, one of them tall and pyramidal like that of a
cathedral, fronting the water and appearing at a very small distance
from us though the Water alone is reckoned three miles across. Our
present route lay in a direction which carried us away from Southampton.
Crossing another field we reached the little village of Dibden, prettily
situated on an eminence, among trees, overlooking the Water: and from
hence we had two miles of carriage road to Hythe, on the banks of the
estuary. This little village, which is conspicuous to all who navigate
the Water, by its cheerful riant appearance at the foot of the côteau,
is the point from which those who come from Fawley, Beaulieu, and that
corner of the coast and of the Forest generally, cross to Southampton:
there is a regular ferry. Though Hythe is but a small place, it has two
rather large inns, which directly overlook the Water. We stopped to
dinner at one of them, and were afterwards carried over in a sailing
boat to Netley Abbey. After the fine views we had of the open sea, under
most favorable circumstances, in the earlier part of our tour, we were
not sorry, by way of variety, to see this, the finest river scenery in
England, the only scenery which I suppose can be assimilated, however
remotely, to that of the great American rivers. A tide river (for such I
must term it, though really an arm of the sea) three miles wide, with
gentle côteaux rising on both sides of it, covered with numerous and
rich trees; in one place (about Netley) with a fine timber-wood: above,
the beautiful town of Southampton with its lofty spires and fine
position, and to the right of it a broad creek going up from the main
stream, like another river discharging itself into this. Below, dimly
descried in the distance, the coast of the Isle of Wight, fronted and
almost equally divided by Calshot Castle, on a narrow slip of land or
spit, resembling on a smaller scale that of Hurst Castle and projecting
forward from the Fawley and Exbury coast, almost half closing the mouth
of the stream. We landed at the nearest point of the shore to Netley
Abbey: and had only about a quarter of a mile to walk when we reached
that celebrated ruin; which is finely situated in a little hollow or
basin, among beech woods and slopes covered with corn fields. We staid
nearly two hours examining the Abbey; which is even finer than Bolton
Priory, in Wharfedale, being about double its size, and equally
perfect.87 Unlike Bolton, it consists not of one, but of several large
apartments. You enter through a square court yard, bounded by a Edition:
current; Page: [609] noble row of arches; from this you pass into the
largest apartment which is itself larger than all Bolton taken together,
and in fine preservation. At each end an immense Gothic window rises to
an enormous height: a row of fine arches bounds it on the further side,
and on the nearer towards the centre of the building much of the
groining of a vaulted passage remains: in the middle of this side is a
recess, of which one side is open, the other three are perfect,
consisting of two stories of arches of the lightest and most elegant
Gothic, with much even of the ornaments remaining: the stone staircase
in one of the turrets is still practicable, and you can climb by it up
to the first story, and walk round the three sides of the recess and in
various directions over the solid wall. In addition to the usual
accompaniments of a ruin, the ivy, etc., all parts of the interior of
this building have, I presume by the good taste of some former
possessor, been planted with noble ash trees: there must be between
twenty and thirty of them, the most beautiful I ever saw, and probably
the tallest: a glorious sight even independently of the ruin, and which
besides the shelter they give to it and receive from it, mix their
transparent spreading boughs in the most graceful manner conceivable
with the finest parts of the ruin, and contribute greatly to give it
that tranquil yet wild and deserted air which harmonizes so well with
the other parts of the scene. There are various other apartments besides
those I have mentioned, which seem to have been rendered habitable after
the great building was in ruins: many of the arches have been bricked up
and the walls plastered over: but this barbarizing process has been in
part reversed, the plaster and brickwork partially pulled down and the
old wall and arches exposed, which in those places has been preserved
from decay, and looks as fresh as if it were built yesterday. The old
parts of the Abbey are of a loose crumbling sandstone, with here and
there a column which appears to have been ornamental, of a shell
limestone, resembling Retworth marble; I suppose it is Purbeck stone.
There are outlying buildings where the vaulting and groining are still
more perfect, perhaps were originally still finer, than in the main
building. I have given a most imperfect and lame description of this
beautiful ruin, but no description can do it justice: from every point,
external or internal, it is a mine of wealth and delight to the artist:
it is also a place where (if tourist and sight-seers could be but for so
long a time excluded) one might dream and muse for a whole summer day;
and a poet might perhaps derive inspiration from time so passed, though
to any one else, if in the full vigour of his health and faculties, it
would be a scarcely justifiable piece of indolent self-indulgence. The
tracing of the windows, and many other of the minute ornaments, are
considerably less perfect in their preservation than at Bolton: but the
difference is far more than made up by the greater magnitude, the more
complicated and artistical plan of the structure, and the noble mixture
of so many lovely ash trees, more lofty than the loftiest parts of the
building and blending with it in a harmonious mixture which to be
completely felt must be seen.—On leaving the ruin, we descended to the
water’s edge, along which there is a beautiful path, to the ferry by
which you cross the creek already Edition: current; Page: [610] noticed.
To our right we had a beautiful verdant côteau, clothed with wood except
where it is crowned by the elegant residence of Mr. Chamberlayne,88 in
the purest taste, perhaps, of any very recent edifice that I have seen
in England. To our left, the magnificent estuary, still nearly at high
water: it is one of the disadvantages of Southampton as of the Lymington
coast, that except when the water is near its highest a vast extent of
mud is discovered, bare, or green only with the Salicornia herbacea, the
light and bright verdure of which takes off a little from the deformity.
But of this we at present saw nothing. After being ferried across the
creek, which considered as a creek, terminates very little higher up, we
came almost immediately upon what seems to be the public promenade of
the town of Southampton; it lies along the water’s edge, has a raised
gravel walk with various seats, and is planted with trees, though of no
very great magnitude or beauty. It is however a pleasant place to
saunter in the evening. We entered Southampton under the gateway of an
old castle which (like that of Norwich) is used as a county gaol: and
came at once upon the quay, from which we walked up the High Street, and
were much struck with its length, and its prosperous and cheerful
appearance. Southampton is certainly one of the largest, and one of the
handsomest towns in the South of England; and one of the few large
country towns which make one feel a desire to live in them. There seems
nothing very remarkable in its public buildings, and except the
churches, which are of a size and splendid appearance (I speak only of
the outside, not having been in the interior of any of them) reminding
one of the churches in the North of England, where the common churches
of a country town are not inferior in size, and decidedly superior in
architecture, to the cathedrals in the South. A large gate-way, in the
Gothic stile but not I should think very old, with some grotesque
figures and two strange fresco paintings of knights in armour from the
local romance Sir Bevis of Hampton,89 divides the High Street, and the
town; which are distinguished into “above-bar,” and “below bar.” Besides
the High Street, which is of great length, there are various cross
streets of no mean dimensions. The place seems busy, and prosperous; and
its many inns look almost splendid.

5th

A rainy Sunday at a country inn. We had many schemes for passing this
day, which still remained to us at the expiration of our tour; but they
were all knocked on the head by a continued, though light, rain, and we
were thrown upon our own resources: fortunate in having not lost an hour
by rain in the whole tour up to this time, nor had even one drop of it
except the one day when we arrived at Christchurch (and a flying shower
the next day before we started) but still not very Edition: current;
Page: [611] well pleased with our lot, being in a situation of which
those who have never been in it (who I trust are many) may be aided in
gaining some conception by Washington Irving’s description in the
Sketch-book.90 Southampton would have afforded many resources on any
other day, but today every thing was shut up; neither books nor
newspapers were to be had: however, we still survive having found
various occupations, of which one was that of finishing this journal. We
had a short walk in the evening in the immediate environs.

6th

Returned to town by the vulgar road, in the common stage-coach fashion.

Edition: current; Page: [612]
[lf0223-27_figure_013.jpg]

Edition: current; Page: [613]


33.: Walking Tour of Cornwall
 3-9 OCTOBER, 1832

MS, private (photocopy, Mill-Taylor Collection, Add. Mat. II, M511),
first notebook; Mill-Taylor Collection, Vol. XXXVII, second notebook.
Mill was alone until Falmouth, where he was joined by John and Sarah
Austin for the main part of the tour. “Austin was very ill for a time in
Cornwall but recovered, and was completely set up in health and spirits
by a little tour to the Land’s End in which I accompanied him and Mrs
Austin” (EL, XII, 129 [to Carlyle, 22 Oct., 1832]). As not published in
Mill’s lifetime, not listed in his bibliography.

3rd October 1832

Set out from Polvellen near Looe in East Cornwall, on a journey to the
western extremity of the county. I intended to be taken up at Liskeard,
due north of Looe, by a cross mail which goes from Devonport to Falmouth
and employs the whole day in that journey. With this view I proceeded up
the estuary of the Looe river.

The south coast of Cornwall, of which nothing is known to those who have
only travelled the great road through Launceston and Bodmin, is a very
peculiar and singularly beautiful part of England. On the one hand, no
or almost no part of the English coat presents so remarkable a
succession of long bold promontories projecting far into the sea,
alternating with capacious and noble bays deeply indenting the rocky
main-land. Beginning with the Start near Torbay, the most noted of these
headlands are the Ram-head near Plymouth, the Deadman or Dudman near St.
Austel and the Lizard, which is the most celebrated of all, and which
will receive particular notice in this description. Between these are
others of inferior magnitude, intersecting the great bays formed by
these magnificent promontories and forming bays within bays; indeed the
coast never seems to start out into the sea in order to reach these
great projecting points without preceding this great effort by two or
three smaller ones: it does not throw out the Deadman nor the Lizard at
one bound: these names denote the extreme points of a succession of
headland beyond headland, still preserving a singular unity and
continuity of direction, not only the principal cape but each successive
one pointing almost due south. The whole coast rises abruptly from the
seashore to a considerable height; it is not strictly perpendicular, and
is even covered with pasture of a rough mountainous character; but from
its rocky aspect it wears a wonderfully bold appearance, greatly aided
by the long projecting lines which proceed from it directly to meet the
sea: and where it touches the water it is worn at all the more prominent
points into slate cliffs of rugged and quaint aspect though of no great
height, upon which as upon many sunken rocks or insulated masses of the
same substance the waves dash and break most imposingly.

Edition: current; Page: [614]
Inland, the country when seen from a considerable elevation, has the
appearance, not of a level country with hills rising here and there
above it, but of tableland with valleys sinking below it. The highest
land of the country is an elevated line of granite rock, forming in its
higher regions scenery analogous to that of Dartmoor: it connects with
Dartmoor itself, and terminates at the Land’s End. From this long and
lofty ridge, towards the sea, the country certainly is not level, for it
gradually declines till it ends in the rocky elevated coast which I have
already described: but on the whole its slope is gradual. It is however
intersected at very short distances by glens or chasms, similar to the
Baranca’s which divide the great plateau of Mexico. These begin almost
from the central ridge, and mostly grow constantly deeper as they
descend; so that many of them (paradoxically enough) are deepest where
the high ground which encloses them is lowest, namely at the sea. They
make no conspicuous figure in the general aspect of the country, seen
from above; thus seen, they must strike every one by their number, but
each in itself is but a small feature in the landscape. When, however,
one of these valleys is observed from within itself, especially by a
spectator placed halfway up one of their hilly sides, they are seen to
be, as they in fact are, one of the most strikingly beautiful and
remarkable objects in this or in any country.

These glens are invariably extremely narrow, and the ascent on both
sides of them extremely steep. This brings the two sides of the glen
very close together, thus adding not only to their abruptness but to
their apparent size: as much as a mountainous country loses if its
mountains slope gradually and are far apart, until like Craven it
becomes as tame and insipid as any plain; so does a district of greatly
inferior elevation assume the character of mountain scenery, when each
hill rises from the very base of another and starts so directly up that
their summits seem almost as close together as their bases. Nearly the
whole of both sides of these mountain-defiles is thickly clothed with
wood. If the high parts of Cornwall are commonly naked of trees (though
not so utterly bare and destitute of them as exaggerated representations
would lead us to believe) the deficiency is well made up by the rare
exuberance and richness of the woody clothing which lines every one of
the baranca’s. The wood, indeed, seldom rises to the dignity of timber;
never, I might say, except where a portion of the hill-side has been
subtracted from the general purposes of cultivation and formed into an
ornamental park or grounds. These are naturally the most beautiful spots
of all. But the thick oak copse covering an entire side or both sides of
the glen, is also extremely striking. Here and there a patch is vacant
of wood, not, however, oftener (if so often) than conduces to the
greater beauty of the scene: these patches if in the narrow valley
itself are commonly little pieces of meadow-land watered by the
beautifully clear trout-stream or rivulet, which is invariably found at
the bottom of these rocky dells: but in the higher part of the dell the
copse generally crosses from one hill to the other, filling up the whole
valley, and the rivulet gurgles down the rocks in the midst of trees or
bushes, less often seen than heard. On the hillside these open Edition:
current; Page: [615] spaces are either little districts of cheerful
corn-fields and orchards, or if left unravaged by the plough, are
covered with the most luxuriant growth of furze. The giant-furze of
spring, and the dwarf one of autumn, abound equally; and the latter, in
all South Devon and Cornwall, makes the country as yellow and as
fragrant as its elder brother does in spring: a property which I have
never known it to possess elsewhere. The green of the furze-plant when
not in flower is also beautiful and conspicuous in these lovely spots,
beyond any I ever saw.

When, in descending these valleys towards the sea we came low enough to
meet the tide, our trout-stream or rivulet in every one of the more
important valleys is converted into an estuary. The defile then widens,
and leaves a broader space for the tide, which fills it entirely up, and
at high-water kissing the very foot of the trees, leaves little or
actually nothing to be seen except water, wood and sky.

Of these estuaries the finest is said to be that of Fowey, one of the
two or three fine places in Cornwall which even after the conclusion of
this tour I have not seen. As it is impossible to set any limits to the
beauty of scenery, I will not affirm that this cannot possibly be more
beautiful than Looe. But Looe is eminently so, and of its general
character the following description may convey some idea.

Looe Bay, in the widest sense of the term, is the immense sinus included
between the Ram Head1 a little west of Plymouth, and the Deadman or
Dudman. These extreme boundaries of the Bay form part of all the
extensive views of it: From a few higher spots may be descried at a
greater distance, the still more southerly headlands of the Start and
the Lizard. At the very inmost point, the best therefore for taking a
survey of the entire Bay, is the entrance of the Looe river: which is
also the central point of a smaller bay included within the other, and
which alone I believe is strictly called Looe Bay. Nearly off the
entrance of the harbour is a little green island, at no great distance
from the shore, inhabited by a single family, and the shape and position
of which led Mr. Austin to compare it not unaptly, to an enormous whale
stranded on a shoal. The Looe river issues into the Bay between two high
hills, like a mere river; the narrow defile is nearly filled by the
river itself the remainder is occupied by the curious old slate-roofed
fishing towns of East and West Looe, of boroughmongering notoriety,2
connected by a long narrow ancient stone bridge, and having from some
points a most picturesque effect, particularly in twilight, with which
time of day the dim grey colour of the slate appears to me to harmonize
peculiarly. East Looe in particular, seen from half way up the hill on
the West Looe side, is so closely hemmed in between the steep eminence,
the river and the sea, that it actually seems as if built in the water.
The estuary, strange as it may appear, is not at the mouth of the river,
but above; the Edition: current; Page: [616] river itself being the
outlet of a larger expanse of water. Almost immediately above Looe
Bridge, the channel expands, and not only widens into an arm of the sea
in its main direction, north and south, but sends up another of equal
magnitude westward; to one who stands at the junction of the two or at
any other point except the few which command a direct view of the outlet
and of the sea, the whole when the tide is up has the appearance in the
greatest perfection, of an inland lake, out of which rise at once and
abruptly on all sides, the finely wooded hills already mentioned. The
western branch of the estuary is winding and the valley which contains
it is one of the finest of all the baranca’s: far beyond the reach of
the tide it forms the valley of a little and most beautiful stream,
affording scenery which combines with the general and uniform character
of which I have attempted to give an idea, the most agreeable variety in
the details. In the angle between the two estuaries rise the woods of
Trenant Park: these were once fine timber, but are now copse like the
rest: the park itself, which is the more beautiful because park scenery
is so opposite in character to what I have been describing, looks in the
contrary direction. At the angular point there peeps out of the wood,
near the top of the hill, a kind of summer-house with a grass slope
before it, commanding one of the finest views of the water below and the
hills above. At the foot of the hill just underneath, close to the
water’s edge, is a neat new old-English cottage inhabited I believe by a
gamekeeper or other servant of Mr. Hope,3 the owner of Trenant, and
purchaser of East Looe but three years before it was disfranchised. The
only time I ever was at the cottage, there was nobody in it but one of
the prettiest little girls I ever saw, who though not more than ten
years of age (I should think) seems to take occasional charge of the
ferry-boat. Just opposite to this point, at the foot of the hill which
separates this branch of the estuary from the sea are the house and
prettily laid-out grounds of Mr. Charles Buller, which rejoice in the
name of Polvellen. From this place I was now setting out to ascend the
course of the Looe river towards Liskeard.

There is a road from East Looe along the side of the estuary: this road
is covered at high water, when the rocky hill covered with trees and
bushes is actually washed by the tide: but except for a few hours every
day it is passable, and is by far the shortest road. I followed this
road to a fork in the valley, where it sends up a tributary dell to the
east, of no great length but exquisitely beautiful: almost entirely
occupied by the park, woods and plantations of Morval, the seat of John
Buller Esq.4 the head of the Buller family, and late patron of the
borough of West Looe. Higher up than this fork in the main valley, the
estuary speedily terminates, and Looe river is replaced by the Looe and
Liskeard canal; which of course in some degree mars the beauty of the
valley by the great number of man’s roughest and Edition: current; Page:
[617] least ornamental works which are always connected with a navigable
canal; but the windings of the glen, the great height of the hills which
enclose it (for the country is already in this place much higher than
the coast while the valley does not rise near so rapidly) and the
beautiful woods with which many parts of the hill-sides are clothed,
render even this extremely fine. The most striking spot is, I think,
near the foot of an eminence somewhat higher than the rest of the high
ground and which from its superiority of height and the fragments of
rock which peep out at the summit is dignified with the name of a Tor.
Tregallan Tor is something like the name, but I do not know the exact
spelling. The word mamelon which in French is sometimes applied to a
particular kind of hill, would exactly suit most of the Tors in
Cornwall, particularly those of the granite moors.

I however did not follow the main valley, but the collateral one, and
passed through the woods of Morval, perhaps (all things considered) the
loveliest spot of ground I have seen in the county: I do not mean the
most striking, but the most attaching, and abounding most in delightful
home views. After quitting Mr. Buller’s domains I ascended the high
ground, and kept it all the way to Liskeard.

It is dull work describing every inch of a country: The only way to be
endurable is to select such particulars as will suggest a conception of
the rest. The road to Liskeard is through a cultivated country, rather
pretty than ugly, but not remarkable, on the high ground of Cornwall,
and on the whole gradually rising. Two or three miles beyond Liskeard in
the same direction you ascend to the top of the granite range: in an
interesting part of it too, near the curious block of granite called the
Cheesewring, and the Druidical stones, called the Hurlers. But the road
to Falmouth, into which I struck at Liskeard, runs westward along the
heights instead of climbing to the top of them. Of this road I can give
but a very general description, for I travelled it in a rainy day, and
the clouds and mist which hung about the hills rendered it difficult to
see more than that we first crossed a rather bare cultivated country and
then came upon rocky moors. To the left we occasionally passed the head
of one of the woody glens so often mentioned; a beautiful one, in which
the wood amounted to timber, lay just beyond Lestwithiel. But there was
one point on the road, near St. Blazey, between Lestwithiel and St.
Austel,5 which happily a suspension of the rain and mist enabled me to
catch a passing view of, and which was so strikingly beautiful as to
deserve special mention. A broad inlet of the sea intersected the main
land far and wide, bounded on the further side as we came in sight by a
double headland one stretching behind and beyond another: the furthest
is the Deadman. Off the nearer cape, unless my memory deceives me, is a
picturesque insular rock. Inland is a valley the richest in the
vicinity, which, I am told in finer weather seems as if it had been
brought from another region and dropped here. The most conspicuous
object which met my eye in descending into it was a fine timber wood.
But the sea-view was the glorious Edition: current; Page: [618] one, and
may almost compete with the subsequent glories of Falmouth and Penzance.
As a matter of curiosity only, I may mention that the little streams
here appear in rainy weather to run milk-white; this I was afterwards
told arose from the vicinity of beds of a fine and celebrated porcelain
clay.

The towns which we passed through, Liskeard, Lestwithiel or Lostwithiel,
and St. Austel have no peculiar features to distinguish them from the
Cornish towns. All are slate-roofed and built with rough stones, here
and there in a house better than common the stone is hewn; rather more
frequently faced and edged with brick, but in general the mark of
affluence is stucco. From the nature of the country all the towns are
more or less picturesque, being always either on the side of a hill, or
in a deep hollow between two hills. Liskeard covers the whole side of a
hill; Lestwithiel is in the bottom of a deep valley ascending partly up
both hills; St. Austel is on a hill side. The material here is if I may
trust my recollection chiefly slate: in the remoter part of the county
which we shall presently come to it is rough granite. Everywhere the
church steeples both of towns and villages are simple quadrangular
towers, but tall, sometimes ornamented on some of their faces, and
invariably turreted with sharp points at the four angles. Sometimes
though but rarely there are four smaller turret-like points in the
middles of the four sides. One of these towers when situate in a high
place on the bare moors, where no tree or other object comparable to it
in height intercepts the view from any quarter, is a conspicuous object
for many a mile, and the resemblance in colour between the edifice and
the pale rock on which it is built gives rather a subdued if not a
mournful character to some of the scenery of the table-land. All the
towns on this road were once boroughs; Liskeard still returns one
member, St. Austel none, I forget whether Lestwithiel is completely
disfranchised.6 The road also passes through the well known Grampound
the most ridiculously small and miserable village that can be conceived,
though it is said to have doubled in size since it was disfranchised.7
The other places look thriving enough; Liskeard and Lestwithiel are
chiefly or wholly agricultural towns, St. Austel is the shop of a mining
district of some extent. Hereabouts therefore the ground began to be
perforated, and wherever a shaft was sunk the odd looking wooden machine
appeared which serves to raise and lower the baskets of ore; the only
visible above-ground part of the machinery of the smaller mines.

Truro is a large thriving busy place, of a very different aspect from
most of the others; it is the largest town in Cornwall, well-built with
large houses and broad streets, and is a seaport by the aid of one of
the branches of Falmouth water. As we entered into the valley of this
estuary, we came again among woods and rich Edition: current; Page:
[619] scenery. This continued all the way to Falmouth. The finest part
was the valley of Perran. Leaving the valley of the Truro estuary and
ascending a hill, we kept along the high ground, where looking out to
our right over the immensely rich mining district of Gwennap, we saw
indeed an otherwise bare moor but studded all over at small distances
with single cottages inhabited by miners. Presently looking forward and
to the left we saw ourselves about to descend into a deep and narrow
valley containing another estuary also a branch of the great Falmouth
water, which here by its many arms intersects the country in all
directions. On the other side of the estuary on the summit and declivity
of the hill lay stretched at length the beautiful park of Sir Charles
Lemon, one of the members for the county;8 it is full of fine
plantations and timber and is called Cardew. Further on, the valley
contracts, and fills with wood; and the pretty little village of
Perran-ar-worthal (sometimes basely corrupted into Perran Wharf) shews
itself by the roadside. I regret much that the rapidity with which I was
whirled past this beautiful spot, prevented me not only from seeing the
details of the country but even from being sure that I have seized its
general outline with correctness. I have seen few places where it would
be so delightful to pass four or five days, for the purpose of exploring
the neighbourhood. Mr. Richard Taylor, one of the sons of Mr. John
Taylor the miner, and entrusted with the care of one of the greatest
mining establishments in England the Consolidated Mines has a pretty
little residence in the most beautiful part of this valley.9 His window
faces the water, and beyond the water a line of steep wooded hill; and
the road, also a fine object in a view, and disagreeable only when too
much frequented passes along the valley close to the house. When we
emerged from this valley and ascended the hill on the westernside of it
we came almost immediately in sight of Falmouth harbour, and soon after
saw the peninsula of Pendennis castle almost closing up its mouth; the
town of Penryn stretched on the long side of a hill to our right, and
descended to its foot to meet the principal arm of Falmouth water, along
which we held our course for about two miles further to Falmouth itself,
with the water on our left, and the little town of Flushing beyond
forming a fringe between the estuary and a high steep hill.

Thus far have I ventured though without much confidence of success, to
attempt to convey an idea of what I saw; but here I hardly dare proceed
further, so impossible do I feel it to make any one who has not seen
Falmouth and its harbour, comprehend what it is that renders them so
enchantingly beautiful. Yet having once begun I am ashamed to turn back.
Conceive then the bold lofty coast which I have before attempted to
describe, but here, though without any diminution of its Edition:
current; Page: [620] boldness smoothed down into its softest and
gentlest forms. Imagine a break in this line of coast forming not a bay,
but a broad spacious harbour of which the opening next the sea would be
its longest side, were it not that from the western side, and facing you
as you look down the harbour a low isthmus juts out from the main-land
and suddenly rises into a tall majestic rock somewhat like Gibraltar in
character and crowned by Pendennis Castle, an ancient building still
used for purposes of defence. This peninsula covers so much of the
harbour that not more I should think than one-third of the natural
opening remains, and from many points this outlet being masked, the
land-locked harbour appears an inland lake. Behind the peninsula of
Pendennis Castle lie securely moored, in water which the most violent
storm can do little more than ruffle, twenty or thirty of the lightest
and most elegant little vessels in the world, in the shape of Post
Office packets lying so gracefully in the water that even a landsman
must needs fall in love with them. The harbour-mouth is of extraordinary
depth. A long bold promontory juts out from the land-side and divides
from one another the two noble estuaries which by their junction form
the harbour. One of these estuaries, directly opposite to the harbour
mouth, forms a long arm of the sea which extends to Truro, and a fork of
it eastward to Tregony. Perran water is also I believe a branch of this.
The other properly Falmouth water, extends only two miles inland to
Penryn, which with its glittering slate roofs lies stretched on the hill
at the water-head. It is almost one town with Falmouth which is a long
closely-packed town pressed close between the harbour and the hill-side,
beginning at the isthmus and extending far up the estuary; and opposite
where Falmouth ends, the still more cheerful little town of Flushing
begins, once more frequented by invalids for the sake of a Cornish
climate and because it is so sheltered from the east. This nearly fills
the space between Penryn and Falmouth. From every eminence you see all
three at once. The Truro branch I scarcely saw, not having time to
ascend to Pendennis castle from which it is best seen and which Mr. and
Mrs. Austin, whom I joined at Falmouth, had seen before I arrived. But I
put across the harbour in a boat, with Mr. Austin, to Trefusis Park,
near the end of the promontory which separates the two estuaries. From
hence we had a fine view of the harbour mouth, and the open sea over and
beyond Pendennis Castle. Though the high Castle Rock is bare, the
isthmus is finely wooded; Mr. Robert Fox,10 a wealthy Quaker of great
influence in Cornwall, has a fine house and grounds there which I should
much like to see: the timber we saw probably forms part of his grounds.
But across this isthmus we could see finest of all, the coast, high and
rocky, still trending away to the south, forming as at St. Blazey, one
headland beyond another and a third beyond both, to us invisible, the
Lizard. Altogether this scene, though all its features were bold and
some even grand—such as the peninsular rock and the sea, which is always
so,—had its character of majesty entirely merged in one of overpowering
beauty. Edition: current; Page: [621] A more exhilarating scene of mere
landscape I never expect to live to see nor one to which I could oftener
recur without any diminution of delight.

4th

We started this morning early for Penzance by the mail for there is a
mail from Falmouth to Penzance. We followed the Falmouth water to
Penryn, and then ascended the hill by the main street of that town.
Falmouth is busy, thriving, and neat, though with very narrow streets.
Penryn is comparatively shabby, though the streets are wide; and by no
means bears out when you are in it, the beauty of its appearance from
the river. Its corrupt constituency has been thrown into the new and
pure one of Falmouth, and both together are to return two members.11
Falmouth previously had none, though, as I had almost forgotten to
mention the paltry village of St. Mawes lying over-against it quite
across the harbour had the honour of being a borough.12 Penryn is the
chief port for the exportation of Cornish granite. That of which the new
London Bridge is built, was quarried close to this place.

On quitting Penryn we emerged upon the granite moors; and saw nothing
else in all the West of Cornwall except immediately on the coast. In the
general form and features of this moorland country there is nothing very
striking. It is not abrupt but undulating, and rises by gentle swells
rather than sudden starts. There are however almost always numerous and
considerable eminences within sight though wavy and roundish in their
shape and aspect. The highest and most conspicuous of these are
Carn-math, (very near the Consolidated Mines) and Carn-brek,13 not far
distant from the former. Carn (previously the same with Cairn) seems to
be exactly synonymous with the Devonshire (and Derbyshire) word Tor. The
country generally but the eminences or Carns more particularly, are
covered with great projecting masses of the moor-stone (as Cornish
people call the granite) sometimes jutting out from the rocky
substratum, sometimes lying in vast blocks upon the surface: on these
nothing grows, save in the crevices; elsewhere herbage, at least furze
and turf both good enough for burning, are found. Here and there an
inclosed field produces a greener pasturage; sometimes but rarely the
more fertile spots are converted into arable; but the moor whether
cultivated or not does not lie open, an indefinite expanse, but is
everywhere divided into small patches by inclosures either of loose
pieces of granite more or less carefully piled, or of such fragments and
sods combined. It is, as I afterwards learned, the practice hereabouts,
to assign these patches of moorland to the poorer inhabitants of the
parish, so that each may know where he is at liberty to cut turf and
furze for fuel and how much there is for him to cut. In almost every
inclosed piece of pasture, it is Edition: current; Page: [622] the
practice to put up a large thin hump of granite near the middle for the
convenience of the cattle, namely that they may rub against it: this is
probably found necessary in consequence of the absence of trees: these
stones amount almost to a feature in the scenery and have often a
grotesque effect. It is very common to find here, and in all the West of
Cornwall, upright pieces of granite of various sizes, with crosses or
other religious emblems carved on them, but almost effaced by age: the
stones are generally rounded at the tip thus and are supposed to have
been intended mostly to point out the way to church.

[lf0223-27_figure_014.jpg]

In a hollow about mid-way between Falmouth and Penzance, running north
and south like all the other glens and descending to the sea, is the
town of Helston or Helleston, one of the boroughs redeemed (I think)
from total disfranchisement14 when taxes came to be considered as well
as population: we all agreed that it is very nearly the neatest town we
ever saw; every thing about it speaks of comfort and cleanliness: it
would seem to be a place to which people retire and fix their residence
when they have saved a little money. Helston is a place renowned
throughout the county for eating: to borrow Arthur Buller’s joke,15 you
have sucking pigs for side-dishes, and are helped thrice to goose. There
is a week of incessant feasting in every year, which some have likened
to the ancient Floralia,16 and have even supposed that the Roman custom
may have lingered among the ancient Britons in this remote part of the
island where the British population has never diffused. The festival
begins with a grand scene of merriment, on I forget what day in May, on
which it appears that the whole people of the town, higher classes and
all, sally out into the country under the guise of bringing from thence
the old woman (who the old woman is I forget, though it was elaborately
explained to me) and boughs are gathered and there is dancing and all
sorts of antics. The valley of Helston has some trees in it, and some
cultivation, and might pass for rich in the midst of these moors.

Beyond Helston there is nothing remarkable until the traveller comes in
sight of Mount’s Bay. But this is the most glorious scene of all and
must be described not as it at first appears but as it is.

The south-western extremity of Cornwall, as may readily be seen by
examining the map, is almost exactly similar in its proportions to the
southern extremity of Italy, and may be likened to a foot, of which the
Land’s End is the toe, and the Lizard the heel. Mount’s Bay, so named
from the remarkable insular rock called St. Michael’s Mount, forms the
arch contained between these two extremities, and corresponds to the Bay
of Tarentum; to which, in its shape and position, I should Edition:
current; Page: [623] imagine it to be a reduced but accurate likeness.
It is not landlocked like Falmouth Harbour, but presents a broad open
front to the sea. Its form is that of a fine sweeping curve, almost a
semi-circle, but that its boundary on the east is the longest and
straightest of the promontories of Cornwall, that of the Lizard, which
seen across the Bay seems a smooth unvarying wall, never varying from
its direction, never altering its height. At the inmost point of the Bay
is the little town of Marazion, or Marketjew, from which to St. Ives or
Hayle on the northern coast close to the Bristol Channel it is not five
miles across. This narrow isthmus, comparatively but little elevated
above the sea in any part, incloses the peninsula of St. Just and the
Land’s End.

Over against Marazion, about a quarter of a mile from the shore at high
water, but connected with it by a causeway passable by carts at low
water rises the precipitous rock of St. Michael’s Mount, crowned
formerly by a convent, which was an offset from the monastery of Mont
Saint Michel, perched on a rock of a similar kind off the coast of
Normandy. A chapel and Gothic dwelling house belonging to Sir John St.
Aubyn, have now replaced the remains of the convent.17 These buildings
cover the entire summit of the rock which is about 250 feet high and
with difficulty accessible, except where an access has been made to it
on the side next the main-land. On this side, where the rock is somewhat
less precipitous than on the others, there is a little space sufficient
for two or three houses between the rocky cliff and the water: and on
this side also by erecting walls in the sea itself a little harbour has
been constructed, sufficient to shelter two or three small ships. The
rigging of these little vessels lying off the Mount adds considerably to
the picturesque effect.

As we descended the hill towards Marazion on a splendid autumnal
morning, the picture which gradually opened to us had the Mount for its
foreground; the beautiful bay lighted up by the sun into the most
brilliant blue, its waves rolling in long lines upon the shore, and the
sweep of the elegantly curved sandy beach were the middle, and the
background was formed by the wild-looking ascent of the peninsula of the
Land’s End, forming the western boundary of the bay, with no less than
three sea port towns, Penzance, Newlyn, and Mousehole, glittering in the
sunbeams at its feet. Immediately round the bay the country was no
longer moor-land, but pasturage and occasionally arable; in the
sheltered hollows there were trees, of no inconsiderable numbers and
dimensions for the country. On the heights indeed the violent gales and
the vicinity of the sea prevent many trees from growing, and those which
do grow make but a pitiful figure. From Marazion to Penzance (about
three miles) the road lies along the sandy beach, which abounds in
maritime plants.

Edition: current; Page: [624]
Penzance is one of the busiest, and one of the liveliest little towns I
ever saw: as the shop for a considerable mining district, the place of
export for much of its produce and of import for what it consumes, and a
considerable fishing place besides, it is the most active little place
for its size, perhaps, in the West of England. But of Penzance, more on
our return; for as the weather was unsettled, and as this day happened
to be extremely fine, we resolved to profit by it, and push on to the
Land’s End at once to which end we hired a very convenient car at
Pearce’s Hotel. Notice to all travellers who read this: At Penzance,
Falmouth, Truro, or Barnstaple, be sure to enquire for Pearce’s Hotel.
There are four Pearces,18 near relations I believe all brothers, who
keep large inns in these several towns, and as their inns are invariably
the best in the place I wish there were a Pearce in every town in
England.

The village nearest to the Land’s End is Sennan,19 to which the direct
road is through another village named St. Buryan, on the highest point
of the peninsula, of which the high square steeple may be seen from
every part of the neighbourhood. It was our purpose however not to go
straight to the Land’s End itself but to make a circuit by all the more
interesting points of the coast. We ascended the long and steep hill
above Penzance by an oblique road leaving the fishing town of Newlyn
under our feet, and enjoying as often as we turned our heads, a noble
view of the Bay, the Mount and the Marazion coast. We emerged upon the
heights near the steeple of the little village of Paul, and near the
only clump of trees (I believe) on the whole table-land of the
peninsula. The trees are tolerably high but quite bare even so early in
the autumn, and the branches seemed scanty and stunted. A tree exposed
to the sea gales is always a strange abortion; in the struggle between
the south-west wind and the powers of vegetation, the former always
comes best off. The moorland scenery was here in its greatest purity;
not dreary on account of its novelty and singularity, and because the
extreme mildness of the climate and the balmy genial feeling of the air
even when the wind blew hard, excluded the feeling of coldness and
bleakness. The inclosures are here wholly of rough granite; and the
monuments of Catholic are mixed with those of Druidical superstition. A
Druidical circle of upright stones (nine only, I believe, in number,
though the circle is very complete) stands in a field hard by the road:
there are called the Merry Maidens, and the tradition is that they were
turned into these stones while dancing on a Sunday: a similar
superstition exists respecting the great upright stones called the
Hurlers near the Cheesewring, on the moors between Liskeard and
Launceston. At no great distance from the Merry Maidens are two much
larger stones, Edition: current; Page: [625] upright like the others but
three or four times higher than the upright stones one of which is
placed in every field: these two, which are fantastic and peculiar in
their shape, are called the Pipers, a name probably expressive of the
relation in which they originally stood to the nine dancing damsels. At
about four miles from Penzance, we descended into another of the little
valleys running down to the sea, to which we were now so much
accustomed. This valley contains two or three farmhouses, and a
sufficient number of trees to render it when contrasted with the moors,
almost rich. A little stream gurgles down it, making miniature cascades
and producing verdure wherever it flows: the stream and the valley
terminate in the beautiful Lemorna Cove,20 whose “fair form”21 is worthy
of a name so fair. It is a miniature bay, inclosed between two
projecting points of the high granite shore, and concealed on the
landside by cliffs to the right and left and by the rapid rise of the
secluded valley in the middle which also by a slight change of its
direction causes the cove to be partly masked by a projecting point of
rock. The cliffs are not nearly so bold as those we afterwards saw
though the large blocks of granite which cover the hill sides are always
striking: but it would be impossible or very difficult to scramble round
either of the points, so that the seclusion is complete. The sea was
here of a deep blue rare in our climates, and which Mr. Austin said
reminded him of the Mediterranean. The scene was not grand but
singularly beautiful. The little narrow point where the valley joined
the sea—beach I cannot call it—was covered wtih huge lumps of granite,
rounded like pebbles by the waves and giving a tremendous notion of the
seas which could achieve such a feat. But these cannot be our modern
seas, if as we were afterwards told by Mr. Carne,22 the geologist, of
Penzance, it be true that wherever these boulders (as they are termed)
are found on the coast, a great bed of similar ones is discovered
underground in the interior.

After leaving Lemorna Cove we reascended the heights, and after another
journey of about four miles more, again descended to the coast at the
Logan Rock. In a great part of this interval we were surprised to find
the country declining very gently on our left and extensively laid out
in arable: there is here also an attempt at even an inclosed and wooded
pleasure-ground, belonging to a gentleman of the name (I think) of
Paynter.23 But before we reached the Logan Rock, the coast had again
become much bolder and more rocky than at any place previous. We
descended to the Logan Rock by a footpath across several grass fields,
from which nobody would form any expectation of the striking objects to
which he is approaching here as well as at the Land’s End; the
precipitous rocks are not visible till you are almost close to them and
cannot be adequately seen until you are actually among them; nor is the
apparent elevation above the sea, such as leads you to expect anything
remarkable on the water’s edge. But the cluster of rocks Edition:
current; Page: [626] deriving its name from one remarkable stone, the
Logan Rock; and also the still finer cluster of rocks at the Land’s End;
form each of them a little peninsula, connected with the land by an
isthmus much lower than itself; projecting sufficiently to form on each
side a Bay, and to command across each of these bays, a direct view of
the granite cliffs of the principal coast. By reason of their prominent
position in the sea, and of their peninsular form the waves not only
break upon them but dash around them, and the long lines of surf which
break upon the shore of the bay, may be seen gradually advancing one
behind another from a great distance, viewed as they are from this
advanced post, or watch-tower. The Land’s End however being still finer
than the cluster of rocks about the Logan stone, I shall reserve a more
particular description for the former.

The Logan stone itself is only one of the upper blocks of an immense
pile of granite, consisting or rather seeming to consist of masses
heaped one upon another. The wonder of this stone consists in resting
upon a single point, and being so nicely balanced upon it that a man by
using his strength may set it slightly rocking: but it stands firm and
no hurricane was ever known to blow it down though a foolish Lieutenant
of the Navy named Goldsmith in the wantonness of destruction so
characteristic of Englishmen in their idle hours set nine men to
overthrow it and by their united strength succeeded.24 Government very
properly required Lieutenant Goldsmith to replace it, and the Dockyard
at Devonport furnished the requisite machinery; the thing was
successfully accomplished and the stone now stands as it did before, all
but a few chips which were broken off by the fall. The formation of this
stone, as well as of the Cheesewring, is no mystery to any one who has
ever seen a granite moor. The natural progress of decay in the rock
itself, is perpetually producing approaches to Logan stones as well as
approaches to Cheesewrings. The fact is, though I know not how to
account for it, that the granite invariably wears away in horizontal
fissures: so that a pile of solid granite if left to itself seems always
to end by assuming the aspect of a series of blocks lying one upon
another. As it seems moreover almost always to wear the most rapidly in
the lower parts, the case of a larger block resting upon a smaller is
decidedly more common than the reverse case. The Cheesewring is but a
series of such blocks diminishing downwards. This property of granite
gives a very singular effect to granite cliffs: they often bear a
striking similarity to piles of ancient masonry: odd resemblances to
towers, and antique castles, are perpetually occurring: near Lemorna
Cove there is one enormous upright block of granite, with ivy growing
out of the clefts, which it is hardly possible not to mistake for part
of the wall of some gigantic ruin. Now, these horizontal fissures once
formed, have a tendency always to increase: most of the blocks of
granite are greatly undermined and some of them already rest on a basis
not much greater than the Logan Rock, the superincumbent mass being
separated all round from the living granite below, save at a spot in the
middle, comparatively little more than a point.

Edition: current; Page: [627]
We left the Logan Rock, returned to the road, did not trouble ourselves
to deviate from it in order to go down to another point of considerable
though inferior interest, called the Old Land’s End, because it was once
supposed to be the most westerly point: its local name is
Tol-pedn-Penwith. The principal peculiarity of the spot is I believe a
funnel-shaped hole in the rock. We proceeded straight to Sennan, from
whence we ran down that same night to the Land’s End, about three
quarters of a mile distant. But I reserve the description for the next
day’s journal.

We passed the night in a little inn at the village of Sennan called the
First and Last Inn in England. The sign-board bears on the side next the
Land’s End, the words “The First Inn in England”; on the opposite side
“The Last Inn in England.” This sounds romantic, but unfortunately it is
not now true, whatever it may have been formerly; for there is another
inn next door, on the Land’s End side, which belies the sign-board to
its face; so that it should resign its sign-board to the other, or alter
it to “The Second Inn in England” and “The last but one.” It might also
inscribe itself “the best but one”, or the “second best inn in Sennan”,
for the other, though more humble in appearance, is cleaner and better
kept. It seems that there are almost always persons staying in both
these inns, and often more candidates than can easily be accommodated;
either for pleasure or health. There is one very neat well-built private
house at Sennan; but the village (a church-town as they call the chef
lieu of a parish in the west of Cornwall) as well as another village
near the Logan Rock which is not a church-town, have by no means the
neatness generally found in a Cornish village, but (except in the better
construction of the houses and the well-glazed windows) do not differ
much from one’s ideal of an Irish village. I notice this not as the rule
but as the exception.

5th

This day though not so fine as the preceding, but on the contrary, a
rainy day on the whole was yet favorable, as it held up whenever we
wanted it, and even afforded gleams of sunshine in almost every spot
where there was anything remarkable for them to illuminate.

The Land’s End is as I have already mentioned, a rocky peninsula; to
which you descend from a flat heath which until you come to its very
edge, appears to overhang the sea. When you think you have reached the
sea, you have in reality reached the beginning of a narrow grassy
isthmus, to which you descend abruptly and which conducts you to the
quaint and at the same time magnificent group of upright granite rocks.
The isthmus is bounded on both sides by precipices: it is however broad
enough to pass over without an atom of danger, except perhaps in case of
a tempest setting exactly across it. But the common wind, the south
west, sets not across but along it. Once however a certain General
Arbuthnot25 undertook for a wager to ride his hunter along the isthmus
into the rocky peninsula and did so, but in returning his horse being
frightened or accidentally disturbed, Edition: current; Page: [628]
reared on the very edge of the precipice and fell over among the rocks
in the sea. The rider was saved by catching hold of a point of rock as
he fell. The last prints which the horse’s four feet made on the turf
are kept open and the place always shewn by the pilots who volunteer
themselves as guides. All this sounds romantically dangerous, but when
you see the place, the only thing that surprises you is the accident;
the danger nothing at all.

But the peninsula itself when you are on it is so unlike all ordinary
scenery, that it is scarcely possible to convey anything like an idea of
what it is, except to those who have already seen something (if anything
there be) of the same character. Many have seen cliffs; some have seen
rocky cliffs; but that is quite a different thing from having seen
granite cliffs: a wall of granite worn, (spite of its extraordinary
hardness) quite flat by the beating of the sea and of the tempest; and
few there are who know the fantastic piles into which granite rocks form
themselves, broken into block upon block, big upon little, mass across
mass; covered moreover and even abundantly though thinly coated with a
long grey lichen, called I believe old man’s beard (at least I will call
it so) and in some parts carpeted with another, a closer lichen of the
most brilliant yellow-red colour; mixing with huge crystals of felspar
projecting out of the granite rock. Then there are many who have seen
the sea, but how many have seen such a sea? The whole Atlantic driven
onward by the wind meeting and breaking upon one single point; a great
projecting angle of the hardest of rocks, surrounded every where by
gigantic fragments of the same rock quite out at sea; on every fragment
a great wave breaking every moment, diffusing itself through the air and
descending again in dazzling clouds of white spray; which in the more
confined corners the water getting entangled among the rocks, is
actually churned till the surface is either covered with foam of the
exact colour of the froth of new milk, or is positively yeasted, and
lies in thick glutinous yellow froth, which cannot for some time yet
dissolve again into the common water of the sea. Now stand on the
extreme verge of one of the rocks, and look down, you will see the
mouths of more than one rocky cavern, entirely perforating and
undermining the ground on which you stand: look again seaward, and you
will see the extreme point of the peninsula, but you will see it
different in every different period of the tide; rock descends below
rock in perpetual succession almost like a staircase, how far under low
water mark no spectator can guess. Look to the left, and you will see
within gunshot of the point where you stand, between you and the next
turn of the coast, a long jagged rock pointing seaward and called from
some fancied resemblance the Armed Knight—against which has he taken
arms, the sea or the land? But now look rather to your right, and watch
from far at sea the long lines of rolling water, like moving ridges of
hills, advancing with their slow measured motion and spending their
strength upon the beach of the little cove between you and the shore;
which yet moves not, stirs not, though you would deem it must be swept
away, and the majestic motion dies like the majestic sound, the most
solemn surely in the whole Edition: current; Page: [629] range of
creation, that sound which any objects less than the great
world-elements on their largest scale would attempt in vain to imitate;
a deep hollow bellowing, varied only by occasional thunder-claps when a
wave instead of dying away on the shallowing beach, comes at once and
suddenly with undiminished strength upon a noble rock worthy to be its
antagonist: yet even this gradually expires in a faint murmur, which you
are saved from hearing by the groaning of the succeeding waves long
series of which are already up and following the first. The first! as if
there had been a first! Since there has been a world, these breakers
have succeeded one another uninterruptedly; and while there is a world
they shall never cease.

Beyond the Land’s End, exactly across its direction, far out at sea
though seeming near, is a line of five great rocks at short distances
from one another, the first objects which the ocean meets as it rushes
upon this shore: and the white foam of the breakers may be seen where
you stand: some centuries ago these rocks, we cannot doubt, formed part
of the main land. On one, I believe the central one, of these rocks
shall we say to welcome the boisterous friendship or to defy the raging
enmity of the Atlantic, is placed a lighthouse; the light you may in a
dark night see from the inn-window at Sennan. It is called the Long Ship
light-house, and this range of insular rocks is called the Long Ship.
There is an entire poem or legend lying undiscovered in each of the
picturesque names, which the fancy of seamen or of the neighbouring
peasantry has given to so many of the local objects. One rock is
fancifully termed Dr. Johnson’s Head.26 The Long Ship is decidedly the
most striking feature which individualizes the Land’s End, and
distinguishes it from all the other promontories. Over and beyond these
rocks is to appearance nothing but the wide dark sea: yet reascend the
heathy height, look round and on the very edge of the horizon that
little gleam of brightness but half intercepted by vapours shall enable
you to distinguish from the dark murky lowering clouds which hang over
the horizon, the coast of several of the Scilly Isles. The two largest
seem like long lines, the others like very short ones. There they lie at
the distance of twenty-seven miles in a direct line, just shewing
themselves above the surface of the water, as if like the coral islands
of the Pacific they stood really but three or four feet above it. That
tiny archipelago would be the place for sea-views and solitude! A storm
in such a spot must be worth seeing. From the similitude of the strata
and the exactness with which these islands conform to the direction of
the granite ridge, there can be little doubt that these too originally
formed part of it; but by what world-convulsion, at what wonderfully
remote period, the ocean broke in and carried away at least fifty square
miles of the hardest and most solid of rocks, it passes human
imagination even to conceive.

Now look to the northward. Beyond the little cove already mentioned is a
smaller headland, and beyond that a larger and more spacious bay called
Whitsand Edition: current; Page: [630] Bay, of which hereafter. Of the
bay itself little is visible from the Land’s End; but no other place
affords so grand a view of the further boundary of the bay, the
magnificent Cape Cornwall, which has every just right to be the true
Land’s End but that it is neither the extremity of the granite range,
nor lies due south west like the county nor is its extremity the most
westerly point. But it looks grand from a distance, which the Land’s End
does not. It is a promontory, advancing far from the coast, which has
much receded to form Whitsand Bay: it is not, I believe, of granite, but
a far darker rock, it is long, black, and gloomy, terminates abruptly
then rises suddenly into a sharp peninsular rock and drops down as
suddenly again, thus:

[]

This being taken from memory is of course extremely inaccurate in
respect of proportions, but it is quite correct in the general
conception. Thus has this shore two advanced posts, each wearing its
peculiar character. Let Cape Cornwall have its honours, yet the Land’s
End is the Land’s End, and shall be till the waves wash it away or till
its rocks moulder into dust from the quieter attacks of the atmosphere.
On the edge of the heathy height at a short distance from the Land’s
End, is a small house, appurtenant to one of the little inns at Sennan:
from the windows of it you might, being yourself under shelter, enjoy
the spectacle of a storm on the coast. The rocks close to this little
resting-place are also very fine, though inferior to those of the Land’s
End itself. In either place you may vary the sea view as much as you
like by merely changing your position from one side to another of the
same block of granite, and you may cut the ocean or the rocky coves into
as many smaller pictures as you like by looking at them through the rift
or crevice between two masses of rock.

After leaving Sennan, we made a circuit by the north-western part of the
peninsula. On our way we went down to the beach of Whitsand Bay. This,
like all Bays I ever saw, is cheerful and riant, more beautiful than
grand; it needed, therefore, a ray of light to illuminate it, and draw
out the brilliant colour of the “dark-blue sea”27 an expression of which
I never before felt the full force. Accordingly the sun here for a while
burst forth and shewed the Bay in its fullest beauty. As the name
imports this bay has a beach of the purest and whitest sand I ever saw;
sand which however is sharp to the feeling if blown about your face by
the brisk gale, and when you examine it you find it to be pulverized
granite. No shore in Cornwall or perhaps in England is so renowned for
the abundance of elegant shells which may be picked up on it. The coast
here is not precipitous, but a Edition: current; Page: [631] rapid
grassy slope; as one might expect. It is, of course, chiefly at the
projecting points that the attacks of the sea undermine and wash away
the coast, which is the sole cause of all cliffs.

From Whitsand Bay we soon arrived at the “church-town” (it is actually
something more than a village) of St. Just. This is not so cheerful a
place as Sennan; but it is a busy place being the centre of a mining
district, the only one in the peninsula of Penzance, and probably the
oldest in Cornwall. It is supposed that this is the very place from
which the Phenicians obtained their tin in the very earliest recorded
period of the history of our island, and being imagined to be a little
island like the Scilly Isles, shared with them the name of the
Cassiterides or Tin Islands. These mines are now worked both for tin and
copper; but it is only within a century or so that the copper works have
existed, either in this or any other part of Cornwall. The mines of St.
Just are on the decline, being now superseded in some degree by more
fertile mines in other parts of the county: but the neighbourhood is
still very populous. We went down to Botallock Mine, the celebrated one
which is (or was for many years) worked under the sea; in which the
miners could hear over their heads the rolling of the waves and the
dashing of the pebbles at the bottom. We did not go into the mine
itself, but were anxious to see the spot, which is celebrated and which
was described to us by our hostess at Sennan as “clever scenery.” The
situation is a little narrow cove, environed on three sides by a very
steep rocky coast, approaching to cliff. Half way down one side of this
are one or two of the principal shafts of the mine; and the bal-maidens
(bal in Cornish means a mine) that is, the girls who wash and sort the
ore, were at work in a shed immediately over looking the raging sea.
These cliffs are not granite, but a trap rock, equally hard, and of the
blackest hue; the hornblende predominating in its composition: and it
was odd to behold28 the surge lashing over rocks which looked like
over-grown lumps of coal.

Leaving Botallock and St. Just, we returned to Penzance over some of the
highest ground in the peninsula: seeing, at times, the sea on three
sides of us; and seeing it under circumstances eminently favorable to
its effect on the imagination. Sunny seas are fine things, for the ocean
is beautiful as well as sublime: but there is nothing really
awe-striking but a gloomy sea. In a showery and gusty day when clouds
dark as night conceal the greater part of the sea and you do not clearly
distinguish how much is ocean and how much is cloud; when the sea is
covered with dark streaks any one of which seems the horizon—till you
perceive another behind it; then you know the grandeur of the sea. It
then seems to be indeed the boundary of the earth, boundless itself; for
you do not as in a clear day see the apparent verge of it, but look
forth into the darkness till you can see no further, and know not what
frightful or what perilous thing that darkness may conceal from Edition:
current; Page: [632] you. Vagueness is of the essence of the sublime: it
is therefore that darkness is sublime, light only beautiful: and hence
among other reasons it is that painting so rarely attains the sublime,
since it can only act in light, and through light.

A view of a very different description presented itself when, in
descending from the high ground, we again came in sight of Mount’s Bay
and the Lizard. The evening had now cleared, and this enchanting scene
was in its highest beauty. The long line of the Lizard was so clearly
defined that we could see even the forms of its cliffs; and the Lizard
itself was visible; for what is seen from the Bay is not the real
Lizard, which is a short promontory forming the extremity of the long
one, and generally hidden by it; being considerably to the east of what
seems the termination of the long straight line. We were agreeably
surprised at entering Penzance by a valley filled with trees.

6th

We passed the whole of this day in the neighbourhood of Penzance, and a
greater part of it in seeing St. Michael’s Mount, to which we went with
Mr. Carne, the geologist of Penzance, and his daughter; both of them
remarkable people, and the latter in particular such a person as it is
highly pleasing, and a little surprising, to find in this remote
district.29 Of the Mount itself I have already given a general idea: and
from the description I have attempted to give of the Bay, it may be
conjectured what a splendid sight it is when seen from the Mount. We had
the advantage of a bright sunny day, and the clearest of horizons. From
this elevation we could see quite across the isthmus of Marazion to the
bay or inlet of St. Ives and Hayle: at least if we could not, I am
confounding this with some other view in the neighbourhood. The little
fishing vessels lying in great numbers off Newlyn, reminded us of
Agamemnon’s fleet.30

Marazion is but a poor place, but like almost all towns, looks well when
seen from the sea. Most plausible etymological theories have been framed
to explain its two names, Marazion and Marketjew. The Jews, it is said,
were at an early period the principal speculators in tin, as they were
the principal traders in all other exportable commodities. There is
evidence that this was the principal port for the exportation of tin,
and that the foreigners who traded here had a mart at this place for
their meeting with those who brought down the tin from the interior. The
place therefore was called Marketjew; and “Marazion” had also, through
the medium of “Zion”, something to do with Jerusalem and Jews. Very
good: but it unluckily happens that in an old charter, the town is
spoken of by a Cornish word, which I at Edition: current; Page: [633]
present forget, but which signifies neither more nor less than
“Thursday-market” and which, according as the accent is laid on one
syllable or another admits of an easy corruption into either of the
names by which the place is now known.

This is the place at which the granite and the slate join: and the
mountain-rock forming St. Michael’s Mount is composed of both. Mr. Carne
pointed out to me the granite veins piercing the solid slate, and
sometimes seeming to alternate with it, being themselves joined at their
commencement to the main body of the granite. This is one of the facts
on which the now prevailing school of geologists have founded their
strongest arguments to shew that the granite was protruded in a fluid
condition through the slate, making in consequence breaks in it, into
which breaks the liquid granite flowed, and there solidified. The
opposite school have endeavoured, but I think rather lamely, to account
for the same fact on Neptunian principles.

I have formerly mentioned that the entire summit of the Mount is now
occupied by a modern house belonging to Sir John St. Aubyn and erected
on the site of the ancient convent. But the most recent part of the
erection is, externally at least, in the gewgaw stile of the modern
Gothic, and neither harmonizes with the historic associations connected
with the place, nor with the feelings naturally suggested by such a
scene. The architect however has done one excellent thing, he has made a
glorious terrace from which to look down upon the sea and round upon the
coast would be a delightful employment of an autumn day. It depended
upon something like the cast of a die that I had not the option of such
employment for a whole fortnight together, for Sir John St. Aubyn (who
having quarrelled with his Cornish neighbours because some of them will
not countenance the lady who was his mistress and is his wife,31 prefers
living in the flats of Cambridgeshire or Essex, I forget which, to
enjoying this noble prospect and delightful climate) never lives in this
house himself, but lends it to his friends; many of whom occasionally
stay there for whole weeks; and the Bullers of Polvellen had almost made
up their minds to do so this autumn, in which case I should certainly
have been there with them. However, it is as well or better as it is.

There is a very old tower, a part which still remains of the ancient
building; it stands much higher than the rest and you ascend to it from
the chapel by a long narrow winding staircase which you cannot ascend or
descend but by twisting your body into a spiral like the staircase
itself. When you have thus made a corkscrew of yourself quite as long as
is agreeable, you with some difficulty emerge upon the summit, a little
square area of leads with a sort of ditch round it, and battlements
surrounding all. From this as being the highest point you can take in
the whole view at once, there being nothing to intercept any part of it.
At one of the corners there is what was once probably a little turret or
pinnacle, intended as some say to contain a lamp: but the exterior bars
(if that name can be given to stone) have long Edition: current; Page:
[634] disappeared, and it is now a trial of courage to sit in it with
your feet hanging down externally, where if you slip you are thrown from
the top of the tower to the bottom of the precipice. This is called
sitting in St. Michael’s Chair. The only difficulty is that you cannot
get into the chair from the inside, and must therefore perform at that
height a complicated process of turning round both in getting in and
out. Whether any legend is connected with this I do not know, but the
singular saying is that whoever sits in the chair ensures the
prerogative of rule during the married state. I know not whether this be
an ancient superstition, or a joke founded on the very probable
supposition that a woman who has boldness enough to brave so much
apparent danger (it is chiefly apparent) will by the exercise of the
same boldness obtain (as it is ten chances to one she will deserve) the
government of her husband. At the hazard of passing for cowards, and at
the sacrifice of our prospects of conjugal preeminence, we unanimously
forbore to fill St. Michael’s Chair. We saw no particular use in doing
gratis what any one of us would readily have done for the purpose of
picking up half-a-crown if we had dropped it.

The new part of the building notwithstanding its meretricious taste, is
beautiful when you see it close, for nothing can destroy the beauty of
walls of the purest and finest-grained granite, sparkling in the sun as
if spangled with diamonds.

The interior is very tastefully laid out with oak floors and furniture
in the old English stile, and some very old carvings. We were enabled to
compare the Mount with some drawings of the Mont St. Michel in Normandy.
In the latter the rock itself seems to be much lower, but the building
much grander, being two hundred feet high, while this, rock and all, is
only two hundred and fifty. The Mont St. Michel it seems is still kept
up as a strong fortress, and is used as a state prison.

Our own Mount has stood a siege as it well might. A crevice in the rock
was shewn us, through which the garrison were accustomed to draw up
provisions and water during the siege. When the floor of the Chapel was
taken up in order to restore it (which has been done with considerable
taste) there was found under it a dungeon, in which was discovered a
skeleton, with a pitcher beside it.

They have planted various parts of the Mount with Tamarisks, the
beautiful shrub which is indigenous on the promontory of the Lizard.

There is some little mining hereabouts: Mr. Carne says that the veins
are generally richest near the junction of the granite with some other
rock: but this spot hardly seems to be a case in point. A shaft has been
sunk considerably below high-water mark, so that when the tide is up it
is surrounded by the sea, which is kept out by a coffer-dam. We were
told however that this speculation had not prospered.

We were more and more pleased with the busy, but perfectly rural and
cheerful look of Penzance, and the verdant and exhilarating aspect of
some of the neighbouring slopes and dells, which being seen immediately
after the base moors of the Land’s End, doubtless appeared richer than
they would to a person fresh from the meadows and woods of the inland
country. Yet wherever there is shelter Edition: current; Page: [635]
there are trees, and though bare in the general and distant views, the
country is by no means equally so when you examine the details. In the
immediate neighbourhood of Penzance there are a considerable number of
villas with inclosed and ornamented grounds, some of them as well
planted and wooded as you would desire. The climate must for some
constitutions be invaluable. Snow scarcely ever lies at Penzance at all,
and even on the heights above the Land’s End rarely for more than three
or four hours.

In the evening we walked to drink tea with Mr. Carne at his
country-house (for he has a house in Penzance besides) at the
“church-town” of Madron on the heights above Penzance and about two
miles from it. Mr. Carne is one of the few remaining examples of the old
English commercial men, who never dreamed of assuming aristocratic
habits; he is understood to be very wealthy, yet lives in the simplest
and most unostentatious stile. I walked out with him to the finest point
of view in the whole neighbourhood, at least in what I have seen of it:
a carn, or tor, or little rocky eminence surpassing the rest of the high
ground; it is beautiful in itself from the furze which grows about it,
and the fir plantations of Sir Rose Price32 which border on it: even fir
plantations are an ornament to a country which would otherwise be bare.
But the real beauty of this spot is its view of the Bay, the Mount and
the promontory of the Lizard. The view on the landside is not without
beauty, the forms of the eminence being here bolder than common: if that
can be called the land-side which lies towards the other sea, for the
Hayle coast is almost as near to this spot as the Bay is.

7th

We had intended to complete our examination of the West of Cornwall by
going this day to the Lizard, where there are several remarkable things
to be seen. The long tongue of flat table land which composes the
promontory is indeed in itself, according to all descriptions, somewhat
tame: but the further part of it is remarkable, being composed of the
curious and rare rock called serpentine, and being covered with the
beautiful Erica vagans or Cornish heath which grows on no spot in
England except this serpentine formation. Tamarisks, and other curious
and beautiful plants, are also found here. But the great object of
interest near the Lizard, is Kynance Cove, with its serpentine rocks.
This has been described to us by several persons as the most striking
thing in Cornwall. The serpentine instead of cleaving like the granite,
stands upright, it seems, in solid pillars, variegated of red and green.
But petty obstacles of various kinds connected with time, space, and
conveyance, rendered this journey impracticable. We therefore passed the
forenoon at Penzance, revisited the Carn of yesterday evening, and
returned to Falmouth in the afternoon by the mail as we had come.

Edition: current; Page: [636]
8th

We started this morning by a day coach from Falmouth to Exeter, which
leaves Falmouth very early in the morning and arrives at Exeter about
half past nine in the evening. The road between Falmouth and Truro has
been already described. Beyond Truro it continues pretty as far as the
fork where the Bodmin road separates from that to St. Austel. From this
place to Bodmin it is extremely ugly. It gradually mounts higher and
higher nearly to the top of the granite ridge; the country it passes
over is wet dreary sloppy moor, of the tamest character, having nothing
of the singularity and interesting wildness of the moors about the
Cheesewring. The wind blows so hard on these bare shelterless wastes,
that if the climate were not so mild no one could possibly inhabit them.
This character holds good as far as Bodmin; itself also a poor,
uninteresting town, neither curious nor neat and cheerful. But on
leaving Bodmin the country becomes interesting. Mere bleakness and
dreariness give way to picturesque wildness; we are in the midst of high
Tors like those of Dartmoor; each of these Tors with its masses of
granite projecting from its sides looks like a mountain in miniature;
and when you look back upon the moorland hills from the low country near
Launceston the summits have a sharp abrupt outline like a range of
mountains. Launceston, though a place of some size, has nothing striking
about it except the one view which Turner has very successfully
seized:33 this is the view up to it from the valley of the Tamar, whence
it is seen on the very edge of a table land, overlooking a hollow, with
the extensive ruins of the ancient castle brought into very prominent
relief. From Launceston to Okehampton the country is strikingly
beautiful. We first crossed the Tamar, which is here but a small river,
though a large mountain stream; and whose valley, by which alone the
granite hills of Cornwall are separated from those of Dartmoor, already
begins to exhibit that mingled wildness and richness which characterizes
it in its whole course. After ascending the opposite hill, the road for
the next twenty miles lay wholly along the side of a côteau, overlooking
to the right a rich valley, and beyond it, first the green, but steep
and lofty hills which follow the base of the granite moors, and finally
the high and noble range of Dartmoor itself. From this side, Dartmoor
presents a rapid succession of Tors, bold in their outline, rising at
once and abruptly from the low country, though descending beyond only to
a table land. It is really a mountain range; for there may be mountains
of a thousand feet high, as there may be hills of three thousand. But
this country deserves, and shall one day have, a more particular
examination and description. It would be unjust to attempt to
characterize it from a passing view.

Okehampton is not unworthy of Turner’s fine view.34 The old ivy-covered
Edition: current; Page: [637] castle-ruin, on a knoll standing upright
in the midst of a deep and narrow dell, is unlike anything I ever saw.
Here however it grew dark, and between this place and Exeter I could see
little, except that there was much to see had there been light. The road
actually touches a corner of Dartmoor, and turns round it, but does not
ascend any part of the height.

9th

This day I returned from Exeter to London by the day-coach; and from the
comparative bareness of the country through which I had recently passed,
thought the rich green hills of Somersetshire, and the forests of
hedgerow elms, much more beautiful than I ever thought them before. So I
remember being in extacy at the beauty of the Southampton road
immediately after landing from Normandy.

Edition: current; Page: [638] Edition: current; Page: [639]


DIARY
 1854

Edition: current; Page: [640] Edition: current; Page: [641]


34.: Diary
 8 JANUARY-15 APRIL, 1854

Appendix A in The Letters of John Stuart Mill, ed. Hugh S.R. Elliot, 2
vols. (London: Longmans, Green, 1910), Vol. II, pp. 357-86.

January 8

This little book is an experiment. Whatever else it may do, it will
exemplify, at least in the case of the writer, what effect is produced
on the mind by the obligation of having at least one thought per day
which is worth writing down. And for this purpose no mere speciality,
either of science or practice, can count as a thought. It must either
relate to life, to feeling, or to high metaphysical speculation. The
first thing which I am likely to discover in the attempt is that,
instead of one per day, I have not one such thought in a month; but only
repetitions of thoughts, to us so familiar that writing them here would
only expose the poverty of the land.

January 9

What a sense of protection is given by the consciousness of being loved,
and what an additional sense, over and above this, by being near the one
by whom one is and wishes to be loved the best. I have experience at
present of both these things; for I feel as if no really dangerous
illness could actually happen to me while I have her to care for me; and
yet I feel as if by coming away from her I had parted with a kind of
talisman, and was more open to the attacks of the enemy than while I was
with her.1

January 10

The English, looked at in one point of view, are certainly a remarkably
stupid people. Looked at in another point of view they are continually
striking one as a people among whom talent, of a certain sort, abounds.
This strikes me often, for example, in reading Indian official
documents, or in going through a number of a review or a magazine. The
fact seems to be that there is a great amount of ability shown in the
application of doctrines, while mere stolidity presides over the choice
of the doctrines themselves. An Englishman’s premises, the principles
which he reasons from, or the rules of action which he is to apply, are
all chosen for him. Somebody is supposed to have settled them long ago.
The Englishman’s ability Edition: current; Page: [642] consists in
determining what ought to be done supposing that all these things have
been settled rightly. But even when they have been settled rightly, he
seldom knows or could prove it; he only firmly believes it. The maxims
do not, in his mind, rest on evidence; their evidence, to him, is that
they have, in a manner, grown into the mind itself.

January 11

Those who think themselves called upon, in the name of truth, to make
war against illusions, do not perceive the distinction between an
illusion and a delusion. A delusion is an erroneous opinion—it is
believing a thing which is not. An illusion, on the contrary, is an
affair solely of feeling, and may exist completely severed from
delusion. It consists in extracting from a conception known not to be
true, but which is better than the truth, the same benefit to the
feelings which would be derived from it if it were a reality.

January 12

There is hardly a more striking example of the worthlessness of
posthumous reputation than the oblivion into which my father has fallen
among the world at large. Who was ever better entitled to take his place
among the great names of England? He worked all his life long with
complete disinterestedness for the public good; he had no little
influence on opinion while he lived, most of the reforms which are so
much boasted of may be traced mainly to him, and in vigour of intellect
and character he stood quite alone among the men of his generation. Yet
hardly one person who has grown to years of maturity since he quitted
the scene seventeen years ago knows anything about him, even by name. It
must be allowed, in part explanation, that the system of opinion with
which he was identified has fallen much into the background of late
years. The public has left behind both the good and the bad parts of
it—if they can be called bad which are only omissions.

January 13

The inferiority of the present age is perhaps the consequence of its
superiority. Scarcely any one, in the more educated classes, seems to
have any opinions, or to place any real faith in those which he
professes to have. At the same time, if we compare the writings of any
former period with those of the present, the superiority of these is
unspeakable. We are astonished at the superficiality of the older
writers; the little depths to which they sounded any question; the small
portions of the considerations requiring to be looked at, which those
writers appear to have seen. It requires in these times much more
intellect to marshal so much greater a stock of ideas and observations.
This has not yet been done, or has been done only by very few: and hence
the multitude of thought only breeds increase of uncertainty. Those who
should be the guides of the rest, see too many sides to every question.
They Edition: current; Page: [643] hear so much said, or find that so
much can be said, about everything, that they feel no assurance of the
truth of anything. But where there are no strong opinions there are
(unless, perhaps, in private matters) no strong feelings, nor strong
characters.

January 14

I sometimes think that those who, like us, keep up with the European
movement, are by that very circumstance thrown out of the stream of
English opinion and have some chance of mistaking and misjudging it.
What is it that occupies the minds of three-fourths of those in England
who care about any public interest or any controverted question? The
quarrel between Protestant and Catholic; or that between Puseyite and
Evangelical.2

January 15

It seems to me that there is no progress, and no reason to expect
progress, in talents or strength of mind; of which there is as much,
often more, in an ignorant than in a cultivated age. But there is great
progress, and great reason to expect progress, in feelings and opinions.
If it is asked whether there is progress in intellect, the answer will
be found in the two preceding statements taken together.

January 16

It is an immense defect in a character to be without lightness. A
character which is all lightness can excite neither respect nor
sympathy. Seriousness must be the fond of all characters worth thinking
about. But a certain infusion of the laughing philosopher, even in his
least popular form—an openness to that view of things which, showing
them on the undignified side, makes any exaggerated care about them seem
childish and ridiculous—is a prodigious help towards bearing the evils
of life, and I should think has saved many a person from going mad. It
is also necessary to the completeness even of the intellect itself. The
contemptible side of things is part, though but a part, of the truth of
them, and to be incapable of seeing and feeling that part with as much
force and clearness as any other—to be blind to that aspect of things
which was the only one the Cynics chose to look at3—is to be able to see
things only by halves. There always seems something stunted about the
intellect of those who have no humour, however earnest and enthusiastic,
and however highly cultivated, they often are.

Edition: current; Page: [644]
January 17

It is remarkable how invariably the instinct of the English people is on
the side of the status quo. In all foreign wars, revolutions, etc.,
English opinion is sure to be against the side, be it king or people,
that seems to be attempting to alter an existing order of things. All
other nations admit that great political changes may be made, and even
governments forcibly subverted, in order to improve as well as in order
to preserve. The English allow this in theory, but their feelings never
go along with it in any particular case.

January 18

In the last age the writers of reputation and influence were those who
took a side, in a very decided manner, on the great questions,
religious, moral, metaphysical, and political; who were downright
infidels or downright Christians, thorough Tories or thorough democrats,
and in that were considered, and were, extreme in their opinions. In the
present age the writers of reputation and influence are those who take
something from both sides of the great controversies, and make out that
neither extreme is right, nor wholly wrong. By some persons, and on some
questions, this is done in the way of mere compromise; in some cases,
again, by a deeper doctrine underlying both the contrary opinions; but
done it is, in one or the other way, by all who gain access to the mind
of the present age: and none but those who do it, or seem to do it, are
now listened to.

This change is explained, and partly justified, by the superficiality,
and real onesidedness, of the bolder thinkers who preceded. But if I
mistake not, the time is now come, or coming, for a change the reverse
way.

January 19

I feel bitterly how I have procrastinated in the sacred duty of fixing
in writing, so that it may not die with me, everything that I have in my
mind which is capable of assisting the destruction of error and
prejudice and the growth of just feelings and true opinions. Still more
bitterly do I feel how little I have yet done as the interpreter of the
wisdom of one whose intellect is as much profounder than mine as her
heart is nobler. If I ever recover my health, this shall be amended; and
even if I do not, something may, I hope, be done towards it, provided a
sufficient respite is allowed me.

January 20

Is it true, as Carlyle says, that nobody ever did a good thing by reason
of his bad qualities, but always and necessarily in spite of them?4
Surely this can only be Edition: current; Page: [645] made true by an
arbitrary limitation of the term “good” to morally good, which reduces
the brilliantly sounding assertion to a mere identical proposition.
Useful and even permanently valuable things are continually done from
vanity, or a selfish desire of riches or power; sometimes even from envy
or jealousy, and the desire to lower others. What is true is, that such
good things would almost always have been better done, and would have
produced greatly more good, if they had been done from a more virtuous
motive.

January 21

It is long since there has been an age of which it could be said, as
truly as of this, that nearly all the writers, even the good ones, were
but commentators: expanders and appliers of ideas borrowed from others.
Among those of the present time I can think only of two (now that
Carlyle has written himself out, and become a mere commentator on
himself) who seem to draw what they say from a source within themselves:
and to the practical doctrines and tendencies of both these, there are
the gravest objections. Comte, on the Continent; in England (ourselves
excepted) I can think only of Ruskin.5

January 22

In this age a far better ideal of human society can be formed, and by
some persons both here and in France has been formed, than at any former
time. But to discern the road to it—the series of transitions by which
it must be reached, and what can be done, either under existing
institutions or by a wise modification of them, to bring it nearer—is a
problem no nearer being resolved than formerly. The only means of which
the efficacy and the necessity are evident, is universal Education: and
who will educate the educators?

January 23

There is no doctrine really worth labouring at, either to construct or
to inculcate, except the Philosophy of Life. A Philosophy of Life, in
harmony with the noblest feelings and cleared of superstition, is the
great want of these times. There has always been talent enough in the
world when there was earnestness enough, and always earnestness enough
when there were strong convictions. There seems to be so little talent
now, only because there is universal uncertainty about the great
questions, and the field for talent is narrowed to things of subaltern
interest. Ages of belief, as Goethe says, have been the only ages in
which great things have been Edition: current; Page: [646] done.6 Ages
of belief have hitherto always been religious ages: but Goethe did not
mean, that they must necessarily be so in future. Religion, of one sort
or another, has been at once the spring and the regulator of energetic
action, chiefly because religion has hitherto supplied the only
Philosophy of Life, or the only one which differed from a mere theory of
self-indulgence. Let it be generally known what life is and might be,
and how to make it what it might be, and there will be as much
enthusiasm and as much energy as there has ever been.

January 24

The best, indeed the only good thing (details excepted) in Comte’s
second treatise,7 is the thoroughness with which he has enforced and
illustrated the possibility of making le culte de l’humanité perform the
functions and supply the place of a religion. If we suppose cultivated
to the highest point the sentiments of fraternity with all our fellow
beings, past, present, and to come, of veneration for those past and
present who have deserved it, and devotion to the good of those to come;
universal moral education making the happiness and dignity of this
collective body the central point to which all things are to trend and
by which all are to be estimated, instead of the pleasure of an unseen
and merely imaginary Power; the imagination at the same time being fed
from youth with representations of all noble things felt and acted
heretofore, and with ideal conceptions of still greater to come: there
is no worthy office of a religion which this system of cultivation does
not seem adequate to fulfil. It would suffice both to alleviate and to
guide human life. Now this is merely supposing that the religion of
humanity obtained as firm a hold on mankind, and as great a power of
shaping their usages, their institutions, and their education, as other
religions have in many cases possessed.

January 25

Vanity, in some persons, seems to be an intellectual defect; incapacity
to appreciate qualities different from those they themselves possess;
incapacity to feel the smallness of human affairs and capacities
altogether; ignorance of the multitude of persons who have been or are
superior to them, and the multitude of achievements superior to their
little bit of attainment, etc. Accordingly this kind of vain persons
equally exaggerate the merits and talents of their friends, or of any
persons whom they like or admire. In others, again, vanity seems a moral
defect; a form of selfishness; a dwelling on, and caring about, self and
what belongs to it, beyond the just measure; especially what flatters
its self-importance.

Edition: current; Page: [647]
January 26

Perhaps the English are the fittest people to rule over barbarous or
semibarbarous nations like those of the East, precisely because they are
the stiffest, and most wedded to their own customs, of all civilised
people. All former conquerors of the East have been absorbed into it,
and have adopted its ways, instead of communicating to it their own. So
did the Portuguese; so would the French have done. Not so John Bull; if
he has one foot in India he will always have another on the English
shore.

January 27

Is composition in verse, as one is often prompted in these days to
think, a worn-out thing, which has died a natural death, never to be
revived? Only if Art, in every one of its other branches, is also
destined to be extinguished. Verse is Art applied to the language of
words; it is speech made musical; the most flexible and precise
expression of thoughts and feelings, thrown into beautiful poems. Verse,
therefore, I take to be eternal; but it ought, as well as every other
attempt at public Art, to be suspended at the present time. In a
militant age, when those who have thoughts and feelings to impress on
the world have a great deal of hard work to do, and very little time to
do it in, and those who are to be impressed need to be told in the most
direct and plainest way possible what those who address them are driving
at—otherwise they will not listen—it is foppery to waste time in
studying beauty of form in the conveyance of a meaning. The shortest and
straightest way is the best. The regeneration of the world in its
present stage is a matter of business, and it would be as rational to
keep accounts or write invoices in verse as to attempt to do the work of
human improvement in it.

January 28

A very useful periodical might be started, which should employ itself
wholly in criticising the bad or foolish sayings of persons of note.
Whenever a person of celebrity or importance made a speech containing
appeals to bad feelings or encouragement to mischievous errors, it
should show them up in detail; and when any such person wrote a book or
pamphlet it should supply a thorough and minute criticism of it. Such a
periodical would soon wield a great power if conducted ably, on
principle, and without malice. It would inspire great awe in all persons
whose names are before the public, and would make them fear to indulge
in the truckling and feeding of every vulgar prejudice to which they now
are, on the contrary, tempted by the instinct of seeking safety.

January 29

That the mind of this age, in spite of its prosaic tendencies, is quite
capable of and gifted for Art is proved by its achievements in music, in
which it has excelled Edition: current; Page: [648] all previous times.
Why, then, does it fail in all the other so-called fine arts? Because
music, which excites intenser emotions than any other art, does so by
going direct to the fountains of feeling, without passing through
thought. It thus can be carried to any degree of perfection without
intellect, or at least with only as much as is needed for mastering the
technicalities of that as of any other pursuit. This is not true of any
other of the arts; greatness in any of them absolutely requires
intellect, and in this age the people of intellect have other things to
do. In the ages of great architects, painters, or sculptors, these were
among the men of greatest capacity whom the time produced; Leonardo was
a great mathematician and discoverer in the sciences: Rubens was an
ambassador; Michael Angelo was everything—poet, diplomatist, military
engineer, as well as architect, sculptor, and painter; all were from
their lives and circumstances obliged to be men of great practical
address and ability, as may be seen from the life of such a man as
Benvenuto Cellini.8 No such men now undertake the artist career, even in
the countries in which the so-called arts are still honoured.

January 30

When there is not time for real deliberation, it is generally safer to
act on our first thoughts than on our second. For the first thoughts are
likely to turn on the greater probabilities and more important points of
the case; the second on some minor matter which qualifies and limits the
former.

January 31

A good practical idea, when once it has found anybody to stand up for
it, certainly spreads nowadays with wonderful rapidity. When the India
civil appointments were given up to competition,9 any one could see that
the principles would in time be extended farther; but who would have
expected that in the very next session of Parliament the Government
would bring forward a plan for giving all the appointments in its own
offices to the best-qualified candidates? Yet this, it seems, is to be
the Queen’s Speech this evening.10 It is curious to speculate on the
change which a few years will make in English society, and even in
English character, if once preferment is to go by real or even apparent
merit, and no longer by favour.

Edition: current; Page: [649]
February 1

Nothing impresses one with a more vivid feeling of the shortness of life
than reading history. The same man whom in one chapter we found entering
on his career as a warrior or statesman, a few chapters farther on, when
we are hardly aware of any lapse of time, we find old and dying. Like
the tinge of melancholy in all biographies; the more we are interested
in the hero, the sadder is our foreknowledge of the inevitable fifth
act. One good effect follows from the dioramic passing before us of the
long succession of historical characters who have “strutted and fretted
their hour upon the stage”11—an unbounded contempt for all those lives
which make a great noise in their day, and leave the state of mankind in
no respect better than they found it.

February 2

It almost seems as if no strength of argument on subjects so abstract as
the generalities of philosophy had the power of altering an opinion
already formed. The partisan of the confuted doctrine not only is not
convinced, but always finds some way of slipping his head out of the
noose. But when we come to look into the matter, we find that this
apparently unlimited possibility of raising counter-arguments against
any argument, however conclusive, of which the subject is something at
once highly abstract and extremely familiar, always depends on the great
original error of thinking that an opinion deeply seated in the human
mind proves itself. Until people can be untaught this cardinal error,
they will never have any difficulty in persuading themselves of the
truth of any doctrines which have long been part of the furniture of
their mind. Phrases will never be wanting by which appeal can be made in
some new form to the mind; habits of thought, in justification of any
one of its thoughts: driven from one form of words, they will always
find another in which to reproduce the same invariable inference that so
the thing must be because it is the nature (i.e. the habit) of the mind
so to conceive it. Yet, except in the logic,12 I know not where any real
battle is kept up against this fons errorum. Every fresh edition is a
renewal of the controversy.

February 3

How many are there of the ways of the world, which, far from having been
exaggerated by satirists,13 no satirist has dared to colour as highly as
every-day fact would warrant. How far, for example, the stretch of
invention in the way of malicious gossip transcends anything which we
ever should or even could dream Edition: current; Page: [650] of the
possibility of, until taught by experience. In youth the idea of
liability to misrepresentation floats before the mind as a bare
possibility, unlikely to be ever realised, and if realised, easily set
to rights. As we grow older we learn that the most insignificant
particulars in one’s daily life, unnecessarily revealed, are very likely
to be made the groundwork of a pile of médisance as mountain-like, and
the top of it as distant from the foundation, as the Tower of Babel
itself.14

February 4

The difficulty which writers have found in understanding the morality of
Macchiavelli shows either great obtuseness, or extreme unacquaintance
with the history of the period. It is scarcely credible that any one
should ever have imagined the Principe to be a satire. It bears every
mark of the most straightforward sincerity, as much so as the Florentine
history, and the Discourses on Livy.15 Modern writers, in their simple,
not to say silly, conscientiousness, could not understand how a man,
evidently of good purpose, could tolerate and even counsel crimes. But
in the most flagitious of all recorded ages, when every one possessed of
power, from the Pope, the King of France, and the Emperor to the
smallest usurper of a petty Italian town or leader of a faction there,
literally stuck at nothing—hesitated at no atrocity, no monstrosity of
cruelty or perfidy, to forward even his smallest purpose—it might well
be that even good men reserved their conscientiousness for the choice of
ends, and thought that to be scrupulous about means was weakmindedness,
and would place them at too great disadvantage in struggling with men
who would reciprocate none of their forbearance, and who, in the
degraded state of public opinion, would not even suffer much in
character by availing themselves of every advantage given them. Some
such arguing with themselves is incident to honest men in all ages—even
in the present. The question what means are or are not immoral, always
depends in part on the practice of the age; on what is done by other
people. The radical and eternal distinction between vice and virtue is
not in the means but in the ends. Macchiavelli was a man of real
patriotism, a lover of liberty, and eager for the good of his country.
But he saw no reason for fighting with foils against those who fight
with poniards. And he had an artist-like admiration of perfection even
in villainy; an intellectual respect for intellect and daring, though
employed for ends which all his writings show that he disapproved.

February 5

It is instructive to observe how exactly the same things admit of being
said in Edition: current; Page: [651] defence of all religions. The
first book of Cicero, De Divinatione16 (which contains the arguments to
be afterwards refuted in the second), is an almost exact parallel to the
writings in support of the Hebrew and Christian miracles. The quantity
and quality of testimony produced in favour of oracles, omens, etc., is
overwhelming: and the arguments for the antecedent probability of such
things, allowing that there are gods, and that those gods concern
themselves about human interests, bear the closest resemblance to the
arguments of Christian writers, and are quite as difficult to answer.

February 6

Almost everything Carlyle says of Goethe appears to me to be mistake and
misapprehension.17 But perhaps the greatest mistake of all is to
imagine, as Carlyle does, that Goethe is the typical modern man; that he
has shown to the modern world what it should be, and furnished the
example by which modern life and the modern mind tend henceforth to
shape themselves.18 To me it seems that nothing can be so alien and (to
coin a word) antipathetic to the modern mind as Goethe’s ideal of life.
He wished life itself, and the nature of every cultivated individual in
it, to be rounded off and made symmetrical like a Greek temple or a
Greek drama. It is only small things, or at least things uncomplex and
composed of few parts, that admit of being brought into that harmonious
proportion. As well might he attempt to cut down Shakespeare or a Gothic
cathedral to the Greek model, as to give a rounded completeness to any
considerable modern life. Not symmetry, but bold, free expansion in all
directions is demanded by the needs of modern life and the instincts of
the modern mind. Great and strong and varied faculties are more wanted
than faculties well proportioned to one another; a Hercules or a
Briareus more than an Apollo. Nay, at bottom are your well-balanced
minds ever much wanted for any purpose but to hold and occasionally turn
the balance between the others? Even the Greeks did and could not make
their practical lives symmetrical as they made their art; and the ideal
of their philosophers, so far from being an ideal of equal and
harmonious development, was generally one of severe compression and
repression of the Edition: current; Page: [652] larger portion of human
nature. In the greater huddle of multifarious elements which compose
modern life, symmetry and mental grace are still less possible, and a
strong hand to draw one thing towards us and push another away from us
is the one thing mainly needful. All this is distinctly or obscurely
felt by all who are entitled to any voice on such questions; and
accordingly Goethe never influenced practical life at all, unless indeed
by making scepticism illustrious; and his influence of any kind even in
Germany seems to be now entirely gone.

February 7

If it were possible to blot entirely out the whole of German
metaphysics, the whole of Christian theology, and the whole of the Roman
and English systems of technical jurisprudence, and to direct all the
minds that expand their faculties in these three pursuits to useful
speculation or practice, there would be talent enough set at liberty to
change the face of the world. All other useless mental pursuits that I
at present recollect give employment to few that are fit for anything
else. But these still employ, and in a measure satisfy, here and there a
man of nearly the first order of talent and a vast number of the second.
The world had need be rich in intellect to be able to spare the immense
amount of it which is now far worse than wasted.

February 8

I would not, for any amount of intellectual eminence, be the only one of
my generation who could see the truths which I thought of most
importance to the improvement of mankind. Nor would I, for anything
which life could give, be without a friend from whom I could learn at
least as much as I could teach. Even the merely intellectual needs of my
nature suffice to make me hope that I may never outlive the companion
who is the profoundest and most far-sighted and clear-sighted thinker I
have ever known, as well as the most consummate in practical wisdom. I
do not wish that I were so much her equal as not to be her pupil, but I
would gladly be more capable than I am of thoroughly appreciating and
worthily reproducing her admirable thoughts.

February 9

There are people who say that if you have but books in abundance you are
independent of living sympathy, because you are in communion with the
wise and good of all ages. Alas for such communion! The wise and good of
all ages but the present—all those, at least, who have either written or
been written about—can only by us of the present day be called wise and
good with allowances. In the best of them we can discern what would now
be great follies or prejudices and great moral faults. And so doubtless
will posterity say, and truly, of those of the present time. If any in
the past were wise and good in the full meaning of the terms, they were
doubtless like the few who are so at present, never heard of, or not
known for what they were, beyond a narrow circle into which they
radiated good influences.

Edition: current; Page: [653]
February 10

The clergy, who in all the countries of modern Europe (except France and
Germany in very recent times) have had education in their hands, and in
England have it still as much as ever, have contrived to make
discreditable all the branches of knowledge which they taught or
pretended to teach. Thanks to them, Greek and Latin are commonly
reckoned useless or worse, because they have taught them minus almost
everything in them which is useful. Cambridge has brought discredit even
upon mathematics, making it appear in practice to be a thing which
narrows the mind, as it does whenever it is not taught with an express
purpose of forming the intellect through it to things beyond it.

February 11

It would certainly be unfair to measure the worth of any age by that of
its popular objects of literary or artistic admiration. Otherwise one
might say the present age will be known and estimated by posterity as
the age which thought Macaulay a great writer.19

February 12

I suppose all things which are fundamentally true must, on the whole,
produce by their promulgation (at least in the end) more good than harm;
otherwise one would be apt to regret greatly the things which have been
written in late times, as by Carlyle, in exaltation of the literary
character, meaning thereby the office or function of literature—that it
is the new priesthood, and so on.20 The consequence of the vulgarisation
of these notions has been to make that very feeble and poor minded set
of people, taken generally, the writers of this country, so conceited of
their function and of themselves, however unworthy of it, and has at the
same time made fine people think so much more of them, and admit them so
much more easily to a distant participation of finery, under a polite
show of equality of which they are invariably the dupes, that it has at
once inflated their vanity and lowered their ambition. They aim at a
sort of under-finery instead of aiming at things above finery. They
would like to be indeed a priesthood, an aristocracy of scribblers,
dividing social importance with the other aristocracies, or rather
receiving it from them and basking in their beams. Why must it continue
to be true of all professions and classes: “Starve them that they may
work. Refuse them honour that they may be honest!”

February 13

Many a man thinks himself, and in a certain sense truly, inaccessible to
flattery, Edition: current; Page: [654] for no better reason than that
his worst flatterer is himself. He holds himself so superior to others
that their apparent estimation of him does not increase his own; or
increases it only because the fact of his being admired affords fresh
pabulum to his feeling of his own importance. This kind of
self-conceited people are the most unamiable of all, for they do not
even like other people for seeming to admire them.

February 14

If human life is governed by superior beings, how greatly must the power
of the evil intelligences surpass that of the good, when a soul and an
intellect like hers, such as the good principle perhaps never succeeded
in creating before—one who seems intended for an inhabitant of some
remote heaven, and who wants nothing but a position of power to make a
heaven even of this stupid and wretched earth—when such a being must
perish like all the rest of us in a few years, and may in a few months
from a mere alteration in the structure of a few fibres or membranes,
the exact parallels of which are found in every quadruped! If, indeed,
it were but a removal, not an annihilation—but where is the proof, and
where the ground of hope, when we can only judge of the probability of
another state of existence, or of the mode in which it is governed if it
exist, by the analogy of the only work of the same powers which we have
any knowledge of, namely, this world of unfinished beginnings,
unrealised promises, and disappointed endeavours—a world the only rule
and object of which seems to be the production of a perpetual succession
of fruits, hardly any of them destined to ripen, and, if they do, only
lasting a day.

February 15

All things, however effete, which have ever supplied, even imperfectly,
any essential want of human nature or society, live on with a sort of
life in death until they are replaced. So the religions of the world
will continue standing, if even as mere shells or husks, until
high-minded devotion to the ideal of humanity shall have acquired the
twofold character of a religion, viz., as the ultimate basis of thought
and the animating and controlling power over action.

February 16

Niebuhr said that he wrote only for Savigny;21 so I write only for her
when I do not write entirely from her. But in my case, as in his, what
is written for only one reader, that one being the most competent
intellect, is likeliest to be of use to the Edition: current; Page:
[655] many, readers or not, whose benefit is the object of the writing,
though not the principal incentive to it.

February 17

Every intellectual, or at all events every scientific, pursuit lies
under the popular stigma of being unfeeling. This is partly the language
of mere vulgar prejudice against the impassiveness essential to strictly
rational enquiry, but it is also in some degree well founded, first,
because persons of much feeling usually choose, by preference, other
than scientific pursuits; and, secondly, because essentially solitary
occupations, as scientific speculation usually is, do tend in some
degree to deaden sympathy. For this, among other reasons, speculation
never ought to be the sole and exclusive occupation of any one.

February 18

Nine-tenths of all the true opinions which are held by mankind are held
for wrong reasons. And this is one cause why the removal, now so
constantly going on, of particular errors and prejudices does not much
improve the general understanding. The newly admitted tenth commonly
rests on as mistaken principles as the old error. What is the remedy?
There can be none short of the reconstruction of the human intellect ab
imo.

February 19

Many books have been severely criticised for no better reason than that
they did not satisfy the idea which the critic had formed from the title
of what the book ought to contain; the critic seldom in these cases
deigns to consider that all he says rather proves the title to be in the
wrong than the book. So if a history or a biography professes, though
but by implication, to tell anything, and then does not do so, but
purposely keeps anything back, the writer may justly be blamed, not
however for what his book is, but for what it professes to be without
being. Goethe avoided this snare by calling his autobiography, which
tells just as much about himself as he liked to be known, “Aus meinem
Leben Dichtung und Wahrheit.”22 The Aus even without the Dichtung saves
his veracity.

February 20

Whenever I look back at any of my own writings of two or three years
previous, they seem to me like the writings of some stranger whom I have
seen and known long ago. I wish that my acquisition of power to do
better had kept pace with the continual elevation of my standing point
and change of my bearings towards all the great subjects of thought. But
the explanation is that I owe the enlargement of my Edition: current;
Page: [656] ideas and feelings to her influence, and that she could not
in the same degree give me powers of execution.

February 21

So far are the contrivances in nature from being superior to those of
art that when a delicate artificial instrument, a watch, for example,
goes unaccountably wrong, it is then that we feel that it almost
resembles a piece of nature’s machinery, a living being.

February 22

Carlyle is abundantly contemptuous of all who make their intellects bow
to their moral timidity by endeavouring to believe Christianity. But his
own creed—that everything is right and good which accords with the laws
of the universe23—is either the same or a worse perversion. If it is not
a resignation of intellect into the hands of fear, it is the subornation
of it by a bribe—the bribe of being on the side of Power—irresistible
and eternal Power.

February 23

Now when the superstition which prevented political changes is so much
weakened, there is no solidity of conviction or force of conscience in
our higher classes to resist the introduction of principles which if
applied to their own case would deprive them of all they most value.
Thus the present Governor-General of India, Lord Dalhousie,24 in his
revenue administration, treats with contempt in theory, and tramples
upon in practice, prescription as a foundation of property in land:
prescription on which alone rests the title of most of the English and
Scotch nobility and older gentry to their estates.

February 24

Three-fourths of all the so-called philosophy, as well as all the
poetry, spoken or written about Man, Nature, and the Universe is merely
the writer’s or speaker’s subjective feelings (and feelings very often
extremely unsuitable and misplaced) thrown into objective language.

February 25

Two of the most notable things in the history of mankind are, first, the
grossly immoral pattern of morality which they have always set up for
themselves in the person of their Gods, whether of revelation or of
nature; and secondly, the pains they have taken, as soon as they began
to improve, in explaining away the Edition: current; Page: [657]
detestable conclusions from their premises, and extracting a more
tolerable morality from this poisonous root. For mankind are always
growing better than their religion, and leave behind one after another
of the more vicious parts of it, dwelling more and more exclusively on
those which are better, or admit at least of a better sense. But this
holding fast in theory to a standard ever more and more left behind in
practice is one great cause why the human intellect has not improved in
anything like the same ratio as the sentiments.

February 26

Carlyle says of the English that they act more rationally than most
other people, but are more stupid than almost any other people in giving
their reasons for it.25 The second of these propositions sets a very
narrow limit to the first. To act well without being able to say why one
so acts is to act well only accidentally, i.e. because the natural or
acquired instincts happen to set in a good direction. If the English in
following unconscious instincts act better than other people, it can
only be in so far as their much longer possession of a Government not
arbitrary has made it an instinct in them to respect the rights of
others, and as their greater political freedom has made them habitually
look for success to “a fair field” rather than favour. And as a matter
of fact, I do not think that the English do act more rationally than
other people in any matters other than those to which the influence of
these two causes extends.

February 27

The doctrines of free will and of necessity rightly understood are both
true. It is necessary, that is, it was inevitable from the beginning of
things, that I should freely will whatever things I do will.

February 28

In the moral and psychological department of thought, there is hardly an
instance of a writer who has left a considerable permanent reputation,
or who has continued to be read by after generations, except those who
have treated or attempted to treat of the whole of some great department
of speculation. Aristotle, Bacon, Hobbes, Locke, Hartley, Hume, Reid,
Stewart, Brown, Descartes, Leibnitz, Spinosa, Kant, Condillac,
Montesquieu, Adam Smith, Ricardo, Bentham, etc., etc.26 The only decided
exceptions which I remember are Berkeley and Rousseau. Plato is an
apparent exception, but really a striking example of the rule. Yet few
of the systems of these systematic writers have any permanent value as
systems; their value is the value of some of their fragments. Edition:
current; Page: [658] But the fragments (the parts which are excellent in
wholes which are inadmissible) if published separate would probably have
attracted little notice. This is a tribute which mankind unconsciously
pay to the value of theory and systematic thought; which they fancy they
dislike, and are indeed never weary of decrying.

March 1

The fanatical part of the English are just now very urgent for a
parliamentary inquiry concerning nunneries, to ascertain whether young
women are not detained in them against their will; and there have been
in two successive Sessions majorities in the House of Commons against
the Ministers for setting on foot this enquiry.27 Every word they say
that has the least semblance of an argument is so literally applicable
to marriage that the entire unconsciousness with which they triumphantly
utter the most damning things is irresistibly ludicrous. One speaker
said in yesterday’s debate that a vow of obedience is contrary to the
English Constitution and a violation of the personal freedom which is
the right of every one.28 Another expatiated on the hardship of allowing
young women under age to bind themselves by an irrevocable engagement
when they cannot know that they are binding themselves to.29 What a sad
absence of habitual reflection on the commonest human affairs is shown
by its never occurring to these people how far more true all this is of
marriage; and the marriage vow too is legally binding, which the other,
in this country, is not.

March 2

It is a common saying that the only true test of a person’s character is
actions. There is much error in this. Actions, even habitual ones, are
as fallacious a test of character as any other. A person’s actions are
often an indication not so much of what the person is as of what he
desires to be thought; or, in the case of a better sort of persons, of
what he desires to think himself. Actions, no doubt, are the fittest
test for the world at large, because all they want to know of a man is
the actions they may expect from him. But to his intimates, who care
about what he is and not merely about what he does, the involuntary
indications of feeling and disposition are a much surer criterion of
them than voluntary acts.

March 3

One of the things which most require to be written about, and to be
written much Edition: current; Page: [659] and well, is the perfect
sufficiency of what is called materialism in theory, to supply the
scientific foundation of idealism in feeling and practice.

March 4

What is called morality in these times is a regulated sensuality; in the
same manner exactly as the love of gain is regulated by the
establishment of a law of property.

March 5

Religion begins by being taken for granted; after a time, it is
elaborately proved; at last comes a time (the present) when the whole
effort is to induce people to let it alone.

March 6

It is sometimes said that religion is the only preservative from
superstition; that unbelievers and unbelieving times are the most
indiscriminately credulous: “a godless Regent trembles at a star:”30 the
popular delusions (Mesmer, Cagliostro, etc.) of the time preceding the
French Revolution: mesmerism, table-turning, etc., at present.31 But the
truth is, credulity and love of wonder are so natural to man that they
always (hitherto) run riot when they have only reason to control them.
Credulity has never yet been held in check but by a regulated
credulity—a faith of some sort which excommunicates all wonders but
those which it can use for its own purposes. Those who throw off this
faith do not thereby become altered in the general texture of their
understandings; they remain as credulous as ever, but being no longer
preoccupied (and the appetite for wonder blunted) by one set of
delusions, they are now open to all others.

March 7

When the advocates of theism urge the universal belief of mankind as an
argument of its own correctness, they should accept the whole of that
belief instead of picking and choosing out of it. The appearances in
nature forcibly suggest the idea of a maker (or makers), and therefore
all mankind have believed in gods. The same appearances not only do not
suggest, but absolutely contradict, the idea of a perfectly good maker;
and accordingly mankind have never made their gods good, though they
have always flattered them by calling them so.

Edition: current; Page: [660]
March 8

People who lead regular lives are often unable to conceive how it is
that men with their eyes open do things which are obviously likely to
bring them to ruin, ignominy, and perhaps suicide or the gallows. They
account for it by supposing delusion, madness, the blinding influence of
passion, etc., etc. They do not consider that the men who do the acts
involving this ultimate extreme of failure in life are mostly men who
are already in some position only one or two removes short of it.

March 9

The characteristic of Germany is knowledge without thought; of France,
thought without knowledge; of England, neither knowledge nor thought.

The Germans, indeed, attempt thought; but their thought is worse than
none. The English, with rare exceptions, never attempt it. The French
are so familiar with it that those who cannot think at all throw the
results of their not-thinking into the forms of thought.

March 10

Those who are in advance of their time need to gain the ear of the
public by productions of inferior merit—works grounded on the premises
commonly received—in order that what they may be able to write of
first-rate value to mankind may have a chance of surviving until there
are people capable of reading it.

March 11

Thought and feeling in their lower degrees antagonise, in their higher
harmonise. Much thought and little feeling make a mental voluptuary who
wastes life in intellectual exercise for its own sake. Much feeling and
little thought are the common material of a bigot and fanatic. Much
feeling and much thought make the hero or heroine.

March 12

As it is the best and not the worst people who suffer most from the
pangs of conscience, so it is in our best moments that we feel the most
bitterly the good that we are not. If I were wholly of a different
nature from what I love and admire, I could with an untroubled mind
enjoy and prize it like any other beautiful or precious thing that I
could by no possibility myself have made. But when I am nearest to
feeling in myself some likeness to the one being who is all the world to
me, or when I make the greatest return of love for her most affecting
love and kindness to me, then I am ready to kill myself for not being
like her and worthy of her.

Edition: current; Page: [661]
March 13

An Englishman’s writings on physical science never read like English
writings, for they do not pare away and qualify. But compromise and
halting half-way are so native to the English mind, that if an English
mathematician had to argue his case in an assembly of his countrymen,
one would expect him to say that in theory the three angles of a
triangle may be equal to two right angles, but that in practice they are
only equal to one.

March 14

The way to be popular is to flatter everybody with being what he most
wishes to be (or to be thought). This very undiscerning people do
involuntarily, for they always take the will for the deed. A dull person
cannot perceive real wit, but the man who is always straining for a joke
passes for a wit in his eyes, because he blows a trumpet before his bad
jokes and calls on everybody to listen to them. The rule holds even with
respect to beauty: the woman who is thought handsome by silly people is
always the one who sets up for being handsome, even if positively plain.

March 15

The progress of opinion is like the advance of a person climbing a hill
by a spiral path which winds round it, and by which he is as often on
the wrong side of the hill as on the right side, but still is always
getting higher up.

March 16

It is part of the irony of life, and a part which never becomes the less
affecting because it is so trite, that the fields, hills, and trees, the
houses, really the very rooms and furniture, will look exactly the same
the day after we or those we most love have died.

March 17

When we see and feel that human beings can take the deepest interest in
what will befal their country or mankind long after they are dead, and
in what they can themselves do while they are alive to influence that
distant prospect which they are never destined to behold, we cannot
doubt that if this and similar feelings were cultivated in the same
manner and degree as religion they would become a religion.

March 18

In government, perfect freedom of discussion in all its modes—speaking,
writing, and printing—in law and in fact is the first requisite of good
because the first condition of popular intelligence and mental progress.
All else is secondary. Edition: current; Page: [662] A form of
government is good chiefly in proportion to the security it affords for
the possession of this. Therefore mixed governments, or those which set
up several concurrent powers in the State, which are occasionally in
conflict and never exactly identical in opinions and interests, and each
of which is interested in protecting the opinions and demonstrations of
opinions which the others dislike, are generally preferable to simple
forms of government, or those which establish one power (though it be
that of the majority) supreme over all the rest, and thence able, and
probably inclined, to put down all the writing and speaking which
thwarts its purposes. It remains to be proved by facts (which in America
are more promising than might have been expected) whether pure democracy
is destined to be an exception to this rule.

March 19

The belief in a life after death, without any probable surmise as to
what it is to be, would be no consolation, but the very king of terrors.
A journey into the entirely unknown—the thought is sufficient to strike
with alarm the firmest heart. It may be otherwise with those who believe
that they will be under the care of an Omnipotent Protector. But seeing
how this world is made, the only one of the works of this supposed power
by which we can know it, such a confidence can only belong to those who
are senseless enough and low-minded enough to think themselves in
particular special favourites of the Supreme Power. It is well,
therefore, that all appearances and probabilities are in favour of the
cessation of our consciousness when our earthly mechanism ceases to
work.

March 20

A democratic revolution is one of the most unlikely of all events in
England, for English working men are never likely to rise until they are
starving, and they are not likely to be starving now for generations to
come. But democratic institutions seem likely enough to be conceded, and
that, too, more rapidly than is desirable, by the almost unasked
liberality of the better part of the aristocracy. The Reform Bill of the
present year32 and the plan of opening the Civil Service of Government
to universal competition,33 are the most wonderful instances of unsought
concession to the democratic principle—the former in its ordinary, the
latter in its best, sense—which a reformer had imagined even in his
dreams.

March 21

Nothing so alleviates the smaller evils of life, and almost converts
them into Edition: current; Page: [663] good, as the sympathy of those
who love us and whom we entirely love. The very contrary is the case
when the evil is great: the bitterest part of it is the suffering it
causes to those whose life and happiness are bound up with our own.

March 22

The upholders of the vulgar doctrine that women are not equal in
intellect to men sometimes declare with an air of triumph that the
writings of women are not original. The same thing is said of the Latin
writers and for the same reason. The Greeks had written first, and the
Romans, having received their whole literary education from them,
remained to a certain extent their pupils. But if Roman civilisation had
lasted a little longer, Roman literature would have outgrown its
leading-strings. In the same manner women’s literature is younger than
men’s. Men having long written, and written well, before women wrote at
all, women naturally fell at first into the old paths which men had
made, adopting men’s opinions and men’s forms of art. But before this is
set down as want of originality, it should be known how many of the most
original thoughts of male writers came to them from the suggestion and
prompting of some woman.

March 23

The only true or definite rule of conduct or standard of morality is the
greatest happiness, but there is needed first a philosophical estimate
of happiness. Quality as well as quantity of happiness is to be
considered; less of a higher kind is preferable to more of a lower. The
test of quality is the preference given by those who are acquainted with
both. Socrates would rather choose to be Socrates dissatisfied than to
be a pig satisfied. The pig probably would not, but then the pig knows
only one side of the question: Socrates knows both.34

March 24

A person longing to be convinced of a future state, if at all particular
about evidence, would turn with bitter disappointment from all the
so-called proof of it. On such evidence no one would believe the most
commonplace matters of fact. The pretended philosophical proofs all rest
on the assumption that the facts of the universe bear some necessary
relation to the fancies of our own minds.

March 25

The only change I find in myself from a near view of probable death is
that it makes me instinctively conservative. It makes me feel, not as I
am accustomed—oh, for something better!—but oh, that we could be going
on as we were before. Edition: current; Page: [664] Oh, that those I
love could be spared the shock of a great change! And this feeling goes
with me into politics and all other human affairs, when my reason does
not studiously contend against and repress it.

March 26

As I probably shall have no opportunity of writing out at length my
ideas on this and other matters, I am anxious to leave on record at
least in this place my deliberate opinion that any great improvement in
human life is not to be looked for so long as the animal instinct of sex
occupies the absurdly disproportionate place it does therein; and that
to correct this evil two things are required, both of them desirable for
other reasons, viz., firstly, that women should cease to be set apart
for this function, and should be admitted to all other duties and
occupations on a par with men; secondly, that what any persons may
freely do with respect to sexual relations should be deemed to be an
unimportant and purely private matter, which concerns no one but
themselves. If children are the result, then indeed commences a set of
important duties towards the children, which society should enforce upon
the parents much more strictly than it now does. But to have held any
human being responsible to other people and to the world for the fact
itself, apart from this consequence, will one day be thought one of the
superstitions and barbarisms of the infancy of the human race.

March 27

Surely one of the most certain of the fruits to be expected hereafter
from the progress of knowledge and good sense will be that nobody,
unless killed by accident, will quit life without having completed the
allotted term of threescore and ten.

March 28

It is a loving wish to die before the one we entirely love, but a
selfish wish to die before the one who entirely loves us. It is one of
the most painful parts of our condition that, if we are fortunate enough
to have a true friend, one or the other of these things must happen,
unless, indeed, by a rare chance (as by shipwreck) both die suddenly,
unexpectedly, and together.

March 29

The passion for equality is an attribute either of the most high-minded
or of those who are merely the most jealous and envious. The last should
rather be called haters of superiority than lovers of equality. It is
only the high-minded to whom equality is really agreeable. A proof is
that they are the only persons who are capable of strong and durable
attachments to their equals; while strong and durable attachments to
superiors or inferiors are far more common and are possible to the
vulgarest natures.

Edition: current; Page: [665]
March 30

When death draws near, how contemptibly little appears the good one has
done! how gigantic that which one had the power and therefore the duty
of doing! I seem to have frittered away the working years of life in
mere preparatory trifles, and now “the night when no one can work”35 has
surprised me with the real duty of my life undone.

March 31

Apart from bodily pain, and from grief for the grief of those who love
us, the most disagreeable thing about dying is the intolerable ennui of
it. There ought to be no slow deaths.

April 1

It is a happy effect of habit that the daily occupations, even when
comparatively unimportant, which interested one during life continue to
interest one, if one remains capable of them, even with the end full in
view. I quite appreciate the wish to “die in harness.”

April 2

An experiment is now making in the altered state of human affairs, viz.,
whether a state of war will now, as formerly, interrupt internal
improvement.36 There are already evident signs of its destroying in the
public all active interest in improvement of institutions. But in this
country ministries are now disposed to go on improving with less
stimulus than heretofore from any opinion but that of the enlightened
few. All that seems certain is that nothing will be done while the war
lasts, which requires a strong popular impulse to carry it through the
two Houses.

April 3

The effect of the bright and sunny aspects of Nature in soothing and
giving cheerfulness is never more remarkable than in declining health. I
look upon it as a piece of excellent good fortune to have the whole
summer before one to die in.

April 4

Perhaps even the happiest of mankind would not, if it were offered,
accept the privilege of being immortal. What he would ask in lieu of it
is not to die until he chose.

Edition: current; Page: [666]
April 5

It is characteristic of the English that they have no trust in the
attainment of any end by directly aiming at it. They think that if ends
are ever attained it is by some indirectness or accident, in some way in
which nobody would have expected it. Thus few of them believe that the
plan for the reform of the Civil Service can answer, because they cannot
persuade themselves of the possibility of discovering who is the ablest
of a dozen men by bringing them all face to face to show what they can
do. But they are perfectly satisfied with these they get now, by leaving
the whole matter to chance.

April 6

It is not surprising that in ages of ignorance the principal instrument
of a magician’s arts was supposed to be his books. Books are a real
magic, or rather necromancy—a person speaking from the dead, and
speaking his most earnest feelings and gravest and most recondite
thoughts.

April 7

Hero worship, as Carlyle calls it, is doubtless a fine thing, but then
it must be the worship not of a hero but of heroes. Whoever gives
himself up to the guidance of one man, because that one is the best and
ablest whom he happens to know, will in nine cases out of ten make
himself the slave of that most misleading thing, a clever man’s twists
and prejudices. How many are there of the most deservedly great names in
history whom their contemporaries would have done well and wisely in
implicitly following? One hero and sage is necessary to correct another.

April 8

Moral regenerators in this age mostly aim at setting up a new form
either of Stoicism or of Puritanism—persuading men to sink altogether
earthly happiness as a pursuit. This might be practicable in the ages in
which myriads fled to the Thebaid to get into any solitude out of such a
world,37 but must be a failure now when an earthly life both pleasant
and innocent can be had by many and might by all. What is now wanted is
the creed of Epicurus38 warmed by the additional element of an
enthusiastic love of the general good.

Edition: current; Page: [667]
April 9

All systems of morals agree in prescribing to do that, and only that,
which accords with self-respect. The difference between one person and
another is mainly in that with which their self-respect is associated.
In some it is with worldly or selfish success. In others, with the
supposed favour of the supernal powers. In others, with the indulgence
of mere self-will. In others, with self-conceit. In the best, with the
sympathy of those they respect and a just regard for the good of all.

April 10

If mankind were capable of deriving the most obvious lessons from the
facts before them, in opposition to their preconceived opinions,
Mormonism would be to them one of the most highly instructive phenomena
of the present age. Here we have a new religion, laying claim to
revelation and miraculous powers, forming within a few years a whole
nation of proselytes, with adherents scattered all over the earth, in an
age of boundless publicity, and in the face of a hostile world. And the
author of all this, in no way imposing or even respectable by his moral
qualities, but, before he became a prophet, a known cheat and liar.39
And with this example before them, people can still think the success of
Christianity in an age of credulity and with neither newspapers nor
public discussion a proof of its divine origin!

April 11

The Germans and Carlyle have perverted both thought and phraseology when
they made Artist the term for expressing the highest order of moral and
intellectual greatness. The older idea is the truer—that Art, in
relation to Truth, is but a language. Philosophy is the proper name for
that exercise of the intellect which enucleates the truth to be
expressed. The Artist is not the Seer; not he who can detect truth, but
he who can clothe a given truth in the most expressive and impressive
symbols.

April 12

In quitting for ever any place where one has dwelt as in a home, all the
incidents and circumstances, even those which were worse than
indifferent to us, appear like old friends that one is reluctant to
lose. So it is in taking leave of life: even the tiresome and vexatious
parts of it look pleasant and friendly, and one feels how agreeable it
would be to remain among them.

Edition: current; Page: [668]
April 13

In how many respects it is a changed world within the last half-dozen
years. Free trade instead of restriction—cheap gold and cheapening,
instead of dear and growing dearer—despotism (in France) instead of
liberty—under-population instead of over-population—war instead of
peace. Still, there is no real change in education, therefore all the
other changes are superficial merely. It is still the same world. A
slight change in education would make the world totally different.

April 14

The misfortune of having been born and being doomed to live in almost
the infancy of human improvement, moral, intellectual, and even
physical, can only be made less by the communion with those who are
already what all well-organised human beings will one day be, and by the
consciousness of oneself doing something, not altogether without value,
towards helping on the slow but quickening progress towards that
ultimate consummation.

April 15

The remedies for all our diseases will be discovered long after we are
dead; and the world will be made a fit place to live in, after the death
of most of those by whose exertions it will have been made so. It is to
be hoped that those who live in those days will look back with sympathy
to their known and unknown benefactors.

Edition: current; Page: [669] Edition: current; Page: [670]


APPENDICES

Edition: current; Page: [671]


Appendix A


The Manuscripts

the physical descriptions given here of the manuscripts may be amplified
by the accounts of their histories and provenance in the Textual
Introduction. Other sources of copy-text (including the typescripts of
debating speeches) are also discussed there.

No. 1. Journal and Notebook. The two manuscripts are distinct.

(a) The Journal, BL Add. MS 31909, is a bound volume of 80 ff. made up
of 12 sections, each of which was originally a large single sheet,
numbered and folded to make, when cut, 16 pages, or 8 ff. (except for
the more densely written final sections, where there are 4 ff.), with
the address to Mill’s father on the final page of each. The sections are
numbered correctly up to the fourth; the fifth is not numbered, though
Mill insists in the text that it is number 6; then numbers 6 and 7 are
incorrectly (but emphatically) numbered 7 and 8; the final five sections
are not numbered. The sections are comprised as follows:

  ----- ------------- ------------------- ---------------------------
        Folios        Dates of sections   Dates of covering letters
  1.    ff. 1r-8v     15 May-1 June       2 June
  2.    ff. 9r-16v    2-16 June           16 June
  3.    ff. 17r-24v   17-24 June          24 June
  4.    ff. 25r-32v   24 June-3 July      4 July
  5.    ff. 33r-40v   4-11 July           [11] July
  6.    ff. 41r-48v   11-19 July          19 July
  7.    ff. 49r-56v   20 July-2 Aug.      2 Aug.
  8.    ff. 57r-64v   26 Aug.-2 Sept.     10 Sept.
  9.    ff. 65r-68v   3-12 Sept.          6 Oct.
  10.   ff. 69r-72v   13-17 Sept.         18 Oct.
  11.   ff. 73r-76v   18-30 Sept.         28 Oct.
  12.   ff. 77r-80v   30 Sept.-13 Oct.    21 Nov.
  ----- ------------- ------------------- ---------------------------

There is a gap from 3 to 25 August, and the last entry is for 13
October, after which the account is continued in the Notebook.

(b) The Notebook, St. Andrews University Library, MS 37865, is for the
most Edition: current; Page: [672] part an earlier draft, often much
corrected and revised, of corresponding parts of the Journal. Its
contents are: (1) a foolscap quarto exercise book, in its original paper
covers, of 35 ff. (Probably originally it had 36; as f. 27 is detached,
probably one was torn out between ff. 8 and 9, though there is no
discontinuity in the account.) It is made up of:

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  f. 1r, upper half      Entry for 10 Aug., the beginning of the Pyrenees tour, with the heading “festina lentè.”
  lower half             Description of a distillery and journey jottings.
  f. 1v                  List of “lieues de poste” of Mill’s journeys in France.
  f. 2r                  Another, probably revised, version of the entry for 10 Aug.
  ff. 2r-28r             Entries for 10 Aug.-11 Oct.
  f. 28r, lower third,   Conclusion of translation of Cicero’s _Pro Milone._
  f. 28v, upside down    Beginning of translation into French of opening sections of _Pro Milone._
  f. 29                  Cut out, remaining narrow stub covered with doodles.
  f. 30r, upper half     Continuation (from f. 28r) of entry for 11 Oct.
  lower half             Jottings for journey, interspersed at foot (upside down) with last three lines of account corresponding to the end of the 1st section of the Journal.
  ff. 30v-35v            The 1st section of the Journal, rewritten, upside down except for the last three lines (on f. 30r).
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(2) an additional insert of 14 ff. of smaller format. It contains:

  --------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  ff. 36r-49r           A rewriting of the entry for 11 Oct., and entries for 15 Oct.-6 Feb.
  f. 49v, upside down   The beginning of a dialogue on government
  --------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------

(3) a loose sheet folded to form two narrow ff., consisting of revisions
of Notebook entries:

  ---------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  f. Ar                                    Revised version of entry for 8 Oct.
  ff. Ar,v                                 Revised version of entry for 9 Oct.
  ff. Av-Bv                                Revised version of entry for 10 Oct.
  f. Bv, lower half of page, upside down   Revised and deleted version of entries from 30 Sept. (conclusion) to 5 Oct.
  ---------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

No. 2. Traité de logique. Pierpont Morgan Library, a gift from H.
Bradley Martin in 1959. Titled by Mill on f. 1r: “Traité de Logique /
redigé d’après le Cours de Philosophie / de M. Gergonne / Doyen de la
Faculté des Sciences / de l’Academie de Montpellier / avec des Notes /
par J. Mill.” An exercise notebook, in its original blue covers, 21.0 by
17.5 cm., with 92 ff., numbered on top right Edition: current; Page:
[673] from 1 to 81, with 82 appearing on the top left of f. 81v, and ff.
30-9 appearing by mistake twice in sequence. The text, written recto
only, is divided into chapters, each beginning on a new page, with the
chapter number given as a running head at the right margin, where
marginal contents also appear. While there are indications for several
notes, only one appears (on f. 10v). There are about thirty corrections
in the first four chapters in an unknown (French) hand.

No. 3. Lecture Notes on Logic. Mill-Taylor Collection, Vol. XXXVIII. An
exercise notebook, in its original blue covers, 19.5 by 16.0 cm., with
96 ff., of which the first is blank (except for pencilled initials or
names in Mill’s hand, with some numbers, the only legible ones being the
final six: “JM 9 / Mrs M 17 / Mrs H 12 / Mr H 14 / JB 3 [?] / JM 30”).
The text is written recto only. There must originally have been another
notebook, preceding this one, which begins near the middle of the
lecture course given by Gergonne (see No. 2 above), with notes of the
18th lecture, and runs to the final lecture, no. 32. There are heavy
corrections in another hand throughout the 18th lecture and through the
first three paragraphs of the 19th.

No. 5. Parliamentary Reform. Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/1, the gift of
Lionel, Lord Robbins, 1958. Titled on f. 7v in Mill’s hand: “Speech on /
Parl. Reform / at the / Mutual Impr. Soc. / 1823 or 24,” it consists of
7 ff.: ff. 1-4, 19.8 by 31.4 cm., watermarked “J Whatman” (one of the
East India Company papers) / “1822”; ff. 5-7, 20.8 by 33.2 cm., “J
Whatman / 1823.”

No. 7. Population: Proaemium. Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/2. Titled in
Mill’s hand: “Proaemium of a speech on population,” it consists of 1 f.,
19.7 by 31.7 cm., watermarked “J Whatman / 1823.”

No. 8. Population. Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/2. The opening remarks
(all that exist in manuscript) are on a single sheet folded lengthwise
to make 2 ff. 31.8 × 21.8 cm., with a large tear at the bottom right of
2r, where some (cancelled) text is lost. Watermarked “J Whatman / 1824.”
Written recto and verso to 1/2 f. 2v, the bottom half of which is blank
except for practice penmanship and scrawls, plus the word “starving”;
the cancelled top 2/3 of f. 1r is also written over with practice
penmanship.

No. 9. Population: Reply to Thirlwall. Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/2.
The two parts of the manuscript are titled respectively in Mill’s hand:
“Reply” and “In answer to Thirlwall / Second speech on population at the
Cooperative Society” Edition: current; Page: [674] (“Second speech”
originally read “Two speeches”). They were probably donated by Harold J.
Laski. The first part consists of 8 sheets folded sideways to make 16
ff., each 18.3 by 22.5 cm., written recto and verso to 9r, where the
text ends; 9r to 12r are blank; 12v has substitute wording for the
cancelled lower part of 14r, which has on it “(B)” (i.e., an addition to
the text on 3v); 14v to 15v are blank; 16r has on it “(A)” (i.e., an
addition to 1v); 16v is blank. Watermarked “J Whatman / 1824.” The
second part consists of 3 sheets folded lengthwise to make 6 ff., each
20.9 by 33.6 cm., written recto and verso, except for 6v, on which only
the title appears. Watermarked, ff. 1-2 “J Whatman / 1824,” ff. 3-6
“Balston & Co / 1824” (another supplier of paper to the East India
Company).

No. 10. Cooperation: First Speech. Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/3. This
fragment is on an irregularly torn sheet (on which the watermark does
not appear), app. 19.4 by 18.7 cm., and is written on the verso of an
East India Company document pertaining to 1823.

No. 11. Cooperation: Intended Speech. Connecticut College, Misc.
MSS-Mill. Donated by Harold J. Laski in 1938 in honour of Professor
Marjorie Dilley (a former student at the London School of Economics). It
consists of 3 sheets folded to make 6 ff., 19.7 by 31.5 cm., watermarked
“J Whatman / 1824.” The title, in Mill’s hand, “Intended / speech / at
the Cooper- / ative Society / Never delivered” (the last two words added
later) are on f. 1r; f. 1v is blank. The text is written recto and verso
on ff. 2-6, ending half way down f. 6v.

No. 12. Cooperation: Closing Speech. The manuscript has been divided
into two: the first part is in the Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/3
(donated by Lord Robbins in 1958); the second in Connecticut College,
Misc. MSS-Mill (part of Laski’s donation in 1938—see the previous
entry). The first part consists of 6 sheets, folded to make 12 ff., 18.3
by 22.8 cm., watermarked “J Whatman / Balston & Co / 1824,” written
recto and verso, with some practice penmanship at the bottom of 12v. The
second part consists of 3 sheets, the first two (both watermarked “J
Whatman / Balston & Co / 1824”) folded to make 4 ff., respectively 18.3
by 22.5 cm. (the same as the Mill-Taylor portion) and 21.3 by 33.6 cm.;
the third sheet is torn to leave just 1 f. (on which the watermark does
not appear), also 21.3 by 33.6. The text is written recto and verso, 5r
being cancelled and ending four-fifths of the way down; the title in
Mill’s hand appears on 5v: “Cooperative / Society / Speech on the
Cooperative system.”

No. 13. Cooperation: Notes. Trinity College, Cambridge, Add. MS. c.8026.
Given by Harold J. Laski, 1922. The notes are on a single sheet, folded
to make 4 Edition: current; Page: [675] ff., 11.5 × 17.8 cm., written
recto and verso. Watermarked “J Whatman / 1824”; untitled.

No. 14. The Influence of the Aristocracy. Mill-Taylor Collection,
II/1/5, presumably donated by Harold J. Laski. It consists of 9 ff.: ff.
1-4 and 9 being 20.7 by 33.4 cm., watermarked “J Whatman / 1824”; ff.
5-8 being 20.8 by 33.6 cm., watermarked “J Whatman / Balston & Co /
[1824?].” Written recto and verso, f. 9 blank except for “Speech at /
the London Union / 9th December 1825 / on the Influence / of the
Aristocracy,” in Mill’s hand, as is also the heading on f. 1, “Speech on
the Influence of the Aristocracy. / London Union Society 9th December
1825.”

No. 16. Catiline’s Conspiracy. University of Toronto Rare Book Library,
MSS. 3074. It consists of 5 sheets, folded to make 10 ff., all 18.55 ×
22.8 cm., watermarked “J Whatman / Balston & Co / 1825.” Written recto
and verso to 4/5 of the way down 9v; on 10v Mill has written “Speech on
/ Catiline’s / Conspiracy.” Headed in Mill’s hand: “Speech / delivered
at the / London Debating Society / Tuesday 28th Feby / 1826 / on the
character of Catiline.” All lightly folded vertically as though to fit
in a pocket.

No. 19. The British Constitution [1]. The manuscript has been broken
into two parts: the main part, University of Hull Library, JK 318 M6;
the conclusion, University of Toronto Rare Book Library. The first part
consists of 1 sheet torn in two to make 2 ff., and 6 sheets folded to
make 12 ff., all 18.4 by 22.9 cm., watermarked “J Whatman / Balston & Co
/ 1825.” Written recto and verso, except 1v which ends one-third of the
way down, i.e., at the end of the first paragraph; it is headed in
Mill’s hand: “speech never spoken on the British Constitution.” The
concluding part consists of 1 sheet folded to make 2 ff.., 18.65 × 23.6
cm., watermarked “J Whatman / 1824”. Written recto and 2/3 verso. On the
verso, upside down, Mill has written: “Peroration written for a speech
on radical reform.”

No. 20. The British Constitution [2]. Only the first part of the
manuscript survives: Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/6, presumably donated
by Harold J. Laski. It consists of 4 sheets folded to make 8 ff., 17.9
by 22.7, watermarked “J Whatman / Balston & Co / 1825,” untitled on this
part.

No. 21. The Influence of Lawyers. Only a single folio with fragments of
the manuscript survives: Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/4, donated by Lord
Robbins. Edition: current; Page: [676] It is a torn sheet, 19.5 by 14.3
cm., not watermarked on this part, written recto and verso, untitled.

No. 22. The Use of History. Private. It consists of 5 sheets, folded to
make 10 ff.: ff. 1-4 and 6-7, 18.0 by 22.6 cm. (watermarked “J Whatman /
Balston & Co / 1825”; ff. 5 and 10, 18.6 by 23.9 (watermarked “J Whatman
/ 1824”); ff. 8-9, 15.9 by 20.1 (watermarked only by the Britannia
device that is on Whatman, and Whatman and Balston papers). Written
recto and verso; the whole folded lengthwise (as though to fit into a
pocket), and titled on f. 10v by Mill: “Speech on / the use of / history
/ spoken in 1827” (left side) and “Speech / on / History” (right side).
The text on 8v and 9r is written on the cover of a letter, addressed:
“J. Mill Junr Esq. / 1, Queen’s Square”; “Mr. Reynell / Printer / Brewer
Street / Golden Square.”

No. 23. The Coalition Ministry. Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/7, donated
by Lord Robbins, 1958. It consists of 12 ff., all watermarked “J Whatman
/ Balston & Co / 1825”: ff. 1-2 and 5-12, 18.1 by 23.0 cm.; ff. 3-4,
17.9 by 17.9 cm. Written recto and verso, except for 3v which is blank;
the text ends halfway down 11v; pencilled notes (printed as a note to
the text) complete 11v and one-third of 12r, on which also appears
(upside down) “John Mill Esq. / India House.” Titled: “Speech on / the
coalition / between Canning / and the Whigs / spoken in 1827.”

No. 24. The Present State of Literature. University College London, C.K.
Ogden file, i.e., part of Ogden’s collection. It consists of 10 ff.: ff.
1, 4-6, and 10, 20.2 by 32.3 cm.; f. 2, 20.4 by 13.8 cm.; f. 3, 20.0 by
31.7 cm.; ff. 7-9, 20.0 by 32.0 cm.; all written recto only, except part
of 6v, the versos (originally rectos) containing manuscript text of
Jeremy Bentham’s Rationale of Judicial Evidence. Headed in Mill’s hand:
“Speech on the present state of literature”; this title is repeated,
with “spoken in 1827/8” on f. 10.

No. 25. The Church. Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/9, donated by Moritz J.
Brown, 1951. It consists of 1 folded sheet, plus 9 unfolded ones, making
in all 10 ff.: ff. 1-2 (watermarked “J Whatman / Balston & Co / 1825”),
18.0 by 23.0 cm.; f. 3 (watermarked “J Whatman / Balston & Co / 1826”),
18.0 by 33.8 cm.; ff. 4-8 (watermarked “J Whatman / Balston & Co /
1824”), 18.0 by 33.8 cm.; f. 9 (watermarked “J Whatman / Turkey Mill [a
notepaper] / 1825”), 20.0 by 25.0 cm.; f. 10 (not watermarked but the
same paper as f. 9), also 20.0 by 25.0 cm. Headed in Mill’s hand:
“Speech on the Church.” Written recto and verso, except for ff. 8 (verso
is a portion of Mill’s article of 1826 on the silk trade) and 9 (verso
is a returned form letter of 1827); f. 10 is written recto and verso
over another letter of 1828 and its address.

Edition: current; Page: [677]
No. 26. Perfectibility. Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/8, presumably
donated by Harold J. Laski. It consists of 3 sheets folded to make 6
ff., 21.1 by 33.8 cm., all watermarked “J Whatman / Balston & Co /
1827.” Written recto and verso, except for 6v, on which only the title
(written sideways) appears in Mill’s hand: “Speech on / perfectibility /
spoken in 1828.”

No. 27. Wordsworth and Byron. Mill-Taylor Collection, II/1/11, source
unknown, but perhaps donated by Lord Robbins, 1958. It consists of two
parts, the first (an early version of the opening remarks), 2 ff., 21.1
by 33.5 cm., watermarked “J Whatman / Balston & Co / 1827”; the second
(the main speech), 6 ff., 20.4 by 31.3 cm., watermarked “J Whatman /
Balston & Co / 1826.” Headed in Mill’s hand: “Speech on Wordsworth /
1829.”

No. 28. Montesquieu. The manuscript has been broken into several parts,
one section being missing: the main part is in the Mill-Taylor
Collection, II/1/10, presumably donated by Harold J. Laski; a fragment
is in the University of Toronto Rare Book Library. The main part, headed
in Mill’s hand, “Notes of My Speech Against Sterling, 1829,” consists of
15 ff.: ff. 1-2, 20.4 by 25.0 cm. (written recto and verso over form
letters, dated 1828 and 1827 respectively, not watermarked); f. 3, 18.2
by 22.7 cm. (written recto and verso over an undated letter to Mill, on
paper on which part of the “J Whatman” watermark appears); f. 4, 19.8 by
24.7 cm. (written recto and one-third verso over a letter to Mill
undated as to year, on paper watermarked “Ruse & Turners / 1826”); f. 5,
18.1 by 22.7 cm. (written recto and verso on cover undated as to year,
addressed to Mill, unwatermarked); f. 6, 18.7 by 22.6 cm. (written recto
and one-half verso over a letter to Mill, dated 1828, no watermark on
this portion of sheet); f. 7, 20.2 by 20.9 cm. (watermarked on this
portion “J Whatman”); f. 8, 19.9 by 25.1 cm. (written recto and one-half
verso on letter to Mill, undated as to year, unwatermarked); f. 9, 20.1
by 24.9 cm. (written recto and one-half verso over letter to Mill,
undated as to year, unwatermarked); f. 10, 18.5 by 23.1 cm. (written
recto and verso on cover addressed to Mill, date probably 1828,
unwatermarked); f. 11, 18.7 by 23.2 cm. (written recto and verso on
cover, dated 1828, addressed to Mill, unwatermarked); f. 12, 19.8 by
25.4 cm. (written recto on verso of a form letter, dated 1828,
unwatermarked); f. 13, 20.0 by 25.1 cm. (written recto on verso of a
form letter, dated 1828, unwatermarked); f. 14, 19.9 by 25.1 cm.
(written recto on verso of letter to Mill, undated as to year,
unwatermarked); f. 15, 20.1 by 25.1 cm. (written recto and one-half
verso on a letter to Mill, undated as to year, unwatermarked). The
fragment consists of 1 f. (1/2 of a torn sheet), 20.2 × 25.2 cm.
(written recto and 1/3 verso over a letter on verso from Charles Austin
to Mill, dated only “Saturday”; watermarked “1826”), untitled.

Edition: current; Page: [678]
No. 29. Tour of Sussex. St. Andrews University Library, MS 1499, bought
from Holleyman and Treacher of Brighton. It consists of 22 ff., 18.3 by
22.1 cm., ff. 1-4, 11, 13-18 watermarked “T Barratt / 1827”; no
watermark appears on the other ff. Written recto and verso.

No. 30. Tour of Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, and Surrey.
Yale University Library, John Stuart Mill Papers Box 2, MS 350. A
notebook, in its original blue wrapper, 48 ff., measuring 18.5 × 23.0
cm., watermarked “1818.” The first 44 ff. are written recto and verso,
the last four being blank.

No. 31. Tour of Yorkshire and the Lake District. The main manuscript is
in the Bodleian Library, Don.d.26; Mill’s instructions to Henry Cole and
Cole’s Diary are in the Victoria and Albert Museum. The main manuscript,
untitled, in a modern binding, consists of 59 folios, ff. 1-2 and 57-9
being modern fly-leaf paper, with Mill’s text written recto and verso on
ff. 3-56. The original sheets, folded to make two folios, are of three
types: ff.3-20, 23.0 × 19.0 cms., watermarked “J Whatman / 1830”; ff.
21-38, 23.5 × 19.2 cms., watermarked “GW / 1828”; and ff. 39-56, 23.8 ×
19.2 cms., watermarked “Street & Co / 1830”. The instructions to Cole
are on a single sheet, folded to make 2 ff., the text written recto and
verso on f. 1, and two-thirds of the recto of f. 2.

No. 32. Tour of Hampshire, West Sussex, and the Isle of Wight. Mount
Holyoke College, *BE.M61ya3, purchased from Bernard Quaritch. It
consists of 2 notebooks, in the original marbled covers, both 19.0 by
22.9 cm. The first notebook contains 22 ff., the second, 24 ff.; the
watermarks (“G H Green 1831” in the first notebook, “J Green & Son 1829”
in the second) show on one-half of the folios, the other half being the
counterparts of the folded sheets. Written recto and verso, with the
inside covers blank, except for 2 concluding lines on the inside back
cover of the second notebook. Untitled.

No. 33. Tour of Western Cornwall. The manuscript has been divided into
two parts, corresponding to 2 notebooks: the first formerly in the
possession of Isaac Foot, is now unlocated, not having gone with his
papers to the University of California; the second in the Mill-Taylor
Collection, II/1/14 (with a photocopy of the first in Vol. XXXVII). The
second, 16.2 by 20.0 cm., in the original mottled covers, contains 22
ff., written recto and verso, ff. 1r-8v only, and is untitled.

Edition: current; Page: [679]


Appendix B

Journal and Notebook: Ancillary Materials (1820)

the notebook and journal contain various materials that are not part of
the actual record of events given in No. 1, but bear upon Mill’s
activities and their interpretation.


I.: PLAN OF A DIALOGUE ON GOVERNMENT

On 49v of the Notebook appears the beginning of the dialogue on
government mentioned in the text (p. 11), with an outline of the
considerations bearing on people’s qualification for the suffrage.

As we have now, Sir, an opportunity, if it be agreeable to you it will
be equally so to me, to continue the discussion which we commenced a day
or two ago.

I suppose your Lordship alludes to that concerning government?

I do, Sir

I shall with great pleasure, my Lord, it ren

Qualification by some personal quality
{By some bodily quality
{1. By sex
{2. By age
{By some mental quality
{3. By sanity of mind
{4. By attested probity
{By some particular mental quality
{5. By the possion of some branch of knowledge
Qualification by some extraneous circumstance
{6. By the places which he holds in society as head of a family, as
house holder, as house-owner, as land-owner, etc.
{By something which depends on his revenue itself
{7. By the greatness of his revenue
{7. By some circumstance relative to his revenue
{9. By his disbursements i.e. by the amount of direct taxes which he
pays
{8. By the source from which he derives his revenue

Edition: current; Page: [680]


II.: “LIEUES DE POSTE”

On f. 1v of the Notebook appears this list, covering Mill’s French
travels.

10 août à Toulouse

Route de Calais à Paris par Abbeville et Beauvais lieues de postes

  ------------ ---- ---------------- ----
  Marquise-    5    Poix-            5
  Boulogne-    3½   Grandvilliers-   3½
  Samer-       4    Marseille-       2½
  Montreuil-   5    Beauvais-        4½
  Nampont-     3    Beaumont-        9
  Abbeville-   7    St. Denis-       6
  Airaines-    4½   Paris-           2
  ------------ ---- ---------------- ----

Route de Paris à Toulouse par Orleans, Limoges et Montauban

  ---------------------- ---- -------------- -----
  Arpajon-               8    Châteauroux-   7
  Etampes-               5    Argenton-      7½
  Augerville-            4½   Limoges-       25
  Thoury-                3½   Uzerche-       16
  Artenai-               3    Brive-         10
  Orleans-               5½   Souillac-      9
  la Ferté Senneterre-   5    Cahors-        20½
                              Caussade-      10
  Salbris-               10   Montauban-     5½
  Vierzon-               7    Grizolles-     5
  Vatan-                 6½   Toulouse-      7½
  ---------------------- ---- -------------- -----

11 Août

à l’Ille-Jourdain

Route de Toulouse à Bayonne par Auch, Tarbes, et Pau

  --------------------- ----
  l’Ille en Jourdain-   7
  Gimont-               4
  Auch-                 6
  Mirande-              6
  Mielan-               3
  Rabastens-            3
  Tarbes-               4½
  Pau-                  10
  [Or]thès-             10
  [Peyr]horade          7
  [Bayonne              9]
  --------------------- ----

Edition: current; Page: [681]
Route de Toulouse à Pau par Saint-Gaudens et Bagnères

  -------------- ---- ------------ ---
  Muret-         5½   Lanemezan-   5
  Noé-           3    Bagneres-    6
  Martres-       7    Lourdes-     6
  St. Martory-   2    Lestelle-    4
  St. Gaudens-   5    Pau-         6
  Monréjau-      3½                
  -------------- ---- ------------ ---

Route de Toulouse à Montpellier par Castres

  -------------- ----- -------------- ----
  Puylaurens-    13    Beziers-       6½
  Castres-       3     Pezenas-       6
  St. Amand-     12½   Meze-          4½
  St. Chinian-   5     Montpellier-   8
  -------------- ----- -------------- ----


III.: TRANSLATION OF CICERO

Mill mentions both in the Journal and the Notebook that on 7 October,
1820, he translated part of Cicero’s Pro Milone; though he mentions
reading it on 16 and 17 October, there is no other allusion to a
translation. On f. 28v of the Notebook, upside down, appears the
beginning of the translation, which is continued on f. 284, upside down
on the lower third of the page.

Quoique je craigne, Messieurs, que ce ne me porte deshonneur, à parler
avec peur dans la défense de l’homme le plus courageux, et que ce ne
soit honteux, si, tandis que Milon même a plus d’anxieté pour le salut
de la chose publique que pour la sienne propre, je ne puis apporter à sa
cause une semblable grandeur d’âme; cependant cette nouvelle forme d’un
nouveau jugement1 mes yeux qui cherchent partout l’ancien coutume de la
cour, et la manière precedente des jugemens. Car l’assemblée n’ést pas
comme autrefois,2 nous sommes entouré d’une foule extraordinaire. Car
ces gardes que vous voyez devant tous les temples quoiqu’il soient
placés pour empêcher la violence, n’apportent pourtant rien à l’orateur:
de manière que dans la cour, quoique nous soyons entourés de défenses
sécures et nécessaires, cependant nous ne pouvons même être courageux
sans quelque crainte. Si je croyais que tout ceci était destiné contre
Milon, je me soumettrais, Messieurs, aux temps, et ne croirais pas qu’il
eût du lieu pour un orateur parmi tant de gens armés. Mais je me remets
de ma terreur par la pensée que Pompée, homme des plus sages et justes:
qui ne croirait pas de sa justice à donner aux armes des soldats celui
qu’il avait délivré au jugement de la cour, ni sans doute de sa Edition:
current; Page: [682] prudence, à autoriser par l’autorité publique la
temerité de la multitude citee. Ces armes donc, ces soldats, ses
officiers, ne nous annoncent point le danger, mais la sûreté: ils nous
incitent à être d’une âme non seulement quiête mais grande—ils
promettent à mon plaidoyer non seulement l’aide mais la silence. L’autre
multitude, au moins ceux qui sont des citoyens, ést tout à nous. De tous
ceux que vous voyez nous régarder de tout côte doù l’on peut voir une
partie de la cour, et attendre l’évènement de cette cause, il n’y a
personne qui ne favorise à la vertu de Milon—qui ne croit qu’il s’agit
aujourdhui de soi, de ses enfans, de sa patrie, et de sa fortune. Une
seule classe du peuple s’oppose contre moi: ceux que la fureur de
Clodius a fait paître de rapines, d’incendies, et de tous les maux
publics, ceux qui dans l’assemblée d’hier ont été incités à vous
prévenir par leur voix le jugement que vous devez faire. Si par hasard
ils feront aujourdhui de la même manière, vous devez en prendre
admonition à retenir ce citoyen qui pour votre salut a toujours negligé
ces gens et leurs plus grands clameurs. Dépouillez vous donc, Messieurs,
de quelque crainte que vous puissiez avoir: appliquez vos esprits à la
cause. Car, si jamais vous avez été juge d’un3

Lady Bentham

Bentham, Lady

14th Septr 1820

Bagnères

James Mill

Mill, James

IV.


LETTER FROM LADY BENTHAM TO JAMES MILL

At p. 81 of the Journal (f. 64, otherwise blank) a letter from Lady
Bentham to James Mill begins; it is continued on the top margins of the
preceding folios.

Bagnères

14th Septr 1820

Dear Sir

In the first part of a letter sent from hence above a fortnight ago, I
gave you an account of John’s progress in the French language, and in
other branches of study and acquirements in which his time has been
occupied since he has been with us in order that you might yourself
determine whether his return to you should be from Toulouse, or whether
he should continue with us the winter; but in a few lines at the
conclusion of that letter, I added that the particulars we had heard
from Mr. Berard respecting several of the public lectures at Montpellier
had convinced us that John would be so materially benefited by attending
them, that we in grand committee had resolved that he should remain with
us unless you have some reason which we are not aware of for desiring
his return to England forthwith—Mr. Berard’s judgment is as sound as his
scientific knowledge is superior; he has had more opportunity of seeing
your son, of appreciating his acquirements and of detecting his
deficiencies than any other individual out of our own family; his urgent
desire that we should keep John through the winter had consequently
great weight with Edition: current; Page: [683] us, when we re-opened
the letter already sealed to add the few lines above mentioned—Since
that time I may say, our attention has scarcely been withdrawn an hour
from him; he has travelled in the coach with Bentham Clara and myself
and we have been considerably successful in getting the better of his
inactivity of mind and body when left to himself—Upon all occasions his
gentleness under reproof, and thankfulness for correction are
remarkable; and as it is by reason supported by examples we point out to
him that we endeavour to convince him—not by command that we induce him
to act so or so, we trust that you will have satisfaction from that part
of his education we are giving him to fit him for commerce with the
world at large—Unless therefore we receive immediately your orders for
his return forthwith we shall take him on with us to Montpellier.

We purpose setting out on Sunday for Luchon, where [w]e shall remain two
or three days at least; business at this [final] leaving of Toulouse may
detain us there likewis[e about as long], so that it is probable that an
answer [to us] would still find us there. I hope Mrs. Mill has quite
recovere[d] and that the little one is well—Assure her with my
compliments that we pay every possible attention to Johns health; and
th[at] he has become active and careful in regard to his wardrobe etc.
Mr. B. has already been told that the penknives have arrive[d] safe, and
were received with the pleasure that proofs of Uncles affection always
give—they are beautiful besides. Pray tell him also that Mary is very
much better, though not yet strong; and still requiring my care. The
babe quite well. Should John remain with us, I must beg your permission
to order for him a new coat at Montpellier, partly because he has
outgrown his present ones, partly because seeing the variety of company
he must with us, and be amongst those who dress well, it seems necessary
that his appearance should be not only clean and neat, but also his
cloaths of a form not to be remarkable.


V.: LETTERS FROM RICHARD DOANE

The Bentham Correspondence and Papers, Vol. IX, ff. 424r, 424v, and 441v
(British Library, Add. MSS 33,545), contain the following letters, the
first to Lady Bentham, the other two to Mill.

Richard Doane

Doane, Richard

July 3, 1820

Lady Bentham

Bentham, Lady

July 3, 1820

Madame

Dans la dernière lettre de Jean Mill, il me dit que j’ai oublié une
commission savoir, comment Sir S. Bentham pourrait avoir les ouvrages
que l’Institution a publiès, mais je ne me souviens pas que vous m’avez
jamais donné cette commission là, je ne l’ai pas pu trouver dans aucune
de vos lettres, si vous me l’avez dite à Pompignan c’est bien vrai que
je l’ai oubliè, de quoi j’en suis très faché et j’en demande pardon;
mais vous saurez avant que cette lettre soit finie comment. J’espère
qu’il n’y a pas d’autres choses que j’ai oubliées.

Edition: current; Page: [684]
Dans une de vos lettres vous dites que vous voudriez savoir combien
toutes les commissions ont coutès, ce que je ne savais pas alors je
demandais à Monsr Bentham qui me repondit “tell them to go about their
business, I won’t be dictated to by such people.” Nous avons envoyés
trois canifs par une Dame jusqu’à Paris avec une lettre pour Madame la
Comtesse Berthollet qui les devait avoir fait venir par ce tems ci . . .

Richard Doane

Doane, Richard

July 3, 1820

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 3, 1820

A Jean Mill

Eh bien Monsieur vous voilà sans doute tout a fait un Français. Je
voyais ce matin votre Maman et vos soeurs, elles vous envoient leurs
amitiés etc. e[t] votre Maman desire que vous la direz la première fois
que vous l’écrivez quel progr[ès] vous avez fait dans la Musique et la
Danse, et si vous avez acheté un chapeau et eu les cheveux coupés, etc.
Monr Colls vous envoie ses respects. En meme tems que vous recevrez
cette lettre vous en aurez une de Monr votre père. Votre maman dit que
vos soeurs vont très bien dans leurs études etc. Mes complimens aux
demoiselles et mes respects a Monr George, adieu mon ami et frère
Reprobate, R. Doane

Richard Doane

Doane, Richard

Sept. 27, 1820

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 27, 1820

A Jean Mill

Je vous remercie bien mon chèr Jean de m’avoir écrit si souvent dans vos
lettres à votre pere. Je vous aurais écrit auparavant, mais l’Espagne
nous a donné tant de choses à faire que je n’ai eu que très peu de
loisir. Il faut vous dire que quand vous marchez dans les rues dans ce
pays ci vous n’entendez que les cries de “Vive la Reine” et ne voyez que
les processions des Addresses qui vont se presenter devant sa Majesté à
Brandebourgh House; Les Journaux ont été tout à fait remplies du procès,
dans the House of Lords jusqu’à l’adjournement que se fesait il y a
quelque tems.

Vos soeurs vous ont ecrit par ce transport, les deux ainées en Latin,
Harriett et Jacques ont joignit leur lettres aussi bien qu’on aurait pu
exiger. Madame votre mère et l’enfant se portent très bien comme toute
la famille. Dites à Monsr George que quoique je ne l’ai pas ecrit, je
l’aime autant que jamais. Il faut faire mes complimens aux demoiselles.
J’éspere que vous vous portez aussi bien que moi et Monsr Bentham. Il
commence à faire un peu froid ici, on a des feux chez vous.

Edition: current; Page: [685]


Appendix C


Textual Emendations

in this list, following the page and line numbers, the reading of the
copy-text is given first, and then the amended reading in square
brackets, with an explanation if required. If there is no explanation,
it may be assumed that there is an obvious typographical error, or else
that the change is made for sense or for consistency within the item.
For a description of changes not here listed, see lxiv-lxvi above.
Typographical errors in versions other than the copy-text are ignored.

8.13 Halle, au Blé [Halle au Blé] [as in Notebook and fact]

15.9 [N.B. . . . wheels.] [(N.B. . . . wheels.)] [to avoid confusion]

17.5 Cresansac. A [Cresansac, a] [incomplete revision]

20.6 Toulouse [Pompignan] [as in fact]

29.20 servants Miss [servants and Miss] [incomplete revision]

37n.8 Chrestomatique; [Chrestomatique.] [incomplete revision]

38.1 12me [11me] [as on postmark]

39.32 App.’x. [App’x.]

41.7 July 9 [July 8]

42.8 July 10 [July 9]

43.5 July 11 [July 10]

44.9 July 12 [July 11]

46.8 Continuation [Continuation.]

46.31 July 13 [July 12]

52n.13 Mihi Condonetis [Mihi condonetis] [incomplete revision]

61.11 Save) [Save);] [incomplete revision]

64.6 auberge [auberge,] [incomplete revision]

68.18 etc. il [etc. Il]

80.4-7 [N.B. . . . trousseau.] [(N.B. . . . trousseau.)] [to avoid
confusion]

84.2 moutons [moutons;] [incomplete revision]

94.22 journal [journal,] [incomplete revision]

100.44 heures, [heures.] [incomplete revision]

119n.10 route, [route.] [incomplete revision]

122n.15 Lapeyrouse, [Lapeyrouse.] [incomplete revision]

127.13 Peyrou: [Peyrou.] [the entry ends here]

129.16 toujours [toujours,]

131.7 Prades: [Prades.] [incomplete revision]

131.16 été. [été,] [incomplete revision]

140.35 pere, [pere.]

143.13 Provençal, [Provençal.] [incomplete revision]

150.18 La tension [L’attention]

Edition: current; Page: [686]
152.8 Ceux [ceux] [incomplete revision]

155.30 qui [qu’il] [incomplete revision]

158.9 qui, [qui] [incomplete revision]

158.21 d’aveugles, [d’aveugles:] [incomplete revision]

159.17 la la proposition [la proposition] [incomplete revision]

160.10 Intellectuelles [intellectuelles]

170.8 encore; [encore] [incomplete revision]

170.16 par par méthode [par méthode] [mistake in carrying over to new
page]

171.22 cela [cela,]

173.14 vertu [vertu,]

178.30 connaissances) [connaissances),]

190.14-15 une substance essentiellement pensante [une substance
essentiellement pensante] [underlining not continued to next line]

201.18 couper; [couper,]

215.26 mécanique? [mécanique.]

230.40 argumens. [argumens.”]

234.37-235.1 La partie ést moindre que le tout [in italics]

237.9 commun. [commun.”]

244.3 Géographie [géographie]

246.10 limite. [limite?]

248.27 on de [on a de]

252.24 n’y qu’une [n’y a qu’une]

253.17 honore: [honore:”]

257.30 mala fide [mala fide] [as in L]

259.35 master, [master;] [as in L]

260.31 clergy [clergy,] [as in L]

262.43 melting pot [melting-pot]

263.31 democratic. [democratic?] [incomplete revision]

265.18 however is [however, is]

265.32 to abused [to be abused]

265.38 one. [one?] [incomplete revision]

266.2 truth, it is [truth is]

266.11 persuading that [persuading them that]

267.30 besides [besides,]

268.28 propositions by [propositions; by] [incomplete revision]

269.17 cheapness [cheapness,]

269.25 degree better [degree is better]

269.35 inquiry [enquiry,]

270.13 avoid ever [avoid it ever]

271.30 where is [there is]

273.12-17 parties; the one . . . got; or think . . . ministry, this . .
. party, the other . . . ministry. This is [parties: the one . . . got,
or think . . . ministry; this . . . party: the other . . . ministry:
this is

273.22 land owners [landowners]

273.27 Laws? who [Laws? Who]

274.14 instrument [instrument,]

275.9 radical [radicals]

276.8-12 called independance . . . parliament independant . . . too
independant . . . be independant . . . Seignor independant [all rendered
with e]

276.37 the multitude [the swinish multitude] [context implies the
missing word]

Edition: current; Page: [687]
279.5 change, [change]

280.27 insufficient; [insufficient,] [for sense]

280.37 this all [this is all]

281.34 on this [on us this]

281.34-5 security person [security to person]

284.4 is this [is, this]

284.12 before that [before, that]

284.19 operation the [operation, the]

289.6 corrollary [corollary] [as in L; transcriber’s error?]

289.30 production. another [production. Another] [as in L; transcriber’s
error?]

290.26 population; [population,] [as in L]

290.28 production, [production;] [as in L]

291.9 had [had,] [as in L]

291.21 truth; the . . . soil; was [truth—the . . . soil—was] [as in L;
transcriber’s error?]

291.25 jut [just] [as in L; transcriber’s error]

292.10 has at [has as] [as in L; transcriber’s error]

292.22 best, [best;] [as in L]

294.38 be increasing [be by increasing]

295.17-18 stars: . . . shrubs, [stars; . . . shrubs;]

295.28-9 freezes. Is [freezes: is] [as in previous sentence]

297.5 gentleman [gentlemen] [incomplete revision]

298.38 question, [question.] [incomplete revision]

302.9 rara avis in [rara avis in,] [as Latin quotation]

304.7 to built [to be built]

304.33 us, [us.]

309.27 it, Can [it? Can] [incomplete revision]

312.28 that is [that it is]

312.38 that it is the [that the] [incomplete revision]

317.8-9 there are produced in that place where [should be produced in
that place which] [mistaken or incomplete revision]

317.40 there [their]

319.39-40 village—In . . . Society—I [village. In . . . Society, I]

320.7 bosom—His [bosom. His]

320.18 labour; They [labour; they] [incomplete revision]

322.18 hesitation—But [hesitation? But]

322.30 hold of. [hold of] [incomplete revision]

323.5 therefore [therefore,]

323.14 & the question & the question [and the question] [incomplete
revision]

323.24 can not [cannot] [incomplete revision]

328.27 What [what] [incomplete revision]

330.34 picture it paints is [picture is]

337.3-4 equality; . . . comfortable [equality, . . . comfortable,]

337.30 is it false [but false]

343.12 least My [least my] [incomplete revision]

345.39 aristocracy has [aristocracy—has]

350.10 interests [interest]

356.16 form [forms]

358.1 believe learn [believe to learn]

362.7 monument [Monument]

363.1 government [misgovernment] [mistaken cancellation]

363.4 thief [thief,]

Edition: current; Page: [688]
363.15 will do for [will do for the]

364.37 question [question,]

369.6 therefore [therefore,]

369.19 too I . . . remark that [too—I . . . remark—that]

369.33-4 L’opinione . . . regnano. [“L’opinione . . . regnano.”]
[quotation]

372.37 Consitution [Constitution]

374.13 much a [much as a]

376.25 tiger [Tiger] [as in 35]

377.2, 3-4 his Majesty [His Majesty]

377.3 dogs [Dogs] [as in 35]

377.8, 11 fox [Fox] [as in 35]

377.12 panthers, wolves [Panthers, Wolves] [as in 35]

377.20 that has [that it has]

378.27 saying; but? [saying?] [incomplete revision]

381.9 choosing [chusing] [as in manuscript of first part]

381.15 choose [chuse] [as in manuscript of first part]

382.30 troubles me [troublesome] [transcriber’s error]

388.18 Colley [Collins] [as in fact; transcriber’s error?]

390.13 occupations [occupation] [as in L]

393.14 men it [men, it]

393.30 regulate. [regulate,] [incomplete revision]

394.5 may: But [may. But]

394.6 this: [this?]

395.26 posterity. What [posterity, what]

396.6 been [being] [slip of the pen]

396.17 intervals [intervals,]

401.21 and inoffensive [and most inoffensive] [for sense; in inked
parentheses in TS]

403.18 measure. [measure?]

403.33 always seems [always seen]

404.13 not At [not at] [incomplete revision]

405.29 him, [him,—]

407.9 down. [down?]

407.24 abasement—Do [abasement? Do]

410.19 and if I were to [and to]

410.28 individuals the writer act upon masses the reader [individuals
(the writer) act upon masses (the reader)] [interlined words put in
parentheses for sense]

412.9 a part [apart]

412.23 and an [and so] [slip of the pen?]

414.9 all: [all.]

423.27-8 they possesses [they possess] [incomplete revision]

424.37 advancement have [advancement has] [slip of the pen?]

427.28 Church, I [church. I] [incomplete revision]

427.28 information, it [information. It] [incomplete revision]

428.28 benevolence, [benevolence] [incomplete revision]

428.36 selfishness, [selfishness;]

428.37 strengthening, [strengthening;]

430.21 were; [were.] [incomplete revision]

430.26 virtuous. [virtuous?] [incomplete revision]

431.5 but Because [but because] [incomplete revision]

431.23 mind, [mind;]

Edition: current; Page: [689]
431.34 there there [than there] [slip of the pen]

432.24 force, [force;]

432.30 spikes— [spikes;]

432.36 educated; [educated?]

433.4 why. [why?]

433.5 ask [ask,]

433.12 aspire to. [aspire to?]

433.22 talk, [talk;]

433.25 dependants—[dependants;]

435.3 In Most [In most] [incomplete revision]

435n.6 receive [receive,]

436.28 criticize [Criticize]

437.6 others [others;]

438.2 instance) [instance)—]

438.13 be Granted [be granted] [incomplete revision]

438.22 tumultuous [Tumultuous]

440.4 readers’ mind [reader’s mind] [incomplete revision]

440.7 finds [Finds]

441.25 III. [3.] [to conform to others in list]

442.1 scorn. The [scorn—the]

442.20 feelings [feelings:]

444.10 partly, [partly] [incomplete revision]

446.3 own; I [own. I] [as elsewhere]

448.4 Penryn. [Penryn?]

449.24-5 identity: have [identity. Have] [incomplete revision]

451.19-20 discussing [to discuss] [incomplete revision]

452.13 saw dust [sawdust]

452.14 verdigrean [verdigris]

467.7 valerandi, [valerandi] [incomplete revision]

470.18 fine [fine,]

472.5 about [about,]

472.27 cheerful [cheerful.]

475.3 breakfasted) [breakfasted),]

481.8 Bupleorum [Bupleurum] [as in fact: the reading is uncertain]

490.13 county. [county,]

493.3 pilosus) it [pilosus)—it]

493.10 Astralagus [Astralagalus] [as in fact]

493.20 Bexley, [Bexley),]

509.19 oak [oak;] [incomplete revision]

510.9 more, [more] [incomplete revision]

520.32 falls, [falls] [incomplete revision]

553.28 another [another,]

555.13-15 contrast. We [contrast. [heading] [4th to 7th] [paragraph] We]
[for ease of reading]

555.27-556.2 ones. On [ones. [heading] [8th] [paragraph] On] [for ease
of reading]

559.25 White [White,] [incomplete revision]

561.2 though no [though not]

563.37 Wiltshire [Wiltshire,] [incomplete revision]

564.12 Tirwick [Terwick] [as in fact]

565.25 ornament [ornaments]

Edition: current; Page: [690]
568.20 saw, the storehouses, [saw the storehouses] [incomplete revision]

568.38 pleasuregrounds [pleasure-grounds]

570.25 hedge [hedge,] [incomplete revision]

573.23 south western [south-western]

575.13 keep, [keep] [incomplete revision]

583.12 under of the [under the] [incomplete revision]

584.11 really, [really] [incomplete revision]

585.9 beach, [beach] [incomplete revision]

588.19 Mathiola [Matthiola] [slip of the pen?]

590.20 Brennon [Brannon]

606.14 came) [came),] [for sense]

609.11 ivy &c. [ivy, etc.,]

633.2 according is [according as]

634.27 When up [When] [incomplete revision]

684.12 people [people.”]

Edition: current; Page: [691]


Appendix D


Index of Persons and Works Cited, with Variants and Notes

like most nineteenth-century authors, Mill is cavalier in his approach
to sources, sometimes identifying them with insufficient care, and
occasionally quoting them inaccurately. This Appendix is intended to
help correct these deficiencies, and to serve as an index of names and
titles (which are consequently omitted in the Index proper). Included
here also are (at the end of the appendix and listed alphabetically by
country) references to parliamentary documents and to statute laws. The
material otherwise is arranged in alphabetical order, with an entry for
each person or work quoted or referred to. Speeches are listed in
chronological order in the speaker’s entry. Anonymous articles in
newspapers are entered in order of date under the title of the
particular newspaper. References to mythical and fictional characters
are excluded. The following abbreviations indicate our sources for
biographical information: ADB (Allgemeine deutsche Biographie), BP
(Burke’s Peerage and Baronetage), BU (Biographie universelle), DAB
(Dictionary of American Biography), DBF (Dictionnaire de biographie
française), DNB (Dictionary of National Biography), DPF (Dictionnaire
des parlementaires français), EB (Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th ed.),
GDU (Larousse, Grand dictionnaire universel du XIXe siècle), GE (Grande
encyclopédie), JMP (Judd, Members of Parliament), MEB (Boase, Modern
English Biography), PD (Parliamentary Debates), PP (Parliamentary
Papers), SC (JSM’s library, Somerville College, Oxford), WWBMP (Who’s
Who of British Members of Parliament), WWG (Who Was Who in the Greek
World), WWR (Who Was Who in the Roman World).

The entries take the following form:

1. Identification of persons: birth and death dates are followed by a
biographical source; if no source is indicated, available details are
given in a note.

2. Identification of works: author, title, etc. in the usual
bibliographic form.

3. Notes (if required) giving information about JSM’s use of the source,
indication if the work is in his library, Somerville College, Oxford,
and any other relevant information.

4. Lists of the pages where works are quoted and referred to.

5. In the case of quotations, a list of substantive variants between
Mill’s text and his source, in this form: Page and line reference to the
present text. Reading in the present text] Reading in the source (page
reference in the source).

The list of substantive variants also attempts to place quoted passages
in their contexts by giving the beginnings and endings of sentences. The
original wording is supplied where Mill has omitted two sentences or
less; only the length of other omissions is given. There being
uncertainty about the actual Classical texts used by Mill, the Loeb
editions are usually cited.

Edition: current; Page: [692]
Abadie, Arnaud (1797-1870; DBF). Itinéraire topographique et historique
des Hautes-Pyrénées. Paris: de Pelafol, 1819.

note: the passage JSM quotes from this work is taken by Abadie from
Faget de Baure, Essais historiques sur le Béarn, q.v.

quoted: 72

referred to: 69, 70, 98, 100, 102

72.13 jurats des] jurats1 des (102) [JSM gives the footnotes omitted
here in the following quotation on p. 72 above]

72.15 députés s’arrêtent] députés de chaque nation s’arrêtent (102)

72.15 territoire; les] territoire. Les (102)

72.20 Pats à bant, Paix à l’avenir] Pats à bant (Paix à l’avenir) (103)

72.22-3 ils se placent] ils les placent (103)

Abergavenny, Henry. See Henry Nevill.

Addison, Joseph (1672-1719; DNB). Referred to: 415

Aeschines (ca. 390-314 bc; WWG). Against Timarchus. In The Speeches of
Aeschines (Greek and English). Trans. Charles Darwin Adams. London:
Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1919, 4-155.

referred to: 368, 384

Aeschylus (525/4-456/5 bc; WWG). Αἰσχυλου τραγωδιαι ἑπτα. Aeschyli
tragoediae septem: cum scholiis graecis omnibus; deperditorum dramatum
fragmentis, versione et commentario Thomae Stanleii. London: Bee, 1663.

note: the copy JSM saw is in the Bibliothèque Municipale de Toulouse,
Fonds Racine, 9.

referred to: 56

— Αἰσχυλου Ἀγαμεμνων. Aeschyli Agamemnon. Ad fidem manuscriptorum
emendavit, notas et glossarium adjecit Carolus Jacobus Blomfield.
Cambridge: Typis Academicis, 1818.

referred to: 353

— Αἰσχυλου Προμηθευς Δεσμωτης. Aeschyli Prometheus Vinctus. Ad fidem
manuscriptorum emendavit, notas et glossarium adjecit Carolus Jacobus
Blomfield. Cambridge: Typis Academicis, 10.

referred to: 353

Aesop (ca. 600 bc; WWG). Aesop’s Fables. Trans. Vernon Stanley Vernon
Jones. London: Heinemann; New York: Doubleday, 1912.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. Aesopi Phrygis fabulae graece
et latine, cum aliis opusculis (Pladunes Collection) (Basel: Heruagius,
1544) is in SC.

referred to: 375-7, 438

The Age. Referred to: 448

Alaux (family)

note: the spelling at 122 of the name of these innkeepers is Aloux.

referred to: 122, 123, 124

Albin, John. A Companion to the Isle of Wight; Comprising the History of
the Island, and the Description of Its Local Scenery, as Well as All
Objects of Curiosity (1799). 12th ed. London: Albin, 1831.

quoted: 586

referred to: 569, 579, 584

586.24 “An ancient . . . date”] Here is a light-house, and an ancient .
. . date, which still remains entire, in defiance of time and the stormy
winds by which it has been for ages assailed. (65-6)

586.24-5 “appears] It appears (66)

Alcoran. See Koran.

Aldrich, Henry (1647-1710; DNB). Artis logicae compendium. Oxford:
Sheldonian Theatre, 1691.

referred to: 279, 351

Edition: current; Page: [693]
Alembert, Jean le Rond d’ (1717-83; DBF). Referred to: 169, 236

— “Eclaircissemens sur différens endroits des Elémens de philosophie”
(1767). In Mélanges de littérature, d’histoire et de philosophie (1753).
New ed. 5 vols. Amsterdam: Chatelain, 1759-67, V, 1-272.

note: in SC. The “Eclaircissemens” first appeared in this ed.

referred to: 157, 236, 240

— “Réflexions sur l’histoire et sur les différentes manières de
l’écrire” (1767). In Mélanges, V, 469-94.

note: the “Réflexions” first appeared in this ed.

referred to: 243-4

Alexander (the Great) (356-323 bc; WWG).

note: the reference is merely to someone named after Alexander.

referred to: 557

Alexander of Hales (ca. 1185-1245; DNB).

note: known by the Scholastic title of Doctor irrefragabilis.

referred to: 164

Althorp, Lord. See John Charles Spencer.

Ampère, André Marie (1775-1836; DBF). “Essai d’une classification
naturelle pour les corps simples,” Annales de Chimie et de Physique, 2nd
ser. (1816), I, 295-307, 373-93; II, 5-32, 105-25.

referred to: 54, 55

Anderson-Pelham, Charles (Baron, later Earl of Yarborough) (1781-1846;
BP). Referred to: 585

Androcles.

note: a slave in the time of Tiberius; see Aulus Gellius.

referred to: 162

Anglada, Joseph (1775-1833; DBF). Referred to: 132-43 passim

Annales de Chimie (Paris), 1st series, 1789-1815; 2nd series (Annales de
Chimie et de Physique), 1816-40.

note: the reference is to an unidentified article in the Annales.

referred to: 28

Annales de la Bigorre. See Deville.

Annales de Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées. Ed. Joseph Diez Gergonne
and J.E. Thomas-Lavernède (Nîmes), 1810-32.

referred to: 173

Annales des Voyages. See Nouvelles Annales.

Antisthenes (ca. 450-360 bc; WWG). Referred to: 643

Aquinas. See St. Thomas Aquinas.

Arbuthnot, John (1667-1735; DNB). The History of John Bull (1712). In
Jonathan Swift, The Works of Jonathan Swift, D.D., Dean of St.
Patrick’s, Dublin: Containing Additional Letters, Tracts, and Poems, Not
Hitherto Published; with Notes and a Life of the Author. Ed. Walter
Scott. 19 vols. Edinburgh: Constable; London: White, et al.; Dublin:
Cumming, 1814, VI, 233-407.

note: in SC.

referred to: 422

Arbuthnot, Thomas (1776-1849; DNB). Referred to: 627

Archimedes (287-212 bc; WWG).

note: see also Plutarch, Life of Marcellus.

referred to: 152

Edition: current; Page: [694]
Argens, Jean Baptiste de Boyer, marquis d’ (1704-71; DBF). Lettres
juives, ou Correspondance philosophique historique et critique, entre un
juif voyageur à Paris et ses correspondans en divers endroits (1736-37).
New ed. 8 vols. The Hague: Paupie, 1754.

referred to: 354

Argüelles, Agustín (1776-1844).

note: JSM uses the name Austin de Argueillas; see Diccionario
enciclopedico ilustrada critico de los hombres de España.

referred to: 10

Aristides (d. ca 467 bc; WWG). Referred to: 274

Aristophanes (fl. 427-388 bc; WWG). Referred to: 369-70, 385

— The Knights. In Aristophanes (Greek and English). Trans. Benjamin
Bickley Rogers. 3 vols. London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1924, I, 124-259.

referred to: 369-70, 385

Aristotle (384-322 bc; WWG). Referred to: 147, 189, 215, 261, 286, 367,
657

— The “Art” of Rhetoric (Greek and English). Trans. J.H. Freese. London:
Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1926.

note: De rhetorica seu arte dicendi libri (Greek and Latin), ed. Theodor
Goulston (London: Griffin, 1619) is in SC.

referred to: 351, 352

— The Nicomachean Ethics (Greek and English). Trans. H. Rackham. London:
Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1926.

note: Ethicorum ad Nicomachum libri decem (Greek and Latin), ed. William
Wilkinson (Oxford: Sheldonian Theatre, 1716) is in SC.

referred to: 351, 352

— On the Heavens (Greek and English). Trans. W.K.C. Guthrie. London:
Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1939.

referred to: 229

— On the Soul. In On the Soul, Parva Naturalia, On Breath (Greek and
English). Trans. W.S. Hett. London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1935, 8-202.

referred to: 187, 188

— The Physics (Greek and English). Trans. Philip H. Wickstead and
Francis M. Cornford. 2 vols. London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1963.

note: a one-vol. ed. formerly in SC.

referred to: 251

— Posterior Analytics. In Posterior Analytics, Topica (Greek and
English). Trans. Hugh Tredennick and E.S. Forster. London: Heinemann;
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1960, 24-260.

referred to: 187

— Prior Analytics. In The Categories, On Interpretation, Prior Analytics
(Greek and English). Trans. Harold P. Cooke and Hugh Tredennick. London:
Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967, 181-531.

referred to: 204, 215, 216

— Topica. In Posterior Analytics, Topica, 263-738.

referred to: 163

Edition: current; Page: [695]
Arnauld, Antoine (1612-94; DBF), and Pierre Nicole (1625-95; GDU). La
logique, ou L’art de penser: contenant outre les règles communes,
plusieurs observations nouvelles, propres à former le jugement (1662).
Amsterdam: Wolfgank, 1775.

note: in SC.

referred to: 173, 215, 220, 241, 279

Ashburnham, George (Earl) (1760-1830; BP). Referred to: 469

Ashburnham, John (1603-71; DNB). Referred to: 469

Ashburton, Lord. See Alexander Baring.

Askew, Henry (d. 1850).

note: Rector of Greystoke, Cumberland.

referred to: 553

Astley, Philip (1742-1814; DNB). Referred to: 36

Atkins, John (ca. 1760-1838).

note: Alderman of Walbrook Ward 1808-38.

referred to: 420

Aubuisson de Voisins, Jean François d’ (1769-1841; DBF).

note: JSM uses the spelling Daubuisson.

referred to: 43

Aubuisson de Voisins, Jean Pierre Marguerite d’ (b. 1770).

note: JSM uses the spelling Daubuisson. See Jules Villain, La France
moderne: Haute-Garonne et Arriège.

referred to: 35, 39, 40, 43

Audiffret, Pierre Hyacinthe Jacques Jean Baptiste (1773-1841; DBF). Life
of Omar I. In Biographie universelle ancienne et moderne. Ed. Louis
Gabriel Michaud. 52 vols. Paris: Michaud frères, 1811-28, XXXII, 1-5.

referred to: 225

Augustus, Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus (63 bc-14 ad; WWR). Referred
to: 49, 61

Austin, Charles (1799-1874; DNB).

note: the references are inferred.

referred to: 288, 291, 296, 298

Austin, John (1790-1859; DNB). Referred to: 615-37 passim

Austin, Sarah (née Taylor) (1793-1867; DNB). Referred to: 44, 615-37
passim

Bacon, Francis (1561-1626; DNB). Referred to: 396, 415, 657

— De augmentis scientarum (1623). In The Works of Francis Bacon. Ed.
James Spedding, et al. 14 vols. London: Longman, et al., 1857-74, I,
415-840 (Latin), III, 261-319 (English, Bk. I), IV, 274-498, and V,
3-119 (Bks. II-IX).

note: in SC.

referred to: 169, 178, 241

Balard, Antoine Jérôme (1802-76; DBF).

note: JSM uses the spelling Ballard.

referred to: 135-42 passim

Balsamo, Giuseppe (Count Cagliostro) (1743-95; EB). Referred to: 659

Baran (abbé).

note: not identified.

referred to: 193-4

Edition: current; Page: [696]
Baring, Alexander (Baron Ashburton) (1774-1848; DNB). Referred to: 312,
373

Baring, Francis (1740-1810; DNB). Referred to: 312

Baring, John.

note: the grandfather of Alexander Baring.

referred to: 312

Baring, Thomas (1772-1848; JMP). Referred to: 600

Bathilde (of France) (d. 680 ad; DBF). Referred to: 10, 11

Beauchamp, Henry de (Duke of Warwick) (1425-45; DNB). Referred to: 592

Bentham, Clara (1802-29).

note: one of Sir Samuel Bentham’s daughters.

referred to: 3-143 passim

Bentham, George (1800-84; DNB). Referred to: 3-143 passim

Bentham, Jeremy (1748-1832; DNB). Referred to: 7, 37n, 46, 71n, 90,
409n, 444, 450, 451, 452, 453, 657

— The Book of Fallacies; from the Unfinished Papers of Jeremy Bentham.
Ed. Peregrine Bingham. London: Hunt, 1824.

referred to: 261n, 263, 265, 267, 368, 384

— Chrestomathia: Being a Collection of Papers, Explanatory of the Design
of an Institution, Proposed to Be Set on Foot, under the Name of the
Chrestomathic Day School. London: Payne and Foss, et al., 1816. In The
Works of Jeremy Bentham. Ed. John Bowring. 11 vols. Edinburgh: Tait,
1843, VIII, 1-191.

note: Works in SC.

referred to: 34

— A Fragment on Government (1776). In Works, I, 221-95.

referred to: 309

— Paper on the preservation of grain.

note: not located.

referred to: 11, 12

— Plan of Parliamentary Reform, in the Form of a Catechism (1817). In
Works, III, 433-557.

referred to: 269, 330, 359, 360, 365, 366, 452

Bentham, Maria Sophia (née Fordyce) (1765-1858; DNB). Referred to: 3-143
passim

Bentham, Samuel (1757-1831; DNB). Referred to: 3-143 passim

Bentham, Sarah Jane (1804-64).

note: one of Sir Samuel Bentham’s daughters.

referred to: 3-143 passim

Bérard, Auguste (1796-1852; DBF). Referred to: 128-37 passim

Bérard, Etienne (1764-1839).

note: a chemist, proprietor of an industrial chemical factory in
Montpellier, and Treasurer of the Ecole de Pharmacie, 1813-39.

referred to: 41, 42, 43, 44, 70, 71, 73, 126, 127-41 passim

Bérard, Jacques Etienne (1789-1869; DBF).

note: JSM refers to him as M. Bérard, fils.

referred to: 127-34 passim

Berkeley, George (1685-1753; DNB). Referred to: 166, 415, 657

— An Essay toward a New Theory of Vision (1709). In The Works of George
Berkeley, D.D. 3 vols. London: Priestley, 1820, I, 225-316.

note: in SC.

referred to: 166

Edition: current; Page: [697]
— Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous (1713). In Works, I,
255-360.

referred to: 166

— A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710). In
Works, I, 1-106.

referred to: 166

Berry, Charles Ferdinand de Bourbon, duc de (1778-1820; DBF).

note: JSM uses the spelling Berri.

referred to: 23n, 24

Berthollet, Claude Louis, comte (1749-1822; DBF). Referred to: 11, 12

Berthollet, Marguerite (née Baur) (d. 1828; DBF). Referred to: 11, 12

Bevis of Hampton. Referred to: 610

Bexley, Lord. See Nicholas Vansittart.

Bible. The Holy Bible, Conteyning the Old Testament, and the New: Newly
Translated out of the Originall Tongues: and with the Former
Translations Diligently Compared and Revised by His Maiesties Speciall
Comandement. Appointed to Be Read in Churches. London: Barker, 1611.

referred to: 427, 526

— New Testament.

note: see also Sarah Trimmer’s Abridgment.

referred to: 526

— Acts. Referred to: 361

— Daniel. Referred to: 307

— Ecclesiasticus (Apocryphya). Referred to: 375

— Genesis. Referred to: 650

— John.

quoted: 665

665.5 “The night when no one can work”] I must work the works of him
that sent me, while it is day: the night cometh, when no man can work.
(9:4)

— Judges. Referred to: 279

— Luke. Referred to: 58

— Matthew.

quoted: 306, 389, 401

306.7 the signs of the times,] O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face
of the sky; but can ye not discern the signs of the times? (16:3)

389.24-5 for . . . of heaven:] And again I say unto you, It is easier
for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for . . . enter into
. . . of God. (19:24)

401.7-8 the servants of God and of Mammon,] No man can serve two
masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he
will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and
mammon. (6:24)

— Proverbs.

quoted: 278

278.30-1 snare:] snare: but wise men turn away wrath. (29:8)

— Psalms. Referred to: 427

— I Samuel. Referred to: 279, 314

Biot, Jean Baptiste (1774-1862; DBF). Essai de géométrie analytique. See
Traité analytique.

— Traité analytique des courbes et des surfaces du second degré (1802).
Retitled Essai de géométrie analytique, appliqué aux courbes et aux
surfaces du second ordre. 2nd ed. Paris: Bernard, 1805.

referred to: 129, 130, 131, 132, 139

Edition: current; Page: [698]
Blackstone, William (1723-80; DNB). Referred to: 422

— Commentaries on the Laws of England. 4 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1765-69.

note: the 5th ed., 4 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1773) is in SC.

referred to: 263, 332, 377, 388, 422

Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine. Referred to: 414

Blanquet du Cayla.

note: Rector of the University of Montpellier 1815-22.

referred to: 131

Blanquet du Cayla (Mme).

note: wife of the Rector.

referred to: 131

Blaquiere, Edward (1779-1832).

note: a naval lieutenant.

referred to: 89, 90

Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus (ca. 476-524; WWR). De arithmetica,
libri duo. In Vol. LXIII of Patrologiae cursus completus. Series latina.
Ed. Jacques Paul Migne. Paris: Migne, 1860, cols. 1079-1166.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference.

referred to: 246-7

Boileau, Paul Louis (ca. 1781-1879).

note: botanist, mayor of Bagnères-de-Luchon 1816.

referred to: 106, 109, 110

Boileau-Despréaux, Nicolas (1636-1711; GDU). Referred to: 34

— L’art poétique (1674). In Oeuvres de Nicolas Boileau-Despréaux. Avec
des éclaircissemens historiques, donnez par lui-même. New ed. 2 vols.
The Hague: Gosse and Neaulme, 1729, I, 263-324.

note: in SC.

quoted: 211

referred to: 133, 134, 136

211.18 un . . . poème;] Un . . Poème. (284; Chant II, l. 94)

— “Epistre VI, à Lamoignon” (1683). In Oeuvres, I, 357-70.

referred to: 43

Boiste, Pierre Claude Victoire (1765-1824; GDU). Dictionnaire des
difficultés de la langue française, résolues par les plus célèbres
grammairiens; extrait du Dictionnaire universel par P.C.V. Boiste.
Paris: Boiste, 1800.

referred to: 48, 56, 60

Bolingbroke. See Henry Saint-John.

Bonald, Louis Gabriel Ambroise, vicomte de (1754-1840; DBF).

note: JSM uses the spelling Bonnal.

referred to: 181, 187

— Recherches philosophiques sur les premiers objets des connoissances
morales (1818). In Oeuvres complètes de M. Bonald. 3 vols. Paris: Migne,
1859, III, 1-448.

referred to: 181, 185, 187, 189

The Booke of the Common Prayer and Administracion of the Sacramentes,
and Other Rites and Ceremonies of the Churche: after the Use of the
Churche of England. London: Whitchurche, 1549.

note: the reference at 355 is to the Thirty-nine Articles; the quotation
of the General Confession is indirect.

referred to: 355, 427, 526

Edition: current; Page: [699]
Bordeaux, Henri de Bourbon, comte de Chambord, duc de (1820-83; DBF).
Referred to: 113

Bossuet, Jacques Bénigne (1627-1704; DBF).

note: see also Antoine Léonard Thomas.

referred to: 55

Both, Jan (1618-52; EB). Referred to: 565

Boulet (Mme).

note: JSM’s music teacher in Toulouse.

referred to: 39-60 passim

Bourbon, Antoine de, duc de Vendôme, roi de Navarre (1518-62; DBF).
Referred to: 238

Bourdier de Beauregard, Généreux Valentin (ca. 1723-1803).

note: substituted a tortoise-shell cradle of his own for that of Henri
IV to save it during the Revolution.

referred to: 78

Brannon, George. Vectis Scenery. Being a Series of Original and Select
Views, Exhibiting the Picturesque Beauties, Local Peculiarities, and
Places of Particular Interest in the Isle of Wight, Drawn from Nature
and Engraved by George Brannon (1824). New ed., corrected. Southampton:
Brannon, 1825.

referred to: 590

Brewer, James Norris (fl. 1799-1829; DNB). A Topographical and
Historical Description of the County of Oxford; Containing an Account of
Its Towns, Cathedral, Castles, Antiquities, Churches, Monuments, Public
Edifices, Picturesque Scenery, the Residences of the Nobility, Gentry,
&c. London: Sherwood, et al., 1819.

referred to: 482n

Brougham, Henry Peter (Lord) (1778-1868; DNB). Referred to: 275, 298,
299, 404, 405, 427

— Speech on Trade with India (15 May, 1827; Commons), PD, n.s., Vol. 17,
col. 841.

referred to: 405

— Speech on the Court of Chancery (22 May, 1827; Commons), PD, n.s.,
Vol. 17, cols. 965-73.

referred to: 404

Brown (Miss).

note: not identified.

referred to: 10, 11

Brown, Thomas (1778-1820; DNB). Referred to: 657

Browne, George Samuel (Viscount Montagu) (1769-93; BP). Referred to: 564

Brutus, Marcus Junius (ca. 78-42 bc; WWR). Referred to: 343

Buckler-Lethbridge, Thomas (1778-1849; BP).

note: JSM uses the name Lethbridge.

referred to: 401

— Speech on the Corn Laws (2 May, 1826; Commons), PD, n.s., Vol. 15,
cols. 784-91.

referred to: 381

— Speech on the New Administration—Test Act—Supplies (11 May, 1827;
Commons), PD, n.s., Vol. 17, cols. 745-51.

referred to: 401

Edition: current; Page: [700]
Buller, Arthur William (1808-69).

note: younger brother of JSM’s friend Charles Buller.

referred to: 622

Buller, Charles (1774-1848).

note: father of JSM’s friend Charles Buller. The reference at 633 is to
the Bullers of Polvellen.

referred to: 576, 616, 633

Buller, Charles (1806-48; DNB). Referred to: 576n, 616n, 633

Buller, John (1771-1849).

note: uncle of the younger Charles Buller.

referred to: 616

Burgundy, Duke of. See Charles le Téméraire.

Burke, Edmund (1729-97; DNB). Referred to: 384, 450

— An Appeal from the New to the Old Whigs, in Consequence of Some Late
Discussions in Parliament, Relative to the Reflections on the French
Revolution (1791). In Works of the Right Honourable Edmund Burke. 8
vols. London: Dodsley (Vols. I-III); Rivington (Vols. IV-VIII),
1792-1827, III, 375-519.

note: Vols. III-V of this ed. formerly in SC.

referred to: 263, 332, 377

— Reflections on the Revolution in France, and on the Proceedings in
Certain Societies in London Relative to That Event. In a Letter Intended
to Have Been Sent to a Gentleman in Paris (1790). In Works, III, 19-321.

referred to: 276, 376

— “Speech on a Motion Made in the House of Commons, the 7th of May 1782,
for a Committee to Inquire into the State of the Representation of the
Commons in Parliament.” In Works, V, 387-98.

quoted: 269

269.4-5 “the envy of surrounding nations and the admiration of the
world.”] This Constitution in former days used to be the admiration and
the envy of the world; it was the pattern for politicians; the theme of
the eloquent; the meditation of the philosopher in every part of the
world—as to Englishmen it was their pride, their consolation. (397)

— Thoughts on the Cause of the Present Discontents (1770). In Works, I,
409-505.

referred to: 260, 263, 265, 267, 368, 384

Burnett, Bishop.

note: retired naval lieutenant; see The 1820 Settlers, ed. Guy Butler
(1974).

referred to: 406

Burns, Robert (1759-96; DNB). Works. New ed. 2 pts. London: Tegg, et
al.; Dublin: Milliken, et al.; Glasgow: Griffin, 1824.

note: in SC, as was formerly The Poetical Works, 2 vols. (London:
Pickering, 1830).

referred to: 439

Buron. See Rodriguez Burón.

Burrard-Neale, Harry (1765-1840; BP). Referred to: 594

Burrow, Harriet.

note: JSM’s grandmother.

referred to: 19, 26

Burton, Edward (1794-1836; DNB). An Introduction to the Metres of the
Greek Tragedians. By a Member of the University of Oxford. Oxford:
Pearson, 1821.

referred to: 353

Edition: current; Page: [701]
Butet, Pierre Roland François (1769-1825; DBF). Abrégé d’un cours
complet de léxicographie, à l’usage des élèves de la cinquième classe de
l’école polymatique. Paris: Renouard, 1801.

referred to: 170

Buxton, Thomas Fowell (1786-1845; DNB). An Inquiry Whether Crime and
Misery Are Produced or Prevented, by Our Present System of Prison
Discipline. London: Arch, 1818.

referred to: 278

Byron, George Gordon (Lord) (1788-1824; DNB). Referred to: 434-42 passim

— Cain, a Mystery. In Sardanapalus, a Tragedy. The Two Foscari, a
Tragedy. Cain, a Mystery. London: Murray, 1821, 330-439.

referred to: 438, 439

— Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage, a Romaunt, in Four Cantos (1812-18). 2
vols. London: Murray, 1819.

quoted: 436, 630

referred to: 436, 438, 439

436.37 leaps the live thunder] Far along, / From peak to peak, the
rattling crags among / Leaps the live thunder! (II, 51, Canto III, sect.
xcii, ll. 863-5)

630.29 “dark-blue sea”] All have their fooleries—not alike are thine, /
Fair Cadiz, rising o’er the dark blue sea! (I, 47; Canto I, sect. lxxi,
ll. 1-2)

— Don Juan, a Poem (1819-24). 2 vols. Edinburgh: Kay, 1825.

quoted: 625

referred to: 438, 439

625.10 “fair form”] But what was strangest in this virgin crew, /
Although her beauty was enough to vex, / After the first investigating
view, / They all found out as few, or fewer, specks / In the fair form
of their companion new, / Than is the custom of the gentle sex, / When
they survey, with Christian eyes or Heathen, / In a new face “the
ugliest creature breathing.” (II, Canto 6, stanza 37)

— The Giaour, a Fragment of a Turkish Tale. London: Murray, 1813.

referred to: 436, 438, 439

— Lara, a Tale. London: Murray, 1814.

referred to: 438

— Manfred, a Dramatic Poem. London: Murray, 1817.

referred to: 439

— Marino Faliero, Doge of Venice. In Marino Faliero, Doge of Venice. An
Historical Tragedy, in Five Acts. The Prophecy of Dante, a Poem. London:
Murray, 1821, 1-208.

referred to: 436

— Parisina. In The Siege of Corinth: A Poem. Parisina: A Poem. London:
Murray, 1816, 59-91.

referred to: 435n, 436

— The Prisoner of Chillon. In The Prisoner of Chillon, and Other Poems.
London: Murray, 1816, 3-22.

referred to: 437

— The Siege of Corinth. In The Siege of Corinth: A Poem. Parisina: A
Poem. London: Murray, 1816, 1-58.

referred to: 435n, 437

Edition: current; Page: [702]
Cabanis, Pierre Jean Georges (1757-1808; DBF). Referred to: 187

— Rapports du physique et du moral de l’homme (1802). 2 vols. Paris:
Caille and Rivier, 1815.

note: in SC.

referred to: 187, 189

Caesar, Gaius Julius (100-44 bc; WWR).

note: the reference at 557 is merely to someone named after Caesar.

referred to: 50, 557

Cagliostro. See Giuseppe Balsamo.

Cagnoli, Antonio (1743-1816). Traité de trigonométrie rectiligne et
sphérique (in Italian, 1786). Trans. N.M. Chompré. 2nd ed. Paris:
Courcier, et al., 1808.

note: see Dizionario biografico degli Italiani.

referred to: 35, 41

Cambon, Jean (b. ca. 1758).

note: local landowner in Montpellier.

referred to: 127-8

Cambronero, Manuel María (1765-1834).

note: JSM uses the spelling Cambronaro; see Enciclopedia universal
ilustrada.

referred to: 20-1

Camden, Lord. See John Jeffreys Pratt.

Campbell, Alexander. See Glynn-Campbell.

Canaletto (or Canal), Giovanni Antonio (1697-1768; EB). Referred to: 565

Canning, George (1770-1827; DNB). Referred to: 285, 333, 379, 398-408
passim, 409n

— Corrected Report of the Speech of the Right Honourable George Canning,
in the House of Commons, 25th April, 1822, on Lord John Russell’s Motion
for a Reform of Parliament. London: Hatchard, 1822.

referred to: 285

— Speech on Sir Francis Burdett’s Motion for a Reform of Parliament (2
June, 1818; Commons), PD, 1st ser., Vol. 38, cols. 1170-3.

referred to: 449

— Speech on the New Administration—Shipping Interest (3 May, 1827;
Commons), PD, n.s., Vol. 17, cols. 539-41.

referred to: 399, 402, 403-4

— Speech on the Publication of Libels—Motion for the Repeal of One of
the Six Acts (31 May, 1827; Commons), PD, n.s., Vol. 17, cols. 1077-81.

referred to: 405, 406

— Speech on the Dissenters’ Marriage Bill (19 June, 27; Commons), PD,
n.s., Vol. 17, col. 1345.

referred to: 399

Carew, John Edward (1785?-1868; DNB). Referred to: 565

Carlile, Jane.

note: wife of Richard Carlile.

referred to: 419, 420, 421

Carlile, Mary Ann.

note: sister of Richard Carlile.

referred to: 419, 420, 421

Carlile, Richard (1790-1843; DNB). Referred to: 419, 420, 421

Carlyle, Thomas (1795-1881; DNB). Referred to: 644, 653, 656, 667

Edition: current; Page: [703]
— “Boswell’s Life of Johnson,” Fraser’s Magazine, V (May 1832), 379-413.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 644

— “Death of Goethe,” New Monthly Magazine, XXXIV (June 1832), 507-12.

referred to: 651

— “Goethe,” Foreign Review and Continental Miscellany, II (July 1828),
80-127.

note: the reference is illustrative of Carlyle’s view of Goethe as
“exemplar” of the age.

referred to: 651

— “Goethe’s Faust,” New Edinburgh Review, II (Apr. 1822), 316-34.

referred to: 651

— “Goethe’s Helena,” Foreign Review and Continental Miscellany, I (Apr.
1828), 429-68.

referred to: 651

— “Goethe’s Works,” Foreign Quarterly Review, X (Aug. 1832), 1-44.

referred to: 651

— On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and the Heroic in History, London: Fraser,
1841.

note: in SC.

referred to: 653, 666

— Past and Present. London: Chapman and Hall, 1843.

note: the reference is inferential.

referred to: 656, 657

— “Schiller, Goethe, and Madame de Staël,” Fraser’s Magazine, V (Mar.
1832), 171-6.

referred to: 651

— “State of German Literature,” Edinburgh Review, XLVI (Oct. 1827),
304-51.

referred to: 653

Carne, Elizabeth Catherine Thomas (1817-73; MEB).

note: the identification is not certain.

referred to: 632

Carne, Joseph (1782-1858; DNB). Referred to: 625, 632, 634, 635

Carnot, Lazare Nicolas Marguerite (1753-1823; DBF). Referred to: 244

— De la corrélation des figures de géométrie. Paris: Duprat, an IX
[1801].

referred to: 244

— Géométrie de position. Paris: Duprat, an XI [1803].

referred to: 244

— Mémoire sur la relation qui existe entre les distances respectives de
cinq points quelconques pris dans l’espace; suivi d’un Essai sur la
théorie des transversales. Paris: Courcier, 1806.

referred to: 244

Caroline (of England) (1768-1821; DNB). Referred to: 25, 36, 37n

Carrington, Lord. See Robert Smith.

Cartwright, John (1740-1824; DNB). Referred to: 10

Castlereagh, Lord. See Robert Stewart.

Catiline (Lucius Sergius Catilina) (ca. 108-63 bc; WWR).

note: see also Sallust.

referred to: 48, 49n, 50-1, 53, 54, 341-8 passim

Cato, Marcus Porcius (234-149 bc; WWR). Referred to: 331, 343

Cavendish, William George Spencer (Duke of Devonshire) (1790-1858; DNB).
Referred to: 337, 507

Edition: current; Page: [704]
Cellini, Benvenuto (1500-71; EB). Referred to: 648

— Vita di Benvenuto Cellini. Naples: Martello, [1728].

note: written between 1558 and 1566, it was not published until 1728,
and did not become well known outside Italy until the nineteenth
century.

referred to: 648

Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de (1547-1616; EB). Referred to: 415

Chadwick, Edwin (1800-90; DNB). Referred to: 477-99 passim

Chamberlayne, Thomas (1805-76).

note: see Burke’s Landed Gentry.

referred to: 610

Chaptal, Jean Antoine Claude (1756-1832; DBF). Referred to: 125

Charlemagne (ca. 742-814 ad; DBF).

note: the reference is in a logical proposition.

referred to: 213

Charles I (of England) (1600-49; DNB). Referred to: 427, 469

Charles II (of England) (1630-85; DNB). Referred to: 455

Charles le Téméraire, duc de Bourgogne (1433-77; DBF). Referred to: 6

Chauvelin, Bernard François, marquis de (1766-1832; DBF). Referred to:
23

Chesnel de la Charbonnelaye, Louis Pierre François Adolphe (1791-1862;
DBF). Referred to: 24

— Notice sur Henri IV et sur la conservation du berceau de ce prince
pendant les troubles de la France en 1793. Pau: Vignancour, 1818.

referred to: 78

Chesnel de la Charbonnelaye, Marie Thérèse Louise Adelaide (1820-44).

note: daughter of Mary Louisa Bentham Chesnel.

referred to: 40, 42, 76

Chesnel de la Charbonnelaye, Mary Louisa (née Bentham) (1797-1865).

note: daughter of Samuel Bentham.

referred to: 8, 19, 26, 27, 32, 40, 42, 47, 76, 94, 123, 124

Chetwynde, George (1783-1850).

note: a Surrey magistrate; JSM uses the spelling Chetwinde.

referred to: 274

Christ. See Jesus.

Cicero, Marcus Tullius (106-43 bc; WWR). Referred to: 347, 352, 413

— De divinatione. In De senectute, De amicitia, De divinatione (Latin
and English). Trans. William Armistead Falconer. London: Heinemann;
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1923, 222-538.

note: in SC is Opera, 10 vols. (in 8) (Leyden: Elzevir, 1642), in which
this work is at VIII, 156-272.

referred to: 651

— De fato. In De oratore, De fato, Paradoxa stoicorum, De partitione
oratoria (Latin and English). Trans. H. Rackham. London: Heinemann;
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1942, 187-249.

referred to: 197

— The Letters to His Friends (Latin and English). Trans. W. Glynn
Williams. 3 vols. London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1927-29.

note: in SC, Epistolarum ad familiares libri xvi is in Opera, V.

referred to: 137, 138

Edition: current; Page: [705]
— Pro T. Annio Milone. In Cicero: The Speeches, Pro T. Annio Milone, In
L. Calpurnium Pisonem, Pro M. Aemilio Scauro, Pro M. Fonteio, Pro C.
Rabirio Postumo, Pro M. Marcello, Pro Q. Ligario, Pro rege Deiotaro
(Latin and English). Trans. N.H. Watts. London: Heinemann: Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1953, 6-123.

note: in Opera, IV, 220-620.

referred to: 114, 125, 126, 127

Clairaut, Alexis Claude (1713-65; DBF).

note: see also Lacroix.

referred to: 227

— “Quatre problèmes sur de nouvelles courbes,” Miscellanea berolinensia
ad incrementum scientiarum, ex scriptis societatis regiae scientiarum
exhibitis edita, IV (1734), 143-52.

referred to: 227

Clarendon, Lord. See Edward Hyde.

Claude (1600-82; GDU).

note: born Claude Gelée, called Lorrain.

referred to: 565

Clayton, William Robert (1786-1866; MEB). Referred to: 493

Clément-Desormes, Nicolas (1778-1841; DBF). Referred to: 9

Clifford, Anne (Countess of Dorset, Pembroke and Montgomery) (1590-1676;
DNB). Referred to: 508

Cobbett, William (1762-1835; DNB). Referred to: 285, 303, 406, 600

— Cobbett’s Sermons on 1. Hypocrisy and Cruelty. 2. Drunkenness. 3.
Bribery. 4. Oppression. 5. Unjust Judges. 6. The Sluggard. 7. Murder. 8.
Gaming. 9. Public Robbery. 10. The Unnatural Mother. 11. Forbidding
Marriage. 12. Parsons and Tithes. London: Clement, 1822.

referred to: 600

— Cobbett’s Weekly Political Pamphlet, XXXI-XXXV (2 Nov., 1816-6 Jan.,
1820).

note: this cheap edition (the 2nd) of the Register was dubbed “twopenny
trash” by the editor of the ministerial Courier (q.v.), among others. It
ceased publication upon becoming subject to the newspaper stamp duty in
1820 (60 George III & 1 George IV, c. 9, q.v.).

referred to: 406

— Cottage Economy; Containing Information Relative to the Brewing of
Beer, Making of Bread, Keeping of Cows, Pigs, Bees, Ewes, Goats, Poultry
and Rabbits, and Relative to Other Matters Deemed Useful in the
Conducting of the Affairs of a Labourer’s Family . . . to Which Is Added
The Poor Man’s Friend: A Defence of the Rights of Those Who Do the Work
and Fight the Battles. London: Clement, 1822.

referred to: 600

— “Rural Ride, through the North East Part of Sussex, and All across
Kent, from the Weald of Sussex, to Dover,” Cobbett’s Weekly Register, 6
Sept., 1823, cols. 577-634.

referred to: 303-4

— A Treatise on Cobbett’s Corn, Containing Instructions for Propagating
and Cultivating the Plant and for Harvesting and Preserving the Crop;
and also an Account of the Several Uses to Which Produce Is Applied,
with Minute Directions Relative to Each Mode of Application. London:
Cobbett, 1828.

referred to: 600

Edition: current; Page: [706]
—, ed. Cobbett’s Weekly Political Register.

referred to: 600

Cole, Henry (1808-82; DNB). Referred to: 551-6 passim, 557-611 passim

Coleridge, Samuel Taylor (1772-1834; DNB). Referred to: 429-30, 437

— Christabel. In Christabel; Kubla Khan, a Vision; The Pains of Sleep.
London: Murray, 1816, 3-48.

referred to: 437

— “Lewti, or the Circassian Love Chaunt” (1794). In The Poetical Works
of S.T. Coleridge, Including the Dramas of Wallenstein, Remorse, and
Zapolya. 3 vols. London: Pickering, 1828, I, 167-8.

referred to: 437

— “Lines on an Autumnal Evening” (1793). In The Poetical Works, I, 30-4.

referred to: 437

— “The Rime of the Ancient Mariner.” In Sibylline Leaves: A Collection
of Poems by S.T. Coleridge, Esq. London: Rest Fenner, 1817, 1-39.

quoted: 582

582.27-8 “For thou] And thou (17)

— Second Lay Sermon [“Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters”]
(1817). 2nd ed. In On the Constitution of Church and State, and Lay
Sermons. Ed. Henry Nelson Coleridge. London: Pickering, 1839, 303-430.

note: in SC.

referred to: 429-30

Collins, Anthony (1676-1729; DNB). Referred to: 388

Colquhoun (Miss).

note: the sister-in-law of Thomas Thomson.

referred to: 44

Combe, George (1788-1858; DNB). A System of Phrenology. 2nd ed.
Edinburgh: Anderson; London: Longman, 1825.

note: 1st ed. entitled Essays on Phrenology (1819).

referred to: 433

Combettes, Joseph Marie de, vicomte de Caumon (1771-1855).

note: a magistrate; referred to by Mill as Caumbette Comon.

referred to: 59

Comte, Andrienne (née Say) (1795-1857).

note: daughter of Jean Baptiste Say; wife of Charles Comte.

referred to: 7

Comte, Isidore Auguste Marie François Xavier (1798-1857; DBF). Referred
to: 645

— Système de politique positive, ou Traité de sociologie, instituant la
religion de l’humanité. 4 vols. Paris: Mathias, Carilian-Goeury and
Dalmont (Vol. I); Comte, et al. (Vol. II); Comte, Carilian-Goeury and
Dalmont (Vols. III-IV), 1851-54.

note: in SC.

referred to: 646

Condillac, Etienne Bonnot de (1715-80; DBF). Referred to: 147, 180, 240,
241, 242, 243, 244, 657

— L’art de penser (1775). In Oeuvres complètes. 31 vols. Paris: Dufart,
1803, IX.

note: in SC.

referred to: 165, 242

— Essai sur l’origine des connoissances humaines (1746). In Oeuvres
complètes, I-II.

referred to: 178, 180-1, 187, 240, 242

Edition: current; Page: [707]
— “Grammaire.” In Oeuvres complètes, VIII, 1-384.

referred to: 243

— “Introduction au cours d’études.” In Oeuvres complètes, VIII, i-cl.

referred to: 240, 242

— La logique, ou Les premiers développemens de l’art de penser (1780).
In Oeuvres complètes, XXX, 131-51.

quoted. 215, 241

referred to: 149, 179, 181, 189, 242, 243

215.17-20 “Je me rappelle qu’on m’a enseigné au collège qu’on comparait
deux idées par le moyen d’une troisième: qu’on concluait que l’idée A
convient à l’idée B parce que l’une et l’autre convient à l’idée C: On
ne verra rien de tout cela dans ce livre.”] Je me souviens qu’on
enseignoit au Collège, que l’art de raisonner consiste à comparer
ensemble deux idées par le moyen d’une troisième. Pour juger, disoit-on,
si l’idée A renferme ou exclut l’idée B, prenez une troisième idée C, à
laquelle vous les comparerez successivement l’une et l’autre. Si l’idée
A est renfermée dans l’idée C, et l’idée C dans l’idée B, concluez que
l’idée A est renfermée dans l’idée B. Si l’idée A est renfermée dans
l’idée C, et que l’idée C exclue l’idée B, concluez que l’idée A exclut
l’idée B. Nous ne ferons aucun usage de tout cela. (XXX, 65n; Pt. I,
Chap. vii)

241.14-17 “La synthèse,” . . . “cette méthode ténébreuse, qu’on appelle
méthode de doctrine, a créé la manie des définitions. J’aurai de la
peine à la faire comprendre, puisqu’en vérité je ne la comprends pas
moi-même. Mais un ouvrage connu en donne cette idée.”] [paragraph] C’est
la synthèse qui a amené la manie des définitions, cette méthode
ténébreuse qui commence toujours par où il faut finir, et que cependant
on appelle méthode de doctrine. [paragraph] Je n’en donnerai pas une
notion plus précise, soit parce que je ne la comprends pas, soit parce
qu’il n’est pas possible de la comprendre. (XXX, 149; Pt. II, Chap. vi)

241.26-31 “Puisque ces deux méthodes sont directement opposées l’une de
l’autre, il faut nécessairement que si l’une est bonne, l’autre soit
mauvaise: car il est clair que si ce que je cherche est sur la montagne,
je ne le trouverai pas si je descends dans la vallée; s’il est dans la
vallée, je ne le trouverai pas sur la montagne. De . . . réfutation plus
sérieuse.”] A ce langage je vois seulement que ce sont là deux méthodes
contraires, et que si l’une est bonne, l’autre est mauvaise En effet, on
ne peut aller que du connu à l’inconnu. Or, si l’inconnu est sur la
montagne, ce ne sera pas en descendant qu’on y arrivera; et s’il est
dans la vallée, ce ne sera pas en montant. Il ne peut donc pas y avoir
deux chemins contraires pour y arriver. De . . critique plus sérieuse.
(XXX, 149-50; Pt. II, Chap. vi)

— Traité des sensations (1754). In Oeuvres complètes, IV, 1-420.

referred to: 154, 165, 187

Condorcet, Marie Jean Antoine Nicolas Caritat, marquis de (1743-94;
DBF). Esquisse d’un tableau historique des progrès de l’esprit humain.
Paris: Agasse, 1795.

referred to: 429-30

— Vie de Voltaire (1787). In François Marie Arouet Voltaire. Oeuvres
complètes. 66 vols. Paris: Renouard, 1819-25, LXIV, 1-172.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 341

Congreve, William (1670-1729; DNB). The Way of the World (1700). In The
Works of Mr. William Congreve, Consisting of His Plays and Poems. 4th
ed. 3 vols. London: Tonson, 1725, III, 3-149.

note: in SC.

referred to: 649

Constituzione politica del Regno delle Due Sicilie. Naples: Matarazzo,
1821.

referred to: 58

Copernicus, Nicolaus (1473-1543; EB). Referred to: 251

— De revolutionibus orbium coelestium libri VI. Nuremberg: Petreium,
1543.

referred to: 251

Edition: current; Page: [708]
Corneille, Pierre (1606-84; DBF). Referred to: 21, 26, 46, 47

The Courier. Leading article on parliamentary reform, 2 Jan., 1817, 2.

referred to: 406

Courtois.

note: banking family in Toulouse. The reference is to two of the four
sons of Isaac Courtois (1743-1819): Louis (1775-1837), Auguste
(1783-1847), Henri (1786-1848), Félix (1790-1865).

referred to: 38

Crabbe, George (1754-1832; DNB). Referred to: 442

Crawley, Francis Edward (1803-32).

note: see Gentlemen’s Magazine, Sept. 1832.

referred to: 478-99 passim

Cribb, Tom (1781-1848; DNB). Referred to: 373

Cromwell, Oliver (1599-1658; DNB). Referred to: 458, 484

Curwen, John Christian (1756-1828; JMP). Referred to: 513, 555

Cuvier, Georges Léopold Chrétien Frédéric Dagobert, baron (1769-1832;
DBF). Leçons d’anatomie comparée. 5 vols. Paris: Baudoin, an VIII [1800]
(Vols. I-II); Genets, an XIV [1805] (Vols. III-V).

referred to: 250

Cuyp, Aelbert Jacobsz (1620-91; EB). Referred to: 565

Dalhousie, Lord. See James Ramsay.

Daniel, George (1789-1864; DNB). The Modern Dunciad, a Satire; with
Notes, Biographical and Critical. London: Redwell and Wilson, 1814.

referred to: 417

Darlington, Lord. See William Harry Vane.

Daubuisson. See Aubuisson de Voisins.

Daure.

note: JSM’s fencing master in France.

referred to: 51, 112

David, Jacques Louis (1748-1825; DBF). Referred to: 10, 11

Davis, John Scarlett. Fourteen Views in Lithography, of Bolton Abbey,
Wharfedale, Yorkshire, from Drawings of This Beautiful Ruin, and the
Adjoining Scenery, Taken on the Spot by J. Scarlett Davis, under the
Immediate Approval of the Rev. W. Carr, B.D., to Which Is Added a
Description of Each View. 2nd ed. London: Cock, 1829.

referred to: 507

Davy, Humphry (1778-1829; DNB). Referred to: 176, 301

— “The Bakerian Lecture on Some Chemical Agencies of Electricity,”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, XCVII, Pt. 1
(1807), 1-56.

referred to: 301

— “On the Action of Acids on the Salts Usually Called Hyperoxymuriates,
and on the Gases Produced from Them,” Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London, CV, Pt. 1 (1815), 214-19.

referred to: 176

— “Some Experiments on a Solid Compound of Iodine and Oxygene, and on
Its Chemical Agencies,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
of London, CV, Pt. 1 (1815), 203-13.

referred to: 176

Dawes (or Daw), Sophia, baronne de Feuchères (1790-1840; DNB). Referred
to: 601

Edition: current; Page: [709]
D’Eichthal. See Eichthal.

Demosthenes (384-322 bc; WWG). Referred to: 261, 286, 352, 405, 413

— De falsa legatione. In De corona and De falsa legatione (Greek and
English). Trans. C.A. and J.H. Vince. London: Heinemann; New York:
Putnam’s Sons, 1926, 246-472.

referred to: 368, 384

Descartes, René (1596-1650; DBF). Referred to: 147, 187, 657

— Discours de la méthode pour bien conduire sa raison et chercher la
vérité dans les sciences, plus la dioptrique, les météores, et la
géométrie, qui sont des essais de cette méthode. Leyden: printed Maire,
1637.

note: the same phrase is quoted in both places; see also next entry.

quoted: 225, 234

225.15 Je pense, donc je suis:] Et remarquant que cete verité: ie pense,
donc ie suis, estoit si ferme & si assurée, que toutes les plus
extravagantes suppositions des Sceptiques n’estoient pas capables de
l’esbransler, ie iugay que ie pouvois la recevoir, sans scrupule, pour
le premier principe de la Philosophie, que ie cherchois. (32)

— Dissertatio de methodo rectè utendi ratione, et veritatem in scientiis
investigandi (in French, 1637). In Opera philosophica, 4th ed.
Amsterdam: Elzevir, 1664.

note: this ed. (works separately paged) in SC. See also previous entry.

referred to: 162, 193, 248

— Meditationes de prima philosophia, in quibus dei existentia, et animae
humanae à corpore distinctio, demonstrantur (1641). In Opera
philosophica.

referred to: 187

— Principia philosophiae (1644). In Opera philosophica.

referred to: 164, 165

Destutt de Tracy, Antoine Louis Claude, comte (1754-1836; DBF).

note: JSM uses the spelling Destutt-Tracy.

referred to: 11, 240

— Eléments d’idéologie. 5 pts. in 4 vols. Paris: Didot l’aîné, et al.,
1801-15.

note: another ed. (Paris: Courcier, 1817-18) formerly in SC.

quoted: 187

referred to: 11, 166-7, 185, 186, 187, 199, 200, 243

187.19 penser est sentir] Penser, comme vous voyez, c’est toujours
sentir, et ce n’est rien que sentir. (I, 35)

Detant.

note: proprietor of an inn at Calais.

referred to: 4

Detant (Mlle).

note: daughter of M. Detant.

referred to: 4, 5

Deville, Jean Marie Joseph (1787-1853; DBF). Annales de la Bigorre.
Tarbes: Lavigne, 1818.

referred to: 113, 113n

Devonshire, Duke of. See William Cavendish.

Diderot, Denis (1713-84; DBF). Referred to: 169, 180

— “Lettre à Mademoiselle ***.” In Oeuvres de Denis Diderot, publiées sur
les manuscrits de l’auteur. Ed. Jacques André Naigeon. 15 vols. Paris:
Desray, 1798, II, 328-45.

note: in SC.

referred to: 169

Edition: current; Page: [710]
—, and Jean le Rond d’Alembert, eds. Encyclopédie, ou Dictionnaire
raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers, par une société de gens
de lettres. 17 vols. Paris: Briasson, et al., 1751-65.

referred to: 169

Diogenes (the Cynic) (ca. 400-323 bc; WWG).

note: see also Diogenes Laertius.

referred to: 175, 643

Diogenes Laertius (? early 3rd c. ad; WWR). “Diogenes.” In Lives of
Eminent Philosophers. Trans. R.D. Hicks. 2 vols. London: William
Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1925, II, 22-84.

note: De vitis, dogmatibus et apophthegmatibus clarorum philosophorum
libri X—graece et latine, 2 vols. (Amsterdam: Westenius, 1692), is in
SC.

referred to: 175

— “Epicurus.” In Lives of Eminent Philosophers, II, 528-677.

referred to: 666

The Directory; or, The Ancient and Present State of Tunbridge Wells.
Tunbridge Wells: Sprange, 1816.

referred to: 471, 472

Doane, Richard (1805-48).

note: Bentham’s amanuensis.

referred to: 7, 16, 18, 21, 25, 52n, 56, 60, 71, 71n, 94n

Donovan, Alexander (1775/6-1846).

note: Whig candidate for Lewes 1826 and 1830; Gentleman’s Magazine.

referred to: 465

Du Camp (M.).

note: professor of rhetoric in Toulouse; JSM also uses the spellings
Decampe and de Campe.

referred to: 19, 36-7, 39-40, 41, 48, 112-13, 113n

Dunmail (King of Cumbria) (d. 945/6 ad). Referred to: 527

Duns, Joannes Scotus (1265/6-1308?; DNB). Referred to: 163

Duplàa, Martin Simon, baron de (1777-1834).

note: sub-prefect of Oloron from 1819.

referred to: 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84

Du Pont de Nemours, Pierre Samuel (1739-1817; DBF). Speech on the
Colonies (13 May, 1791), Gazette Nationale, ou Le Moniteur Universel, 15
May, 1791, 558.

quoted: 227

227.10 “Périsse plutôt les colonies qu’un principe.”] Si toutefois cette
scission devait avoir lieu, s’il fallait sacrifier l’intérêt ou la
justice, il vaudrait mieux sacrifier les Colonies qu’un principe. (558)

Dürer, Albrecht (1471-1528; EB). Referred to: 565

Duveyrier, Anne Honoré Joseph (“Mélesville”) (1787-1865; DBF), Jean
Bernard Eugène Cantiran de Boirie (1785-1837; DBF), and Jean Toussaint
Merle (1785-1852; GDU). Le bourgmestre de Sardam, ou Les deux Pierre,
mélodrame comique en trois actes et à grand spectacle. Paris: Barba,
1818.

note: first produced at the Théâtre de la Porte-Saint-Martin, 2 June,
1818.

referred to: 113

Edition: current; Page: [711]
Edmund I (of England) (922?-946 ad; DNB). Referred to: 527

Egremont, Lord. See George O’Brien Wyndham.

Eichthal, Gustave d’ (1804-86; DBF).

note: JSM spells his name d’Eichtal.

referred to: 478, 479

Eldon, Lord. See John Scott.

Elizabeth I (of England) (1533-1603; DNB). Referred to: 455

Ellis, William (1800-81).

note: the reference is to a speech by him at the Cooperative Society in
1825.

referred to: 317

Ellison (Mr.).

note: an English clergyman in Toulouse.

referred to: 55n, 56

Ensor, George (1769-1843; DNB). Referred to: 1-13 passim, 26, 27, 44,
45, 50, 51

— An Inquiry Concerning the Population of Nations, Containing a
Refutation of Mr. Malthus’s Essay on Population. London: Wilson, 1818.

referred to: 10, 11

— Radical Reform: Restoration of Usurped Rights. London: Wilson, 1819.

note: the next item, Reply of Mr. Ensor, is bound in with the 2nd ed.
(also 1819) of Radical Reform.

referred to: 10, 11

— Reply of Mr. Ensor to an Article in No. XLIII of the Quarterly Review
on Radical Reform.

note: seen Ensor, Radical Reform.

referred to: 10, 11

Epicurus (341-270 bc; WWG).

note: see also Diogenes Laertius.

referred to: 666

Eratosthenes (ca. 280-200 bc; WWG). Referred to: 246-7

Euclid (ca. 300 bc; WWG). The Elements of Geometrie (in Greek, 1533).
Trans. H. Billingsley. London: Day, 1570.

referred to: 33, 34, 39, 41, 356

Euler, Leonhard (1670-1745; NDB). Referred to: 215, 352, 357

— Lettres à une Princesse d’Allemagne sur divers sujets de physique et
de philosophie. 3 vols. Mietau and Leipzig: Steidel (Vols. I-II); St.
Petersburg: Imperial Academy of Sciences (Vol. III), 1770, 1772.

referred to: 215, 216-17

Euripides (485/4(?)-407/6 bc; WWG). Referred to: 356

— The Bacchanals. In Euripides (Greek and English). Trans. Arthur S.
Way. 4 vols. London: Heinemann; New York; Macmillan, 1912, III, 1-123.

note: Αἱ του̑ Εὐριπίδου τραγωδίαι σωζόμεναι. Euripidis tragoediae quae
supersunt (Greek and Latin), ed. Samuel Musgrave, 10 vols. (Glasgow:
Foulis; Edinburgh: Laing; London: Bremner, 1797), was formerly in SC.

referred to: 666

— Euripidis Hecuba ad fidem manuscriptorum emendata, et brevis notis,
emendationum potissimum rationes reddentibus instructa. Ed. Richard
Porson. London: Wilkie, 1802.

referred to: 353

Edition: current; Page: [712]
Fabre (M.).

note: the nephew of Etienne Bérard.

referred to: 133

Fabricius, Gaius Luscinus (fl. 282 bc; WWR). Referred to: 331

Faget de Baure, Jean Jacques (1755-1817; DBF). Essais historiques sur le
Béarn. Paris: Denugon and Eymery, 1818.

note: the quotation is taken from Abadie, q.v. for the collation.

quoted: 72

Fénélon, François Louis de Salignac, marquis de la Mothe (1722-64; DBF).
Referred to: 226

— Seconde [-Cinquième] partie des avantures de Télémaque, fils d’Ulysse.
N.p.: n.p., 1699.

referred to: 226

— Suite du quatrième livre de l’Odyssée d’Homère, ou Les avantures de
Télémaque, fils d’Ulysse. Paris: Barbin, 1699.

referred to: 226

Fenwick, Isabella (d. 1856).

note: a cousin of Henry Taylor.

referred to: 540, 548

Ferras (Mme).

note: a lady from whom the Benthams rented an apartment in
Bagnères-de-Luchon.

referred to: 104, 105

Feuchères, madame de. See Sophia Dawes.

Fielding, Henry (1707-54; DNB). Referred to: 415

Fitzsimmons.

note: a teacher of English in Toulouse.

referred to: 48, 57

Fitzwilliam, Charles William Wentworth (Lord Milton, later 3rd Earl
Fitzwilliam) (1786-1857; DNB). Speech on the State of the Corn Laws (18
Apr., 1826; Commons), PD, n.s., Vol. 15, cols. 351-5.

referred to: 381

Fitzwilliam, William Wentworth (2nd Earl Fitzwilliam) (1748-1833; DNB).
Referred to: 337

Flaxman, John (1755-1826; DNB). Referred to: 565

Fleming, Diana Le (née Howard).

note: widow of the late Sir Michael Le Fleming.

referred to: 519, 520, 522

Fleming, Michael Le (1748-1806).

note: owner of a park at Rydal in the Lake District.

referred to: 519

Fleming, Richard (1791-1857; MEB). Referred to: 525

Flint, Charles.

note: complained of the misconduct of an unpaid magistrate, Chetwynde.

referred to: 274

Fontenelle, Bernard le Bovier de (1657-1757; DBF). Entretiens sur la
pluralité des mondes. Paris: Blageart, 1686.

referred to: 57

Edition: current; Page: [713]
— Ὸμιλίαι ῶερὶ ῶληθύος χόσμων. Vienna: Bentotay, 1794.

referred to: 57

Forster, Thomas Furly (1761-1825; DNB). Flora Tonbrigensis; or, A
Catalogue of Plants Growing Wild in the Neighbourhood of Tonbridge
Wells, Arranged According to the Linnaean System, from Sir J.E. Smith’s
“Flora Britannica.” London: Arch; Tunbridge Wells: Sprange, 1816.

note: JSM writes “Tunbridgensis.”

referred to: 471, 472

Fourcroy, Antoine François de (1755-1809; DBF). Philosophie de chimie,
ou Vérités fondamentales de la chimie moderne, disposées dans un nouvel
ordre. Paris: printed Simon, 1792.

referred to: 57

— Χημιχὴ ϕιλοσοϕία. Trans. T.M. Iliadou. Vienna; Tazi, 1802.

referred to: 57

Fox, Henry Richard Vassall (Baron Holland) (1773-1840; DNB). Referred
to: 275, 398, 399

Fox, Robert Were (1789-1877; DNB). Referred to: 620

Fox, William Johnson (1786-1864; DNB). “Sandown Bay,” Monthly
Repository, VI (Apr. 1832), 271-80.

referred to: 572, 582

Franconi, Antonio (1737-1836; DBF). Referred to: 36, 37, 38

Franconi, Henri Minette (1779-1849; DBF). Referred to: 36, 37, 38

Franconi, Laurent Antoine (1776-1849; DBF). Referred to: 36, 37, 38

Franks, John Henry.

note: a labourer at Betchworth, Surrey.

referred to: 282

Gainsborough, Thomas (1727-88; DNB). Referred to: 565

Galen, Claudius (129-199 ad; WWR). Referred to: 215

Galilei, Galileo (1564-1642; EB). Referred to: 396

Gall, Franz Joseph (1758-1828; EB), and Johann Caspar Spurzheim
(1776-1832; EB). Anatomie et physiologie du systême nerveux en général,
et du cerveau en particulier; avec des observations sur la possibilité
de reconnoître plusieurs dispositions intellectuelles et morales de
l’homme et des animaux, par la configuration de leurs têtes. 4 vols.
[plus 1 vol. of plates and atlas]. Paris: Schoell, 1810-19.

referred to: 196

Gallien. See Galen.

Gassendi, Pierre (1592-1655; DBF). Institutio logica. In Petri Gassendi
opera omnia. Ed. Henri Louis Habert de Montmor. 6 vols. Lyons: Anisson
and Devenet, 1658, I, 91-124.

referred to: 215

Gaveaux, Pierre (1761-1825; DBF). Le bouffe et le tailleur. Opéra
comique en un acte. Paris: Bouillerot, 1804.

referred to: 73

Gay-Lussac, Joseph Louis (1778-1850; DBF).

note: see also Welter.

referred to: 176

Edition: current; Page: [714]
— “Recherches sur l’acide prussique,” Annales de Chimie, XC (31 July,
1815), 136-231.

referred to: 176

— “Sur les combinaisons du soufre avec les alcalis,” Annales de Chimie
et de Physique, 2nd ser., VI (1817), 321-31.

referred to: 136

Gellius, Aulus (b. ca. 130 ad; WWR). The Attic Nights of Aulus Gellius
(Latin and English). Trans. John C. Rolfe. 3 vols. London: Heinemann;
New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1927-28.

referred to: 162, 212

George IV (of England) (1762-1830; DNB). Referred to: 37, 285

Gergonne, Joseph Diez (1771-1859; DBF). Referred to: 131-43 passim,
145-90 passim, 191-253 passim

— “Essai sur la théorie des définitions,” Annales de Mathématiques Pures
et Appliquées, IX (1 July, 1818), 1-35.

referred to: 173

Germain, Charles Sackville (Duke of Dorset) (1767-1843; DNB). Referred
to: 465

Gilpin, William (1724-1804; DNB). Remarks on Forest Scenery, and Other
Woodland Views, (Relative Chiefly to Picturesque Beauty) Illustrated by
the Scenes of New-Forest in Hampshire. 2 vols. London: Blamire, 1791.

referred to: 595, 596, 597, 599, 607

Girault-Duvivier, Charles Pierre (1765-1832; DBF). Grammaire des
grammaires, ou Analyse raisonnée des meilleurs traités sur la langue
françoise. 2 vols. Paris: Porthmann, 1812.

referred to: 33, 34, 35, 38, 40, 41, 43, 48, 55, 56, 60

Glynn-Campbell, Alexander (1796-1836; JMP). Referred to: 574

Godard d’Aucour de Saint-Just, Claude (1769-1826; DBF). Le calife de
Bagdad, opéra comique en un acte mêlée d’ariettes, paroles de
Saint-Juste, musique de Boieldieu. Paris: Vente, 1801.

note: first produced at the Opéra Comique of Paris, 16 Sept., 1800.

referred to: 113

Goderich, Lord. See Frederick John Robinson.

Godwin, William (1756-1836; DNB). Things as They Are; or, The Adventures
of Caleb Williams (1794). 4th ed. 3 vols. London: Simpkin and Marshall,
1816.

note: in SC; the quotations are indirect.

quoted: 359, 371, 383

Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749-1832; EB). Referred to: 645-6, 651,
652, 655

— Aus meinem Leben. Dichtung und Wahrheit (1811-14, 1832). In Werke. 55
vols. Stuttgart and Tübingen: Cotta’schen Buchhandlung, 1828-33,
XXIV-XXVI.

note: in SC.

referred to: 655

— Noten und Abhandlungen zu besserem Verständnis des West-östlischen
Divans. In Werke, VI.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 645-6

— “Zeit und Zeitung” (1815). In Werke, II, 309.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 416

Edition: current; Page: [715]
Goldsmith, Hugh Colvill (1789-1841; DNB). Referred to: 626

Goldsmith, Oliver (1728-74; DNB). Referred to: 415

Gordon, Frances (Lady William; née Ingram) (d. 1841; BP). Referred to:
536, 548, 549

Gordon, James Willoughby (1773-1851; DNB). Referred to: 574

Gordon, William (Lord) (1744-1823; BP). Referred to: 534, 536

Gracchus, Gaius Sempronius (153-122 bc; WWR). Referred to: 383

Gracchus, Tiberius Sempronius (163-133 bc; WWR). Referred to: 383

Grafigny, Françoise d’Issembourg d’Happoncourt de (1695-1758; DBF).
Lettres d’une Péruvienne. [Paris:] n.p., [1747].

referred to: 250

Graham, George John (1801-88).

note: friend and walking companion of JSM.

referred to: 455-75 passim

Grammaire des Grammaires. See Girault-Duvivier.

Grant, Horace (1800-59).

note: colleague of JSM’s in the Examiner’s Office, India House.

referred to: 455-75 passim, 478-99 passim, 501-567 passim

Gray, Thomas (1716-71; DNB). “Letter to Dr. Wharton” (18 Oct., 1769). In
The Works of Thomas Gray, with Memoirs of His Life and Writings by
William Mason. Ed. Thomas James Mathias. 2 vols. London: Porter, 1814,
I, 447-71.

note: the quotation is in a quotation from a guide-book by Jonathan
Otley, q.v.

quoted: 526

referred to: 535

526.22-3 “some . . . demolished”] Next I passed by the little chapel of
Wiborn, out of which the Sunday congregation were then issuing; soon
after a beck near Dunmeil-raise, when I entered Westmoreland a second
time, and now began to see Holm-crag, distinguished from its rugged
neighbours, not so much by its height as by the strange broken outlines
of its top, like some . . . demolished and the stones that composed it
flung across each other in wild confusion. (I, 459)

Green, William (1761-1823; DNB). A Description of Sixty Studies from
Nature; Etched in the Soft Ground, by William Green, of Ambleside; after
Drawings Made by Himself in Cumberland, Westmorland and Lancashire,
Comprising, a General Guide to the Beauties of the North of England.
London: Longman, et al.; Ambleside: Green, 1810.

note: the quotation is in a quotation from a guide-book by Jonathan
Otley, q.v.

quoted: 526

526.24 “lion and a lamb”] The buildings in this scene are called by the
name of a stone bridge which is lower down the river, and on the way to
Easedale from Grasmere church: to improve the composition, the stepping
stones have been brought nearer to the houses than they actually are;
the distance is Helme Crag, but the rocks on its summit, called the Lion
and the Lamb, cannot be seen from this place. (51)

Greene, Octavius.

note: an employee of the East India Co., 1814-47.

referred to: 355

Greenhill-Russell, Robert (ca. 1763-1836; BP). Referred to: 484

Grenfell, Pascoe (1761-1838; DNB). Referred to: 493

Grenville, Richard Temple Nugent Brydges Chandos (Duke of Buckingham and
Chandos) (1776-1839; DNB). Referred to: 408

Grenville, William Wyndham (Baron Grenville) (1759-1834; DNB). Referred
to: 275

Edition: current; Page: [716]
Grey, Charles (Earl Grey) (1764-1845; DNB). Referred to: 574

— Speech Presenting a Motion to Refer the Petition from the Society of
the Friends of the People for a Parliamentary Reform to a Committee (6
May, 1793; Commons). In The Parliamentary History of England, from the
Norman Conquest in 1066, to the Year 1803. Ed. William Cobbett and John
Wright. 36 vols. London: Bagshaw, Longmans, 1806-20, Vol. XXX, cols.
787-99.

referred to: 274, 273-4, 274

Grey, Henry George (Lord Howick, later 3rd Earl Grey) (1802-94; DNB).
Referred to: 359

— Speech at Newcastle (11 Apr., 1826), in “Newcastle Dinner to Lord
Howick,” Examiner, 23 Apr., 1826, 258.

referred to: 359

Groot, Hugo de (Grotius) (1583-1645; EB). Inleiding tot de Hollandsche
Rechtsgeleerdheyd (1619-21). See next entry.

— The Jurisprudence of Holland. Trans. R.W. Lee. 2 vols. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1926.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. JSM’s reference is to his
having “heard lately” of the information given in the parts cited.

referred to: 387

Hachette, Jeanne. See Jeanne Laisné.

Hamilton, Claud (Lord) (1813-84; WWBMP). Speech on Conventual and
Monastic Institutions (28 Feb., 1854; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 131,
cols. 101-3.

referred to: 658

Hampden, John (1594-1643; DNB). Referred to: 409n, 447

Hampden-Trevor, John (Viscount Hampden) (1749-1824; DNB). Referred to:
485

Harris, James Edward (Earl of Malmesbury) (1778-1841; BP). Referred to:
575

— Speech on the Game Laws Amendment Bill (11 May, 1827; Lords), PD,
n.s., Vol. 17, cols. 733-8.

referred to: 408

Hartley, David (1705-57; DNB). Referred to: 657

Hatchard (Mr.).

note: a nurseryman.

referred to: 599, 600

Hawkins, John Heywood (1802-77; JMP). Referred to: 574

Hayward, Abraham (1801-84; DNB). Referred to: 391

Hazlitt, William (1778-1830; DNB). Referred to: 415

— “The Drama. No. IV,” London Magazine, IV (Apr. 1820), 432-40.

note: the references are all to the phrase “the spirit of the age.”

referred to: 270, 348, 405, 411

— “The Spirits of the Age (No. III): The Late Mr. Horne Tooke,” New
Monthly Magazine, X (Mar. 1824), 246-54.

referred to: 282

Helvétius, Claude Adrien (1715-71; GDU). De l’esprit (1758). New ed. 2
vols. Paris: Durand, 1758.

referred to: 189

Hénault, Charles Jean François (1685-1770; GDU). Nouvel abrégé
chronologique de Edition: current; Page: [717] l’histoire de France;
contenant les événemens de notre histoire depuis Clovis jusqu’à la mort
de Louis XIV. Paris: Prault père, 1744.

referred to: 49, 51, 53, 54

Henri IV (of France) (1553-1610; GDU). Referred to: 10, 11, 77, 78, 238

Henry VI (of England) (1421-71; DNB). Referred to: 469

Herodotus (484-420 bc; WWG). Herodotus (Greek and English). Trans. A.D.
Godley. 4 vols. London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1921.

note: two Greek and Latin eds (9 vols., Glasgow: Foulis, 1761; 7 vols.,
Edinburgh: Laing, 1806) were formerly in SC.

referred to: 595

Hobart, George Robert, later Hampden (Earl of Buckinghamshire)
(1789-1849; EB). Referred to: 485

Hobbes, Thomas (1588-1679; DNB). Referred to: 657

— Leviathan; or, The Matter, Form, and Power of a Commonwealth,
Ecclesiastical and Civil (1651). In The English Works of Thomas Hobbes.
Ed. William Molesworth. 11 vols. London: Bohn, 1839-45, III.

note: in SC.

referred to: 33

— “The Preface to the Reader,” Philosophical Rudiments Concerning
Government and Society (1651). In English Works, II, ix-xxiv.

referred to: 188

Holme-Sumner, George (1760-1838; JMP). Speech on Commitments by
Magistrates (2 Mar., 1824; Commons), PD, n.s. Vol. 10, cols. 646-7.

referred to: 274

— Speech on Commitments and Convictions (27 May, 1824; Commons), PD,
n.s. Vol. 11, col. 908.

referred to: 274

— Speech on the State of the Corn Laws (18 Apr., 1826; Commons), PD,
n.s. Vol. 15, cols. 355-8.

referred to: 381

Homer (ca. 700 bc; WWG). Referred to: 56

— The Iliad (Greek and English). Trans. Augustus Taber Murray. 2 vols.
London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1924.

note: a 2-vol. Greek ed. of the Iliad and Odyssey (Oxford, 1800) is in
SC.

referred to: 632

Hope, Henry Thomas (1808-62; MEB). Referred to: 616

Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus) (65-8 bc; WWR). Carmina (Odes). In The
Odes and Epodes (Latin and English). Trans. C.E. Bennett. London:
Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1964, 1-347.

note: Opera, new ed., ed. William Baxter (Glasgow and Edinburgh:
Mundell; London: Robinson and Payne; Cambridge: Lunn, 1796) is in SC.

referred to: 43, 46, 51, 52, 56

— Satires. In Satires, Epistles, and Ars poetica (Latin and English).
Trans H. Rushton Fairclough. London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons,
1929, 4-244.

referred to: 137

Horton, Robert John Wilmot (1784-1841; DNB). Referred to: 406

— Speech on the Conduct of Charles Somerset (8 May, 1826; Commons), PD,
n.s., Vol. 15, cols. 964-5.

referred to: 406

Edition: current; Page: [718]
Howard, Bernard Edward (Duke of Norfolk) (1765-1842; DNB). Referred to:
275, 459, 465, 551

Howard, John (1726?-90; DNB). Referred to: 447

Hugues Capet (of France) (946-96 ad; GDU). Referred to: 238

Hume, David (1711-76; DNB). Referred to: 415, 657

— The History of England from the Invasion of Julius Caesar to the
Revolution in 1688 (1756-62). 8 vols. London: Cadell, et al., 1823.

referred to: 423

Hume, Joseph (1777-1855; DNB). Referred to: 285, 405, 406, 409n

— Speech on the Publication of Libels—Repeal of One of the Six Acts (31
May, 1827; Commons), PD, n.s., Vol. 17, cols. 1063-6.

referred to: 405, 406

Hume, Maria (née Burnley).

note: wife of Joseph Hume.

referred to: 45

Hunt, Henry (1773-1835; DNB). Referred to: 285

— Memoirs of Henry Hunt, Esq., Written by Himself, in His Majesty’s Jail
at Ilchester, in the County of Somerset. 3 vols. London: Dolby, 1820-22.

referred to: 126

Huskisson, William (1770-1830; DNB). Referred to: 401, 409n

— Speech on the Shipping Interest of the Country (7 May, 1827; Commons),
PD, n.s., Vol. 17, cols. 619-62.

referred to: 407

Hutchinson, Sara (1775-1835).

note: William Wordsworth’s sister-in-law.

referred to: 520

Hyde, Edward (1609-74; DNB). The Life of Edward, Earl of Clarendon, Lord
High Chancellor of England, and Chancellor of the University of Oxford.
2 vols. in 1. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1759.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 421

Irving, Edward (1792-1834; DNB). Referred to: 415

Irving, Washington (“Geoffrey Crayon”) (1783-1859; DAB). “The Stout
Gentleman, a Tale of Mystery.” In Bracebridge Hall; or, The Humourists.
A Medley. 2 vols. New York: Van Winkle, 1822, I, 124-44.

referred to: 611

— The Sketch-Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent. 7 pts. New York: printed Van
Winkle, 1819-20.

referred to: 611

Ismail Ibn Al-Sharif (Sultan of Morocco) (1645/6-1727; EB).

note: known as Muley or Mouley Ismael.

referred to: 332

Isocrates (436-338 bc; WWG). To Demonicus. In Isocrates (Greek and
English). Trans. George Norlin. 3 vols. London: Heinemann; Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1928, I, 4-35.

note: Opera omnia graece et latine, ed. Athanasius Auger, 2 vols.
(Paris: Didot l’aîné, 1782), is in SC.

referred to: 368, 384

Edition: current; Page: [719]
Jackson, George (1785-1861; MEB).

note: the identification is conjectural.

referred to: 9

Jacob, William (1762?-1851; DNB). “Ensor’s Radical Reform: Restoration
of Usurped Rights,” Quarterly Review, XXII (Nov. 1819), 102-7.

referred to: 10, 11

James I (of England) (1566-1625; DNB). Referred to: 474

James II (of England) (1633-1701; DNB). Referred to: 474

Jeffrey, Francis (Lord) (1773-1850; DNB). Referred to: 414, 415

— “Madame de Staël—Sur la littérature,” Edinburgh Review, XXI (Feb.
1813), 1-50.

referred to: 414

Jeffreys, George (Baron) (1648-89; DNB).

note: JSM uses the spelling Jefferies.

referred to: 274

Jenkinson, Robert Banks (Lord Liverpool) (1770-1828; DNB). Referred to:
379

Jesus. Referred to: 123, 260, 447

Joan of Arc (Jeanne Darc) (1411-31; GDU).

note: JSM refers to her as Joan of Arques and Jeanne d’Arques.

referred to: 15

Johnson, Samuel (1709-84; DNB). Referred to: 629

Jones, John Gale (1769-1838).

note: see Biographical Dictionary of Modern British Radicals.

referred to: 297-8, 300-2

Joudou, J.B. Guide des voyageurs à Bagnères-de-Bigorre et dans les
environs. Tarbes: Joudou, 1818.

referred to: 69

Julian (Flavius Claudius Julianus) (331/2-363 ad; WWR). Referred to: 8,
9

Julie (Mlle).

note: Sara Bentham’s maid.

referred to: 32, 61n

Jussieu, Antoine Laurent de (1748-1836; GDU). Genera plantarum, secundum
ordines naturales disposita, juxta methodum in horto regio Parisiensi
exaratam, anno MDCCLXXIV. Paris: Hérissant, 1789.

referred to: 171

Juvenal (ca. 60-140 ad; WWR). Satires. In Juvenal and Persius (Latin and
English). Trans. G.G. Ramsay. London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1950, 2-307.

quoted: 302

302.9 rara avis in] sit formosa decens dives fecunda, vetustos /
porticibus disponat avos, intactior omni / crinibus effusis bellum
dirimente Sabina, / rara avis in terris nigroque simillima cycno: / quis
feret uxorem cui constant omnia? (VI, 96; 161-6)

Kant, Immanuel (1724-1804; ADB). Referred to: 147, 445n, 657

— Kritik der reinen Vernunft (1781). In Sämmtliche Werke. Ed. Karl
Rosenkrantz and Friedrich Schubert. 14 vols. in 12. Leipzig: Voss,
1838-40, II.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. Critik of Pure Reason, trans.
Francis Haywood, 2nd ed. (London: Pickering, 1848), is in SC.

referred to: 165-6, 189

Edition: current; Page: [720]
Kemp, Thomas Read (1781?-1844; DNB). Referred to: 465

Kinloch, George (1775-1833).

note: see Biographical Dictionary of Modern British Radicals

referred to: 8, 10

Knatchbull, Edward (1781-1849; DNB). Referred to: 380

Kneller, Godfrey (1646-1723; DNB). Referred to: 565

Koran. Referred to: 225

Kotzebue, August Friedrich Ferdinand von (1761-1819; EB). Referred to:
24

La Bruyère, Jean de (1645-96; GDU). Les caractères de Théophraste,
traduits du grec. Avec Les caractères ou les moeurs de ce siècle (1688).
4th ed. Paris: Michallet, 1689.

note: in the section “Des ouvrages de l’esprit.”

referred to: 47

Lacroix, Sylvestre François (1765-1843; GDU). Biography of Clairaut. In
Biographie universelle ancienne et moderne. Ed. Louis Gabriel Michaud.
52 vols. Paris: Michaud frères, 1811-28, VIII, 593-8.

referred to: 227

— Elémens d’algèbre, à l’usage de l’Ecole Centrale des Quatre-Nations.
Paris: Duprat, an VIII [1799].

referred to: 131

— Traité du calcul différentiel et du calcul intégral (1798). 2nd ed. 3
vols. Paris: Courcier, 1810, 1814, 1819.

referred to: 34, 45

La Fontaine, Jean de (1621-95; GDU). Fables choisies mises en vers. 5
vols. Paris: Thierry, and Barbin, 1678-94.

note: the quotation is from the fable “L’ours et l’amateur des jardins”
(III, 134-9); some of the references are inferential.

quoted: 211

referred to: 20, 21, 33, 37, 40, 45, 60

211.9 il . . . parler, mais . . . taire.] Il . . . parler, et . . .
taire; / Mais tous deux sont mauvais alors qu’ils sont outrez. (III,
135)

Lagrange, Joseph Louis, comte de (1736-1813; GDU). Referred to: 352, 357

— Théorie des fonctions analytiques (1797). New ed. Paris: Courcier,
1813.

referred to: 129, 182

Laharpe, Jean François de (1739-1803; GDU). Lycée, ou Cours de
littérature ancienne et moderne. 16 vols. in 19. Paris: Agasse, ans
VII-XIII [1799-1805].

referred to: 46, 47

Laisné, Jeanne (b. 1454?; GDU). Referred to: 6

Lalande, Joseph Jérôme Le Français de (1732-1807; GDU). Astronomie
(1764). 3rd ed. 3 vols. Paris: Desaint, 1792.

referred to: 57

— Έπιτομὴ ἀστρονομίας. Trans. D.D. Philippides. 2 vols. Vienna:
Bentotay, 1803.

referred to: 57

Lamarck, Jean Baptiste Pierre de Monet, chevalier de (1744-1829; GDU).
Referred to: 168-9

Edition: current; Page: [721]
— Flore françoise, ou Description succincte de toutes les plantes qui
croissent naturellement en France, disposée selon une nouvelle méthode
d’analyse. 3 vols. Paris: Imprimerie royale, 1778.

referred to: 168-9

— Systême des animaux sans vertèbres, ou Tableau général des classes,
des ordres et des genres de ces animaux. Paris: Deterville, an IX
[1801].

referred to: 168-9

Lamoignon, François Chrétien de (1644-1709; GDU). Referred to: 43

Lamotte d’Incamps, Jean Denis (b. 1760).

note: owner of the château de Moumour, near Oloron.

referred to: 84, 85

Lancaster, Joseph (1778-1838; DNB).

note: the references are to his system of education.

referred to: 427

Lancelot, Claude (ca. 1615-95; GDU), and Louis Isaac Lemaistre de Sacy
(1613-84; GDU). “Le jardin des racines grecques: mis en vers françois.”
In Le jardin des racines grecques, mises en vers françois, avec un
traité des prépositions et autres particules undéclinables et un recueil
alphabétique des mots françois tirez de la langue grecque. Paris: Le
Petit, 1657, 1-218.

referred to: 226

Langlès, Louis Mathieu (1763-1824; GDU). Referred to: 9

Langlois, Hyacinthe. Itinéraire du royaume de France, divisé en cinq
régions. 3rd ed. rev. Paris: Langlois, 1820 [1819].

referred to: 16

Lansdowne, Lord. See Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice.

Lapeyrouse. See Picot de Lapeyrouse.

Laplace, Pierre Simon, marquis de (1749-1827; GDU). Referred to: 11,
239, 352, 357

— Exposition du système du monde (1796). 4th ed. Paris: Courcier, 1813.

note: in SC.

referred to: 138, 139, 140, 141

— Traité de mécanique céleste. 5 vols. and supplement. Paris: Duprat, et
al., 1798-1825.

referred to: 239

La Ramée, Pierre (1515-72; GDU).

note: took the Latin name Petrus Ramus.

referred to: 168

— Dialecticae institutiones, ad celeberrimam, et illustrissimam Lutetiae
Parisiorum academiam. Paris: Bogardus, 1543.

referred to: 168

Las Cases, Emmanuel Augustin Dieudonné Marin Joseph, comte de
(1766-1842; GDU). Mémorial de Sainte-Hélène. Journal of the Private Life
and Conversations of the Emperor Napoleon at Saint Helena (1823). 8 pts.
in 4 vols. London: Colburn, 1823.

referred to: 421

Latil, Jean Baptiste Marie Anne Antoine, duc de (1761-1839; GE).
Referred to: 24

Laurent, Jean Antoine (1763-1833; GDU). Referred to: 10, 11

Lavoisier, Antoine Laurent (1743-94; GDU). Referred to: 176, 230

Edition: current; Page: [722]
— “Considérations générales sur la nature des acides, et sur les
principes dont ils sont composés” (1777). In Histoire de l’académie
royale des sciences. Année 1778. Avec les mémoires de mathématique et de
physique pour la même année, tirés des registres de cette académie.
Paris: Imprimerie royale, 1781, 535-47.

referred to: 176, 230

— Méthode de nomenclature chimique, proposée par MM. de Morveau,
Lavoisier, Bertholet et de Fourcroy. On y a joint un nouveau système de
caractères chimiques adaptés à cette nomenclature, par MM. Hassenfratz
et Adet. Paris: Cuchet, 1787.

referred to: 176

Layrieu (or Larrieu).

note: a dancing master in Toulouse.

referred to: 34, 35, 38, 40, 41, 43, 47, 48, 51

Lebeau, Charles (1701-78; GDU). Opera latina d. Caroli Lebeau (1782-83).
2nd ed. augmented. 2 vols. Paris: Delalain, 1816.

referred to: 57, 59-60

Legendre, Adrien Marie (1752-1834; GDU). Eléments de géométrie, avec des
notes. Paris: Didot, an II [1794].

referred to: 26, 33, 34, 35, 38, 39, 40, 41, 47

Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von (1646-1716; ADB).

note: JSM uses the spelling Leibnitz.

referred to: 147, 235, 657

— Second éclaircissement du système de la communication des substances
(1696). In Opera philosophica. Ed. Johann Eduard Erdmann. Berlin:
Eichler, 1840, 133-4.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. In SC is a collection
entitled Esprit de Leibnitz (1772).

referred to: 189

— Système nouveau de la nature et de la communication des substances,
aussi bien que de l’union, qu’il y a entre l’âme et le corps (1695). In
Opera philosophica, 124-8.

referred to: 189

Lely, Peter (1618-80; DNB). Referred to: 565

Lemon, Charles (1784-1868; WWBMP). Referred to: 619

Lennox, Charles Gordon (Duke of Richmond) (1791-1860; DNB). Referred to:
566, 567

Lenthéric, Pierre (1793-1849; GDU). Referred to: 129-42 passim

Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519; EB). Referred to: 648

Leonidas (of Sparta) (fl. 488-480 bc; WWG). Referred to: 10, 11

Lesage, Alain René (1668-1747; GDU). L’histoire de Gil Blas de
Santillane. 4 vols. Paris: Ribou, 1715-35.

referred to: 471

L’Estrange, Roger (1616-1704; DNB). “A Shepherd Turn’d Merchant.” In
Fables of Aesop and Other Eminent Mythologists: With Morals and
Reflections. London: Sare, et al., 1692, 93-4.

note: this fable is not in the translation by Jones used elsewhere in
CW.

referred to: 578

Lethbridge, Thomas. See Thomas Buckler-Lethbridge.

Letronne, Jean Antoine (1787-1848; GDU). “Essai sur le plan et la
disposition générale du labyrinthe d’Egypte, d’après Hérodote, Diodore
de Sicile et Strabon,” Nouvelles Annales des Voyages, de la Géographie
et de l’Histoire, VI (1820), 133-54.

note: see also Nouvelles Annales.

referred to: 110

Edition: current; Page: [723]
Linnaeus (von Linné) Carl (1707-78; GDU). Referred to: 170-1

— Fundamenta botanica quae majorum operum prodromi instar theoriam
scientiae botanices per breves aphorismos tradunt. Amsterdam: Schouten,
1736.

referred to: 170-1

— Systema naturae, sive regna tria naturae systematice proposita per
classes, ordines, genera, et species. Leyden: Batavorum, 1735.

referred to: 170-1

Liverpool, Lord. See Robert Jenkinson.

Lloyd, John Horatio (1798-1884; MEB). Referred to: 358

Locke, John (1632-1704; DNB). Referred to: 193, 388, 445n, 657

— An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1690). In Works. New ed. 10
vols. London: Tegg, et al., 1823, I-III.

note: in SC.

referred to: 157, 187, 193

— Letter to Anthony Collins (21 Mar., 1704). In Works, X, 282-6.

quoted: 388

388.20-2 “I am glad,” . . . “when my works fall into the hands of
readers like you, for you seize the scope of my speculations without
sticking in the incidence.”] You have a comprehensive knowledge of it,
and do not stick in the incidents; which I find many people do; which,
whether true or false, make nothing to the main design of the Essay,
that lies in a little compass, and yet, I hope, may be of great use to
those who see and follow that plain and easy method of nature, to carry
them the shortest and clearest way to knowledge. (285)

Longayrou (M.).

note: passenger in the diligence with JSM.

referred to: 16, 17, 18

Louis IX (Saint Louis, of France) (1214-70; GDU). Referred to: 71, 241

Louis XI (of France) (1423-83; GDU).

note: the reference is in a syllogism.

referred to: 224

Louis XIV (of France) (1638-1715; GDU). Referred to: 13, 49

Louis XV (of France) (1710-74; GDU). Referred to: 13, 14, 227

Louis XVI (of France) (1754-93; GDU). Referred to: 6, 141, 207, 396

Louis XVIII (of France) (1755-1824; GDU). Referred to: 14, 24

Louvel, Louis Pierre (1783-1820; GDU). Referred to: 23-4

Lovelace, John (Baron) (ca. 1638-93; DNB). Referred to: 494n

Lowe, Joseph (d. 1831).

note: solicitor, Radical writer and friend of James Mill; lived in
France after 1814.

referred to: 59

Lucian (2nd century ad; WWR).

note: Λουχιανου̑ Σαμοσατέως ἅπαντα. Luciani Samosatensis opera. Cum nova
versione Tiber Hemsterhusii & Io. Matthiae Gesneri, ed. Johannes
Fredericus Reitzius, 4 vols. (Amsterdam. Wetstenius, 1743-46), in SC. As
it is not known which ed. JSM was using in France, the individual works
are cited from the Loeb ed. (see next entry).

— Lucian (Greek and English). Trans. A.M. Harmon, et al. 8 vols. London:
Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1961.

referred to: 20, 22, 26, 53, 113, 135, 140

— “Alectryon” (“Somnium, seu gallus”; “The Dream; or, The Cock”). In
Lucian, II, 172-238.

referred to: 33

Edition: current; Page: [724]
— “Βιω̑ν πρα̑σις” (“Vitarum auctio”; “Philosophies for Sale”). In Lucian,
II, 450-510.

referred to: 29, 32, 52

— “Cataplus” (“Cataplus, sive tyrannus”; “The Downward Journey; or, The
Tyrant”). In Lucian, II, 2-56.

referred to: 35, 52, 53, 133

— “Deorum concilium” (“The Parliament of the Gods”). In Lucian, V,
418-40.

referred to: 54, 58

— “Hermotimus” (“Hermotimus; or, Concerning the Sects”). In Lucian, VI,
260-414.

note: the reference at 22 is inferred.

referred to: 21, 22, 27, 52

— “Icaromenippus” (“Icaromenippus; or, The Sky Man”). In Lucian, II,
268-322.

referred to: 47, 52, 137

— “Jupiter confutatus” (“Zeus Catechized”). In Lucian, II, 50-86.

referred to: 40

— “Jupiter tragoedus” (“Zeus Rants”). In Lucian, II, 90-168.

referred to: 51, 52

— “Necyomantia” (“Menippus, sive necyomantia”; “Menippus; or, The
Descent into Hades”). In Lucian, IV, 72-108.

referred to: 35, 36, 39, 52

— “Prometheus.” In Lucian, II, 242-65.

referred to: 41

— “Vocalium judicium” (“The Consonants at Law”). In Lucian, I, 396-408.

referred to: 34, 52

Lushington, Stephen (1782-1873; MEB). Referred to: 404

— Speech on the Court of Chancery (22 May, 1827; Commons), PD, n.s.,
Vol. 17, cols. 962-5.

referred to: 404

McAdam, John Loudon (1756-1836; DNB). Referred to: 277

Macaulay, Thomas Babington (1800-59; DNB). Referred to: 653

Macdonald, James (1784-1832; JMP). Referred to: 600

Machiavelli, Niccolò (1469-1527; EB).

note: at 369 and 385 JSM uses the spelling Machiavel, at 650
Macchiavelli.

referred to: 369, 385, 650

— Discorsi sopra la prima deca di Tito Livio (1531). In Opere istoriche
e politiche. 4 vols. Filadelfia: Nella stamperia delle provincie unite,
1818, III.

note: in SC.

quoted: 369, 385

referred to: 650

369.33-4 L’opinione . . . regnano.] Ma l’opinione . . . regnano; de’
principi si parla sempre con mille paure e mille rispetti. (165)

— Istorie fiorentine (1532). In Opere, I-II, 131.

referred to: 650

— Il principe (1532). In Opere, IV, 1-112.

referred to: 650

Madge, Thomas (1786-1870; MEB). Referred to: 516, 519, 520, 432, 433,
536

Edition: current; Page: [725]
Maelzel, Johann Nepomuk (1772-1834).

note: see New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians.

referred to: 360

Malebranche, Nicolas (1638-1715; GDU). Referred to: 228

— Recherche de la vérité (1674-78). In Oeuvres complètes. Ed. A.
Robinet, et al., 20 vols. Paris: Vrin, 1962-67, I-III.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference.

referred to: 166, 187, 190, 193, 247

Malmesbury, Lord. See James Edward Harris.

Malthus, Thomas Robert (1766-1834; DNB). Referred to: 286

— An Essay on the Principle of Population; or, A View of Its Past and
Present Effects on Human Happiness; with an Inquiry into Our Prospects
Respecting the Future Removal or Mitigation of the Evils Which It
Occasions (1798). 5th ed. with Additions. 3 vols. London: Murray, 1817.

referred to: 286, 287-96 passim, 296-307 passim

Mandeville, Bernard de (1670-1733; EB). Referred to: 415

Marius, Gaius (157-86 bc; EB). Referred to: 344, 347

Marshall, John (1765-1845).

note: a cotton manufacturer and intimate of the Benthamite circle.

referred to: 553

Mary (of Scotland) (1542-87; DNB). Referred to: 342

Mascaron, Jules (1634-1703; GDU). Oraison funèbre du très-haut et
très-puissant Prince Henri de la Tour-d’Auvergne, vicomte de Turenne
(1676). In Recueil des oraisons funèbres prononcées par Messire Jules
Mascaron. Paris: Du Près, 1704, 303-412.

referred to: 43, 46

Maupertuis, Pierre Louis Moreau de (1698-1759; GDU). Referred to: 167

— “Examen philosophique de la preuve de l’existence de Dieu employée
dans l’Essai de cosmologie” (1758). In Oeuvres de Maupertuis. New ed. 4
vols. Lyon: Bruyset, 1768, I, 387-424.

referred to: 167

Méhul, Etienne Henri (1763-1817; GDU). L’irato, ou L’emporté. Opera
bouffon en un acte. Paris: Pleyel, 1801.

referred to: 73

Mercier, Louis Sébastien (1740-1814; GDU). “Newton.” In Mon bonnet de
nuit, par M. Mercier, ouvrage qui doit servir de suite au “Tableau de
Paris.” 4 vols. Lausanne: Heubach, 1784-85, IV, 209-14.

referred to: 231-2

Mesmer, Friedrich Anton (1733-1815; EB). Referred to: 659

Michelangelo (1475-1564; EB).

note: JSM uses the spelling Michael Angelo.

referred to: 648

Mill, Clara Esther (later Digweed) (1810-86).

note: one of JSM’s sisters; at 38 he refers to her as Clarisse.

referred to: 19, 22, 26, 32, 38, 44, 46, 52n, 71, 126, 496

Mill, George Grote (ca. 1825-53).

note: JSM’s youngest brother.

referred to: 496

Edition: current; Page: [726]
Mill, Harriet (née Burrow) (1782?-1854; DNB).

note: JSM’s mother.

referred to: 19, 26, 32, 38, 46, 52n, 71, 126, 496

Mill, Harriet Isabella (1812-97).

note: one of JSM’s sisters; he refers to her at 38 and 52n as Henriette.

referred to: 19, 26, 32, 38, 46, 52n, 71, 126, 496

Mill, Harriet Taylor (née Hardy) (1807-58).

note: JSM’s wife.

referred to: 641, 643, 644, 645, 652, 654, 655-6, 660

Mill, Henry (1820-40).

note: one of JSM’s brothers.

referred to: 71, 126, 496

Mill, James Bentham (1814-62).

note: one of JSM’s brothers; he refers to him at 38 as Jacques, at 52n
as Jacobus.

referred to: 19, 26, 32, 38, 52n, 71, 126, 496

Mill, James (1773-1836; DNB). Referred to: 3-143 passim, 427, 496, 642

— “Government” (1820). In Essays. London: printed Innes, [1825].

note: one of the articles composed for the Supplement to the
Encyclopaedia Britannica.

referred to: 11, 12, 45

— The History of British India. 3 vols. London: Baldwin, et al., 1817
[1818].

note: see also the next entry.

referred to: 9, 137

— 2nd ed. 6 vols. London: Baldwin, et al., 1820.

referred to: 45

— “Periodical Literature: Edinburgh Review (Part I),” Westminster
Review, I (Jan. 1824), 206-49.

referred to: 416

Mill, Jane Stuart (later Ferraboschi) (1816?-1883).

note: one of JSM’s sisters.

referred to: 19, 26, 32, 38, 46, 52n, 71, 126, 496

Mill, John Stuart. “Cooperation: First Speech.”

note: No. 10. The reference at 306 is prospective.

referred to: 306, 314, 315

— “The Influence of the Aristocracy.”

note: No. 14.

referred to: 359, 364

— “Population.”

note: No. 8.

referred to: 299, 306

— A System of Logic: Ratiocinative and Inductive. London: Parker, 1843.
CW, VII-VIII.

referred to: 649

— Utilitarianism (1861). London: Parker, et al., 1863. In CW, X, 203-59.

note: the reference is to the illustration (Socrates and the pig) later
used in Utilitarianism (X, 212).

referred to: 663

All but one of the following manuscript items are not extant.

— Botany notes.

referred to: 66, 67

— Catalogue of plants that grow on the Pic du Midi.

referred to: 95

Edition: current; Page: [727]
— Catalogue of plants growing in the area of Bagnères-de-Luchon.

referred to: 107

— Chemistry notes of Anglada’s lectures.

referred to: 132-43 passim

— Dialogue on government.

note: a draft plan is printed in App. B.

referred to: 11, 12, 20, 21, 39, 40, 45, 132

— Itinerary of route from Bagnères-de-Bigorre to Toulouse.

referred to: 95

— Livre géographique et statistique.

referred to: 22, 29, 30, 36, 37, 39, 40, 41, 48, 60, 66, 67

— Logic notes.

note: the latter part is printed here as No. 3.

referred to: 131-43 passim

— Notes on area around Bagnères-de-Bigorre.

note: some of these notes are printed at 72.

referred to: 70

— Notes on zoology taken in Provençal’s lectures.

referred to: 132-43 passim

— Table of price of commodities in towns he had visited.

referred to: 67

— Tables of logic.

referred to: 71

— Thèmes.

note: various French composition exercises.

referred to: 139, 140, 141, 142

— Traité de logique.

note: this is presumably not No. 2, which was based on the lecture
series that had not yet begun.

referred to: 127

— Translation of Cicero’s Pro Milone.

note: reproduced in App. B.

referred to: 114

— Treatise on the definition of political economy.

referred to: 54

— Treatise on the utility of size in land and industry.

referred to: 54

— Treatise on value.

referred to: 47

Mill, Mary Elizabeth (later Colman) (1822-1913).

note: JSM’s youngest sister.

referred to: 496

Mill, Wilhelmina Forbes (later King) (1808-61).

note: JSM’s eldest sister; at 38 he refers to her as Guillaumine.

referred to: 19, 22, 26, 32, 36, 38, 44, 46, 52n, 71, 126, 496

Millot, Claude François Xavier (1726-85; GDU). Elémens de l’histoire de
France, depuis Clovis jusqu’à Louis XV. Paris: Durand, 1768.

referred to: 20

Mills, William (1793-1834).

note: Oxford professor.

referred to: 126

Edition: current; Page: [728]
Milton, Lord. See Charles Fitzwilliam.

Milton, John (1608-74; DNB). Referred to: 413, 437

— Paradise Lost (1667). In The Poetical Works of Mr. John Milton.
London. Tonson, 1695, 1-343.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 390

Mirabeau, Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de (1749-91; EB). Referred to:
383

Mitford, William (1794-1827; DNB). Referred to: 352

— The History of Greece (1784-1818). 10 vols. London: Cadell and Davies,
1818-20.

note: formerly in SC.

referred to: 352-3, 367

Mitory (Miss).

note: an Englishwoman capable of sensing colours by touch.

referred to: 156

Molière, Jean Baptiste Poquelin (1622-73; GDU). Referred to: 21, 22

— Dépit amoureux (1656). Paris: Barbin, 1663.

referred to: 73

— L’estourdy, ou Les contretemps (1653). Paris: Quinet, 1663.

referred to: 19

Molyneux, William (1656-98; DNB). Referred to: 388

Montagu, Viscount. See George Samuel Browne.

Montagu-Scott, Henry James (Baron Montagu of Boughton) (1776-1845; BP).

note: JSM spells his title Montague.

referred to: 599

Montesquieu, Charles Louis de Secondat, baron de la Brède et de
(1689-1755; GDU). Referred to: 443, 444, 450-1, 657

— Considérations sur les causes de la grandeur des Romains, et de leur
décadence (1734). New ed. Edinburgh: Hamilton, et al., 1751.

note: in SC.

referred to: 250, 347

— De l’esprit des loix, ou Du rapport que les loix doivent avoir avec la
constitution de chaque gouvernement, les moeurs, le climat, la religion,
le commerce, etc. 2 vols. Geneva: Barillot, [1748].

referred to: 450-1

— Lettres persanes. 2 vols. in 1. Amsterdam: Brunel, 1721.

referred to: 249-50

The Monthly Repository. Referred to: 572

Montlaur de Murles, Charles Joseph Marie de (b. ca. 1763).

note: proprietor of the estate of Restinclières bought by Samuel
Bentham.

referred to: 42

Moore, Thomas (1779-1852; DNB). Referred to: 415

Morand (M.).

note: professor of French literature at Montpellier.

referred to: 132, 134, 135

Morellet, André (1727-1819; GDU). “Remarques sur un ouvrage intitulé:
Abrégé d’un cours complet de léxicographie.” In Mélanges de littérature
et de philosophie du 18e siècle. 4 vols. Paris: Lepetit, 1818, I,
369-84.

referred to: 170

Edition: current; Page: [729]
Morning Chronicle. Unheaded leader on the case of John Franks, 3 Aug.,
1824, 2-3.

referred to: 282

Morning Herald and Daily Advertiser. Referred to: 391

Mudge, William (1762-1820; DNB). Referred to: 538

Muley Ismael. See Isma’il.

Napier, Joseph (1804-82; DNB). Speech on Conventual and Monastic
Institutions (28 Feb., 1854; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 131, cols.
77-85.

referred to: 658

Napoleon I (1768-1821; GDU). Referred to: 13, 14, 269, 282, 373, 421,
467

Neale, Harry Burrard. See Burrard-Neale.

Nero, Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus (37-68 ad; WWR). Referred to: 332

Neville, Henry (Earl of Abergavenny) (1755-1843; DNB). Referred to: 465,
472

Newton, Isaac (1642-1727; DNB).

note: the reference at 212-13 is in an unidentified quotation; that at
232 derives from Louis Sébastien Mercier, q.v.

referred to: 212-13, 231-2, 236, 352, 357, 381, 384

— Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica (1687). In Opera quae
exstant omnia. Ed. Samuel Horsley. 5 vols. London: Nichols, 1779-85,
II-III.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. The so-called “Jesuits’
Edition” (Geneva: Barillot, 1739-42) is in SC.

referred to: 236, 251, 252

Nicole, Pierre. See Antoine Arnaud.

Nicomachus (of Gerasa) (d. ca. 196 ad; EB). Referred to: 246-7

Niebuhr, Barthold Georg (1776-1831; EB). Referred to: 654

— The History of Rome (in German, 1811-12). 3 vols. Trans. Julius
Charles Hare and Connop Thirlwall (Vols. I and II); William Smith and
Leonhard Schmitz (Vol. III). London (Vols. I and II printed Cambridge):
Taylor, 1828 (Vol. I), 1832 (Vol. II); Taylor and Walton, 1842 (Vol.
III).

note: a German ed., 3 vols. (Berlin: Reimer, 1827-32 [Vol. II is of the
1836 ed.]), is in SC, as are the two vols. of Lectures, ed. Schmitz
(London, Taylor and Walton, 1844) that complete Niebuhr’s History.

referred to: 654

Norfolk, Duke of. See Howard.

Northcote, James (1746-1831; DNB). Referred to: 565

Northumberland, Earl of. See Percy.

Nouvelles Annales des Voyages, de la Géographie et de l’Histoire (1819
ff.).

note: though JSM refers to the Annales des Voyages (1808-14) it is
certain that he is referring to the Nouvelles Annales, a continuation of
the earlier periodical. See also Letronne.

referred to: 110, 127, 128, 129

Nugent, George (1757-1849; DNB). Referred to: 493

O’Brien, William.

note: a member of the London Debating Society.

referred to: 358-71 passim, 374, 379

O’Connell, Daniel (1775-1847; DNB). Speech on the Parliamentary Reform
Bill (22 July, 1831; Commons), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 5, col. 214.

referred to: 615

Edition: current; Page: [730]
Olivier.

note: proprietor of a variety theatre in Paris.

referred to: 54-5

Omar I (Abou Hafsa Ibn al Khattab) (ca. 581-644 ad; BU).

note: JSM wrote Oram for Omar. See also Audiffret.

referred to: 225

Opie, John (1761-1807; DNB). Referred to: 566

Ord, William Henry (1803-38; WWBMP). Referred to: 574

Orde, later Orde-Powlett, Thomas (Baron Bolton) (1746-1807; DNB).
Referred to: 575

Orléans, Louis Philippe Joseph, duc d’ (1747-93; GDU).

note: known as Philippe Egalité.

referred to: 6

Orléans, Philippe II, duc d’ (1674-1723; EB).

note: the reference is in a quotation from Pope.

referred to: 659

Otley, Jonathan (1766-1856). A Concise Description of the English Lakes,
the Mountains in Their Vicinity, and the Roads by Which They May Be
Visited: with Remarks on the Mineralogy and Geology of the District.
Keswick: Otley, 1823.

quoted: 526

referred to: 537

Ovid (43 bc-ad 17; EB). Art of Love and Other Poems (Latin and English).
Trans. J.H. Mozley. London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1929.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 414

Owen, Robert (1771-1858; DNB).

note: references to “Mr. Owen’s system” are interpreted as applying to
his Report, q.v.

referred to: 288, 289, 307, 308, 325

— A New View of Society; or, Essays on the Formation of the Human
Character, Preparatory to the Development of a Plan for Gradually
Ameliorating the Condition of Mankind (1813). 2nd ed. London: Longman,
et al.; Edinburgh; Constable, and Oliphant; Glasgow: Smith, and Brash,
1816.

note: Essays 3 and 4 first appeared in this ed.

referred to: 289, 299

— Report to the County of Lanark, of a Plan for Relieving Public
Distress, and Removing Discontent, by Giving Permanent, Productive
Employment, to the Poor and Working Classes. Glasgow: Wardlaw and
Cunninghame; Edinburgh: Constable, et al.; London: Longman, et al.,
1821.

referred to: 288-96 passim, 297, 300, 308, 309, 313, 315, 323-5, 325-6

Owen, Robert Dale (1801-77; DNB). An Outline of the System of Education
at New Lanark. Glasgow: Wardlaw and Cunninghame, 1824.

referred to: 325-6

P . . . , Jules de. Review of Programme du cours du droit public,
positif et administratif, à la Faculté de Droit de Paris; pour l’année
1819-20, par M. le baron de Gérando (Paris: Baudoin, 1819), Revue
Encyclopédique, VI (June 1820), 496-512.

referred to: 47-8

Paget, Edward (1775-1849; MEB). Referred to: 497

Partouneaux, Louis, comte (1770-1835; GDU).

note: at 19 JSM uses the spelling Partineaux.

referred to: 19, 35, 37

Edition: current; Page: [731]
Partouneaux, “Tonin” (b. 1800).

note: the second son of General Partouneaux, and great friend of George
Bentham.

referred to: 35, 37

Partouneaux (Mme).

note: wife of Louis, comte Partouneaux, the General.

referred to: 35, 37, 43

Paynter, John (1791-1847).

note: see Burke’s Landed Gentry.

referred to: 625

Peachey, William (ca. 1763-1838; JMP).

note: JSM uses the spelling Peachy.

referred to: 534

Pearce, Henry.

note: a hotel proprietor in Truro.

referred to: 624

Pearce, John (d. 1837).

note: a hotel proprietor in Falmouth and Penzance.

referred to: 624

Pearce, Joseph.

note: a member of the hotel-owning family in Cornwall.

referred to: 624

Pearce, William (ca. 1792-1847).

note: a hotel proprietor in Falmouth.

referred to: 624

Peel, Robert (1788-1850; DNB). Referred to: 311, 399

Percy, Henry (Earl of Northumberland) (1564-1632; DNB). Referred to: 565

Petty-Fitzmaurice, Henry (Marquis of Lansdowne) (1780-1863; DNB).
Referred to: 398, 399, 427

— Speech on the Roman Catholic Question (17 May, 1819; Lords), PD, 1st
ser., Vol. 40, cols. 438-40.

referred to: 399

Phillips, Thomas (1770-1845; DNB). Referred to: 566

Picot de Lapeyrouse, Philippe (1744-1818; GDU). Referred to: 96

— Histoire abrégée des plantes des Pyrénées, et itinéraire des
botanistes dans ces montagnes. Toulouse: Bellegarrigue, 1813.

referred to: 96, 97n, 126

Pierrotou.

note: a servant of the Benthams; at 21 JSM uses the spelling Piertot.

referred to: 21, 24, 25n, 29, 31n, 37, 37n, 54, 60n

Pitman, John (fl. 1820-32). Panorama of Constantinople and Its Environs
from Scutari. London: Leigh, 1831.

referred to: 568

Pitt, William (the younger) (1759-1806; DNB). Referred to: 384

Pius VII (Barnabò Chiaramonti; Pope) (1742-1823; EB). Referred to: 58

Plato (427-347 bc; WWG). Referred to: 147, 175, 187, 238, 352, 657

— Apology. In Euthyphro, Apology, Crito, Phaedo, Phaedrus (Greek and
English). Trans. H.N. Fowler. London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1914, 60-145.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 390

Edition: current; Page: [732]
— Meno (Memon). In Laches, Protagoras, Meno, Euthydemus (Greek and
English). Trans. W.R.M. Lamb. London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1952, 264-370.

referred to: 187

— Republic (Greek and English). Trans. Paul Shorey. 2 vols. London:
Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1946.

referred to: 307

— The Sophist. In Theaetetus, Sophist (Greek and English). Trans. H.N.
Fowler. London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1921, 259-459.

referred to: 239

— The Statesman. In The Statesman, Philebus, Ion (Greek and English).
Trans. H.N. Fowler and W.R.M. Lamb. London: Heinemann; New York:
Putnam’s Sons, 1925, 1-195.

referred to: 239

Playfair, John (1748-1819; DNB). Referred to: 352, 357

Plot, Robert (1640-96; DNB). The Natural History of Oxfordshire; Being
an Essay toward the Natural History of England. Oxford: n.p., 1677.

referred to: 482n

Plutarch (fl. ad 50-120; WWG). Life of Marcellus. In Lives (Greek and
English). Trans. Bernadotte Perrin. 11 vols. London: Heinemann;
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1914-26, V, 435-523.

referred to: 152

Pocklington, Joseph. See Joseph Pocklington Senhouse.

Polybius (ca. 200-120 bc; WWR). Referred to: 367

Pompignan, Jean Louis Georges Marie Lefranc, marquis de (1760-1840).

note: son of the poet Jean Jacques Lefranc.

referred to: 20, 21, 24, 27, 30, 31, 56

Pompignan, Jean Marie Claude Alphonse Lefranc, comte de (1788-1869).

note: grandson of the poet Jean Jacques Lefranc, son of the marquis de
Pompignan.

referred to: 27, 31, 32, 34

Pompignan, Louise Lefranc, marquise de (née de Beaumont-Baynac).

note: wife of Jean Louis Georges Pompignan.

referred to: 20, 21, 27, 28, 28-9, 31, 32

Pope, Alexander (1688-1744; DNB). Referred to: 437

— The Dunciad (1728). In Works. New ed. Ed. Joseph Warton, et al. 9
vols. and Supplemental Vol. London: Priestley, 1822 (Supp. Vol., London:
Hearne, 1825), V.

note: this ed. in SC.

referred to: 408, 417

— Epistle I, “Of the Knowledge and Characters of Men,” of Moral Essays.
In Works, III, 171-202.

quoted: 659

659.13-14 “a godless Regent trembles at a star”] What made (say
Montagne, or more sage Charron!) / Otho a warrior, Cromwell a buffoon? /
A perjur’d Prince, a leaden Saint revere, / A godless Regent tremble at
a Star? (184; ll. 87-90)

— Windsor Forest (1713). In Works, I, 161-92.

referred to: 478

Pouzin, Martin Hugues César (1768-1822).

note: Professor of Botany in the Ecole de Pharmacie in Montpellier.

referred to: 143

Edition: current; Page: [733]
Poyntz, Elizabeth Mary (née Browne).

note: wife of William Poyntz.

referred to: 564

Poyntz, William Stephen (1770-1840; WWBMP). Referred to: 564

Pratt, John Jeffreys (Earl and Marquis of Camden) (1759-1840; DNB).
Referred to: 471

Price, Rose (1768-1834; BP). Referred to: 635

Provençal, Jean Michel (1781-1845).

note: Professor of Zoology at the University of Montpellier.

referred to: 132-43 passim

Ptolemy (Claudius Ptolemaeus) (fl. 2nd cent. ad; WWR). Referred to: 251

— Almagestum Cl. Ptolemei Pheludiensis Alexandrini, astronomorum
principis, opus ingens ac nobile omnes coelorum motus continens. Venice:
Liechtenstein, 1515.

referred to: 251

Pusey, Edward Bouverie (1800-82; DNB). Referred to: 643

Quintillian (ad ca. 33-100; WWR). Institutio oratoria (Latin and
English). Trans. H.E. Butler. 4 vols. London: Heinemann; Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1921.

note: in SC formerly was an edition published in Leipzig, 1816-21.

quoted: 413

413.5 Sciat] Sciat etiam Ciceroni placuisse aiio Maiiamque geminata /
scribere; quod si est, etiam iungetur ut consonans. (I, 66; I, iv, ll)

Racine, Jean (1639-99; GDU). Referred to: 20, 21, 46, 47, 56

Ramond, Louis François Elisabeth de Carbonnière, baron (1753-1827; GDU).
Referred to: 122

Ramsay, James Andrew Broun (Marquis and Earl of Dalhousie) (1812-60;
DNB). Referred to: 656

Ramus. See Pierre La Ramée.

Ravaillac, François (1578-1610; GDU). Referred to: 10, 11

Ravez, Auguste Simon Hubert Marie (1770-1849; DPF). Referred to: 23

Ray, John (1627-1705; DNB). Synopsis methodica stirpium Britannicarum.
London: Smith, 1690.

referred to: 482n

Reboul, Henri Paul Irénée (1763-1839; GDU).

note: at 97n and 122 JSM uses the spelling Rébouls, at 124 Rebouls.

referred to: 97n, 122, 124

— “Nivellement des principaux sommets de la chaîne des Pyrénées,”
Annales de Chimie et de Physique, 2nd ser., V (1817), 234-60.

referred to: 97n

Regnard, Jean François (1655-1709; GDU). Referred to: 28

Reid, Thomas (1710-96; DNB). Referred to: 657

Revue Encyclopédique, La. Referred to: 48

Reynolds, Joshua (1723-92; DNB). Referred to: 565

Ricardo, David (1772-1823; DNB). Referred to: 409n, 657

Richardson, Samuel (1689-1761; DNB). Referred to: 415

Edition: current; Page: [734]
Richmond, Duke of. See Charles Gordon Lennox.

Robertson, William (1721-93; DNB). Referred to: 383-4

— The History of the Reign of the Emperor Charles V (1769). In Works. 6
vols. London: Longman, et al., 1851, III-IV.

note: this ed. cited (although it postdates the reference) as it is in
SC.

referred to: 368, 383-4

Robespierre, Maximilien François Marie Isidore de (1758-94; GDU).
Referred to: 285

Robinson, Frederick John (Viscount Goderich, later Earl of Ripon)
(1782-1859; DNB). Referred to: 409n

— Speech on the New Administration—Exposition of the Late Ministers (2
May, 1827; Lords), PD, n.s., Vol. 17, cols. 472-9.

referred to: 401

— Speech on the Corn Bill (25 May, 1827; Lords), PD, n.s., Vol. 17,
cols. 984-99.

referred to: 401

Rodríguez Burón (Mme).

note: wife of Tomàs, resident at Montauban.

referred to: 12, 13, 18

Rodríguez Burón, Tomàs.

note: Spanish man of letters living in France.

referred to: 8-13 passim

Roebuck, John Arthur (1801-79; DNB). Referred to: 341-8 passim, 418-27
passim, 434n, 436

Rogers, Samuel (1763-1855; DNB). “The Boy of Egremond.” In Poems. New
ed. London: Cadell, 1827, 202-4.

referred to: 508

Romilly, Samuel (1757-1818; DNB). Referred to: 275

Romilly, William (d. ca. 1154).

note: the boy who died crossing the Strid.

referred to: 508

Romney, George (1734-1802; DNB). Referred to: 565

Rosa, Salvator (1615-73; EB). Referred to: 565

Rose, George Henry (1771-1855; DNB). Referred to: 600, 601, 602

Rose, George Pitt (1797-1851; JMP). Referred to: 600

Rossi, John Charles Felix (1762-1839; DNB). Referred to: 565

Rous (M., senior).

note: presumably the same person as the M. Rousse at 20.

referred to: 20, 54, 57

Rous (M., junior).

note: son of M. Rous, senior.

referred to: 54, 57

Rousseau, Jean Jacques (1712-78; EB). Referred to: 257, 657

— Discours sur l’origine et les fondements de l’inégalité parmi les
hommes (1755). In Oeuvres complètes. 2nd ed. 25 vols. in 12. Paris:
Feret, 1826, I, 239-392.

note: in SC.

referred to: 257

Rubens, Peter Paul (1577-1640; EB). Referred to: 648

Ruskin, John (1819-1900; DNB). Referred to: 645

Edition: current; Page: [735]
Russell, Francis.

note: one of the sons of William Thomas Russell, q.v.

referred to: 22-59 passim, 112

Russell, John (Lord) (1792-1878; DNB). Referred to: 398, 399, 404, 574

— Speech on the New Administration—Test Act—Supplies (11 May, 1827;
Commons), PD, n.s., Vol. 17, col. 744.

referred to: 403

— Speech on the Test and Corporation Acts (7 June, 1827; Commons), PD,
n.s., Vol. 17, cols. 1145-8.

referred to: 403

Russell, Richard (b. ca. 1809).

note: one of the sons of William Thomas Russell, q.v.

referred to: 22-59 passim, 112

Russell, William (1798-1850; JMP). Referred to: 484

Russell, William.

note: the eldest son of William Thomas Russell, q.v.

referred to: 22-59 passim, 112, 114

Russell, William Thomas (b. 1776).

note: son of Francis Russell, sheriff of Limerick.

referred to: 19-60 passim, 112, 114

Russell (Mrs.).

note: wife of William Thomas Russell, q.v.

referred to: 22, 36, 43, 57

Sackville, George John Frederick (Duke of Dorset) (1794-1815; BP).
Referred to: 474

Sackville, Thomas (Earl of Dorset) (1536-1608; DNB). Referred to: 474

Sacy. See Claude Lancelot.

St. Aubyn, John (1758-1839; DNB). Referred to: 623, 633

St. Aubyn, Juliana (née Vinicombe) (ca. 1769-1856; DNB). Referred to:
633

St. John (St. Jean). Referred to: 32

Saint-John, Henry (Viscount Bolingbroke) (1678-1751; DNB). Referred to:
396, 415

St. Louis. See Louis IX of France.

St. Peter.

note: the reference at 226 (to St. Pierre) is in a syllogism.

referred to: 35, 226

St. Thomas Aquinas (ca. 1225-74; EB). Referred to: 163-4

Sallust (Gaius Sallustius Crispus) (86-35 bc; WWR). “Bellum Catilinae”
(“The War with Catiline”). In Sallust (Latin and English). Trans. J.C.
Rolfe. 2 vols. London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1931, I, 1-129.

note: in SC is Opera omnia, ed. H. Homer (London: Payne, 1889).

quoted: 347

referred to: 48, 50-1, 53, 54, 344

347.21-2 “Regibus . . . semperque his . . . virtus formidolosa] Nam
regibus . . . semperque eis . . . virtus formidulosa (12; VII)

Sand, Karl Ludwig (1795-1820; ADB). Referred to: 24

Sanderson, Robert (1587-1663; DNB). Logicae artis compendium (1615). 2nd
ed. Oxford: Lichfield and Short, 1618.

note: in SC.

referred to: 35, 37

Edition: current; Page: [736]
Sauvage (M.).

note: JSM’s French teacher.

referred to: 40-60 passim, 114

Savigny, Friedrich Karl von (1779-1861; EB). Referred to: 654

Say, Alfred (b. ca. 1807).

note: son of J.B. Say.

referred to: 7, 9

Say, Andrienne. See Comte.

Say, Horace Emile (1794-1860; GDU). Referred to: 7, 9, 12

Say, Jean Baptiste (1767-1832; GDU). Referred to: 7-14 passim, 22, 26

— Traité d’économie politique, ou Simple exposition de la manière dont
se forment, se distribuent, et se consomment les richesses (1803). 4th
ed. 2 vols. Paris: Deterville, 1819.

note: in SC.

referred to: 47, 137-8, 138

Say, Julie (née Gourdel-Deloche) (d. 1830).

note: wife of J.B. Say.

referred to: 7, 9, 12

Say, Octavie (1804-65).

note: daughter of J.B. Say.

referred to: 7, 9, 12

Schwediauer (Swediaur), François Xavier (1748-1824; GDU). Referred to:
8, 9, 11

Scott, John (Lord Eldon) (1751-1838; DNB). Referred to: 368, 384

— Speech on Roman Catholic Claims (5 May, 1825; Lords), PD, n.s., Vol.
13, cols. 373-4.

referred to: 368, 384

— Speech on the Roman Catholic Relief Bill (17 May, 1825; Lords), PD,
n.s., Vol. 13, cols. 762-6.

referred to: 368, 384

— Speech on the Abolition of Slavery (7 Mar., 1826; Lords), PD, n.s.,
Vol. 14, cols. 1155-9.

referred to: 368, 384

Scott, Walter (1771-1832; DNB). Referred to: 415, 436, 437

Sedgwick, Adam (1785-1873; DNB). Referred to: 534

Senhouse, Joseph Pocklington (1804-74).

note: landowner in Cumberland.

referred to: 540, 548

Sevene, Louis (1758-1828).

note: proprietor of the Château de Monferrier.

referred to: 130

Shakespeare, William (1564-1616; DNB). Referred to: 651

— As You Like It. In The Riverside Shakespeare. Ed. G. Blakemore Evans.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1974, 369-400.

quoted: 499

499.11-12 “ends this strange eventful history”] Last scene of all, /
That ends this strange eventful history, / Is second childishness, and
mere oblivion, / Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans every thing.
(382; II, vii, 163-6)

— King Lear. In The Riverside Shakespeare, 1255-95.

referred to: 343

Edition: current; Page: [737]
— Macbeth. In The Riverside Shakespeare, 1306-42.

note: the quotation at 596 is indirect.

quoted: 596, 649

649.8 “strutted and fretted their hour upon the stage”] Life’s but a
walking shadow, a poor player, / That struts and frets his hour upon the
stage, / And then is heard no more. (1337; V, v, 24-6)

— The Two Noble Kinsmen. In The Riverside Shakespeare, 1639-81.

referred to: 408

Shelley, John (1771-1852; MEB). Referred to: 465

Sheridan, Richard Brinsley Butler (1751-1816; DNB). “Mr. Sheridan’s
Speech on Summing up the Evidence on the Second, or Begum Charge” (3, 6,
10, and 13 June, 1788). In Speeches of the Late Right Honourable Richard
Brinsley Sheridan. 5 vols. London: Martin, 1816, II, 55-127.

note: the quotation is indirect. The passage cited is not in the version
of the speech published in 1788 (London: Richardson).

quoted: 420

Sicard, Roch Ambroise Cucurron, abbé (1742-1822; GDU). Referred to: 199

— Elémens de grammaire générale appliqués à la langue française (1799).
3rd ed. 2 vols. Paris: Deterville, 1808.

referred to: 199

Sidney, Algernon (1622-83; DNB). Referred to: 447

Simeon, Richard Godin (1784-1854; MEB). Referred to: 569, 574

Simson, Robert (1687-1768; DNB). Referred to: 352, 357

Smith, Adam (1723-90; DNB). Referred to: 657

Smith, James Edward (1759-1828; DNB). Flora Britannica. 3 vols. London:
White, 1800-04.

referred to: 472, 495

Smith, John Abel (1801-71; DNB).

note: the identification is probable.

referred to: 460

Smith, Joseph (1805-44; DAB). Referred to: 667

Smith, Robert (Baron Carrington) (1752-1838; DNB). Referred to: 488

Snooke, William Drew (1787-1857). Flora Vectiana, Being an Arrangement
of the More Rare and Interesting Plants Indigenous to the Isle of Wight.
London: printed Taylor, 1823.

referred to: 588, 589, 592

Socrates (469-399 bc; WWG).

note: see also Cicero, De fato.

referred to: 197, 663

Solomon. Referred to: 381

Somerset, Charles Henry (1767-1831).

note: Governor of the Cape of Good Hope.

referred to: 406

Sophocles (ca. 496-406/5 bc; WWG). Referred to: 353

South, Robert (1634-1716; DNB). Referred to: 415

Southey, Robert (1774-1843; DNB). Referred to: 413, 532, 533, 536, 540,
548, 551

— Sir Thomas More; or, Colloquies on the Progress and Prospects of
Society. 2 vols. London: Murray, 1829.

referred to: 532, 549

Edition: current; Page: [738]
Spencer, John Charles (Lord Althorp, later Earl Spencer) (1782-1845;
DNB). Referred to: 398, 399

Spinoza, Benedict de (1632-77; EB).

note: JSM uses the spelling Spinosa.

referred to: 657

Spurzheim, Johann Caspar. See Franz Joseph Gall.

Sterling, John (1806-44; DNB).

note: the references at 419, 420, and 423 are inferred.

referred to: 419, 420, 423, 443-53 passim

Sterne, Laurence (1713-68; DNB). Referred to: 415

Stewart, Dugald (1753-1828: DNB). Referred to: 657

— Some Account of a Boy Born Blind and Deaf. Edinburgh: from
Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, 1812.

referred to: 154

Stewart, John (1805-60; MEB). Referred to: 594

Stewart, Matthew (1717-85; DNB). Referred to: 352, 357

Stewart, Robert (Lord Castlereagh) (1769-1822; DNB). Referred to: 378-9

Stoker, Elizabeth.

note: Jeremy Bentham’s housekeeper.

referred to: 45

Stuart, Charles (Baron Stuart de Rothesay) (1779-1845; DNB). Referred
to: 601, 602

Stuart (or Stewart), Henry (Lord Darnley) (1545-67; DNB). Referred to:
342

Suetonius (Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus) (b. ca. 70 ad; WWR). “Divus
Iulius” (“The Deified Julius”). In Suetonius (Latin and English). Trans.
J.C. Rolfe. 2 vols. London: Heinemann; New York; Macmillan, 1914, I,
1-119.

note: see also the next entry.

referred to: 50

— C. Suetonius Tranquillus, et in eum commentarius, exhibente Joanne
Schildio. Leyden and Rotterdam; ex officina Hackiana, 1667.

note: in SC.

referred to: 61

Sulla, Lucius Cornelius (138-78 bc; WWR).

note: JSM uses the spelling Sylla.

referred to: 344

Sumner, Holme. See George Holme-Sumner.

Swift, Jonathan (1667-1745; DNB). Referred to: 396, 415

— A Tale of a Tub (1704). In The Works of Jonathan Swift, D.D., Dean of
St. Patrick’s Dublin; Containing Additional Letters, Tracts, and Poems,
Not Hitherto Published; with Notes and a Life of the Author. Ed. Walter
Scott. 19 vols. Edinburgh: Constable: London: White, et al.; Dublin:
Cumming, 1814, XI, 1-211.

note: in SC.

referred to: 279

Talleyrand-Périgord, Alexandre Angélique de (1736-1821; GE). Referred
to: 24

Tapps, George Ivison (1753-1835).

note: the “Whig proprietor” at Christchurch, Hampshire.

referred to: 600

Tapps-Gervis, George William (1795-1842; MEB). Referred to: 600

Edition: current; Page: [739]
Taylor, George (1771-1851; MEB). Referred to: 536, 548

Taylor, Henry (1800-86; DNB). Referred to: 536, 540, 548

Taylor, J. (née Mills).

note: the step-mother of Henry Taylor.

referred to: 540, 548

Taylor, John (1779-1863; MEB). Referred to: 619

Taylor, Richard (1810-83).

note: mining engineer, son of John Taylor.

referred to: 619

Taylor, Robert (1784-1844; DNB). Referred to: 420

Thirlwall, Connop (1797-1875; DNB). Referred to: 297, 298, 300, 302-3,
304-5, 307, 386

Thomas, Antoine Léonard (1732-85; GDU). “De Mascaron et de Bossuet.”
Chap. xxix of Essai sur les éloges, ou Histoire de la littérature et de
l’éloquence, appliquées à ce genre d’ouvrage. In Oeuvres. 4 vols. Paris:
Moutard, 1773, II, 158-82.

referred to: 55

Thompson, William (1775-1833; DNB).

note: the references are inferred.

referred to: 291, 313-25 passim

— Appeal of One Half the Human Race, Women, against the Pretensions of
the Other Half, Men, to Retain Them in Political, and Thence in Civil
and Domestic, Slavery. London: Longman, et al., 1825.

referred to: 314, 321

Thomson, Thomas (1773-1852; DNB). Referred to: 32, 44

— A System of Chemistry, 4 vols. Edinburgh: Bell and Bradfute, et al.;
London: Robinson; Dublin: Gilbert and Hodges, 1802.

referred to: 32, 35, 36, 39, 40, 42

Thucydides (2nd half of 5th century bc; WWG). Referred to: 367

Tierney, George (1761-1830; DNB). Referred to: 398, 399

The Times.

— “New Ministry and Mr. Canning,” 4 Apr., 1827, 7.

referred to: 406

— “New Ministry and Mr. Canning,” 9 Apr., 1827, 2.

referred to: 406

Tiran (M.).

note: a musician.

referred to: 72

Titian (Titiano Vecellio) (ca. 1488?-1576; EB). Referred to: 565

Tooke, John Horne (1736-1812; DNB). Referred to: 282

Tooke, William Eyton (1808-30).

note: son of Thomas Tooke, the economist.

referred to: 478

Torrens, Robert (1780-1864; DNB). Referred to: 574

Tournefort, Joseph Pitton de (1656-1708; GDU). Referred to: 122

Trimmer, Sarah (1741-1810; DNB). An Abridgment of the New Testament;
Consisting of Lessons Composed from the Writings of the Four
Evangelists, for the Use of Schools and Families. New ed. London:
Rivington, [1805].

referred to: 526

Edition: current; Page: [740]
Troughton, Edward (1753-1835; DNB). Referred to: 43

Turenne, Henri de la Tour d’Auvergne, vicomte de (1611-75; GDU).
Referred to: 43, 46

Turgot, Anne Robert Jacques, baron de l’Aulne (1727-81; GDU). Referred
to: 396-7, 409n

Turner, Joseph Mallord William (1775-1851; DNB). Referred to: 566, 636

Van der Meulen, Antoine François (1634-90).

note: a painter; JSM uses the spelling Vander Meulen.

referred to: 565

Van Dyck, Anthony (1599-1641; DNB).

note: JSM uses the spelling Vandyke.

referred to: 565

Vane, William Harry (Lord Darlington) (1766-1842; DNB). Referred to: 275

Vansittart, George (1745-1825; JMP). Referred to: 493

Vansittart, Nicholas (Baron Bexley) (1766-1851; DNB). Referred to: 493

Vasey, Poole Hickman (ca. 1762-1834).

note: a colonel in the army of the East India Company; JSM spells his
name Vaysey.

referred to: 137

Victoria (of England) (1819-1901; DNB). Speech from the Throne (31 Jan.,
1854), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 130, cols. 2-5.

referred to: 648, 662

Villiers, Thomas Hyde (1801-32; DNB). Referred to: 594

Virenque, Joseph Guillaume (1759-1829).

note: professor of chemistry in the Faculty of Medicine, Montpellier.

referred to: 136, 139-43 passim

Virgil (Publius Virgilius Maro) (70-19 bc; WWR). Referred to: 21, 23

— Aeneid. In Virgil (Latin and English). Trans. H. Rushton Fairclough. 2
vols. London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1922, I, 240-570 (Bks.
I-VI) and II, 2-364 (Bks. VII-XII).

note: see also the next entry. In SC is Opera, ed. C.G. Heyne, 4 vols
(London: Priestley, 1821).

referred to: 47, 48

— Aeneidis Publii Virgilii Maronis libri XII graeco carmine heroico
expressi, notisque perpetuis illustrati studio ac labore Eugenii de
Bulgaris (Latin and Greek). 3 vols. Petropoli: In Academia Scientiarum,
1791-92.

referred to: 57

— Eclogues. In Virgil (q.v. under Aeneid), I, 2-76.

referred to: 33, 34, 35

— Georgics. In Virgil (q.v. under Aeneid), I, 80-236.

referred to: 36, 38, 40

Volney, Constantin François de Chasseboeuf, comte de (1757-1820; GDU).
Referred to: 243-4

— “Histoire.” In Séances des écoles normales, recueillies par des
sténographes, et revues par les professeurs. Leçons. 6 vols. Paris:
Reynier, an VI (1797-98), II, 425-47, III, 405-37.

quoted: 244

Edition: current; Page: [741]
244.2 méthode analytique] La quatrième méthode que j’appelle analytique
ou philosophique, est la même que la précédente, quant à la manière de
procéder; mais elle en diffère, en ce qu’au lieu de traiter un sujet
d’art, de science ou de passion, etc.: elle embrasse un corps politique
dans toutes ses parties; c’est-à-dire, que s’attachant à un peuple, à
une nation, considérés comme individus identiques, elles les suit pas à
pas dans toute la durée de leur existence physique et morale, avec cette
circonstance caractéristique, que d’abord elle pose en ordre tous les
faits de cette existence, pour chercher ensuite à déduire de leur action
réciproque les causes et les effets de l’origine, des progrès, et de la
décadence de ce genre de combinaison morale, que l’on appelle corps
politique et gouvernement; c’est en quelque sorte l’histoire
biographique d’un peuple, et l’étude physiologique des lois
d’accroissement et de décroissement de son corps social (III, 410-11)

Voltaire, François Marie Arouet (1694-1778; GDU).

note: the quotation has not been located.

quoted: 212-13

referred to: 21, 22, 26, 27, 28, 31, 34

— Essais sur les moeurs et l’esprit des nations, et sur les principaux
faits de l’histoire, depuis Charlemagne jusqu’à Louis XIII (1756). In
Oeuvres complètes 66 vols. Paris: Renouard, 1819-25, XIII-XVI.

note: this ed. in SC.

referred to: 38, 39, 40, 41, 43

— La Henriade (1724). In Oeuvres complètes, VIII, 1-302.

quoted: 211

211.38 Descend des cieux auguste Vérité] Descends du haut des cieux,
auguste Vérité! (VIII, 47, Chant premier, l. 7)

— Nanine, ou Le préjugé vaincu (1749). In Oeuvres complètes, IV, 1-81.

quoted: 253

253.16-17 “non il n’ést rien que Nanine n’honore:] Non, il n’est rien
que sa vertu n’honore. (IV, 79; III, viii)

Wallace, John (b. 1771).

note: friend of James Mill.

referred to: 44

Warner, Richard (1763-1857; DNB). A Tour through Cornwall, in the Autumn
of 1808. London: Wilkie and Robinson, 1809.

referred to: 622

Warwick, Duke of. See Henry de Beauchamp.

Wellesley, Arthur (Duke of Wellington) (1769-1852; DNB). Referred to:
373, 448

Walter, Jean Joseph (1763-1852; GDU) and Louis Joseph Gay-Lussac (q.v.).
“Sur un acide nouveau formé par le soufre et l’oxigene,” Annales de
Chimie et de Physique, 2nd ser., X (1819), 312-19.

referred to: 136

West, Benjamin (1738-1820; DNB). Referred to: 566

West, John (1756-1817). Elements of Mathematics: Comprehending Geometry,
Conic Sections, Mensuration, Spherics. Illustrated with 30
Copper-Plates. For the Use of Schools. Edinburgh: Creech; London:
Longman, et al., 1784.

referred to: 20, 33-4, 39, 47, 48, 52, 352, 357

West, Thomas (1720-79; DNB). A Guide to the Lakes: Dedicated to the
Lovers of Landscape Studies, and to All Who Have Visited, or Intend to
Visit the Lakes in Cumberland, Westmorland, and Lancashire. London:
Richardson and Urquhart; Kendal, Pennington, 1778.

Edition: current; Page: [742]
note: the quotation is in a quotation from a guide-book by Jonathan
Otley, q.v.

quoted: 526

526.23 “a mass of antediluvian ruins”] [paragraph] This vale of peace is
about four miles in circumference, and guarded at the upper end by
Holme-crag, a broken pyramidal mountain, that exhibits an immense mass
of Antideluvian ruins. (84)

Westmorland, Thomas (1774-1845).

note: a Cumberland farmer.

referred to: 544

Whitaker, Thomas Dunham (1759-1821; DNB). The History and Antiquities of
the Deanery of Craven, in the County of York. London: Nicols, 1805.

referred to: 508n

White, Gilbert (1720-93; DNB). Referred to: 559, 561

— The Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne, in the County of
Southampton. London: White, 1789.

referred to: 559, 561

White, Mary (1767-1839).

note: fifth daughter of Benjamin White, Gilbert White’s brother;
mistakenly identified by JSM as Gilbert’s sister.

referred to: 559

Whitmore, William Wolryche (1787-1858; MEB). Speech on the State of the
Corn Laws (18 Apr., 1826; Commons), PD, n.s., Vol. 15, cols. 318-35.

referred to: 381

Wilderspin, Samuel (ca. 1792-1866; DNB). Referred to: 427

Wilkes, John (1727-97; DNB). Referred to: 494

William III (of England) (1650-1702; DNB). Referred to: 494

Williams, Owen (1764-1832; JMP). Referred to: 493

Windham, William (1750-1810; DNB).

note: Mill uses the spelling Wyndham.

referred to: 384

— Speech on Defence of the Country (22 July, 1807; Commons), PD, 1st
ser., Vol. 9, cols. 882-906.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 339

Wolff, Christian (Freiherr von) (1679-1754; ADB). Elementa matheseos
universae. 2 vols. Magdeburg: Libraria Rengeriana, 1713-15.

referred to: 235

Wordsworth, Catherine (1808-12).

note: one of the poet’s children who died young.

referred to: 526

Wordsworth, Dorothy (1771-1855; MEB).

note: at 520 JSM refers to the following poems, published in William
Wordsworth’s Poetical Works (q.v.): “Address to a Child, during a
Boisterous Winter Evening,” “The Cottager to Her Infant,” “The Mother’s
Return.”

referred to: 512, 515, 520, 526

Wordsworth, Dorothy (1804-47).

note: the poet’s daughter.

referred to: 520

Wordsworth, Mary (née Hutchinson) (1770-1859).

note: the poet’s wife.

referred to: 520

Edition: current; Page: [743]
Wordsworth, Thomas (1806-12).

note: one of the poet’s children who died young.

referred to: 526

Wordsworth, William (1770-1850; DNB). Referred to: 410, 519, 520, 522,
524, 526, 527, 528, 529, 536, 537, 582, 434-42 passim

— “Andrew Jones.” In Lyrical Ballads, with Other Poems (1798). 2nd ed. 2
vols. London: Longman and Rees, 1800, II, 89-91.

referred to: 442

— A Description of the Scenery of the Lakes in the North of England
(1810). 3rd ed. London: Longman, et al., 1822.

note: in SC.

referred to: 528, 538

— “Essay, Supplementary to the Preface” (1815). In Poetical Works
(q.v.), II, 357-91.

referred to: 435n

— “Lines Left upon a Seat in a Yew-tree Which Stands near the Lake of
Esthwaite.” In Lyrical Ballads, with a Few Other Poems. Bristol:
Longman, 1798, 59-62.

referred to: 442

— Poems. 2 vols. London: Longman, et al., 1807.

note: JSM refers to the following poems in this collection: “Alice Fell”
and “Her eyes are wild, her head is bare” (1798).

referred to: 435n, 438

— Poems, Including Lyrical Ballads, and the Miscellaneous Pieces of the
Author, with Additional Poems, a New Preface, and a Supplementary Essay.
2 vols. London: Longman, et al., 1815.

referred to: 435n

— Poetical Works. 5 vols. London: Longman, et al., 1827.

note: in SC. JSM refers to the following poems, published in Poetical
Works: “Complaint of a Forsaken Indian Woman” (1798), The Excursion,
Being a Portion of the Recluse (1814), “The Farmer of Tilsbury Vale”
(1800), “The Female Vagrant” (1827), “The Force of Prayer; or, The
Founding of Bolton Priory: A Tradition” (1815), “The Fountain” (1800),
“Influence of Natural Objects, in Calling Forth and Strengthening the
Imagination in Boyhood and Early Youth” (1807), “I wandered lonely as a
cloud” (1807), “The Kitten and the Falling Leaves” (1807), “Laodamia”
(1815), “The Last of the Flock” (1798), “Lines, Composed a Few Miles
above Tintern Abbey, on Revisiting the Banks of the Wye during a Tour”
(1798), “Michael, a Pastoral Poem” (1800), “A Morning Exercise” (1828),
“Nutting” (1800), “Ode. Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of
Early Childhood” (1807), “Ode to Duty” (1807), “The Old Cumberland
Beggar” (1800), “Personal Talk,” “Continued,” “Continued,” and
“Concluded” (otherwise known as “Miscellaneous Sonnets, Pt. 1, nos.
xxxviii-xli”), “Peter Bell” (1819), “A Poet’s Epitaph” (1800), “Power of
Music” (1807), “The Reverie of Poor Susan” (1800), “Rural Architecture”
(1800), “The Sailor’s Mother” (1807), “The Solitary Reaper” (1807), “The
Sparrow’s Nest” (1807), “Stray Pleasures” (1807), “To a Butterfly”
(1807), “To a Highland Girl” (1807), “The Two Thieves” (1800), “The
White Doe of Rylstone” (1815), “Yew Trees” (1815).

referred to: 434-42 passim

— “Preface to the Second Edition of the Lyrical Ballads” (1800). In
Poetical Works (q.v.), IV, 357-89.

referred to: 435n

— Preface to The Excursion (1814). In Poetical Works (q.v.), V, ix-xvi.

referred to: 440

— “Resolution and Independence” (1807). In Poetical Works (q.v.), II,
125-31.

quoted: 436, 605

Edition: current; Page: [744]
436.37 the stockdove broods] There was a roaring in the wind all night;
/ The rain came heavily and fell in floods; / But now the sun is rising
calm and bright; / The birds are singing in the distant woods; / Over
his own sweet voice the Stock-dove broods; / The Jay makes answer as the
Magpie chatters; / And all the air is filled with pleasant noise of
waters. (II, 125)

605.1-3 Motionless as a cloud. . . . / Which heareth] Himself he
propped, limbs, body, and pale face, / Upon a long grey staff of shaven
wood: / And, still as I drew near with gentle pace, / Upon the margin of
that moorish flood / Motionless as a cloud the old Man stood, / That
heareth (II, 128)

— “The Waggoner, in Three Cantos” (1819). In Poetical Works (q.v.), I,
269-312.

note: the quotation is in a quotation from a guide-book by Jonathan
Otley; q.v.

quoted: 526

referred to: 528

526.24-5 ‘astrologer and old woman’] Save that above a single height /
Is to be seen a lurid light, / Above Helm-crag—a streak half dead, / A
burning of portentous red; / And, near that lurid light, full well / The
ASTROLOGER, sage Sydropel, / Where at his desk and book he sits, /
Puzzling on high his curious wits; / He whose domain is held in common /
With no one but the ANCIENT WOMAN, / Cowering beside her rifted cell; /
As if intent on magic spell,— / Dread pair, that, spite of wind and
weather, / Still sit upon Helm-crag together! (280-1)

Wyndham, George O’Brien (Earl of Egremont) (1751-1837; DNB). Referred
to: 456, 565, 566

Xerxes I (of Persia) (d. 465 bc; EB).

note: see also Herodotus. The reference at 559 is merely to someone
named after Xerxes.

referred to: 559, 595

Yarborough, Lord. See Charles Anderson-Pelham.

Young, Arthur (1741-1820; DNB). Travels during the Years 1787, 1788, and
1789. Undertaken More Particularly with a View of Ascertaining the
Cultivation, Wealth, Resources, and Natural Prosperity of the Kingdom of
France. 2nd ed. 2 vols. London and Bury St. Edmunds: Richardson, 1794.

note: in SC.

referred to: 30

Young, Edward (1683-1765; DNB). Two Epistles to Mr. Pope, Concerning the
Authors of the Age. London: Gilliver, 1730.

referred to: 417

Young, James (1782-1848).

note: friend and disciple of Bentham’s.

referred to: 10, 11


PARLIAMENTARY PAPERS AND SESSIONAL PAPERS OF THE HOUSE OF LORDS

“A Bill [as Amended by the Committee] Intituled An Act to Deprive Her
Majesty Caroline Amelia Elizabeth of the Title, Prerogatives, Rights,
Privileges, and Exemptions of Queen Consort of This Realm; and to
Dissolve the Marriage between His Majesty and the Said Caroline Amelia
Elizabeth,” 1 George IV (7 July, 1820), Sessional Papers of the House of
Lords, 1820, CXIV, 293-4.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 25-6, 36, 37n

Edition: current; Page: [745]
“Minutes of Evidence Taken before the Select Committee Appointed to
Inquire into the Disturbances in Ireland,” PP, 1825, VII, 1-499.

referred to: 363

“Minutes of Evidence Taken before the Select Committee of the House of
Lords Appointed to Examine into the Nature and Extent of the
Disturbances Which Have Prevailed in Those Districts of Ireland Which
Are Now Subject to the Provisions of the Insurrection Act,” PP, 1825,
VII, 501-802.

referred to: 363

“Report from the Select Committee Appointed to Inquire into the State of
Ireland, More Particularly with Reference to the Circumstances Which May
Have Led to Disturbances in That Part of the United Kingdom,” PP, 1825,
VIII, 4-172.

referred to: 363

“Second Report from the Select Committee Appointed to Inquire into the
State of Ireland, More Particularly with Reference to the Circumstances
Which May Have Led to Disturbances in That Part of the United Kingdom,”
PP, 1825, VIII, 173-292.

referred to: 363

“Third Report from the Select Committee Appointed to Inquire into the
State of Ireland, More Particularly with Reference to the Circumstances
Which May Have Led to Disturbances in That Part of the United Kingdom,”
PP, 1825, VIII, 293-456.

referred to: 363

“Fourth Report from the Select Committee Appointed to Inquire into the
State of Ireland, More Particularly with Reference to the Circumstances
Which May Have Led to Disturbances in That Part of the United Kingdom,”
PP, 1825, VIII, 457-855.

referred to: 363

“Minutes of Evidence Taken before the Select Committee Appointed to
Inquire into the State of Ireland, More Particularly with Reference to
the Circumstances Which May Have Led to Disturbances in That Part of the
United Kingdom,” PP, 1825, IX, 1-675.

referred to: 363

“A Bill for Granting Duties of Customs on Corn,” 7 & 8 George IV (29
Mar., 1827), PP, 1826-27, I, 413-18.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 399, 408

“A Bill for Granting Relief to Certain Persons Dissenting from the
Church of England, in Respect of the Mode of Celebrating Marriage,” 8
George IV (14 May, 1827), PP, 1826-27, II, 21-4.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 399

“A Bill to Amend the Laws Relating to the Customs,” 7 & 8 George IV (8
June, 1827), PP, 1826-27, II, 371-84.

note: enacted as 7 & 8 George IV, c. 56 (1827).

referred to: 407

“A Bill to Exclude the Borough of Penryn, in the County of Cornwall,
from Sending Members to Serve in Parliament, and to Enable the Town of
Manchester, in the County Palatine of Lancaster, with Certain Townships
Adjoining, to Send Two Burgesses to Serve in Parliament,” 9 George IV
(20 Feb., 1828), PP, 1828, II, 87-106.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 448

“A Bill to Prevent the Forcible Detention of Females in Religious
Houses,” 14 Victoria (11 Mar., 1851), PP, 1851, V, 511-16.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 658

Edition: current; Page: [746]
“A Bill to Facilitate the Recovery of Personal Liberty in Certain
Cases,” 16 Victoria (12 May, 1853), PP, 1852-53, VI, 1-4.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 658

“A Bill Further to Amend the Laws Relating to the Representation of the
People in England and Wales,” 17 Victoria (16 Feb., 1854), PP, 1854, V,
375-418.

note: not enacted.

referred to: 662

“Report on the Organisation of the Permanent Civil Service, Together
with a Letter from the Rev. B. Jowett,” PP, 1854, XXVII, 1-31.

note: known as the Northcote-Trevelyan Report; prepared by Sir Stafford
Northcote and Sir Charles Trevelyan, who dated it 23 Nov., 1853.

referred to: 662, 666


STATUTES


BRITISH

1 Elizabeth, c. 2. An Act for the Uniformity of Common Prayer and
Service in the Church, and Administration of the Sacraments (1558).

referred to: 422

1 James I, c. 27. An Act for the Better Execution of the Intent and
Meaning of Former Statutes Made against Shooting in Guns, and for the
Preservation of the Game of Pheasants and Partridges, and against the
Destroying of Hares with Hare-Pipes, and Tracing Hares in the Snow
(1603).

referred to: 282, 361, 374

13 Charles II, 2nd sess., c. 1. An Act for the Well-Governing and
Regulating of Corporations (1661).

note: the Corporation Act.

referred to: 422

13 & 14 Charles II, c. 4. An Act for the Uniformity of Public Prayers,
and Administration of Sacraments, and Other Rites and Ceremonies: and
for Establishing the Form of Making, Ordaining and Consecrating Bishops,
Priests and Deacons in the Church of England (1662).

referred to: 422

22 & 23 Charles II, c. 25. An Act for the Better Preservation of the
Game, and for Securing Warrens Not Inclosed, and the Several Fishings of
This Realm (1671).

referred to: 273, 278, 285, 330, 335, 378

25 Charles II, c. 2. An Act for Preventing Dangers Which May Happen from
Popish Recusants (1672).

note: the first Test Act.

referred to: 399, 402, 403-4, 422

30 Charles II, 2nd sess., c. 1. An Act for the More Effectual Preserving
the King’s Person and Government, by Disabling Papists from Sitting in
Either House of Parliament (1677) [1678].

note: the second Test Act.

referred to: 399, 402, 403-4, 422

10 Anne, c. 2. An Act for Preserving the Protestant Religion, by Better
Securing the Church of England, as by Law Established; and for
Confirming the Toleration Granted to Edition: current; Page: [747]
Protestant Dissenters by an Act, Intituled, An Act for Exempting Their
Majesties Protestant Subjects, Dissenting from the Church of England,
from the Penalties of Certain Laws, and for Supplying the Defects
Thereof; and for the Further Securing the Protestant Succession, by
Requiring the Practicers of the Law in North Britain to Take the Oaths,
and Subscribe the Declaration Therein Mentioned (1711).

note: the Occasional Conformity Act.

referred to: 422

12 Anne, 2nd sess., c. 16. An Act to Reduce the Rate of Interest,
without Any Prejudice to Parliamentary Securities (1713).

note: the most significant of the Usury Laws.

referred to: 273

23 George III, c. 66. An Act for Granting to His Majesty Several Rates
and Duties upon Waggons, Wains, Carts, and Other Such Carriages, Not
Charged with Any Duty under the Management of the Commissioners of
Excise (1783).

referred to: 599

39 & 40 George III, c. 67. An Act for the Union of Great Britain and
Ireland (2 July, 1800).

referred to: 269, 362

55 George III, c. 26. An Act to Amend the Laws Now in Force for
Regulating the Importation of Corn (23 Mar., 1815).

referred to: 273, 285, 330, 335, 360, 366, 378, 600

57 George III, c. 19. An Act for the More Effectually Preventing
Seditious Meetings and Assemblies (31 Mar., 1817).

referred to: 370, 385

57 George III, c. 90. An Act for the Prevention of Persons Going Armed
by Night for the Destruction of Game; and for Repealing an Act, Made in
the Last Session of Parliament, Relating to Rogues and Vagabonds (10
July, 1817).

referred to: 273, 278, 285, 330, 335, 378

60 George III & 1 George IV, c. 1. An Act to Prevent the Training of
Persons to the Use of Arms, and to the Practice of Military Evolutions
and Exercise (11 Dec., 1819).

note: the first of the “Six Acts.”

referred to: 273, 378, 405

60 George III & 1 George IV, c. 2. An Act to Authorize Justices of the
Peace, in Certain Disturbed Counties, to Seize and Detain Arms Collected
or Kept for Purposes Dangerous to the Public Peace; to Continue in Force
until the Twenty-fifth Day of March 1822 (18 Dec., 1819).

note: the second of the “Six Acts.”

referred to: 273, 378, 405

60 George III & 1 George IV, c. 4. An Act to Prevent Delay in the
Administration of Justice in Cases of Misdemeanour (23 Dec., 1819).

note: the third of the “Six Acts.”

referred to: 273, 378, 405

60 George III & 1 George IV, c. 6. An Act for More Effectually
Preventing Seditious Meetings and Assemblies; to Continue in Force until
the End of the Session of Parliament next after Five Years from the
Passing of the Act (24 Dec., 1819).

note: the fourth of the “Six Acts.”

referred to: 273, 370, 378, 385, 405

60 George III & 1 George IV, c. 8. An Act for the More Effectual
Prevention and Punishment of Blasphemous and Seditious Libels (30 Dec.,
1819).

note: the fifth of the “Six Acts.”

referred to: 273, 378, 405

Edition: current; Page: [748]
60 George III & 1 George IV, c. 9. An Act to Subject Certain
Publications to the Duties of Stamps upon Newspapers, and to Make Other
Regulations for Restraining the Abuses Arising from the Publication of
Blasphemous and Seditious Libels (30 Dec., 1819).

note: the sixth of the “Six Acts,” known as the “Twopenny Trash Act.”

referred to: 273, 378, 405, 406

1 & 2 George IV, c. 47. An Act to Exclude the Borough of Grampound, in
the County of Cornwall, from Sending Burgesses to Serve in Parliament;
and to Enable the County of York to Send Two Additional Knights to Serve
in Parliament, in Lieu Thereof (8 June, 1821).

referred to: 618

3 George IV, c. 40. An Act for Consolidating into One Act and Amending
the Laws Relating to Idle and Disorderly Persons, Rogues and Vagabonds,
Incorrigible Rogues and Other Vagrants in England (24 June, 1822).

referred to: 330

3 George IV, c. 60. An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the Importation
of Corn (15 July, 1822).

referred to: 273, 285, 330, 335, 360, 366, 378, 399, 600

5 George IV, c. 83. An Act for the Punishment of Idle and Disorderly
Persons, and Rogues and Vagabonds in That Part of Great Britain Called
England (21 June, 1824).

referred to: 330

6 George IV, c. 114. An Act to Regulate the Trade of the British
Possessions Abroad (5 July, 1825).

note: the Reciprocity Act.

referred to: 407

7 & 8 George IV, c. 57. An Act to Permit, until 1st May, 1828, Certain
Corn, Meal, and Flour to Be Entered for Home Consumption (2 July, 1827).

referred to: 600

9 George IV, c. 60. An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the Importation
of Corn (15 July, 1828).

referred to: 600

2 & 3 William IV, c. 45. An Act to Amend the Representation of the
People in England and Wales (7 June, 1832).

note: the First Reform Act.

referred to: 564, 574, 587, 618, 621, 622

16 & 17 Victoria, c. 95. An Act to Provide for the Government of India
(20 Aug., 1853).

referred to: 648


FRENCH

Unheaded decree abolishing titles (20 June, 1790), Gazette Nationale, ou
Le Moniteur Universel, 21 June, 1790, 704.

referred to: 277

Constitution de la république française, proposée au peuple français par
la Convention Nationale. Paris: Imprimerie de la république, an III
[1795].

referred to: 170

Loi sur l’organisation de l’instruction publique, Bull. 203, No. 1216 (3
brumaire, an IV; 25 Oct., 1795), Bulletin des lois de la république
française, 1st ser., VI, 1-13.

referred to: 170

Edition: current; Page: [749]
Arrêté contenant une nouvelle organisation de l’Institut National, Bull.
243, No. 2257 (3 pluviôse, an XI; 23 Jan., 1803), Bulletin des lois de
la république française, 3rd ser., VII, 373-8.

referred to: 170

Code civil des Français. Paris: Imprimerie de la république, 1804.

referred to: 24, 30, 76

Code Napoléon. Bull. 154 bis, No. 2653 bis (3 Sept., 1807), Bulletin des
lois de l’empire français, 4th ser., Nos. bis.

note: separately paginated, 1-383, with index 1-80. The “Bulletins bis”
are not included in their numerical places in the annual volumes, but
are gathered, for each period, in a separate volume.

referred to: 22

Décret impérial portant organisation de l’Université, Bull. 185, No.
3179 (17 Mar., 1808), Bulletin des lois de l’empire français, 4th ser.,
VIII, 145-71.

referred to: 15, 24

Décret impérial concernant le régime de l’Université, Bull. 402, No.
7452 (15 Nov., 1811), Bulletin des lois de l’empire français, 4th ser.,
XV, 425-56.

referred to: 15, 24

Charte constitutionnelle, Bull. 17, No. 133 (4 June, 1814), Bulletin des
lois du royaume de France, 5th ser., I, 197-207.

referred to: 14, 23

Règlement pour la chambre des députés des départemens (25 June, 1814),
Moniteur Universel, 28 June, 1814, 711-12.

referred to: 23

Ordonnance du roi qui maintient provisoirement l’organisation des
Académies, et la taxe du vingtième des frais d’études établie par le
décret du 17 mars 1808, et charge une commission d’exercer, sous
l’autorité du ministre de l’intérieur, les pouvoirs attribués au
grand-maître et autres officiers de l’Université, Bull. 15, No. 68 (15
Aug., 1815), Bulletin des lois du royaume de France, 7th ser., I, 141-3.

referred to: 15, 24

Loi sur les élections, Bull. 137, No. 1694 (5 Feb., 1817), Bulletin des
lois du royaume de France, 7th ser., IV, 113-18.

referred to: 14, 23

Loi sur la répression des crimes et délits commis par la voie de la
presse, ou par tout autre moyen de publication, Bull. 278, No. 6444 (17
May, 1819), Bulletin des lois du royaume de France, 7th ser., VIII,
465-71.

referred to: 14, 23

Loi relative à la poursuite et au jugement des crimes et délits commis
par la voie de la presse, ou par tout autre moyen de publication, Bull.
280, No. 6515 (26 May, 1819), Bulletin des lois du royaume de France,
7th ser., VIII, 513-20.

referred to: 14, 23

Loi relative à la publication des journaux ou écrits périodiques, Bull.
284, No. 6648 (9 June, 1819), Bulletin des lois du royaume de France,
7th ser., VIII, 601-4.

referred to: 14, 23

Loi sur la publication des journaux et écrits périodiques, Bull. 356,
No. 8494 (31 Mar., 1820), Bulletin des lois du royaume de France, 7th
ser., X, 385-7.

referred to: 14, 23

Loi sur les élections, Bull. 379, No. 8910 (29 June, 1820), Bulletin des
lois du royaume de France, 7th ser., X, 1001-6.

referred to: 14, 23, 26, 36, 50

Edition: current; Page: [750]


IRISH

2 Elizabeth, c. 1. An Act for Restoring to the Crown the Ancient
Jurisdiction over the Estate Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and
Abolishing All Foreign Power Repugnant to the Same (1560).

referred to: 269, 362

2 Elizabeth, c. 2. An Act for the Uniformity of Common Prayer and
Service in the Church, and the Administration of the Sacraments (1560).

referred to: 269, 362


SPANISH

The Spanish Constitution. Proclaimed at Cadiz, March 19th, 1812;
Re-proclaimed at Cadiz, March 19th, 1820; and Adopted as the
Constitution of Naples and Sicily, July 4th, 1820. London: Benbow, 1820.

referred to: 58

Edition: current; Page: [751]
1
Commonly Chobham.

2
This sentence is interlined.

3
Charles II (1630-85) reigned 1660-85; Elizabeth I (1538-1603) reigned
1558-1603.

4
George O’Brien Wyndham (1751-1837), 3rd Earl of Egremont, a patron of
the arts, had estates in Cumberland as well as Sussex.

5
The preventive service, or preventive water guard, was a coastguard
service established in 1815 to prevent smuggling. Men and boats under
the command of half-pay naval lieutenants were stationed on the coast of
Sussex and Kent.

6
The Fitzalan title, which began with Richard Fitzalan (1267-1302), 1st
Earl, passed by marriage to the Howard family with Philip Howard
(1557-95), 13th Earl, and then was annexed in 1660 to the Dukedom of
Norfolk (held by the Howard family). As leading Roman Catholics, the
Howards were enemies of the Commonwealth forces under Oliver Cromwell
(1599-1658). The current head of the house was Bernard Edward Howard,
12th Duke.

7
Probably John Abel Smith (1801-71), a banker and magistrate for Sussex
and Middlesex, who later was M.P. for Midhurst (1830) and Chichester
(1831-59).

8
Elsewhere and correctly Adur.

*
N.B. This hill and copse are visible from Box hill, and form an
excellent landmark. [Mill’s note at the foot of the page.]

9
The 64 ft. viewing tower, built in 1766 by Richard Hull (ca. 1689-1772)
on the highest point (965 ft.) in the county, had been rebuilt after
wanton damage and raised some twenty feet in height; the top was not
accessible, however, at this time.

10
Mill uses both this and the more common spelling, Surrey.

11
The Lordship of Lewes and its Castle date from the eleventh century,
Lewes being the barony seat of the Earls of Surrey until the end of the
fourteenth century. Early in the fifteenth century the Lordship was
divided in three, held at the time of Mill’s visit by the Earl of
Abergavenny (currently Henry Neville [1755-1843], 2nd Earl), the Duke of
Norfolk (currently Bernard Edward Howard), and the Duke of Dorset
(currently Charles Sackville Germain [1767-1843], 5th Duke). The site
and ruins, leased in 1774 for 99 years, were at this time held by Thomas
Read Kemp (ca. 1781-1844), M.P. for Lewes, 1811-16 and again 1826-37,
who built Kemp Town, a suburb of Brighton.

12
Kemp and John Shelley (1771-1852), who was a sitting member, were
elected in 1826, defeating Alexander Donovan (1775/6-1846).

13
These masonry towers, containing vaulted rooms and capped with a gun
platform, were built during the Napoleonic wars at short intervals along
the coast, especially in the South and East, as a defensive measure. The
name comes from a tower on Cape Mortella in Corsica, which surprisingly
resisted British assault in 1794.

14
The guide misled the visitors: the name Herstmonceux (derived from Old
English hyrst, a wooded hill, plus Monceux, the name of the lords of the
manor from the twelfth century) existed before the building of the
castle during the reign, 1422-61, of Henry VI (1421-71).

15
Commonly Battle.

16
The owner was George Ashburnham (1760-1830), 3rd Earl, the descendant of
John Ashburnham (1603-71), M.P. for Hastings, made Groom of the
Bedchamber in 1628 by Charles I, to whom he reported Parliament’s
proceedings.

17
John Jeffreys Pratt (1759-1840), 2nd Earl and 1st Marquis of Camden.

18
Mill may have been using The Directory; or, The Ancient and Present
State of Tunbridge Wells (Tunbridge Wells: Sprange, 1816), which
mentions several details he comments on, including the rocks (p. 11),
but does not make the comparison with the caverns of the robbers in
Alain René Lesage (1668-1747), L’histoire de Gil Blas de Santillane, 4
vols. (Paris: Ribou, 1715-35), Vol. I, pp. 27-8 (Bk. I, Chap. iv).

19
In The Directory, pp. 10-12.

20
Thomas Furly Forster, Flora Tonbrigensis; or, A Catalogue of Plants
Growing Wild in the Neighbourhood of Tonbridge Wells (London: Arch;
Tunbridge Wells: Sprange, 1816), p. 30n.

21
James Edward Smith, Flora Britannica, 3 vols. (London: White, 1800-04),
Vol. I, p. 368.

22
Mentioned in The Directory, pp. iv-v, though the term “showplace” is not
used.

23
Commonly Tonbridge.

24
Thomas Sackville (1536-1608), 1st Earl of Dorset, was the first owner of
Knole Castle; on the death of George John Frederick Sackville
(1794-1815), 4th Duke of Dorset, it passed for life to his widow,
Arabella Diana Cope, and then on her death to their daughter Mary, who
was the current owner.

25
The traditional account concerning James I (1566-1625), who reigned
1603-25, for which there is no firm evidence, was evidently maintained
by a guide, who may have independently and improbably added James II
(1633-1701), who reigned 1685-88, to the tale.

1
For the basis of the comparison, see No. 1 above, entry for 12 October,
1820.

2
The Mills had been at Bagshot in the autumn of 1818.

3
Alexander Pope, Windsor Forest (1713), in Works, Vol. I, p. 175-7 (ll.
171-218).

4
Gustave d’Eichthal (not d’Eichtal) (1804-86), at this time a
Saint-Simonian apostle propagandizing in England. In his diary
d’Eichthal records for 3 July: “Diner à Reading avec M. Mill et ses
amis.” William Eyton Tooke (1808-30), another close friend of Mill’s at
this time, committed suicide two years later.

5
Later in this journal Mill uses the more common spelling, Pangbourne.

6
As noted in No. 29, Mill uses both this and the more common spelling,
Surrey.

7
Mill appears to have written “Chakesden.”

8
Usually Beaconsfield.

9
See, e.g., early accounts in Robert Plot (1640-96), The Natural History
of Oxfordshire (Oxford: n.p., 1677), pp. 146-8, and John Ray
(1627-1705), Synopsis methodica stirpium Britannicarum (London: Smith,
1690), pp. 174-5; a nearly contemporary reference is in James Norris
Brewer (fl. 1799-1829), A Topographical and Historical Description of
the County of Oxford (London: Sherwood, et al., 1819), p. 308.

10
The owner was in fact Robert Greenhill-Russell (ca. 1763-1836), M.P. for
Thirsk 1806-32, not his cousin, William Russell (1798-1850), M.P. for
Saltash 1822-26, and then for Bletchingly 1826-27. Chequers came into
the Russell family when John Russell, son of Frances, the daughter of
Oliver Cromwell, married Joanna Thurbarne Rivett, whose father had
acquired it by marriage.

11
The house had been owned by John Hampden-Trevor (1749-1824), 3rd
Viscount Hampden, who had died without issue, and who was the
great-great grandson of the John Hampden famed for his opposition to
Charles I. When Mill saw the estate, it was in the hands of George
Robert Hobart (1789-1849), the Earl of Buckinghamshire, who took the
name of Hampden on inheriting the Hampden estates in Buckinghamshire.

12
Robert Smith (1752-1838), Baron Carrington.

13
Normally Cliveden, though Mill consistently writes Clifden.

14
Now Wooburn.

15
George Nugent (1757-1849), who had been Commander-in-Chief in India
1811-13, was M.P. for Buckingham 1819-32.

16
George Vansittart (1745-1825), M.P. for Berkshire 1784-1812, was uncle
of Nicholas Vansittart (1766-1851), Baron Bexley, who had been
Chancellor of the Exchequer from 1812 to 1823, when he entered the Lords
but remained in the Cabinet.

17
Owen Williams (1764-1832), actually M.P. for Marlow 1796-1832, a member
of the family which was joined by Pascoe Grenfell (1761-1838), M.P. for
Great Marlow 1802-20 and for Penryn 1820-26, in developing the mining
industry in Cornwall and Anglesey.

18
William Robert Clayton (1786-1866).

19
The inscription mentioned by Mill below indicates that John Lovelace
(ca. 1638-93), then owner of Lady Place, held private meetings in the
vault, including “several consultations for calling in the Prince of
Orange,” later William III (1650-1702), who replaced James II on the
throne in 1688.

20
John Wilkes (1727-97), the demagogic politician, had been inducted in
1762 into the notorious “Franciscans of Medmenham,” or “Hell-Fire Club”
by its founder, Francis Dashwood (1709-81), Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Wilkes joined fully in the “orgies,” being expelled after releasing a
baboon in Satanic insignia during a black mass.

21
E.g. in James Smith, Flora Britannica, Vol. II, p. 659.

22
As Mill notes earlier, also (and more commonly) Wokingham.

23
At this time the Governor was Edward Paget (1775-1849).

24
Elsewhere Mill writes correctly Chobham.

25
One assumes an ironical reference to Shakespeare, As You Like It, II,
vii, 164; in The Riverside Shakespeare, p. 382.

1
See No. 29, entry of 27 July, 1827.

2
John Scarlett Davis (1804-45), Fourteen Views in Lithography of Bolton
Abbey, 2nd ed. (London: Cock, 1829); Mill is referring to the 6th plate,
a view of the interior of the nave, and the 7th, a view of the choir.

3
William George Spencer Cavendish.

4
Both Wordsworth, “The Force of Prayer or the Founding of Bolton Abbey: A
Tradition” (1815), in Poetical Works, Vol. IV, pp. 265-8, and Samuel
Rogers (1763-1855), “The Boy of Egremond,” in Poems, new ed. (London:
Cadell, 1827), pp. 202-4, draw upon Thomas Dunham Whitaker (1759-1821),
The History and Antiquities of the Deanery of Craven, in the County of
York (London: Nichols, 1805), p. 324, for the traditional tale of the
drowning of William Romilly (ca. 1154) and the founding of the Abbey.

5
First published, 1815; in Poetical Works, Vol. IV, p. 17 (ll. 229-38).

6
Anne Clifford (1590-1676), Countess of Dorset, Pembroke and Montgomery,
who inherited the northern estates of the Earls of Cumberland and was a
great restorer of churches and castles (including Barden Tower and
Skipton Castle), had married first Richard Sackville, 3rd Earl of
Dorset, and second Philip Herbert, 4th Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery.

7
Mill had strong personal memories of Forde Abbey, near Chard in
Somerset, where the Mill family had spent many months from 1814 to 1818
as guests of Jeremy Bentham, who rented it as a summer and fall
residence.

8
Dorothy Wordsworth (1771-1855), sister of William.

9
Not identified.

10
John Christian Curwen (1756-1828), author, M.P. for Carlisle 1786-1812
and 1816-20, and for Cumberland 1820-28.

11
Thomas Madge (1786-1870), formerly co-pastor of the Octagon Chapel,
Norwich, 1811-25, whom Mill had met in 1822 when studying with the
Austins (CW, Vol. XII, p. 13), and who then became minister of the Essex
Street Chapel, Strand, London, 1825-60.

12
Commonly Esthwaite.

13
Commonly Nab Scar.

14
Commonly Rothay.

15
Diana Le Fleming (née Howard), widow of Michael Le Fleming (1748-1806).

16
Sara Hutchinson (1775-1835), sister of Mary Wordsworth (1770-1859).

17
Dorothy Wordsworth, “Address to a Child, during a Boisterous Winter
Evening,” “The Mother’s Return,” and “The Cottager to Her Infant” (all
1815), in William Wordsworth, Poetical Works, Vol. I, pp. 9-11, 12-14,
and 200.

18
E.g., in “To a Butterfly” and “The Sparrow’s Nest” (both 1807), ibid.,
pp. 4 and 156.

19
Dorothy Wordsworth (1804-47).

20
Commonly Ullswater.

21
Poetical Works, Vol. V, pp. 61-2.

22
Ibid., Vol. I, p. 247.

23
Richard Fleming (1791-1857) was Rector of Grasmere and Windermere, and
ofBowness.

24
The first edition of The Booke of the Common Prayer and Administracion
of the Sacramentes, and Other Rites and Ceremonies of the Churche: after
the Use of the Churche of England appeared in 1549 (London:
Whitchurche). That of the “King James Bible,” to which Mill is obviously
referring, appeared in 1611 (London: Barber); the edition of 1617 is a
reissue of the 1st edition.

25
Thomas (1806-12) and Catherine (1808-12).

26
Sarah Trimmer (1741-1810), An Abridgement of the New Testament, an
extremely popular work that appeared in many editions, e.g., in 1805 as
“A new ed.” (London: Rivington).

27
Jonathan Otley (1766-1856), A Concise Description of the English Lakes,
the Mountains in Their Vicinity, and the Roads by Which They May Be
Visited (Keswick: Otley, 1823), pp. 109-10. The quotations are from
Thomas Gray (1716-71), “Letter to Dr. Wharton” (1769), in Works, ed.
Thomas James Mathias, 2 vols. (London: Porter, 1814), Vol. I, p. 459;
Thomas West (1720-79), A Guide to the Lakes (London: Richardson and
Urquhart; Kendal: Pennington, 1778), p. 84;William Green (1761-1823), A
Description of Sixty Studies from Nature (London: Longman, et al.;
Ambleside: Green, 1810), p. 51; and Wordsworth, “The Waggoner” (1819),
in Poetical Works, Vol. I, pp. 280-1.

28
Wordsworth had lived in the “neat little house” (Allan Bank) from 1808
to 1810, after living in his “cottage” (Dove Cottage, not then so named)
from 1799 to 1806; he was at the time of Mill’s visit in Rydal Mount, as
indicated above.

29
According to some traditions, Dunmail was apprehended by Edmund I (ca.
922-46 ad) in 946.

30
A Description of the Scenery of the Lakes in the North of England
(1810), 3rd ed. (London: Longman, et al., 1822), pp. 3-7.

31
Mill’s usual spelling for Blencathra.

32
“Rural Architecture” (1800), in Poetical Works, Vol. I, pp. 27-8.

33
From its mention in “The Waggoner,” iv, 17.

34
Daniel Crosthwaite (ca. 1776-1847), the owner at that time, was the son
of Peter Crosthwaite, who founded the museum in 1780. A manuscript
catalogue of the “Cabinet of Curiosities” is in the Wordsworth Trust.

35
Southey, Sir Thomas More; or, Colloquies on the Progress and Prospects
of Society, 2 vols. (London: Murray, 1829), frontispiece to Vol. II.

36
William Gordon (1744-1823) had been deputy ranger of St. James’s Park
and Hyde Park.

37
William Peachey (ca. 1763-1838) was M.P. for Taunton 1826-30.

38
Adam Sedgwick (1785-1873), Professor of Geology at Cambridge.

39
“Letter to Dr. Wharton,” p. 450.

40
Usually Portinscale.

41
Frances Gordon (née Ingram) (d. 1841), whose main residence was in
Piccadilly.

42
Henry Taylor (1800-86), man of letters as well as civil servant, son of
George Taylor (1771-1851), a farmer of literary and reclusive tastes.

43
“Yew Trees,” in Poetical Works, Vol. II, pp. 53-4.

44
Otley, A Concise Description of the English Lakes, pp. 36-7.

45
The Ordnance Survey, originally called the Trigonometrical Survey,
aiming at a mapping of the whole of England, was founded in 1791, and
issued its first sheet in 1801.

46
Wordsworth’s image; see n30 above.

47
Wordsworth cites this judgment (probably delivered in conversation) by
William Mudge (1762-1820), a leading member of the Ordnance Survey,
Description, pp. 143-4.

48
Usually Hindscarth.

49
Actually Taylor’s step-mother (née Mills), his mother having died in his
infancy, and his father having remarried in 1818. Isabella Fenwick (d.
1856) is almost certainly the cousin in question.

50
Joseph Pocklington (1804-74), who took in 1842 the additional surname
Senhouse.

51
Elsewhere and correctly, Lodore or Lowdore.

52
Usually Mellbreak.

53
Thomas Westmorland (1774-1845), Vicar of Great Sandal, Yorkshire, from
1818, and perpetual curate of Buttermere.

54
Southey, Sir Thomas More; or, Colloquies, Vol. II, pp. 153-4 (facing p.
153 is an engraving of the Tarn).

55
I.e., Henry Cole, whose diary entry for the previous day, Saturday, 30th
July, indicates that after starting early in the morning, he joined Mill
and Grant at the Queen’s Head Inn at Keswick.

56
Cole’s diary for 31st July mentions the first part of the walk, to
Castle Head, where they saw a “Collection of Minerals and Musical
Stones,” refers to the “Beauty of the girl waiting at the Ale House,”
and indicates that the inn in Patterdale was satisfactory.

57
Henry Askew (d. 1850), Rector of Greystoke, Cumberland.

58
John Marshall (1765-1845), of the cotton manufacturing family, an
intimate of the Benthamite circle.

59
Cole’s diary for 1st August indicates that, as Mill implies, they went
in a boat on Ullswater, from which they saw Helvellyn.

60
Cole’s diary for 2nd August contains detail lacking in Mill’s account:
“we lost our way to Pooley Bridge which a Country man would not tell
Mill thinking he was in jest—after a very long walk we at length reached
Paterdale [sic] at 11 at night after much fatigue and proportionally
weary.”

61
Again Cole’s diary (for 3rd August) adds colour to Mill’s tale:
“Patterdale Inn must be remembered for its Ale, Trout and Marmalade”;
and the change from it to the Salutation Inn in Ambleside “was by no
means for the better—Very Civil but very tardy—and their Cookery not to
be mentioned in the same breath—”

62
Mill’s account of these four days, being much compressed, is given
further perspective by the entries in Cole’s diary: “Thursday 4
[August]. Mill went to see Wordsworth and Grant and I to Rydal Lake
where the rain kept us for two hours under the protection of of [sic]
the umbrage of some very fine Sycamores—The neighbourhood of Ambleside
is of remarkable variety—The Meadows—Lakes and Mountains each offer its
attractions—and I should have liked the place much better if some silly
young men from the University who would be sailors had not been
perpetually intruding themselves before—[sic]

“Friday 5 [August]. Stockgill Force is well worthy of a visit but the
waterfalls do not attall [sic] approach in grandeur either of situation
or of size those of Wales—Troutbeck Lane—but the Day was too cloudy to
have a good view of the Mountains which when clear must be fine from
this spot—I passed the Evening (Mill and Grant having gone to
Wordsworth) in company with a troop of pretty and well behaved Children
drawing the Bridge at Rydal—A Cottage belonging to Mr. Tilbrooke is
situate here and commands a magnificent view—He and his elegant wife
kindly asked me to see their grounds which are well arrange [sic] and
look quite fairy like amidst the surrounding Mountains.—

“Saturday 6 [August]. Our morning was devoted to walking by the Coniston
road by the w. side of Windermere—to the Station House, from whence the
view is remarkably Fine—crossing the ferry we returned through Bowness
to Ambleside—M and G dined with Wordsworth and I passed my evening not
so agreably [sic] as usual—the rain prevented my drawing—and the
aforesaid Collegians smoking and drinking at the Inn—This was the only
time since I left Town that the situation felt irksome—The Fir trees are
of extraordinary Size and magnificence around Ambleside—especially one
in front of The Town.

“Sunday, 7 [August]. Mill and Grant accompanied me on the road to
Coniston Lake about 4 miles—. . . .”

Cole’s diary continues, with the account of this tour ending when he
left Kendal by the coach for Manchester on the 11th, having had as a
guide to the Lakes after Mill and Grant left him the following
instructions from Mill (cf. the entries for 25th to 27th July above):
“Go over Brathay bridge, and take the Hawkshead road, but leave
Hawkshead and Esthwaite water a little to your left. You soon come upon
one of the best views of Coniston water. Go along the road down the
valley as far as you find necessary for seeing the best views; then go
to the inn at the head of the lake, where you can dine, and sleep if you
please.—Go up Yewdale and Tilberthwaite dale, and through a beautiful
pass into Little Langdale. When there, turn to your left, follow the
vale to its head, and you will see the mountain horse path which winds
over the mountain Wrynose into Eskdale. At the head of Little Langdale,
if you have time, turn to your right and walk about a mile by Blea Tarn
until you see the head of Great Langdale; then return.

“From Eskdale you will easily get to Wastdale head: when there, walk
about half a mile or more along the road down the north side of the lake
towards its foot: then return; you can dine at the last farmhouse of the
group. The pass into Ennerdale lies between the mountains Kirkfell and
Yewbarrow; you can easily find it, or any one at Wastdale will shew it
to you: cross Ennerdale, and climb over the pass of Scarf [Scarth] Gap,
which you will perceive to be the lowest point of the mountains
opposite. Descend to Gatesgarth, at the head of Buttermere water, and
take the road down the side of the lake to Buttermere.

“When at Buttermere, walk round Crummock Lake, and see Scale Force; you
should go by the further side of the lake, and return by the nearer; and
in going you will find a footpath through a wood to your left, which
will render your journey shorter and prettier. It is worth while, when
at the foot of Crummock Lake, to walk half a mile towards Loweswater; a
little gate opens from the road into a field where a point of high
ground commands the whole lake. Walk a little way up the valley of
Newlands: and go either to Keswick by that valley, or into Borrowdale by
Gatesgarth and under Honistar Crag.”

1
Directories list William Alexander, a maltster, John Caesar (or Caeser),
a baker and confectioner, and Xerxes Charles, a draper, milliner, and
dressmaker. (Cole mentions Caesar as a grocer, and Xerxes as a hosier.)

2
Gilbert White (1720-93), The Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne
(London: White, 1789).

3
Ibid., p. 2.

4
As Cole indicates, they mistook the village for Hartley, and were
“rectified by a bright eyed girl’s bursting with laughter in Mill’s face
for his misconception, which to her seemed to have all the design of
wilfulness of error in order to serve as a prelude to conversation.”

5
Ibid., p. 5 (in fact the Plestor).

6
Mary White (1767-1839) was actually Gilbert’s niece, fifth daughter of
his brother Benjamin. Mill had originally written, and then revised, “I
suppose his daughter.”

7
Natural History, p. 288.

8
After mentioning “darkeyed damsels skipping downwards with a life
evidencing their animal spirits,” Cole says: “An old man, who had been
gathering furze, in descent, held some colloquy with Mill upon the state
of singleness in which the damsels aforesaid, had hitherto passed their
existence, and he regretted that age and infirmities prevented his
rendering himself so gallant as his capacity once permitted—and
inclination still prompted him.”

9
Natural History, p. 3.

10
Ibid., pp. 14-16. Mill later uses the spelling Wolmer.

11
Or, in Cole’s words, “amidst the rude flat Honkings . . . expressive of
glee and boisterous joy from the Villagers, we retired for the night.”

12
Natural History, pp. 3, 31.

13
Commonly Empshott.

14
There, Cole says, they “solaced themselves with the delights of a change
of linen, and revelled in the dinner of Lamb and Currant tart. . . .”

15
The Bill had been enacted the previous month as 2 & 3 William IV, c. 45.

16
William Stephen Poyntz (1770-1840), then M.P. for Ashburton.

17
Commonly Cowdray.

18
Elizabeth Mary Browne, the sister of George Samuel Browne (1769-93), 6th
Viscount Montagu, inherited Cowdray Park on his death, which
extinguished the title; she married Poyntz in 1794.

19
Henry Percy (1564-1632), 9th Earl of Northumberland, suspected of
complicity in the gunpowder plot, when imprisoned in the Tower of London
for sixteen years, spent his time studying and writing.

20
Mill’s catalogue refers to the great panoply of painters and sculptors
represented in the Wyndham collection: John Flaxman (1755-1826), John
Edward Carew (ca. 1785-1868), John Charles Felix Rossi (1762-1839),
Anthony Van Dyck (1599-1641), Peter Lely (1618-80), Godfrey Kneller
(1646-1723), Titian (Titiano Vecellio) (ca. 1488-1576), Claude Gelée,
called Lorrain (1600-82), Salvator Rosa (1615-73), Aelbert Jacobsz Cuyp
(1620-91), Jan Both (1618-52), Antoine François Van der Meulen
(1634-90), Giovanni Antonio Canaletto (or Canal) (1697-1768), Albrecht
Dürer (1471-1528), Joshua Reynolds (1723-92), Thomas Gainsborough
(1727-88), James Northcote (1746-1831), John Opie (1761-1807), George
Romney (1734-1802), Benjamin West (1738-1820), Thomas Phillips
(1770-1845), and Joseph Mallord William Turner (1775-1851).

21
See No. 29, entry for 20th July, 1827.

22
Charles Gordon Lennox (1791-1860), 5th Duke of Richmond.

23
Held in July, these races date from 1802.

24
John Pitman (fl. 1820-32), Panorama of Constantinople and Its Environs
from Scutari (London: Leigh, 1831).

25
Richard Godin Simeon (1784-1854), M.P. for the Isle of Wight 1832-37.

26
John Albin, A Companion to the Isle of Wight, 12th ed. (London: Albin,
1831), p. 52. (Mill identifies this guidebook below.)

27
Not to Cole’s advantage, who reports: “Of the Road from Ride to Newport
I am scarcely able to speak, partly in consequence of being poked inside
the Coach, partly from an indisposition to examine on account of ill
health and partly from being asleep.”

28
Now Bembridge Harbour.

29
William Johnson Fox (1786-1864), “Sandown Bay,” Monthly Repository, VI
(Apr. 1832), 271-80. It is hard to believe that Mill was not certain
about the authorship, for he had been increasingly close to Fox, through
whom he met Harriet Taylor, for two years. Fox was the editor of the
Monthly Repository, for which Mill began to write a few months later.

30
That is, listed with those disfranchised by the Reform Act, 2 & 3
William IV, c. 45.

31
John Heywood Hawkins (1802-77), who had been M.P. for St. Michael
1830-31 and for Tavistock 1831-32, was elected and sat for Newport until
1841. James Willoughby Gordon (1773-1851), who had served in the army
with distinction, was defeated.

32
Robert Torrens (1780-1864), the political economist and journal
proprietor who had published Mill’s first two letters to the newspapers
in 1822, M.P. for Ashburton 1831-32, was elected for Bolton, which he
represented until 1835. William Henry Ord (1803-38) was elected with
Hawkins, and sat for Newport until 1837.

33
Simeon was reported as strongly supporting the Reform Bill (The Times, 3
Oct., 1831, p. 5), and so by inference the Whig leaders such as Lord
John Russell and Charles Grey.

34
Alexander Glynn-Campbell (1796-1836), who had been M.P. for Fowey
1819-20, and was defeated by Simeon in the election.

35
Cole says: “Our Landlord was a Radical politician, taking his creed from
the Examiner Newspaper—and from him we obtained a complete list of the
Electioneering pamphlets and Correspondence.”

36
Thomas Orde, later Orde-Powlett (1746-1807), Baron Bolton, had been
Governor until his death; he was succeeded by James Harris, Earl of
Malmesbury.

37
This cottage, which Mill visited during his next walking tour, was
obviously already known to him; Charles Buller (1774-1848), who had been
M.P. for West Looe 1812-16 and 1826-30, was the father of Mill’s friend
Charles Buller (1806-48), who succeeded his father at West Looe in 1830,
and was elected for Liskeard in 1832.

38
See No. 31, entry for 3rd August, 1831.

39
Cf. “The Shepherd Turned Merchant,” in Roger L’Estrange (1616-1704),
Fables of Aesop and Other Eminent Mythologists (London: Sare, et al.,
1692), pp. 93-4, where the final comment of the merchant, who had lost a
cargo of figs, is more extravagant: “Yes, yes, says he, When the Devil’s
Blind. You’d ha’ some more Figs, with a Vengeance, Wou’d ye?”

40
Albin, Companion, p. 13.

41
See No. 31, entry for 25th July.

42
I.e., W.J. Fox, “Sandown Bay.”

43
Coleridge, “The Rime of the Ancient Mariner,” in Sibylline Leaves
(London: Rest Fenner, 1817), p. 17n (where the acknowledgment to
Wordsworth is given).

44
The first manuscript notebook ends here.

45
Cf. No. 31, conclusion of the entry for 14th July.

46
I.e., the Salutation Inn, Ambleside, where Mill had stayed during his
tour of the Lakes from 13th to 17th July and 3rd to 8th August, 1831.
See the relevant entries in No. 31.

47
Albin, Companion, pp. 72-3.

48
Here Cole was reminded of “the mountain side walks near Ulleswater,”
where he had been with Mill in the previous year.

49
In Cole’s view, they dined “very moderately in respect of treatment,
very dearly in respect of cost.”

50
Charles Anderson-Pelham (1781-1846), Earl of Yarborough.

51
Albin, Companion, p. 66.

52
Probably that reported in The Times on 9 Nov., 1827, p. 2.

53
Actually in a work after 1823 sold and sometimes bound with Albin,
William Drew Snooke (1787-1857), Flora Vectiana, Being an Arrangement of
the More Rare and Interesting Plants Indigenous to the Isle of Wight
(London: [Albin,] 1823), p. 23.

54
Snooke, p. 16.

55
Cole comments: “In respect of Scenery this part of the island is very
inferior to the Opposite part but my companion Mill found a great
harvest for plants hereabouts and his remark was a just one, that
objects of beauty were furnished by the Eastern half whilst those of
curiosity were to be found here.”

56
Mentioning that the cave was more than 200 ft. deep, Cole adds: “I
confess that the great pleasure of going into a Cave, seems to [me], as
to Mr. Peacock, to arise chiefly in coming out again Safely.” Thomas
Love Peacock (1785-1866), the novelist, lived in and owned the house in
which Cole resided, and was Mill’s superior in the Examiner’s Office of
the East India Company.

57
Cole comments: “the sight evidently moved our Watermen to indignation,
at the punishment which their unfortunate owners would receive,—viewing
as they must have done the punishment as one quite disproportioned to
the offence. Thus is it that our boasted Laws alienate the people from
obedience to them—Here is a needy man for the crime of defrauding the
Revenue of a few Shillings, seized, from his wife and Children (who
thereby become thrown upon the parish) and cast into Prison for 5
years.—This punishment is quite ineffective upon others by instilling
terror or acting as a preventive and such was indicated plainly by the
man who rowed us to the needles, and who by his manner, it was evident
was ready for any such job, if offered to him.”

58
George Brannon, in his work of engravings of the Isle of Wight, Vectis
Scenery: Being a Series of Original and Select Views, new ed., corrected
(Southampton: Brannon, 1825), does not have an engraving of Scratchell
Bay and its cave; however, he has one of a cave in Freshwater Bay, which
is contiguous to Scratchell Bay, with a “rugged arch” (p. 35). Perhaps
the unlikeness reflects a mistake by Mill.

59
The storm that undermined the pillar actually occurred in 1764
(sixty-eight years before Mill’s observation). In 1832, according to
standard accounts, there were three Needles; however, perspectivecould
suggest that one was part of the shore, and Cole, who also says there
were two, notes that they were cut “into five apparent pieces and hence
their number as stated in the books of the Island.”

60
Snooke, p. 3.

61
Henry de Beauchamp (1425-45), Duke of Warwick, was said to have been
crowned King of the Isle of Wight by Henry VI in 1445.

62
Cole is more vivid: “The stream up to Lymington is confined within a
very narrow space in consequence of the prodigious masses of this
sediment—adhesive thereto, are complete fields of sea weeds and other
vile vegetable substances. It is difficult to imagine a less attractive
entrance to a place than such as is here afforded to Lymington—Malaria
is suggested to the imagination in its greatest malignity and as these
beds of mud, are left in a state of evaporation during half the day when
not overflowed by the tide—the effect of them I conjecture must be
highly pernicious to the health of the Town.”

63
Harry Burrard-Neale (1765-1840), who had first been elected for
Lymington in 1818, was again returned in the Conservative interest in
1832.

64
Thomas Hyde Villiers (1801-32), a friend of Mill’s and his associate in
the London Debating Society, M.P. for Hedon 1826-30, for Wootton Bassett
1830-31, and for Bletchingley 1831-32, died during this campaign; he had
voted for the Reform Bill in all its stages, and consequently had in
fact helped disfranchise the “nomination” borough for which he had sat.
John Stewart (1805-60), a Conservative, though a free trader, was
elected, and sat for Lymington until 1847.

65
The account by Herodotus (traditionally 484-420 bc) is in Herodotus
(Greek and English), trans. A.D. Godley, 4 vols. (London: Heinemann; New
York: Putnam’s Sons, 1921), Vol. III, pp. 334 and 356-8 (VII, 21 and
43).

66
William Gilpin (1724-1804), Remarks on Forest Scenery, and Other
Woodland Views, (Relative Chiefly to Picturesque Beauty) Illustrated by
the Scenes of New-Forest in Hampshire, 2 vols. (London: Blamire, 1791),
Vol. II, pp. 250-5.

67
Shakespeare, Macbeth, V, iii, 23; in the Riverside Shakespeare, p. 1336.

68
Gilpin, p. 153.

69
Ibid., pp. 134-5 (Souley Pond).

70
Henry James Montagu-Scott (1776-1845), Baron Montagu of Boughton.

71
Cole’s version is less reticent: “The clear transparency of the water,
together with its smoothness enticed us, into a boat, which in our
wisdom, or rather I in my wisdom for J.M. tacitly assented thereto,
supposed we could easily navigate. The stream was just beginning to flow
down and we proceeded glibly enough—and much further than I deemed
right, but my companion who seemed to have no just notions of the
probable difficulty of our return continued expressing his desire to
descend lower. From our boat we certainly obtained many points of view
which somewhat repaid us for our trouble and it is a matter incumbent on
all who wish to estimate the beauties of Beaulieu to get into a boat for
that purpose, but it must be recollected that a waterman should form one
of the party. We in our boat floated down, nearly within view of
Buckler’s Hard before we deemed it meet to return and then we essayed
our ascent up the stream. Difficult indeed was our task and slow, most
slow was our progress. Mill was but a tyro in rowing and in addition to
the inequality with which he applied his force he so frequently just but
skimmed the surface of the water, whereby the pulling on my part, shoved
the boat first on one side then on the other of the River. The Man of
whom we had engaged the boat inferring from our absence that nothing
less than a casting-away, upon a mud bank could have been our fate, came
down in a small boat and found us tugging away with great vigour in the
very midst of the current making way perhaps at a rate sufficient to
have enabled us to reach Beaulieu in about three hours, if the water had
continued sufficiently deep but this would not have been the case. We
were extracted from our difficulty by engaging the Man to row us back,
which he did as far as the state of the tide would allow, and then
having landed us we walked back to the place of starting. . . . We
returned home to Lymington by the high road . . . well animated with our
water adventure.”

72
For Gilpin’s disparaging comments on the tameness of the view of the
Isle of Wight from the New Forest, see, e.g., Remarks, Vol. II, pp. 78,
89, 131, 158-9, and 185.

73
By 23 George III, c. 66 (1783), vehicles for human beings (and therefore
with springs) were taxed, while agricultural carts were not. Mill is
also playing with words, as two-wheeled carts were known as “tax” or
“taxed” carts. Cole refers to it as “an untaxed, unspringing cart.”

74
Not otherwise identified; Cole, who calls him a greengrocer, says he was
modestly proud of “his newly acquired rights as an elector.”

75
George Henry Rose (1771-1855), Lord of the Manor of Christchurch, who
had been M.P. for Southampton and Christchurch, and sat again for the
latter 1837-44.

76
George William Tapps-Gervis (1795-1842), who had been M.P. for New
Romney and was elected for Christchurch in 1832, was the son of George
Ivison Tapps (1753-1835).

77
George Pitt Rose (1797-1851) had been the second member for Christchurch
1826-32.

78
The statutes controlling the import of grain included 55 George III, c.
26 (1815), 3 George IV, c. 60 (1822), 7 & 8 George IV, c. 57 (1827), and
the most recent one, 9 George IV, c. 60 (1828).

79
Cobbett propagated widely his Tory Radical views through Cobbett’s
Weekly Political Register, which with slightly different titles ran from
1803 to 1835. The other works referred to include Cobbett’s Sermons on
1. Hypocrisy and Cruelty. 2. Drunkenness. 3. Bribery. 4. Oppression. 5.
Unjust Judges. 6. The Sluggard. 7. Murder. 8. Gaming. 9. Public Robbery.
10. The Unnatural Mother. 11. Forbidding Marriage. 12. Parsons and
Tithes (London: Clement, 1822); and, on agriculture, Cottage Economy
(London: Clement, 1822), and A Treatise on Cobbett’s Corn (London:
Cobbett, 1828).

80
James Macdonald (1784-1832), M.P. for Hampshire 1831-32, had just been
appointed Governor of the Ionian Islands but had died in June; he was
succeeded in the seat by Thomas Baring (1772-1848), head of the great
financial firm of Baring, who had been M.P. for Wycombe 1806-32.

81
“Captain Swing” was the name used to personify the rick-burning and
other current disturbances in the agricultural areas mostly of the
south.

82
Charles Stuart (1779-1845), Baron Stuart de Rothesay.

83
Sophia Dawes (1790-1840), baronne de Feuchères, daughter of an Isle of
Wight fisherman, who had had an astonishing career in France, had just
bought a Hampshire property, having moved back to England after her
failure in attempts to secure an inheritance from the estate of Louis
Henri Joseph, duc de Bourbon (1756-1830), whose mistress she had been,
and who, apparently distraught at his inability to escape her, had
committed suicide. Mill had commented on the affair several times in the
Examiner, beginning on 18 December, 1831 (see CW, Vol. XXII, p. 372).

84
Mill is perhaps alluding to Cole, who gives a full description in his
account of 1st August.

85
“Resolution and Independence,” in Poetical Works, Vol. II, p. 128.

86
Remarks, e.g., Vol. I, p. 44, and Vol. II, p. 74.

87
See No. 31, entry for 10th July, 1831.

88
Thomas Chamberlayne (1805-76), whose estate included Netley Abbey.

89
This romance, which derives from a French chanson de geste, Beuve
d’Homstone, probably is ultimately based on a legend originating with
the Danish invaders of Britain.

90
Mill would seem to be referring not to The Sketch-Book of Geoffrey
Crayon, Gent., 7 pts. (New York: n.p., 1819-20), but to such scenes as
that in “The Stout Gentleman: A Tale of Mystery,” in Bracebridge Hall;
or, The Humourists, 2 vols. (New York: Van Winkle, 1822), Vol. I, pp.
124-44, also by Washington Irving (1782-1859).

1
Usually Rame Head.

2
See, e.g., the derogatory remarks on these constituencies by Daniel
O’Connell (1775-1847), Irish leader and M.P. for various Irish
constituencies following Catholic Emancipation, Speech on the
Parliamentary Reform Bill (22 July, 1831), PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 5, col.
214.

3
Henry Thomas Hope (1808-62), M.P. for East Looe 1830-32.

4
John Buller (1771-1849), M.P. for West Looe 1796 and 1826-27, brother of
Charles Buller, Sr., and uncle to Mill’s friend, Charles Buller, Jr.

5
Usually St. Austell. Mill notes the alternative spelling of Lostwithiel
below.

6
Liskeard (on Schedule B of the Reform Bill) had one member; St. Austell
had never been a borough; Lostwithiel was on Schedule A and so was
disfranchised.

7
Grampound had been disfranchised as almost devoid of electors by a
separate act, 1 & 2 George IV, c. 47 (1821).

8
Charles Lemon (1784-1868), M.P. for Cornwall 1831-32 and for West
Cornwall 1832-41 and 1842-57.

9
Richard Taylor (1810-83), a mining engineer, was manager of the
Consolidated Mines at Gwennap, founded in 1819 by his father John Taylor
(1779-1863); they were relatives of Sarah Austin.

10
Robert Were Fox (1789-1877).

11
The uniting of Penryn with Falmouth was covered in Sect. 6 of the Reform
Act.

12
St. Mawes was in Schedule A of the Reform Act, and so disfranchised.

13
Properly, Carn-brea; Mill may have written “Carn-breh.”

14
Helston was in Schedule B of the Reform Act.

15
Arthur William Buller (1808-69) was the younger brother of Charles
Buller, Jr.

16
See Richard Warner (1763-1857), A Tour through Cornwall, in the Autumn
of 1808 (London: Wilkie and Robinson, 1809), p. 216.

17
St. Michael’s Mount was granted to Mont Saint Michel by charter in 1070.
It passed into the St. Aubyn family in 1657, and was at this time the
property of John St. Aubyn (1758-1839), who had represented various
Cornwall constituencies 1784-90 and 1807-12.

18
William Pearce, who took over the King’s Head, Truro, in 1806, had four
sons to whom Mill is undoubtedly referring. Henry ran the Royal Hotel in
Truro; John (d. 1837), the Royal Hotel, Falmouth, and later the Union
Hotel, Penzance; William the younger (ca. 1792-1847) followed John at
the Royal, Falmouth; Joseph may have been proprietor of the hotel in
Barnstaple.

19
Properly Sennen.

20
Properly Lamorna.

21
Byron, Don Juan, Vol. II, p. 10 (Canto 6, Stanza 37).

22
Joseph Carne (1782-1858).

23
John Paynter (1791-1847).

24
Hugh Colvill Goldsmith (1789-1841); the well-publicized episode occurred
in 1824.

25
Probably Thomas Arbuthnot (1776-1849), who had become a Major-General in
1825.

26
After the well-known irregular features of Samuel Johnson (1709-84), the
man of letters.

27
Byron, Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage, Vol. I, p. 47 (Canto I, sect. lxxi,
l. 2).

28
The first notebook ends here; the continuation is in the Mill-Taylor
Collection.

29
Joseph Carne’s most eminent daughter was his fourth, Elizabeth Catherine
Thomas Carne (1817-73), who later wrote popular works and contributed
papers to the Royal Cornwall Geological Society; she was only fifteen
years old at this time, but Mill at fifteen was himself a “remarkable
person.”

30
Homer, The Iliad (Greek and English), trans. A.T. Murray, 2 vols.
(London: Heinemann; New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1924), Vol. I, pp. 86-106
(II, 494-759).

31
Juliana St. Aubyn (née Vinicombe) (ca. 1769-1856).

32
1768-1834.

33
Mill may have seen the original watercolour by Turner, Launceston,
Cornwall, shown in the Exhibition Hall, Piccadilly, in June 1829
(catalogue No. 20); it was also available in engravings.

34
Okehampton was also shown at the exhibition in 1829 (catalogue No. 10),
and was available as an engraving.

1
The reference is, of course, to Harriet Taylor Mill (1807-58), his wife.

2
The Anglo-Catholics or High Church Party in the Church of England were
often identified as followers of Edward Bouverie Pusey (1800-82), one of
the founders of the Oxford Movement. It was frequently opposed to the
Low Church, or Evangelical Party.

3
The Cynical school of Greek philosophers, founded by Antisthenes (ca.
450-360 bc) and typified in Diogenes the Cynic, held that virtue, not
pleasure, is the end of existence. In his Autobiography, which he was
writing in these months, Mill mentions this Cynical trait as marking his
father’s character (CW, Vol. I, p. 48).

4
See “Boswell’s Life of Johnson,” Fraser’s Magazine, V (May 1832), 386,
by Thomas Carlyle (1795-1881), who with his wife Jane had been in the
1830s and 1840s among the closest associates of Mill and Harriet Taylor.

5
Isidore Auguste Marie François Xavier Comte (1798-1857), the French
sociologist with whom Mill had an extensive correspondence in the 1840s,
and whose later views were repugnant to both the Mills; and John Ruskin
(1819-1900), the English critic of art, architecture, and society, with
whom Mill seems to have been acquainted only through his writings.

6
Cf. Noten und Abhandlungen zu besserem Verständnis des West-östlischen
Divans, in Werke, Vol. VI, p. 159.

7
Système de politique positive, ou Traité de sociologie, instituant la
religion de l’humanité, 4 vols. (Paris: Mathias, et al., 1851-54).

8
Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519), the Florentine multi-talented genius;
Peter Paul Rubens (1577-1640), the much travelled Flemish painter who
acted for the Spanish in negotiations with England in 1629-30;
Michelangelo Buonarroti (1475-1564), the Tuscan whose tempestuous career
involved multifarious demands by his patrons, especially the Medici. The
Vita of Benvenuto Cellini (1500-71), the Florentine sculptor, engraver,
and goldsmith, gives one of the most informative accounts of the period.
It had recently been published in English as Memoirs of Benvenuto
Cellini, trans. Thomas Roscoe (London: Bohn, 1847).

9
By 16 & 17 Victoria, c. 95 (1853), Sects. 37-42.

10
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 130, col. 4.

11
Macbeth, V, v, 25; in the Riverside Shakespeare, p. 1337.

12
I.e., his own System of Logic Ratiocinative and Inductive, first
published in 1843 (London: Parker), with further editions (to this time)
in 1846 and 1851. (In CW, Vols. VII-VIII.)

13
E.g., in the original of the catchphrase, The Way of the World (1700),
by the satiric playwright, William Congreve (1670-1729).

14
See Genesis, 11:1-9.

15
Il principe (1532), in Opere, Vol. IV, pp. 1-112; Istorie fiorentine
(1532), ibid., Vol. I, Vol. II, pp. 1-131; and Discorsi sopra la prima
deca di Tito Livia (1531), ibid., Vol. III.

16
In De senectute, De amicitia, De divinatione (Latin and English), trans.
W.A. Falconer (London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1923), pp. 222-538.

17
Mill probably had read all of Carlyle’s articles on Goethe: “Goethe’s
Faust,” New Edinburgh Review, II (Apr. 1822), 316-34; “Goethe’s Helena,”
Foreign Review, I (Apr. 1828), 429-68; “Goethe,” ibid., II (July 1828),
80-127; “Schiller, Goethe, and Madame de Staël,” Fraser’s Magazine, V
(Mar. 1832), 171-6; “Death of Goethe,” New Monthly Magazine, XXXIV (June
1832), 507-122; and “Goethe’s Works,” Foreign Quarterly Review, X (Aug.
1832), 1-44.

18
See “Goethe,” Foreign Review, pp. 87-8.

19
Thomas Babington Macaulay (1800-59), the historian, politician, and
essayist.

20
See, e.g., “State of German Literature,” Edinburgh Review, XLVI (Oct.
1827), 304-51, as well as On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and the Heroic in
History (London: Fraser, 1841).

21
Friedrich Karl von Savigny (1779-1861), historian and professor of law,
was much revered by his pupil, the historian Barthold Georg Niebuhr
(1776-1831); for one of his tributes, see the Preface to his History of
Rome (1811-12), trans. J.C. Hare, et al., 3 vols. (London: Taylor and
Walton, 1828-42), Vol. I, p. xiv.

22
First published in 1811-14 and 1832; in Werke, Vols. XXIV-XXVI.

23
Cf. Carlyle, Past and Present (London: Chapman and Hall, 1843), pp. 32-3
and 307-9 (Bk. I, Chap. iv, and Bk. III, Chap. xv).

24
James Andrew Broun Ramsay (1812-60), 1st Marquis and 10th Earl of
Dalhousie, Governor-General of India 1843-56.

25
Past and Present, pp. 212 ff. (Bk. II, Chap. v).

26
For the philosophers and economists mentioned here and in the next two
sentences, see App. D.

27
“A Bill to Prevent the Forcible Detention of Females in Religious
Houses,” 14 Victoria (11 Mar., 1851), PP, 1851, V, 511-16, was defeated
on 14 May, 1851, in the Commons (PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 116, col. 988); and
“A Bill to Facilitate the Recovery of Personal Liberty in Certain
Cases,” 16 Victoria (12 May, 1853), PP, 1852-53, VI, 1-4, was defeated
on 8 August, 1853, in the Commons (PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 129, cols.
1463-9).

28
Joseph Napier (1804-82), M.P. for Dublin University, Speech on
Conventual and Monastic Institutions (28 Feb., 1854), PD, 3rd ser., Vol.
131, cols. 78-9.

29
Claud Hamilton (1813-84), M.P. for Tyrone, ibid., cols. 101-2.

30
Alexander Pope, “Of the Knowledge and Characters of Men” (1731), Epistle
I, l. 90, of Moral Essays, in Works, Vol. III, p. 184. The Regent was
Philip, Duke of Orleans (1674-1723), a religious sceptic but
superstitious.

31
Friedrich Anton Mesmer (1733-1815), an Austrian doctor, based his
practice on a hypothetical magnetic fluid (“animal magnetism”) that
supposedly cured diseases; he was involved in much controversy,
especially over the role of hypnotism. “Count Cagliostro” was the
assumed name of Giuseppe Balsamo (1743-95), an Italian impostor who sold
alchemical elixirs, and who was imprisoned in Paris, London, and Rome.

32
“A Bill Further to Amend the Laws Relating to the Representation of the
People in England and Wales,” 17 Victoria (16 Feb., 1854), PP, 1854, V,
375-418 (not enacted).

33
See “Report on the Organisation of the Permanent Civil Service,” PP,
1854, XXVII, 1-31; and the Speech from the Throne (31 Jan., 1854), PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 130, col. 4.

34
For Mill’s published use of this argument, See Utilitarianism (1861), in
CW, Vol. X, p. 212.

35
John, 9:4.

36
Turkey and Russia had been at war since September 1853. After the
destruction of the Turkish fleet in November, the British and French
sent warships to the Black Sea, and the Crimean War began in March 1854.

37
See Euripides (ca. 485-407 bc), The Bacchanals, in Euripides (Greek and
English), trans. A.S. Way, 4 vols. (London: Heinemann; New York:
Macmillan, 1912), Vol. III, pp. 1-123. The followers of Dionysius went
from Thebes to the neighbouring mountains to perform his rites; the
moral regenerator was Penthus, who pursued them. For the notion that
solitude was sought, see p. 8 (ll. 32-8) and p. 16 (ll. 143-65).

38
For the hedonistic creed of Epicurus (341-270 bc), see Diogenes
Laertius, “Epicurus,” in Lives of Eminent Philosophers, Vol. II, pp.
662-76 (X, 139-54).

39
Joseph Smith (1805-44), the founder of the Church of the
Latter-Day-Saints (Mormons), was continuously accused of lying and
chicanery from the time he announced his visions in the 1820s and
claimed to find the gold plates of Mormon in 1830. The Mormons made
large numbers of converts in Britain in the late 1840s and early 1850s,
who emigrated to the new settlements in the western U.S.A.

1
A gap is left in the manuscript.

2
Again a gap in the manuscript.

3
The text breaks off here.


