Preliminary Remarks

aIn every department of human affairs, Practice long precedes Science:
systematic enquiry into the modes of action of the powers of nature, is
the tardy product of a long course of efforts to use those powers for
practical ends. The conception, accordingly, of Political Economy as a
branch of science is extremely modern; but the subject with which its
enquiries are conversant has in all ages necessarily constituted one of
the chief practical interests of mankind, and, in some, a most unduly
engrossing one.

That subject is Wealth. Writers on Political Economy profess to teach,
or to investigate, the nature of Wealth, and the laws of its production
and distribution: including, directly or remotely, the operation of all
the causes by which the condition of mankind, or of any society of human
beings, in respect to this universal object of human desire, is made
prosperous or the reverse. Not that any treatise on Political Economy
can discuss or even enumerate all these causes; but it undertakes to set
forth as much as is known of the laws and principles according to which
they operate.

bEvery one has a notion, sufficiently correct for common purposes, of
what is meant by wealth. The enquiries which relate to it are in no
danger of being confounded with those relating to any other of the great
human interests. All know that it is one thing to be rich, another thing
to be enlightened, brave, or humane; that the questions how a nation is
made wealthy, and how it is made free, or virtuous, or eminent in
literature, in the fine arts, in arms, or in polity, are totally
distinct enquiries. cThosec things, indeed, are all indirectly
connected, and react upon one another. A people has sometimes become
free, because it had first grown wealthy; or wealthy, because it had
first become free. The creed and laws of a people act powerfully upon
their economical condition; and this again, by its influence on their
mental development and social relations, reacts upon their creed and
laws. But though the subjects are in very close contact, they are
essentially different, and have never been supposed to be otherwise.

It is no part of the design of this treatise to aim at metaphysical
nicety of definition, where the ideas suggested by a term are already as
determinate as practical purposes require. But, little as it might be
expected that any Edition: current; Page: [4] mischievous confusion of
ideas could take place on a subject so simple as the question, what is
to be considered as wealth, it is matter of history, that such confusion
of ideas has existed—that theorists and practical politicians have been
equally and at one period universally, infected by it, and that for many
generations it gave a thoroughly false direction to the policy of
Europe. I refer to the set of doctrines designated, since the time of
Adam Smith, by the appellation of the Mercantile System.

While this system prevailed, it was assumed, either expressly or
tacitly, in the whole policy of nations, that wealth consisted solely of
money; or of the precious metals, which, when not already in the state
of money, are capable of being directly converted into it. According to
the doctrines then prevalent, whatever tended to heap up money or
bullion in a country added to its wealth. Whatever sent the precious
metals out of a country impoverished it. If a country possessed no gold
or silver mines, the only industry by which it could be enriched was
foreign trade, being the only one which could bring in money. Any branch
of trade which was supposed to send out more money than it brought in,
however ample and valuable might be the returns in another shape, was
looked upon as a losing trade. Exportation of goods was favoured and
encouraged (even by means extremely onerous to the real resources of the
country), because, the exported goods being stipulated to be paid for in
money, it was hoped that the returns would actually be made in gold and
silver. Importation of anything, other than the precious metals, was
regarded as a loss to the nation of the whole price of the things
imported; unless they were brought in to be re-exported at a profit, or
unless, being the materials or instruments of some industry practised in
the country itself, they gave the power of producing exportable articles
at smaller cost, and thereby effecting a larger exportation. The
commerce of the world was looked upon as a struggle among nations, which
could draw to itself the largest share of the gold and silver in
existence; and in this competition no nation could gain anything, except
by making others lose as much, or, at the least, preventing them from
gaining it.

It often happens that the universal belief of one age of mankind—a
belief from which no one was, nor without an extraordinary effort of
genius and courage, could at that time be free—becomes to a subsequent
age so palpable an absurdity, that the only difficulty then is to
imagine how such a thing can ever have appeared credible. It has so
happened with the doctrine that money is synonymous with wealth. The
conceit seems too preposterous to be thought of as a serious opinion. It
looks like one of the crude fancies of childhood, instantly corrected by
a word from any grown person. But let no one feel confident that he
dwouldd have escaped the delusion if he had lived at the time when it
prevailed. All the associations Edition: current; Page: [5] engendered
by common life, and by the ordinary course of business, concurred in
epromotinge it. So long as those associations were the only medium
through which the subject was looked at, what we now think so gross an
absurdity fseemed a truism. Once questioned, indeed, it was doomed; but
no one was likely to think of questioning it whose mind had not become
familiar with certain modes of stating and of contemplating economical
phenomena, which have only found their way into the general
understanding through the influence of Adam Smith and of his expositors.

In common gdiscourseg, wealth is always expressed in money. If you ask
how rich a person is, you are answered that he has so many thousand
pounds. All income and expenditure, all gains and losses, everything by
which one becomes richer or poorer, are reckoned as the coming in or
going out of so much money. It is true that in the inventory of a
person’s fortune are included, not only the money in his actual
possession, or due to him, but all other articles of value. These,
however, enter, not in their own character, but in virtue of the sums of
money which they would sell for; and if they would sell for less, their
owner is reputed less rich, though the things themselves are precisely
the same. It is true, also, that people do not grow rich by keeping
their money unused, and that they must be willing to spend in order to
gain. Those who enrich themselves by commerce, do so by giving money for
goods as well as goods for money; and the first is as necessary a part
of the process as the last. But ha personh who buys goods for purposes
of gain, does so to sell them again for money, and in the expectation of
receiving more money than he laid out: to get money, therefore, seems
even to the person himself the ultimate end of the whole. It often
happens that he is not paid in money, but in something else; having
bought goods to a value equivalent, which are set off against those he
sold. But he accepted these at a money valuation, and in the belief that
they would bring in more money eventually than the price at which they
were made over to him. A dealer doing a large amount of business, and
turning over his capital rapidly, has but a small portion of it in ready
money at any one time. But he only feels it valuable to him as it is
convertible into money: he considers no transaction closed until the net
result is either paid or credited in money: when he retires from
business it is into money that he converts the whole, and not until then
does he deem himself to have irealizedi his gains: just as if money were
the only wealth, and money’s worth were only the means of attaining it.
If jit be now askedj for what end money is desirable, unless to supply
the wants or pleasures of koneselfk or Edition: current; Page: [6]
others, the champion of the system would not be at all embarrassed by
the question. True, he would say, these are the uses of wealth, and very
laudable uses while confined to domestic commodities, because in that
case, by exactly the amount which you expend, you enrich others of your
countrymen. Spend your wealth, if you please, in whatever indulgences
you have a taste for; but your wealth is not the indulgences, it is the
sum of money, or the annual money income, with which you purchase them.

While there were so many things to render the assumption which is the
basis of the mercantile system plausible, there is also some small
foundation in reason, though a very insufficient one, for the
distinction which that system so emphatically draws between money and
every other kind of valuable possession. We really, and justly, look
upon a person as possessing the advantages of wealth, not in proportion
to the useful and agreeable things of which he is in the actual
enjoyment, but to his command over the general fund of things useful and
agreeable; the power he possesses of providing for any exigency, or
obtaining any object of desire. Now, money is itself that power; while
all other things, in a civilized state, seem to confer it only by their
capacity of being exchanged for money. To possess any other article of
wealth, is to possess that particular thing, and nothing else: if you
wish for another thing instead of it, you have first to sell it, or to
submit to the inconvenience and delay (if not the impossibility) of
finding some one who has what you want, and is willing to barter it for
what you have. But with money you are at once able to buy whatever
things are for sale: and lonel whose fortune is in money, or in things
rapidly convertible into it, seems both to himself and others to possess
not any one thing, but all the things which the money places it at his
option to purchase. The greatest part of the utility of wealth, beyond a
very moderate quantity, is not the indulgences it procures, but the
reserved power which its possessor holds in his hands of attaining
purposes generally; and this power no other kind of wealth confers so
immediately or so certainly as money. It is the only form of wealth
which is not merely applicable to some one use, but can be turned at
once to any use. And this distinction was the more likely to make an
impression upon governments, as it is one of considerable importance to
them. A civilized government derives comparatively little advantage from
taxes unless it can collect them in money: and if it has large or sudden
payments to make, especially payments in foreign countries for wars or
subsidies, either for the sake of conquering or of not being conquered
(the two chief objects of national policy until a late period), scarcely
any medium of payment except money will serve the purpose. All these
causes conspire to make both individuals and governments, in estimating
their means, attach almost exclusive importance to money, either in esse
Edition: current; Page: [7] or in posse, and look upon all other things
(when viewed as part of their resources) scarcely otherwise than as the
remote mmeansm of obtaining that which alone, when obtained, affords the
indefinite, and at the same time instantaneous, command over objects of
desire, which best answers to the idea of wealth.

An absurdity, however, does not cease to be an absurdity when we have
discovered what were the appearances which made it plausible; and the
Mercantile Theory could not fail to be seen in its true character when
men began, even in an imperfect manner, to explore into the foundations
of things, and seek their premises from elementary facts, and not from
the forms and phrases of common discourse. So soon as they asked
themselves what is really meant by money—what it is in its essential
characters, and the precise nature of the functions it performs—they
reflected that money, like other things, is only a desirable possession
on account of its uses; and that these, instead of being, as they
delusively appear, indefinite, are of a strictly defined and limited
description, namely, to facilitate the distribution of the produce of
industry according to the convenience of those among whom it is shared.
Further consideration showed that the uses of money are in no respect
promoted by increasing the quantity which exists and circulates in a
country; the service which it performs being as well rendered by a small
as by a large aggregate amount. Two million quarters of corn will not
feed so many persons as four millions; but two millions of pounds
sterling will carry on as much traffic, will buy and sell as many
commodities, as four millions, though at lower nominal prices. Money, as
money, satisfies no nwant;n its worth to any one, consists in its being
a convenient shape in which to receive his incomings of all sorts, which
incomings he afterwards, at the times which suit him best, converts into
the forms in which they can be useful to him. oGreat as the difference
would be between a country with money, and a country altogether without
it, ito would be only one of convenience; a saving of time and trouble,
like grinding by water ppowerp instead of by hand, or (to use Adam
Smith’s illustration) like the benefit derived from roads; and to
mistake money for wealth, is the same sort of error as to mistake the
highway which may be the easiest way of getting to your house or lands,
for the house and lands themselves.

qMoney, being the instrument of an important public and private purpose,
is rightly regarded as wealth; but everything else which serves any
human purpose, and which nature does not afford gratuitously, is wealth
also. To be wealthy is to have a large stock of useful articles, or the
means of Edition: current; Page: [8] purchasing them. Everything forms
therefore a part of wealth, which has a power of purchasing; for which
anything useful or agreeable would be given in exchange. Things for
which nothing could be obtained in exchange, however useful or necessary
they may be, are not wealth in the sense in which the term is used in
Political Economy. Air, for example, though the most absolute of
necessaries, bears no price in the market, because it can be obtained
gratuitously: to accumulate a stock of it would yield no profit or
advantage to any one; and the laws of its production and distribution
are the subject of a very different study from Political Economy. But
though air is not wealth, mankind are much richer by obtaining it
gratis, since the time and labour which would otherwise be required for
supplying the most pressing of all wants, can be devoted to other
purposes. It is possible to imagine circumstances in which air would be
a part of wealth. If it became customary to sojourn long in places where
the air does not naturally penetrate, as in diving-bells sunk in the
sea, a supply of air artificially furnished would, like water conveyed
into houses, bear a price: and if from any revolution in nature the
atmosphere became too scanty for the consumption, or could be
monopolized, air might acquire a very high marketable value. In such a
case, the possession of it, beyond his own wants, would be, to its
owner, wealth; and the general wealth of mankind might at first sight
appear to be increased, by what rwould ber so great a calamity to them.
sThe error would lie in not tconsideringt, thats however rich the
possessor of air might become at the expense of the rest of the
community, all persons else would be poorer by all that they were
compelled to pay for what they had before obtained without payment.

uThis leads to an important distinction in the meaning of the word
wealth, as applied to the possessions of an individual, and to those of
a nation, or of mankind. In the wealth of mankind, nothing is included
which does not of itself answer some purpose of utility or pleasure. To
an individual anything is wealth, which, though useless in itself,
enables him to claim from others a part of their stock of things useful
or pleasant. Take, for instance, a mortgage of a thousand pounds on a
landed estate. This is wealth to the person to whom it brings in a
revenue, and who could perhaps sell it in the market for the full amount
of the debt. But it is not wealth to the country; if the engagement were
annulled, the country would be neither poorer nor richer. The mortgagee
would have lost a thousand pounds, and the owner of the land would have
gained it. Speaking nationally, the mortgage was not itself wealth, but
merely gave A a claim to a portion of the wealth of B. It was wealth to
A, and wealth which he could transfer to a third person; but what he so
transferred was in fact a joint ownership, to the extent of a Edition:
current; Page: [9] thousand pounds, in the land of which B was nominally
the sole proprietor. The position of fundholders, or owners of the
public debt of a country, is similar. They are mortgagees on the general
wealth of the country. The cancelling of the debt would be no
destruction of wealth, but a transfer of it: a wrongful abstraction of
wealth from certain members of the community, for the profit of the
government, or of the tax-payers. Funded property therefore cannot be
counted as part of the national wealth. This is not always borne in mind
by the dealers in statistical calculations. For example, in estimates of
the gross income of the country, founded on the proceeds of the
income-tax, incomes derived from the funds are not always excluded:
though the tax-payers are assessed on their whole nominal income,
without being permitted to deduct from it the portion levied from them
in taxation to form the income of the fundholder. In this calculation,
therefore, one portion of the general income of the country is counted
twice over, and the aggregate amount made to appear greater than it is
by valmostv thirty millions. A country, however, may include in its
wealth all stock held by its citizens in the funds of foreign countries,
and other debts due to them from abroad. But even this is only wealth to
them by being a part ownership in wealth held by others. It forms no
part of the collective wealth of the human race. It is an element in the
distribution, but not in the composition, of the general wealth.

wAnother example of a possession which is wealth to the person holding
it, but not wealth to the nation, or to mankind, is slaves. It is by a
strange confusion of ideas that slave property (as it is termed) is
counted, at so much per head, in an estimate of the wealth, or of the
capital, of the country which tolerates the existence of such property.
If a human being, considered as an object possessing productive powers,
is part of the national wealth when his powers are owned by another man,
he cannot be less a part of it when they are owned by himself. Whatever
he is worth to his master is so much property abstracted from himself,
and its abstraction cannot augment the possessions of the two together,
or of the country to which they both belong. In propriety of
classification, however, the people of a country are not to be counted
in its wealth. They are that for the sake of which its wealth exists.
The term wealth is wanted to denote the desirable objects which they
possess, not inclusive of, but in contradistinction to, their own
persons. They are not wealth to themselves, though they are means of
acquiring it.w

It has been proposed to define wealth as signifying “instruments:”
meaning not tools and machinery alone, but the whole accumulation
possessed by individuals or communities, of means for the attainment of
their ends. Edition: current; Page: [10] Thus, a field is an instrument,
because it is a means to the attainment of corn. Corn is an instrument,
being a means to the attainment of flour. Flour is an instrument, being
a means to the attainment of bread. Bread is an instrument, as a means
to the satisfaction of hunger and to the support of life. Here we at
last arrive at things which are not instruments, being desired on their
own account, and not as mere means to something beyond. This view of the
subject is philosophically correct; or rather, this mode of expression
may be usefully employed along with others, not as conveying a different
view of the subject from the common one, but as giving more distinctness
and reality to the common view. It departs, however, too widely from the
custom of language, to be likely to obtain general xacceptancex, or to
be of use for any other purpose than that of occasional illustration.

Wealth, then, may be defined, all useful or agreeable things which
possess exchangeable value; or, in other words, all useful or agreeable
things except those which can be obtained, in the quantity desired,
without labour or sacrifice. To this definition, the only objection
seems to be, that it leaves in uncertainty a question which has been
much debated—whether what are called immaterial products are to be
considered as wealth: whether, for example, the skill of a workman, or
any other natural or acquired power of body or mind, shall be called
wealth, or not: a question, not of very great importance, and which, so
far as requiring discussion, will be more conveniently considered in
yanother placey.*

zThese things having been premised respecting wealth, we shall next turn
our attention to the extraordinary differences in respect to it, which
exist between nation and nation, and between different ages of the
world; differences both in the quantity of wealth, and in the kind of
it; as well as in the manner in which the wealth existing in the
community is shared among its members.

There is, perhaps, no people or community, now existing, which subsists
entirely on the spontaneous produce of vegetation. But many tribes still
live exclusively, or almost exclusively, on wild animals, the produce of
hunting or fishing. Their clothing is skins; their habitations, huts
rudely formed of logs or boughs of trees, and abandoned at an hour’s
notice. The food they use being little susceptible of storing up, they
have no accumulation of it, and are often exposed to great privations.
The wealth of such a community consists solely of the skins they wear; a
few ornaments, the taste for which exists aamong most savagesa; some
rude utensils; the Edition: current; Page: [11] weapons with which they
kill their game, or fight bagainstb hostile competitors for the means of
subsistence; canoes for crossing rivers and lakes, or fishing in the
sea; and perhaps some furs or other productions of the wilderness,
collected to be exchanged with civilized people for blankets, brandy,
and tobacco; of which foreign produce also there may be some unconsumed
portion in store. To this scanty inventory of material wealth, ought to
be added their land; an instrument of production of which they make
slender use, compared with more settled communities, but which is still
the source of their subsistence, and which has a marketable value if
there be any agricultural community in the neighbourhood requiring more
land than it possesses. This is the state of greatest poverty in which
any entire community of human beings is known to exist; though there are
much richer communities in which portions of the inhabitants are in a
condition, as to subsistence and comfort, cas little enviable as that of
the savage.

The first great advance beyond this state consists in the domestication
of the more useful animals; giving rise to the pastoral or nomad state,
in which mankind do not live on the produce of hunting, but on milk and
its products, and on the annual increase of flocks and herds. This
condition is not only more desirable in itself, but more conducive to
further progress: and a much more considerable amount of wealth is
accumulated under it. So long as the vast natural pastures of the earth
are not yet so fully occupied as to be consumed more rapidly than they
are spontaneously reproduced, a large and constantly increasing stock of
subsistence may be collected and preserved, with little other labour
than that of guarding the cattle from the attacks of wild beasts, and
from the force or wiles of predatory men. Large flocks and herds,
therefore, are in time possessed, by active and thrifty individuals
through their own exertions, and by the heads of families and tribes
through the exertions of those who are connected with them by
allegiance. There thus arises, in the shepherd state, inequality of
possessions; a thing which scarcely exists in the savage state, where no
one has much more than absolute necessaries, and in case of deficiency
must share even those with his tribe. In the nomad state, some have an
abundance of cattle, sufficient for the food of a multitude, while
others have not contrived to appropriate and retain any superfluity, or
perhaps any cattle at all. But subsistence has ceased to be precarious,
since the more successful have no other use which they can make of their
surplus than to feed the less fortunate, while every increase in the
number of persons connected with them is an increase both of security
and of power: and thus they are enabled to divest themselves of all
labour except that of government and superintendence, and acquire
dependents to fight for them in war and to serve them in peace. One of
the features of this state of society is, that a Edition: current; Page:
[12] part of the community, and in some degree even the whole of it,
possess leisure. Only a portion of time is required for procuring food,
and the remainder is not engrossed by anxious thought for the morrow, or
necessary repose from muscular activity. Such a life is highly
favourable to the growth of new wants, and opens a possibility of their
gratification. A desire arises for better clothing, utensils, and
implements, than the savage state contents itself with; and the surplus
food renders it practicable to devote to these purposes the exertions of
a part of the tribe. In all or most nomad communities we find domestic
manufactures of a coarse, and in some, of a fine kind. There is ample
evidence that while those parts of the world which have been the cradle
of modern civilization were still generally in the nomad state,
considerable skill had been attained in spinning, weaving, and dyeing
woollen garments, in the preparation of leather, and in what appears a
still more difficult invention, that of working in metals. Even
speculative science took its first beginnings from the leisure
characteristic of this stage of social progress. The earliest
astronomical observations are attributed, by a tradition which has much
appearance of truth, to the shepherds of Chaldea.

dFrom this state of society to the agricultural the transition is not
indeed easy (for no great change in the habits of mankind is otherwise
than difficult, and in general either painful or very slow), but it lies
in what may be called the spontaneous course of events. The growth of
the population of men and cattle began in time to press upon the earth’s
capabilities of yielding natural pasture: and this cause doubtless
produced the first tilling of the ground, just as at a later period the
same cause made the superfluous hordes of the nations which had remained
nomad precipitate themselves upon those which had already become
agricultural; until, these having become sufficiently powerful to repel
such inroads, the invading nations, deprived of this outlet, were
eobliged alsoe to become agricultural communities.

But after this great step had been completed, the subsequent progress of
mankind seems by no means to have been so rapid (certain rare
combinations of circumstances excepted) as might perhaps have been
anticipated. The quantity of human food which the earth is capable of
returning even to the most wretched system of agriculture, so much
exceeds what could be obtained in the purely pastoral state, that a
great increase of population is invariably the result. But this
additional food is only obtained by a great additional amount of labour;
so that not only an agricultural has much less leisure than a pastoral
population, but, with the imperfect tools and unskilful processes which
are for a long time employed (and which over the greater part of the
earth have not even yet been abandoned), agriculturists do not, unless
in unusually advantageous circumstances of climate Edition: current;
Page: [13] and soil, produce so great a surplus of food, beyond their
necessary consumption, as to support any large class of labourers
engaged in other departments of industry. The surplus, too, whether
small or great, is usually torn from the producers, either by the
government to which they are subject, or by individuals, who by superior
force, or by availing themselves of religious or traditional feelings of
subordination, have established themselves as lords of the soil.

The first of these modes of appropriation, by the government, is
characteristic of the extensive monarchies which from a time beyond
historical record have occupied the plains of Asia. The government, in
those countries, though varying in its qualities according to the
accidents of personal character, seldom leaves much to the cultivators
beyond mere necessaries, and often strips them so bare even of these,
that it finds itself obliged, after taking all they have, to lend part
of it back to those from whom it has been taken, in order to provide
them with seed, and enable them to support life until another harvest.
Under the régime in question, though the bulk of the population are ill
provided for, the government, by collecting small fcontributionsf from
great numbers, is enabled, with any tolerable management, to make a show
of riches quite out of proportion to the general condition of the
society; and hence the inveterate impression, of which Europeans have
only at a late period been disabused, concerning the great opulence of
Oriental nations. In this wealth, without reckoning the large portion
which adheres to the hands employed in collecting it, many persons of
course participate, besides the immediate household of the sovereign. A
large part is distributed among the various functionaries of government,
and among the objects of the sovereign’s favour or caprice. A part is
occasionally employed in works of public utility. The tanks, wells, and
canals for irrigation, without which in gmanyg tropical climates
cultivation could hardly be carried on; the embankments which confine
the rivers, the bazars for dealers, and the seraees for travellers, none
of which could have been made by the scanty means in the possession of
those using them, owe their existence to the liberality and enlightened
self-interest of the better order of princes, or to the benevolence or
ostentation of here and there a rich individual, whose fortune, if
traced to its source, is always found to have been drawn immediately or
remotely from the public revenue, most frequently by a direct grant of a
portion of it from the sovereign.

The ruler of a society of this description, after providing largely for
his own support, and that of all persons in whom he feels an interest,
and after maintaining as many soldiers as he thinks needful for his
security or his state, has a disposable residue, which he is glad to
exchange for articles of luxury suitable to his disposition: as have
also the class of persons who Edition: current; Page: [14] have been
enriched by his favour, or by handling the public revenues. A demand
thus arises for elaborate and costly manufactured articles, adapted to a
narrow but a wealthy market. This demand is often supplied almost
exclusively by the merchants of more advanced communities, but often
also raises up in the country itself a class of artificers, by whom
certain fabrics are carried to as high excellence as can be given by
patienceh, quickness of perception and observation,h and manual
dexterity, without any considerable knowledge of the properties of
objects: such as some of the cotton fabrics of India. These artificers
are fed by the surplus food which has been taken by the government and
its agents as their share of the produce. So literally is this the case,
that in some countries the workman, instead of taking his work home, and
being paid for it after it is finished, proceeds with his tools to his
customer’s house, and is there subsisted until the work is complete. The
insecurity, however, of all possessions in this state of society,
induces even the richest purchasers to give a preference to such
articles as, being of an imperishable nature, and containing great value
in small bulk, are adapted for being concealed or carried off. Gold and
jewels, therefore, constitute a large proportion of the wealth of these
nations, and many a rich Asiatic carries nearly his whole fortune on his
person, or on those of the women of his harem. No one, except the
monarch, thinks of investing his wealth in a manner not susceptible of
removal. He, indeed, if he feels safe on his throne, and reasonably
secure of transmitting it to his descendants, sometimes indulges a taste
for durable edifices, and produces the Pyramids, or the Taj Mehal and
the Mausoleum at Sekundra. The rude manufactures destined for the wants
of the cultivators are worked up by village artisans, who are
remunerated by land given to them rent-free to cultivate, or by fees
paid to them in kind from such share of the crop as is left to the
villagers by the government. iThisi state of society, however, is not
destitute of a mercantile class; composed of two divisions, grain
dealers and money dealers. The grain dealers do not usually buy grain
from the producers, but from the agents of government, who, receiving
the revenue in kind, are glad to devolve upon others the business of
conveying it to the places where the prince, his chief civil and
military officers, the bulk of his troops, and the artisans who supply
the wants of these various persons, are assembled. The money dealers
lend to the unfortunate cultivators, when ruined by bad seasons or
fiscal exactions, the means of supporting life and continuing their
cultivation, and are repaid with enormous interest at the next harvest;
or, on a larger scale, they lend to the government, or to those to whom
it has granted a portion of the revenue, and are indemnified by
assignments on the revenue collectors, or by having certain districts
put into their possession, that they may pay themselves from the
revenues; to enable Edition: current; Page: [15] them to do which, a
great portion of the powers of government are usually made over
simultaneously, to be exercised by them until either the districts are
redeemed, or their receipts have liquidated the debt. Thus, the
commercial operations of both these classes of dealers take place
principally upon that part of the produce of the country which forms the
revenue of the government. From that revenue their capital is
periodically replaced with a profit, and that is also the source from
which their original funds have almost always been derived. Such, in its
general features, is the economical condition of most of the countries
of Asia, as it has been from beyond the commencement of authentic
history, and is still, wherever not disturbed by foreign influences.

jIn the agricultural communities of ancient Europe whose early condition
is best known to us, the course of things was different. These, at their
origin, were mostly small town-communities, at the first plantation of
which, in an unoccupied country, or in one from which the former
inhabitants had been expelled, the land which was taken possession of
was kregularlyk divided, in equal or lin graduatedl allotments, among
the families composing the community. In some cases, instead of a town
there was a confederation of towns, occupied by people of the same
reputed race, and who were supposed to have settled in the country about
the same time. Each family produced its own food and the materials of
its clothing, which were worked up within itself, usually by the women
of the family, into the coarse fabrics with which the age was contented.
Taxes there were none, as there were either no paid officers of
government, or if there were, their payment had been provided for by a
reserved portion of land, cultivated by slaves on account of the state;
and the army consisted of the body of citizens. The whole produce of the
soil, therefore, belonged, without deduction, to the family which
cultivated it. So long as the progress of events permitted this
disposition of property to last, the state of society was, for the
majority of the free cultivators, probably not an undesirable one; and
under it, in some cases, the advance of mankind in intellectual culture
was extraordinarily rapid and brilliant. This more especially happened
where, along with madvantageousm circumstances of race and climate, and
no doubt with many favourable accidents of which all trace is now lost,
was combined the advantage of a position on the nshoresn of a great
inland sea, the other coasts of which were already occupied by settled
communities. The knowledge which in such a position was acquired of
foreign productions, and the easy access of foreign ideas and
inventions, made the chain of Edition: current; Page: [16] routine,
usually so strong in a rude people, hang loosely on these communities.
To speak only of their industrial development; they early acquired
variety of wants and desires, which stimulated them to extract from
their own soil the utmost which they knew how to make it yield; and when
their soil was sterile, or after they had oreached the limito of its
capacity, they often became traders, and bought up the productions of
foreign countries, to sell them in other countries with a profit.

The duration, however, of this state of things was from the first
precarious. These little communities lived in a state of almost
perpetual war. For this there were many causes. In the ruder and purely
agricultural communities a frequent cause was the mere pressure of their
increasing population upon their limited land, aggravated as that
pressure so often was by deficient harvests, in the rude state of their
agriculture, and depending as they did for food upon a very small extent
of country. On these occasions, the community often emigrated en masse,
or sent forth a swarm of its youth, to seek, sword in hand, for some
less warlike people, who could be expelled from their land, or detained
to cultivate it as slaves for the benefit of their despoilers. What the
less advanced tribes did from necessity, the more prosperous did from
ambition and the military spirit: and after a time the whole of these
city-communities were either conquerors or conquered. In some cases, the
conquering state contented itself with imposing a tribute on the
vanquished: who being, in consideration of that burden, freed from the
expense and trouble of their own military and naval protection, might
enjoy under it a considerable share of economical prosperity, while the
ascendant community obtained a surplus of wealth, available for purposes
of collective luxury or magnificence. From such a surplus the Parthenon
and the Propylæa were built, the sculptures of Pheidias paid for, and
the festivals celebrated, for which Æschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, and
Aristophanes composed their dramas. But this state of political
relations, most useful, while it lasted, to the progress and ultimate
interest of mankind, had not the elements of durability. A small
conquering community which does not incorporate its conquests, always
ends by being conquered. Universal dominion, therefore, at last rested
with the people who practised this art—with the Romans; who, whatever
were their other devices, always either began or ended by taking a great
part of the land to enrich their own leading citizens, and by adopting
into the governing body the principal possessors of the remainder. It is
unnecessary to dwell on the melancholy economical history of the Roman
empire. When inequality of wealth once commences, in a community not
constantly engaged in repairing by industry the injuries of fortune, its
advances are gigantic; the great masses of wealth swallow up the
smaller. The Roman empire ultimately became covered with Edition:
current; Page: [17] the vast landed possessions of a comparatively few
families, for whose luxury, and still more for whose ostentation, the
most costly products were raised, while the cultivators of the soil were
slaves, or small tenants in a nearly servile condition. From this time
the wealth of the empire progressively declined. In the beginning, the
public revenues, and the resources of rich individuals, sufficed at
least to cover Italy with splendid edifices, public and private; but at
length so dwindled under the enervating influences of misgovernment,
that what remained was not even sufficient to keep those edifices from
decay. The strength and riches of the civilized world became inadequate
to make head against the nomad population which skirted its northern
frontier; they overran the empire, and a different order of things
succeeded.

pIn the new frame in which European society was now cast, the population
of each country may be considered as composed, in unequal proportions,
of two distinct nations or races, the conquerors and the conquered: the
first the proprietors of the land, the latter the tillers of it. These
tillers were allowed to occupy the land on conditions which, being the
product of force, were always onerous, but seldom to the extent of
absolute slavery. Already, in the later times of the Roman empire,
predial slavery had extensively transformed itself into a kind of
serfdom: the coloni of the Romans were rather villeins than actual
slaves; and the incapacity and distaste of the barbarian conquerors for
personally superintending industrial occupations, left no alternative
but to allow to the cultivators, as an incentive to exertion, some real
interest in the soil. If, for example, they were compelled to labour,
three days in the week, for their superior, the produce of the remaining
days was their own. If they were required to supply the provisions of
various sorts, ordinarily qneededq for the consumption of the castle,
and were often subject to requisitions in excess, yet after supplying
these demands they were suffered to dispose at their will of whatever
additional produce they could raise. Under this system during the Middle
Ages it was not impossible, no more than in rmodern Russia (where, up to
the recent measure of emancipation, the same system still essentially
prevailed),r for serfs to acquire property; and in fact, their
accumulations are the primitive source of the wealth of modern Europe.

In that age of violence and disorder, the first use made by a serf of
any small provision which he had been able to accumulate, was to buy his
freedom and withdraw himself to some town or fortified village, which
had remained undestroyed from the time of the Roman dominion; or,
without Edition: current; Page: [18] buying his freedom, to abscond
thither. In that place of refuge, surrounded by others of his own class,
he attempted to live, secured in some measure from the outrages and
exactions of the warrior caste, by his own prowess and that of his
fellows. These emancipated serfs mostly became artificers; and lived by
exchanging the produce of their industry for the surplus food and
material which the soil yielded to its feudal proprietors. This gave
rise to a sort of European counterpart of the economical condition of
Asiatic countries; except that, in lieu of a single monarch and a
fluctuating body of favourites and employés, there was a numerous and in
a considerable degree fixed class of great landholders; exhibiting far
less splendour, because individually disposing of a much smaller surplus
produce, and for a long time expending the chief part of it in
maintaining the body of retainers whom the warlike habits of society,
and the little protection afforded by government, rendered indispensable
to their safety. The greater stability, the fixity of personal position,
which this state of society afforded, in comparison with the Asiatic
polity to which it economically corresponded, wass one main reason why
it was also found more favourable to improvement. From this time the
economical advancement of society has not been further interrupted.
Security of person and property grew slowly, but steadily; the arts of
life made constant progress; plunder ceased to be the tprincipalt source
of accumulation; and feudal Europe ripened into commercial and
manufacturing Europe. In the latter part of the Middle Ages, the towns
of Italy and Flanders, the free cities of Germany, and some towns of
France and England, contained a large and energetic population of
artisans, and many rich burghers, whose wealth had been acquired by
manufacturing industry, or by trading in the produce of such industry.
The Commons of England, the Tiers-Etat of France, the bourgeoisie of the
Continent generally, are the descendants of this class. As these were a
saving class, while the posterity of the feudal aristocracy were a
squandering class, the former by degrees substituted themselves for the
latter as the owners of a great proportion of the land. This natural
tendency was in some cases retarded by laws contrived for the purpose of
detaining the land in the families of its uexistingu possessors, in
other cases accelerated by political revolutions. Gradually, though more
slowly, the immediate cultivators of the soil, in all the more civilized
countries, ceased to be in a servile or semi-servile state: though the
legal position, as well as the economical condition attained by them,
vary extremely in the different nations of Europe, and in the great
communities which have been founded beyond the Atlantic by the
descendants of Europeans.

vThe world now contains several extensive regions, provided with the
Edition: current; Page: [19] various ingredients of wealth in a degree
of abundance of which former ages had not even the idea. Without
compulsory labour, an enormous mass of food is annually extracted from
the soil, and maintains, besides the actual producers, an equal,
sometimes a greater number of labourers, occupied in producing
conveniences and luxuries of innumerable kinds, or in transporting them
from place to place; also a multitude of persons employed in directing
and superintending these various labours; and over and above all these,
a class more numerous than in the most luxurious ancient societies, of
persons whose occupations are of a kind not directly productive, and of
persons who have no occupation at all. The food thus raised supports a
far larger population than had ever existed (at least in the same
regions) on an equal space of ground; and supports them with certainty,
exempt from those periodically recurring famines so abundant in the
early history of Europe, and in Oriental countries even now not
unfrequent. Besides this great increase in the quantity of food, it has
greatly improved in quality and variety; while conveniences and
luxuries, other than food, are no longer limited to a small and opulent
class, but descend, in great abundance, through many widening strata in
societyw. The collective resources of one of these communities, when it
chooses to put them forth for any unexpected purpose; its ability to
maintain fleets and armies, to execute public works, either useful or
ornamental, to perform national acts of beneficence like the ransom of
the West India slaves; to found colonies, to have its people taught, to
do anything in short which requires expense, and to do it with no
sacrifice of the necessaries or even the substantial comforts of its
inhabitants, are such as the world never saw before.

But in all these particulars, characteristic of the modern industrial
communities, those communities differ widely from one another. Though
abounding in wealth as compared with former ages, they do so in very
different degrees. Even of the countries which are justly accounted the
richest, some have made a more complete use of their productive
resources, and have obtained, relatively to their territorial extent, a
much larger produce, than others; nor do they differ only in amount of
wealth, but also in the rapidity of its increase. The diversities in the
distribution of wealth are still greater than in the production. There
are great differences in the condition of the poorest class in different
countries; and in the proportional numbers and opulence of the classes
which are above the poorest. The very nature and designation of the
classes who originally share among them the produce of the soil, vary
not a little in different places. In some, the landowners are a class in
themselves, almost entirely separate from the classes engaged in
industry: in others, the proprietor of the land is Edition: current;
Page: [20] almost universally its cultivator, owning the plough, xand
oftenx himself holding it. Where the proprietor himself does not
cultivate, there is sometimes, between him and the labourer, an
intermediate agency, that of the farmer, who advances the subsistence of
the labourers, supplies the yinstrumentsy of production, and receives,
after paying a rent to the landowner, all the produce: in other cases,
the landlord, his paid agents, and the labourers, are the only sharers.
Manufactures, again, are sometimes carried on by scattered individuals,
who own or hire the tools or machinery they require, and employ little
labour besides that of their own family; in other cases, by large
numbers working together in one building, with expensive and complex
machinery owned by rich manufacturers. The same difference exists in the
operations of trade. The wholesale operations indeed are everywhere
carried on by large capitals, where such exist; but the retail dealings,
which collectively occupy a zvery greatz amount of capital, are
sometimes conducted in small shops, chiefly by the personal exertions of
the dealers themselves, with their families, and perhaps an apprentice
or two; and sometimes in large establishments, of which the funds are
supplied by a wealthy individual or association, and the agency is that
of numerous salaried shopmen or shopwomen. Besides these differences in
the economical phenomena presented by different parts of what is usually
called the civilized world, all those earlier states which we previously
passed in review, have continued in some part or other of the world,
down to our own time. Hunting communities still exist in America,
nomadic in Arabia and the steppes of Northern Asia; Oriental society is
in essentials what it has always been; athe great empire of Russia isa
even now, in many respects, the scarcely modified image of feudal
Europe. Every one of the great types of human society, down to that of
the Esquimaux or Patagonians, is still extant.

bThese remarkable differences in the state of different portions of the
human race, with regard to the production and distribution of wealth,
must, like all other phenomena, depend on causes. And it is not a
sufficient explanation to ascribe them exclusively to the degrees of
knowledge possessed at different times and places, of the laws of nature
and the physical arts of life. Many other causes co-operate; and that
very progress and unequal distribution of physical knowledge are partly
the effects, as well as partly the causes, of the state of the
production and distribution of wealth.

In so far as the economical condition of nations turns upon the state of
physical knowledge, it is a subject for the physical sciences, and the
arts founded on them. But in so far as the causes are moral or
psychological, Edition: current; Page: [21] dependent on institutions
and social relations, or on the principles of human nature, their
investigation belongs not to physical, but to moral and social science,
and is the object of what is called Political Economy.

The production of wealth; the extraction of the instruments of human
subsistence and enjoyment from the materials of the globe, is evidently
not an arbitrary thing. It has its necessary conditions. Of these, some
are physical, depending on the properties of matterc, dandd on the
amount of knowledge of those properties possessed at the particular
place and timec. These Political Economy does not investigate, but
assumes; referring for ethe groundse, to physical science or common
experience. Combining with these facts of outward nature other truths
frelating tof human nature, it attempts to trace the secondary or
derivative laws, by which the production of wealth is determined; gin
which must lie the explanation of the diversities of riches and poverty
in the present and past, and the ground of whatever hincreaseh in wealth
is reserved for the future.

Unlike the laws of Production, those of Distribution are partly of human
institution: since the manner in which wealth is distributed in any
given society, depends on the statutes or usages therein iobtainingi.
But though governments or nations jhave the power of decidingj what
institutions shall kexistk, they cannot arbitrarily determine how those
institutions shall work. The conditions on which the power they possess
over the distribution of wealth is dependent, and the manner in which
the distribution is leffectedl by the various modes of conduct which
society may think fit to adopt, are mas much a subject for scientific
enquiry as any of the physical laws of naturem.

The laws of Production and Distribution, and some of the practical
consequences deducible from them, are the subject of the following
treatise.

Edition: current; Page: [22] Edition: current; Page: [23]


BOOK I: PRODUCTION

Edition: current; Page: [24] Edition: current; Page: [25]


CHAPTER I: Of the Requisites of Production

§ 1. [Requisites of production, what] The requisites of production are
two: labour, and appropriate natural objects.

Labour is either bodily or mental; or, to express the distinction more
comprehensively, either muscular or nervous; and it is necessary to
include in the idea, not solely the exertion itself, but all feelings of
a disagreeable kind, all bodily inconvenience or mental annoyance,
connected with the employment of one’s thoughts, or muscles, or both, in
a particular occupation. Of the other requisite—appropriate natural
objects—it is to be remarked, that some objects exist or grow up
spontaneously, of a kind suited to the supply of human wants. There are
caves and hollow trees capable of affording shelter; fruit, roots, wild
honey, and other natural products, on which human life can be supported;
but even here a considerable quantity of labour is generally required,
not for the purpose of creating, but of finding and appropriating them.
In all but these few and (except in the very commencement of human
society) unimportant cases, the objects supplied by nature are only
instrumental to human wants, after having undergone some degree of
transformation by human exertion. Even the wild animals of the forest
and of the sea, from which the hunting and fishing tribes derive their
sustenance—though the labour of which they are the subject is chiefly
that required for appropriating them—must yet, before they are used as
food, be killed, divided into fragments, and subjected in almost all
cases to some aculinary processa, which are operations requiring a
certain degree of human labour. The amount of transformation which
natural substances undergo before being brought into the shape in which
they are directly applied to human use, varies from this or a still less
degree of alteration in the nature and appearance of the object, to a
change so total that no trace is perceptible of the original shape and
structure. There is little resemblance between a piece of a mineral
substance found in the earth, and a plough, an axe, or a saw. There is
less resemblance between porcelain and the decomposing granite of which
it is made, or between sand mixed with sea-weed, and glass. The
difference is greater still between the fleece of a sheep, or a handful
of cotton seeds, and a web Edition: current; Page: [26] of muslin or
broad cloth; and the sheep and seeds themselves are not spontaneous
growths, but results of previous labour and care. In these several cases
the ultimate product is so extremely dissimilar to the substance
supplied by nature, that in the custom of language nature is represented
as only furnishing materials.

Nature, however, does more than supply materials; she also supplies
powers. The matter of the globe is not an inert recipient of forms and
properties impressed by human hands; it has active energies by which it
co-operates with, and may even be used as a substitute for, labour. In
the early ages bpeopleb converted their corn into flour by pounding it
between two stones; they next hit on a contrivance which enabled them,
by turning a handle, to make one of the stones revolve upon the other;
and this process, a little improved, is still the common practice of the
East. The muscular exertion, however, which it required, was very severe
and exhausting, insomuch that it was often selected as a punishment for
slaves who had offended their masters. When the time came at which the
labour and sufferings of slaves were thought worth economizing, the
greater part of this bodily exertion was rendered unnecessary, by
contriving that the upper cstonec should be made to revolve upon the
lower, not by human strength, but by the force of the wind or of falling
water. In this case, natural agents, the wind or the gravitation of the
water, are made to do a portion of the work previously done by labour.

§ 2. [The function of labour defined] Cases like this, in which a
certain amount of labour has been dispensed with, its work being
devolved upon some natural agent, are apt to suggest an erroneous notion
of the comparative functions of labour and natural powers; as if the
co-operation of those powers with human industry were limited to the
cases in which they are made to perform what would otherwise be done by
labour; as if, in the case of things made (as the phrase is) by hand,
nature only furnished passive materials. This is an illusion. The powers
of nature are as actively operative in the one case as in the other. A
workman takes a stalk of the flax or hemp plant, splits it into separate
fibres, twines together several of these fibres with his fingers, aided
by a simple instrument called a spindle; having thus formed a thread, he
lays many such threads side by side, and places other similar threads
directly across them, so that each passes alternately over and under
those which are at right angles to it; this part of the process being
facilitated by an instrument called a shuttle. He has now produced a web
of cloth, either linen or sackcloth, according to the material. He is
said to have done this by hand, no natural force being supposed to have
acted in concert with him. But by what force is each step of Edition:
current; Page: [27] this operation rendered possible, and the web, when
produced, held together? aBy the tenacity, or force of cohesion, of the
fibres:a which is one of the forces in nature, and which we can measure
exactly against other mechanical forces, and ascertain how much of any
of them it suffices to neutralize or counterbalance.

If we examine any other case of what is called the action of man upon
nature, we shall find in like manner that the powers of nature, or in
other words the properties of matter, do all the work, when once objects
are put into the right position. This one operation, of putting things
into fit places for being acted upon by their own internal forces, and
by those residing in other natural objects, is all that man does, or can
do, with matterb. He only moves one thing to or from another. He moves a
seed into the ground; and the natural forces of vegetation produce in
succession a root, a stem, leaves, flowers, and fruit. He moves an axe
through a tree, and it falls by the natural force of gravitation; he
moves a saw through it, in a particular manner, and the physical
properties by which a softer substance gives way before a harder, make
it separate into planks, which he arranges in certain positions, with
cnails driven through them, orc adhesive matter between them, and
produces a table, or a house. He moves a spark to fuel, and it
dignitesd, and by the force egenerated ine combustion it cooks the food,
melts or softens the iron, converts into beer or sugar the malt or
cane-juice, which he has previously moved to the spot. He has no other
means of acting on matter than by moving it. Motion, and resistance to
motion, are the only things which his muscles are constructed for. By
muscular contraction he can create a pressure on an outward object,
which, if sufficiently powerful, will set it in motion, or if it be
already moving, will check or modify or altogether arrest its motion,
and he can do no more. But this is enough to have given fall the command
which mankind have acquired over natural forces immeasurably more
powerful than themselves; a command which, great as it is already, is
without doubt destined to become indefinitely greater. He gexertsg this
power either by availing himself of natural forces in existence, or by
arranging objects in those mixtures and combinations by which natural
forces are generated; as when by putting a lighted match to fuel, and
water into a boiler over it, he Edition: current; Page: [28] generates
the expansive force of steam, a power which has been made so largely
available for the attainment of human purposes.*

Labour, then, in the physical world, is always and solely employed in
putting objects in motion; the properties of matter, the laws of nature,
do the rest. The skill and ingenuity of human beings hareh chiefly
exercised in discovering movements, practicable by their powers, and
capable of bringing about the effects which they desire. But, while
movement is the only effect which man can immediately and directly
produce by his muscles, it is not necessary that he should produce
directly by them all the movements which he requires. The first and most
obvious substitute is the muscular action of cattle: by degrees ithe
powers of inanimate nature are made to aidi in this too, as by making
the wind, or water, things already in motion, communicate a part of
their motion to the jwheelsj, which before that invention kwere made tok
revolve by muscular force. lThis service is extortedl from the powers of
wind and water by a set of actions, consisting like the former in moving
certain objects into certain positions in which they constitute what is
termed a mmachinem; but the muscular action necessary for this is not
constantly renewed, but performed once for all, and there is on the
whole a great economy of labour.

§ 3. [Does nature contribute more to the efficacy of labour in some
occupations than in others?] Some writers have raised the question,
whether nature gives more assistance to labour in one kind of industry
or in another; and have said that in some occupations labour does most,
in others nature most. In this, however, there seems much confusion of
ideas. The part which nature has in any work of man, is indefinite and
incommensurable. It is impossible to decide that in any one thing nature
does more than in any other. One cannot even say that labour does less.
aLess labour may bea required; but if that which is required is
absolutely indispensable, the result is just as much the product of
labour, as of nature. When two conditions are equally necessary for
producing the effect at all, it is bunmeaningb to say that so much of it
is produced by one and so much by the other; it is like Edition:
current; Page: [29] attempting to decide which half of a pair of
scissors has most to do in the act of cutting; or which of the factors,
five and six, contributes most to the production of thirty. The form
which this conceit usually assumes, is that of supposing that nature
lends more assistance to human endeavours in agriculture, than in
manufactures. This notion, held by the French Economistes, and from
which Adam Smith was not free, arose from a misconception of the nature
of rent. The rent of land being a price paid for a natural agency, and
no such price being paid in manufactures, these writers imagined that
since a price was paid, it was because there was a greater amount of
service to be paid for: whereas a better consideration of the subject
would have shown cthat the reason why the use of land bears a price is
simply the limitation of its quantity, and that if air, heat,
electricity, chemical agencies, and the other powers of nature employed
by manufacturers, were sparingly supplied, and could, like land, be
engrossed and appropriated, a rent could be exacted for them also.

§ 4. [Some natural agents limited, others practically unlimited, in
quantity] This leads to a distinction which we shall find to be of
primary importance. Of natural powers, some are unlimited, others
limited in quantity. By an unlimited quantity is of course anot meanta
literally, but practically unlimited: a quantity beyond bthe use which
can in any, or at leastb in present circumstances, be made of it. Land
is, in some newly settled countries, practically unlimited in quantity:
there is more than can be used by the existing population of the
country, or by any accession likely to be made to it for cgenerationsc
to come. But even there, land favourably situated with regard to markets
or means of carriage, is generally limited in quantity: there is not so
much of it as persons would gladly occupy and cultivate, or otherwise
turn to use. In all old countries, land capable of cultivation, land at
least of any tolerable fertility, must be ranked among agents limited in
quantity. Water, for ordinary purposes, on the banks of rivers or lakes,
may be regarded as of unlimited abundance; but if required for
irrigation, it may even there be insufficient to supply all wants, while
in places which depend for their consumption on cisterns or tanks, or on
wells which are not copious, or are liable to fail, water takes its
place among things the quantity of which is most strictly limited. Where
water itself is plentiful, yet waterpower, i.e. a fall of water
applicable by its mechanical force to the service of industry, may be
exceedingly limited, compared with the use which would be made of it if
it were more abundant. Coal, metallic Edition: current; Page: [30] ores,
and other useful substances found in the earth, are still more limited
than land. They are not only strictly local but exhaustible; though, at
a given place and time, they may exist in much greater abundance than
would be applied to present use even if they could be obtained gratis.
Fisheries, in the sea, are in most cases a gift of nature practically
unlimited in amount; but the Arctic whale fisheries have long been
insufficient for the demand which exists even at the very considerable
price necessary to defray the cost of appropriation: and the immense
extension which the Southern fisheries have in consequence assumed, is
tending to exhaust them likewise. River fisheries are a natural resource
of a very limited character, and would be rapidly exhausted, if allowed
to be used by every one without restraint. Air, even that state of it
which we term wind, may, in most situations, be obtained in a quantity
sufficient for every possible use; and so likewise, on the sea coast or
on large rivers, may water carriage: though the wharfage or harbour-room
applicable to the service of that mode of transport is in many
situations far short of what would be used if easily attainable.

It will be seen hereafter how much of the economy of society depends on
the limited quantity in which some of the most important natural agents
exist, and more particularly land. For the present I shall only remark
that so long as the quantity of a natural agent is practically
unlimited, it cannot, unless susceptible of artificial monopoly, bear
any value in the market, since no one will give anything for what can be
obtained gratis. But as soon as a limitation becomes practically
operative; as soon as there is not so much of the thing to be had, as
would be appropriated and used if it could be obtained for asking; the
ownership or use of the natural agent acquires an exchangeable value.
When more dwater power isd wanted in a particular district, than there
are falls of water to supply eite, persons will give an equivalent for
the use of a fall of water. When there is more land wanted for
cultivation than a place possesses, or than it possesses of a certain
quality and certain advantages of situation, land of that quality and
situation may be sold for a price, or let for an annual rent. This
subject will hereafter be discussed at length; but it is often useful to
anticipate, by a brief suggestion, principles and deductions which we
have not yet reached the place for exhibiting and illustrating fully.

Edition: current; Page: [31]


CHAPTER II: Of Labour as an Agent of Production

§ 1. [Labour employed either directly about the thing produced, or in
operations preparatory to its production] The labour which terminates in
the production of an article fitted for some human use, is either
employed directly about the thing, or in previous operations destined to
facilitate, perhaps essential to the possibility of, the subsequent
ones. In making bread, for example, the labour employed about the thing
itself is that of the baker; but the labour of the miller, though
employed directly in the production not of bread but of flour, is
equally part of the aggregate sum of labour by which the bread is
produced; as is also the labour of the sower and of the reaper. Some may
think that all these persons ought to be considered as employing their
labour directly about the thing; the corn, the flour, and the bread
being one substance in three different states. Without disputing about
this question of mere language, there is still the ploughman, who
prepared the ground for the seed, and whose labour never came in contact
with the substance in any of its states; and the plough-maker, whose
share in the result was still more remote. All these persons ultimately
derive the remuneration of their labour from the bread, or its price:
the plough-maker as much as the rest; for since ploughs are of no use
except for tilling the soil, no one would make or use ploughs for any
other reason than because the increased returns, thereby obtained from
the ground, afforded a source from which an adequate equivalent could be
assigned for the labour of the plough-maker. If the produce is to be
used or consumed in the form of bread, it is from the bread that this
equivalent must come. The bread must suffice to remunerate all these
labourers, and several others; asuch asa the carpenters and bricklayers
who erected the farm-buildings; the hedgers and ditchers who made the
fences necessary for the protection of the crop; the bminers and
smeltersb who extracted or prepared the iron of which the plough and
other cinstrumentsc were made. These, however, and the plough-maker,
Edition: current; Page: [32] do not depend for their remuneration upon
the bread made from the produce of a single harvest, but upon that made
from the produce of all the harvests which are successively gathered
until the plough, or the dbuildings and fences, are worn out. We must
add yet another kind of labour; that of transporting the produce from
the place of its production to the place of its destined use: the labour
of carrying the corn to market, and from market to the miller’s, the
flour from the miller’s to the baker’s, and the bread from the baker’s
to the place of its final consumption. This labour is sometimes very
considerable: flour is transported to England from beyond the Atlantic,
corn from the heart of Russia; and in addition to the labourers
immediately employed, the waggoners and sailors, there are also costly
instruments, such as ships, in the construction of which much labour has
been expended: that labour, however, not depending for its whole
remuneration upon the bread, but for a part only; ships being usually,
during the course of their existence, employed in the transport of many
different kinds of commodities.

To estimate, therefore, the labour of which any given commodity is the
result, is far from a simple operation. The items in the calculation are
very numerous—as it may seem to some persons, infinitely so; for if, as
a part of the labour employed in making bread, we count the labour of
the blacksmith who made the plough, why not also (it may be asked) the
labour of making the tools used by the blacksmith, and the tools used in
making those tools, and so back to the origin of things? But after
mounting one or two steps in this ascending scale, we come into a region
of fractions too minute for calculation. Suppose, for instance, that the
same plough will last, before being worn out, a dozen years. Only
one-twelfth of the labour of making the plough must be placed to the
account of each year’s harvest. A twelfth part of the labour of making a
plough is an appreciable quantity. But the same set of tools, perhaps,
suffice to the plough-maker for forging a hundred ploughs, which serve
during the twelve years of their existence to prepare the soil of eas
manye different farms. A twelve-hundredth part of the labour of making
fhisf tools, is as much, therefore, as has been expended in procuring
one year’s harvest of a single farm: and when this fraction comes to be
further apportioned among the various sacks of corn and loaves of bread,
it is seen at once that such quantities are not worth taking into the
account for any practical purpose connected with the commodity. It is
true that if the tool-maker had not laboured, the corn and bread never
would have been produced; but they will not gbe soldg a tenth part of a
farthing dearer in consideration of his labour.

Edition: current; Page: [33]
§ 2. [Labour employed in producing subsistence for subsequent labour]
Another of the modes in which labour is indirectly or remotely
instrumental to the production of a thing, requires particular notice:
namely, when it is employed in producing subsistence, to maintain the
labourers while they are engaged in the production. This previous
employment of labour is an indispensable condition to every productive
operation, on any other than the very smallest scale. Except the labour
of the hunter and fisher, there is scarcely any kind of labour to which
the returns are immediate. Productive operations require to be continued
a certain time, before their fruits are obtained. Unless the labourer,
before commencing his work, possesses a store of food, or can obtain
access to the stores of some one else, in sufficient quantity to
maintain him until the production is completed, he can undertake no
labour but such as can be carried on at odd intervals, concurrently with
the pursuit of his subsistence. He cannot obtain food itself in any
abundance; for every mode of so obtaining it, requires that there be
already food in store. Agriculture only brings forth food after the
lapse of months; and though the labours of the agriculturist are not
necessarily continuous during the whole period, they must occupy a
considerable part of it. Not only is agriculture impossible without food
produced in advance, but there must be a very great quantity in advance
to enable any considerable community to support itself wholly by
agriculture. A country like England or France is only able to carry on
the agriculture of the present year, because that of past years has
provided, in those countries or somewhere else, sufficient food to
support their agricultural population until the next harvest. They are
only enabled to produce so many other things besides food, because the
food which was in store at the close of the last harvest suffices to
maintain not only the agricultural labourers, but a large industrious
population besides.

The labour employed in producing this stock of subsistence, forms a
great and important part of the past labour which has been necessary to
enable present labour to be carried on. But there is a difference,
requiring particular notice, between this and the other kinds of
previous or preparatory labour. The miller, the reaper, the ploughman,
the plough-maker, the waggoner and waggon-maker, even the sailor and
ship-builder when employed, derive their remuneration from the ultimate
product—the bread made from the corn on which they have severally
operated, or supplied the instruments for operating. The labour that
produced the food which fed all these labourers, is as necessary to the
ultimate result, the bread of the present harvest, as any of those other
portions of labour; but is not, like them, remunerated from it. That
previous labour has received its remuneration from the previous food. In
order to raise any product, there are needed labour, tools, and
materials, and food to feed the labourers. But the tools Edition:
current; Page: [34] and materials are of no use except for obtaining the
product, or at least are to be applied to no other use, and the labour
of their construction can be remunerated only from the product when
obtained. The food, on the contrary, is intrinsically useful, and is
applied to athe direct usea of feeding human beings. The labour expended
in producing the food, and recompensed by it, needs not be remunerated
over again from the produce of the subsequent labour which it has fed.
If we suppose that the same body of labourers carried on a manufacture,
and grew food to sustain themselves while doing it, they have had for
their trouble the food and the manufactured article; but if they also
grew the material and made the tools, they have had nothing for that
trouble but the manufactured article alone.

The claim to remuneration founded on the possession of food, available
for the maintenance of labourers, is of another kind; remuneration for
abstinence, not for labour. If a person has a store of food, he bhas it
in his power tob consume it himself in idleness, or in feeding others to
attend on him, or to fight for him, or to sing or dance for him. If,
instead of these things, he gives it to productive labourers to support
them during their work, he can, and naturally will, claim a remuneration
from the produce. He will not be content with simple repayment; if he
receives merely that, he is only in the same situation as at first, and
has derived no advantage from delaying to apply his savings to his own
benefit or pleasure. He will look for some equivalent for this
forbearance: he will expect his advance of food to come back to him with
an increase, called in the language of business, a profit; and the hope
of this profit will generally have been a part of the inducement which
made him accumulate a stock, by economizing in his own consumption; or,
at any rate, which made him forego the application of it, when
accumulated, to his personal ease or satisfaction. The food also which
maintained other workmen while producing the tools or materials, must
have been provided in advance by some one, and he, too, must have his
profit from the ultimate product; but there is this difference, that
here the ultimate product has to supply not only the profit, but also
the remuneration of the labour. The tool-maker (say, for instance, the
plough-maker) does not indeed usually wait for his payment until the
harvest is reaped; the farmer advances it to him, and steps into his
place by becoming the owner of the plough. Nevertheless, it is from the
harvest that the payment is to come; since the farmer would not
undertake this outlay unless he expected that the harvest would repay
him, and with a profit too on this fresh advance; that is, unless the
harvest would yield, besides the remuneration of the farm labourers (and
a profit for advancing it), a sufficient residue to remunerate the
plough-maker’s labourers, give the plough-maker a profit, and a profit
to the farmer on both.

Edition: current; Page: [35]
§ 3. [Labour employed in producing materials] From these considerations
it appears, that in an enumeration and classification of the kinds of
industry which are intended for the indirect or remote furtherance of
other productive labour, we need not include the labour of producing
subsistence or other necessaries of life to be consumed by productive
labourers; for the main end and purpose of athisa labour is the
subsistence itself; and though the possession of a store of it enables
other work to be done, this is but an incidental consequence. The
remaining modes in which labour is indirectly instrumental to
production, may be arranged under five heads.

First: Labour employed in producing materials, on which industry is to
be afterwards employed. This is, in many cases, a labour of mere
appropriation; extractive industry, as bit has been aptly named by M.
Dunoyerb. The labour of the miner, for example, consists of operations
for digging out of the earth substances convertible by industry into
various articles fitted for human use. Extractive industry, however, is
not confined to the extraction of materials. Coal, for instance, is
employed, not only in the cprocessc of industry, but in directly warming
human beings. When so used, it is not a material dof productiond, but is
itself the ultimate product. So, also, in the case of a mine of precious
stones. These are to some small extent employed in the productive arts,
as diamonds by the glass-cutter, emery and corundum for polishing, but
their principal destination, that of ornament, is a direct use; though
they commonly require, before being so used, some process of
manufacture, which may perhaps warrant our regarding them as materials.
Metallic ores of all sorts are materials merely.

Under the head, production of materials, we must include the industry of
the wood-cutter, when employed in cutting and preparing timber for
building, or wood for the purposes of the carpenter’s or any other art.
In the forests of America, Norway, Germany, the Pyrenees and Alps, this
sort of labour is largely employed on trees of spontaneous growth. In
other cases, we must add to the labour of the wood-cutter that of the
planter and cultivator.

eUnder the same head are also comprisede the labours of the
agriculturist in growing flax, hemp, cotton, feeding silkworms, raising
food for cattle, producing bark, dye-stuffs, fsomef oleaginous plants,
and many other things only useful because required in other departments
of industry. So, too, the labour of the hunter, as far as his object is
furs or feathers; of the shepherd and the cattle-breeder, in respect of
wool, hides, horn, bristles, horse-hair, Edition: current; Page: [36]
and the like. The things used as materials in some process or other of
manufacture are of a most miscellaneous character, drawn from almost
every quarter of the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms. And
besides this, the finished products of many branches of industry are the
materials of others. The thread produced by the spinner is applied to
hardly any use except as material for the weaver. Even the product of
the loom is chiefly used as material for the fabricators of articles of
dress or furniture, or of further instruments of productive industry, as
in the case of the sailmaker. The currier and tanner find their whole
occupation in converting raw material into what may be termed prepared
material. In strictness of speech, almost all food, as it comes from the
hands of the agriculturist, is nothing more than material for the
occupation of the baker or the cook.

§ 4. [Labour employed in producing implements] The second kind of
indirect labour is that employed in making tools or implements for the
assistance of labour. I use these terms in their most comprehensive
sense, embracing all permanent instruments or helps to production, from
a flint and asteel for striking a light, to a steam ship, or the most
complex apparatus of manufacturing machinery. There may be some
hesitation where to draw the line between implements and materials; and
some things used in production (such as fuel) would scarcely in common
language be called by either name, popular phraseology being shaped out
by a different class of necessities from those of scientific exposition.
To avoid a multiplication of classes and denominations answering to
distinctions of no scientific importance, political economists generally
include all things which are used as immediate means of production (the
means which are not immediate will be considered presently) either in
the class of implements or in that of materials. Perhaps the line is
most usually and most conveniently drawn, by considering as a material
every instrument of production which can only be used once, being
destroyed (at least as an instrument for the purpose in hand) by a
single employment. Thus fuel, once burnt, cannot be again used as fuel;
what can be so used is only any portion which has remained unburnt the
first time. And not only it cannot be used without being consumed, but
it is only useful by being consumed; for if no part of the fuel were
destroyed, no heat would be generated. A fleece, again, is destroyed as
a fleece by being spun into thread; and the thread cannot be used as
thread when woven into cloth. But an axe is not destroyed as an axe by
cutting down a tree: it may be used afterwards to cut down a hundred or
a thousand more; and though deteriorated in some small degree by each
use, it does not do its work by being deteriorated, as the coal and the
fleece do theirs by being destroyed; on the contrary, it is the better
instrument the better it Edition: current; Page: [37] resists
deterioration. There are some things, rightly classed as materials,
which may be used as such a second and a third time, but not while the
product to which they at first contributed remains in existence. The
iron which formed a tank or a set of pipes may be melted bto form a
plough or a steam-engine; the stones with which a house was built may be
used after it is pulled down, to build another. But this cannot be done
while the original product subsists; their function as materials is
suspended, until the exhaustion of the first use. Not so with the things
classed as implements; they may be used repeatedly cforc fresh work,
until the time, sometimes very distant, at which they are worn out,
while the work already done by them may subsist unimpaired, and when it
perishes, does so by its own laws, or by casualties of its own.*

The only practical difference of much importance arising from the
distinction between materials and implements, is one which has attracted
our attention in another case. Since materials are destroyed as such by
being once used, the whole of the labour required for their production,
as well as the abstinence of the person who supplied the means for
carrying it on, must be remunerated from the fruits of that single use.
Implements, on the contrary, being susceptible of repeated employment,
the whole of the products which they are instrumental in bringing into
existence are a fund which can be drawn upon to remunerate the labour of
their construction, and the abstinence of those by whose accumulations
that labour was supported. It is enough if each product contributes a
fraction, commonly an insignificant one, towards the remuneration of
that labour and abstinence, or towards indemnifying the immediate
producer for advancing that remuneration to the person who produced the
tools.

§ 5. [Labour employed in the protection of labour] Thirdly: Besides
materials for industry to employ itself on, and implements to aid it,
provision Edition: current; Page: [38] must be made to prevent its
operations from being disturbed, and its products injured, either by the
destroying agencies of nature, or by the violence or rapacity of men.
This gives rise to another mode in which labour not employed directly
about the product itself, is instrumental to its production; namely,
when employed for the protection of industry. Such is the object of all
buildings for industrial purposes; all manufactories, warehouses, docks,
granaries, barns, farm-buildings devoted to cattle, or to the operations
of agricultural labour. I exclude those in which the labourers live, or
which are destined for their personal accommodation: these, like their
food, supply actual wants, and must be counted in the remuneration of
their labour. There are many modes in which labour is still more
directly applied to the protection of productive operations. The
herdsman has little other occupation than to protect the cattle from
harm: the positive agencies concerned in the realization of the product,
go on nearly of themselves. I have already mentioned the labour of the
hedger and ditcher, of the builder of walls or dykes. To these must be
added that of the soldier, the policeman, and the judge. These
functionaries are not indeed employed exclusively in the protection of
industry, nor does their payment constitute, to the individual producer,
a part of the expenses of production. But they are paid from the taxes,
which are derived from the produce of industry; and in any tolerably
governed country they render to its operations a service far more than
equivalent to the cost. To society at large they are therefore part of
the expenses of production; and if the returns to production were not
sufficient to maintain these labourers in addition to all the others
required, production, at least in that form and manner, could not take
place. Besides, if the protection which the government affords to the
operations of industry were not afforded, the producers would be under a
necessity of either withdrawing a large share of their time and labour
from production, to employ it in defence, or of engaging armed men to
defend them; all which labour, in that case, must be directly
remunerated from the produce; and things which acoulda not pay for this
additional labour, would not be produced. Under the present
arrangements, the product pays its quota towards the same protection,
and notwithstanding the waste and prodigality incident to government
expenditure, obtains it of better quality at a much smaller cost.

§ 6. [Labour employed in the transport and distribution of the produce]
Fourthly: There is a very great amount of labour employed, not in
bringing the product into existence, but in rendering it, when in
existence, accessible to those for whose use it is intended. Many
important classes of labourers find their sole employment in some
function of this kind. There is first the Edition: current; Page: [39]
whole class of carriers, by land or water: muleteers, waggoners,
bargemen, sailors, wharfmen, coalheavers, porters, railway
establishments, and the like. Next, there are the constructors of all
the implements of transport; ships, barges, carts, locomotives, &c., to
which must be added roads, canals, and railways. Roads are sometimes
made by the government, and opened gratuitously to the public; but the
labour of making them is not the less paid for from the produce. Each
producer, in paying his quota of the taxes levied generally for the
construction of roads, pays for the use of those which conduce to his
convenience; and if made with any tolerable judgment, they increase the
returns to his industry by far more than an equivalent amount.

Another numerous class of labourers employed in rendering the things
produced accessible to their intended consumers, is the class of dealers
and traders, or, as they may be termed, distributors. There would be a
great waste of time and trouble, and an inconvenience often amounting to
impracticability, if consumers could only obtain the articles they want
by treating directly with the producers. Both producers and consumers
are too much scattered, and the latter often at too great a distance
from the former. To diminish this loss of time and labour, the
contrivance of fairs and markets was early had recourse to, where
consumers and producers might periodically meet, without any
intermediate agency; and this plan answers tolerably well for many
articles, especially agricultural produce, agriculturists having at some
seasons a certain quantity of spare time on their hands. But even in
this case, attendance is often very troublesome and inconvenient to
buyers who have other occupations, and do not live in the immediate
vicinity; while, for all articles the production of which requires
continuous attention from the producers, these periodical markets must
be held at such considerable intervals, and the wants of the consumers
must either be provided for so long beforehand, or must remain so long
unsupplied, that even before the resources of society aadmitted ofa the
establishment of shops, the supply of these wants fell universally into
the hands of itinerant dealers: the pedlar, who might appear once a
month, being preferred to the fair, which only returned once bor twiceb
a year. In country districts, remote from towns or large villages, the
industry of the pedlar is not yet wholly superseded. But a dealer who
has a fixed abode and fixed customers is so much more to be depended on,
that consumers prefer resorting to him if he is conveniently accessible;
and dealers therefore find their advantage in establishing themselves in
every locality where there are sufficient consumers near at hand to
afford them a remuneration.

In many cases the producers and dealers are the same persons, at least
Edition: current; Page: [40] as to the ownership of the funds and cthec
control of the operations. The tailor, the shoemaker, the baker, and
many other tradesmen, are the producers of the articles they deal in, so
far as regards the last stage in the production. This union, however, of
the functions of manufacturer and retailer is only expedient when the
article dcand advantageously be made at or near the place convenient for
retailing it, and is, besides, manufactured and sold in small parcels.
When things have to be brought from a distance, the same person cannot
effectually superintend both the making and the retailing of them; when
they are best and most cheaply made on a large scale, a single
manufactory requires so many elocal channelse to carry off its supply,
that the retailing fis most convenientlyf delegated to other agency; and
even shoes and coats, when they are to be furnished in large quantities
at once, as for the supply of ga regimentg or of a workhouse, are
usually obtained not directly from the producers, but from intermediate
dealers, who make it their business to ascertain from what producers
they can be obtained best handh cheapest. Even when things are destined
to be at last sold by retail, convenience soon creates a class of
wholesale dealers. When products and transactions have multiplied beyond
a certain point; when one manufactory supplies many shops, and one shop
has often to obtain goods from many different manufactories, the loss of
time and trouble both to the manufacturers and to the retailers by
treating directly with one another makes it more convenient to them to
treat with a smaller number of great dealers or merchants, who only buy
to sell again, collecting goods from the various producers and
distributing them to the retailers, to be by them further distributed
among the consumers. Of these various elements is composed the
iDistributing Class, whose agency is supplementary to that of the
Producing Class: and the produce so distributed, or its price, is the
source from which the distributors are remunerated for their jexertions,
and for the abstinence which enabled them to advance the funds needful
for the business of distribution.

§ 7. [Labour which relates to human beings] We have now completed the
enumeration of the modes in which labour employed on external nature is
subservient to production. But there is yet another mode of employing
labour, which conduces equally, though still more remotely, to that end:
this is, labour of which the subject is human beings. Every human being
has been brought up from infancy at the expense of much labour to some
person or persons, and if this labour, or part of it, had not been
bestowed, the Edition: current; Page: [41] child would never have
attained the age and strength which enable him to become a labourer in
his turn. To the community at large, the labour and expense of rearing
its infant population aforma a part of the outlay which is a condition
of production, and bwhichb is to be replaced with increase from the
future produce of their labour. By the cindividualsc, this labour and
expense are usually incurred from other motives than to obtain such
ultimate return, and, for most purposes of political economy, need not
be taken into account as expenses of production. But the technical or
industrial education of the community; the labour employed in learning
and in teaching the arts of production, in acquiring and communicating
skill in those arts; this labour is really, and in general solely,
undergone for the sake of the greater or more valuable produce thereby
attained, and in order that a remuneration, equivalent or more than
equivalent, may be reaped by the learner, besides an adequate
remuneration for the labour of the teacher, when a teacher has been
employed.

As the labour which confers productive powers, whether of hand or of
head, may be looked upon as part of the labour by which society
accomplishes its productive operations, or in other words, as part of
what the produce costs to society, so too may the labour employed in
keeping up productive powers; in preventing them from being destroyed or
weakened by accident or disease. The labour of a physician or surgeon,
when made use of by persons engaged in industry, must be regarded in the
economy of society as a sacrifice incurred, to preserve from perishing
by death or infirmity that portion of the productive resources of
society which is fixed in the lives and bodily or mental powers of its
productive members. To the individuals, indeed, this forms but a part,
sometimes an imperceptible part, of the motives that induce them to
submit to medical treatment: it is not principally from economical
motives that persons have a limb amputated, or endeavour to be cured of
a fever, though when they do so, there is generally sufficient
inducement for it even on that score alone. This is, therefore, one of
the cases of labour and outlay which, though conducive to production,
yet not being incurred for that end, or for the sake of the returns
arising from it, are out of the sphere of most of the general
propositions which political economy has occasion to assert respecting
productive labour: though, when society and not the individuals are
considered, this labour and outlay must be regarded as part of the
advance by which society effects its productive operations, and for
which it is indemnified by the produce.

§ 8. [Labour of invention and discovery] Another kind of labour, usually
classed as mental, but conducing to the ultimate product as directly,
Edition: current; Page: [42] though not so immediately, as manual labour
itself, is the labour of the inventors of industrial processes. I say,
usually classed as mental, because in reality it is not exclusively so.
All human exertion is compounded of some mental and some bodily
elements. The stupidest hodman, who repeats from day to day the
mechanical act of climbing a ladder, performs a function apartlya
intellectual; bso much so, indeed, thatb the most intelligent dog or
elephant ccould not, probably,c be taught to do it. The dullest human
being, instructed beforehand, is capable of turning a mill; but a horse
cannot turn it without somebody to ddrived and watch him. On the other
hand, there is some bodily ingredient in the labour most purely mental,
when it generates any external result. Newton could not have produced
the Principia without the bodily exertion either of penmanship or of
dictation; and ehe must have drawn many diagrams, and written out many
calculations and demonstrations,e while he was preparing it in his mind.
Inventors, besides the labour of their brains, generally go through much
labour with their hands, in the models which they construct and the
experiments they have to make before their idea can realize itself
successfully in act. Whether mental, however, or bodily, their labour is
a part of that by which the production is brought about. The labour of
Watt in contriving the steamengine was as essential a part of production
as that of the mechanics who build or the engineers who work the
instrument; and was undergone, no less than theirs, in the prospect of a
remuneration from the produce. The labour of invention is often
estimated and paid on the very same plan as that of execution. Many
manufacturers of ornamental goods have inventors in their employment,
who receive wages or salaries for designing patterns, exactly as others
do for copying them. All this is strictly part of the labour of
production; as the labour of the author of a book is equally a part of
its production with that of the printer and binder.

In a national, or universal point of view, the labour of the savant, or
speculative thinker, is as much a part of production in the very
narrowest sense, as that of the inventor of a practical art; many such
inventions having been the direct consequences of theoretic discoveries,
and every extension of knowledge of the powers of nature being fruitful
of applications to the purposes of outward life. The electromagnetic
telegraph was the wonderful and most unexpected consequence of the
experiments of Œrsted and the mathematical investigations of Ampère: and
the modern art of navigation is an unforeseen emanation from the purely
speculative and apparently merely Edition: current; Page: [43] curious
enquiry, by the mathematicians of Alexandria, into the properties of
three curves formed by the intersection of a plane surface and a cone.
No limit can be set to the importance, even in a purely productive and
material point of view, of mere thought. Inasmuch, however, as these
material fruits, though the result, are seldom the direct purpose of the
pursuits of savants, nor is their remuneration in general derived from
the increased production which may be caused incidentally, and mostly
after a long interval, by their discoveries; this ultimate influence
does not, for most of the purposes of political economy, require to be
taken into consideration; and speculative thinkers are generally classed
as the producers only of the books, or other useable or saleable
articles, which directly emanate from them. But when (as in political
economy one should always be prepared to do) we shift our point of view,
and consider not individual acts, and the motives by which they are
determined, but national and universal results, intellectual speculation
must be looked upon as a most influential part of the productive labour
of society, and the portion of its resources employed in carrying on and
in remunerating such labour, as a highly productive part of its
expenditure.

§ 9. [Labour agricultural, manufacturing, and commercial] In the
foregoing survey of the modes of employing labour in furtherance of
production, I have made little use of the popular distinction of
industry into agricultural, manufacturing, and commercial. For, in
truth, this division fulfils very badly the purposes of a
classification. Many great branches of productive industry find no place
in it, or not without much straining; for example (not to speak of
hunters or fishers) the miner, the road-maker, and the sailor. The
limit, too, between agricultural and manufacturing industry cannot be
precisely drawn. The miller, for instance, and the baker—are they to be
reckoned among agriculturists, or among manufacturers? Their occupation
is in its nature manufacturing; the food has finally parted company with
the soil before it is handed over to them: this, however, might be said
with equal truth of the thresher, the winnower, the makers of butter and
cheese; operations always counted as agricultural, probably because it
is the custom for them to be performed by persons resident on the farm,
and under the same superintendence as tillage. For many purposes all
these persons, the miller and baker inclusive, must be placed in the
same class with ploughmen and reapers. They are all concerned in
producing food, and depend for their remuneration on the food produced;
awhena the one class abounds and flourishes, the others do so too; they
form collectively the “agricultural interest;” they render but one
service to the community by their united labours, and are paid from one
common Edition: current; Page: [44] source. Even the tillers of the
soil, again, when the produce is not food, but the materials of what are
commonly termed manufactures, belong in many respects to the same
division in the economy of society as manufacturers. The cotton-planter
of Carolina, and the wool-grower of Australia, have more interests in
common with the spinner and weaver than with the corn-grower. But, on
the other hand, the industry which operates immediately upon the soil
has, as we shall see hereafter, some properties on which many important
consequences depend, and which distinguish it from all the subsequent
stages of production, whether carried on by the same bpersonb or not;
from the industry of the thresher and winnower, as much as from that of
the cotton-spinner. When I speak, therefore, of agricultural labour, I
shall generally mean this, and this exclusively, unless the contrary is
either stated or implied in the context. The term manufacturing is too
vague to be of much use when precision is required, and when I employ
it, I wish to be understood as intending to speak popularly rather than
scientifically.

Edition: current; Page: [45]


CHAPTER III: Of Unproductive Labour

§ 1. [Labour does not produce objects, but utilities] Labour is
indispensable to production, but has not always production for its
effect. There is much labour, and of a high order of usefulness, of
which production is not the object. Labour has accordingly been
distinguished into Productive and Unproductive. There has been not a
little controversy among political economists on the question, what
kinds of labour should be reputed to be unproductive; and they have not
always perceived, that there was in reality no matter of fact in dispute
between them.

Many writers have been unwilling to class any labour as productive,
unless its result is palpable in some material object, capable of being
transferred from one person to another. There are others (among whom are
Mr. M‘Culloch and M. Say) who looking upon the word unproductive as a
term of disparagement, remonstrate against imposing it upon any labour
which is regarded as useful—which produces a benefit or a pleasure worth
the cost. The labour of officers of government, of the army and navy, of
physicians, lawyers, teachers, musicians, dancers, actors, domestic
servants, &c., when they really accomplish what they are paid for, and
are not more numerous than is required for its performance, ought not,
say these writers, to be “stigmatized” as unproductive, an expression
which they appear to regard as synonymous with wasteful or worthless.
But this seems to abea a misunderstanding of the matter in dispute.
Production not being the sole end of human existence, the term
unproductive does not necessarily imply any stigma; nor was ever
intended to do so in the present case. The question is one of mere
language and classification. Differences of language, however, are by no
means unimportant, even when not grounded on differences of opinion; for
though either of two expressions may be consistent with the whole truth,
they generally tend to fix attention upon different parts of it. We must
therefore enter a little into the consideration of the various meanings
which may attach to the words productive and unproductive when applied
to labour.

In the first place, even in what is called the production of material
objects, it must be remembered that what is produced is not the matter
Edition: current; Page: [46] composing them. All the labour of all the
human beings in the world could not produce one particle of matter. To
weave broadcloth is but to rearrange, in a peculiar manner, the
particles of wool; to grow corn is only to put a portion of matter
called a seed, into a situation where it can draw btogether particles of
matter from the earth and air, to formb the new combination called a
plant. Though we cannot create matter, we can cause it to assume
properties, by which, from having been useless to us, it becomes useful.
What we produce, or desire to produce, is always, as M. Say rightly
terms it, an utility. cLabourc is not creative of objects, but of
utilities. Neither, again, do we consume and destroy the objects
themselves; the matter of which they were composed remains, more or less
altered in form: what has really been consumed is only dthe qualities by
which they were fitted for the purpose they have been applied tod. It
is, therefore, pertinently asked by M. Say and others—since, when we are
said to produce objects, we only produce utility, why should not all
labour which produces utility be accounted productive? Why refuse that
title to the esurgeon who sets a limbe, the judge or legislator who
confers security, and give it to the lapidary who cuts and polishes a
diamond? Why deny it to the teacher from whom I learn an art by which I
can gain my bread, and accord it to the confectioner who makes bonbons
for the momentary pleasure of a sense of taste?

It is quite true that all these kinds of labour are productive of
utility; and the question which now occupies us could not have been a
question at all, if the production of utility were enough to satisfy the
notion which mankind have usually formed of productive labour.
Production, and productive, are of course elliptical expressions,
involving the idea of a something produced; but this something, in
common apprehension, I conceive to be, not utility, but Wealth.
Productive labour means labour productive of wealth. We are recalled,
therefore, to the question touched upon in our first chapter, what
Wealth is, and whether only material products, or all useful products,
are to be included in it.

§ 2. [These utilities are of three kinds] Now the utilities produced by
labour are of three kinds. They are,

First, utilities fixed and embodied in outward objects; by labour
employed in ainvestinga external material things with properties which
render them serviceable to human beings. This is the common case, and
requires no illustration.

Edition: current; Page: [47]
Secondly, utilities fixed and embodied in human beings; the labour being
in this case employed in conferring on human beings, qualities which
render them serviceable to themselves and others. To this class belongs
the labour of all concerned in education; not only schoolmasters,
tutors, and professors, but bgovernments, so far as they aim
successfully at the improvement of the people; moralists, and clergymen,
as far as productive of cbenefit; the labour of physicians, as far as
instrumental in preserving life and physical or mental efficiency; of
the teachers of bodily exercises, and of the various trades, sciences,
and arts, together with the labour of the learners in acquiring them;
and all labour bestowed by any persons, throughout life, in improving
the knowledge or cultivating the bodily or mental faculties of
themselves or others.

Thirdly and lastly, utilities not fixed or embodied in any object, but
consisting in a mere service rendered; a pleasure given, an
inconvenience or a pain averted, during a longer or a shorter time, but
without leaving a permanent acquisition in the improved qualities of any
person or thing; the labour being employed in producing an utility
directly, not (as in the two former cases) in fitting some other thing
to afford an utility. Such, for example, is the labour of the musical
performer, the actor, the public declaimer or reciter, and the showman.
Some good may no doubt be produced, dand much emoree might be produced,d
beyond the moment, upon the feelings and disposition, or general state
of enjoyment of the spectators; or instead of good there may be harm;
but neither the one nor the other is the effect intended, is the result
for which the exhibitor works and the spectator pays; nothing but the
immediate pleasure. Such, again, is the labour of the army and navy;
they, at the best, prevent a country from being conquered, or from being
injured forf insulted, which is a service, but in all other respects
leave the country neither improved nor deteriorated. Such, too, is the
labour of the legislator, the judge, the officer of justice, and all
other agents of government, in their ordinary functions, apart from any
influence they may exert on the improvement of the national mind. The
service which they render, is to maintain peace and security; these
compose the utility which they produce. It may appear to some, that
carriers, and merchants or dealers, should be placed in this same class,
since their labour does not add any properties to objects: but I reply
that it does: it adds the property of being in the place where they are
wanted, instead of being in some other place: which is a very useful
property, and the utility it confers is embodied in the things
themselves, which now Edition: current; Page: [48] actually are in the
place where they are required for use, and in consequence of that
increased utility could be sold at an increased price, proportioned to
the labour expended in conferring it. This labour, therefore, does not
belong to the third class, but to the first.

§ 3. [Productive labour is that which produces utilities fixed and
embodied in material objects] We have now to consider which of these
three classes of labour should be accounted productive of wealth, since
that is what the term productive, when used by itself, must be
understood to import. Utilities of the third class, consisting in
pleasures which only exist while being enjoyed, and services which only
exist while being performed, cannot be spoken of as wealth, except by an
acknowledged metaphor. It is essential to the idea of wealth to be
susceptible of accumulation: things which cannot, after being produced,
be kept for some time before being used, are never, I think, regarded as
wealth, since however much of them may be produced and enjoyed, the
person benefited by them is no richer, is nowise improved in
circumstances. But there is not so distinct and positive a violation of
usage in considering as wealth any product which is both useful and
susceptible of accumulation. The skill, and the energy and perseverance,
of the artisans of a country, are reckoned part of its wealth, no less
than their tools and machinery.* According to this definition, we should
regard all labour as productive which is employed in creating permanent
utilities, whether embodied in human beings, or in any other animate or
inanimate objects. aThisa nomenclature I have, in a former Edition:
current; Page: [49] publication,* recommended, as bmost conducive tob
the ends of classificationc; and I am still of that opinionc.

But in applying the term wealth to the industrial capacities of human
beings, there seems always, in popular apprehension, to be a tacit
reference to material products. The skill of an artisan is accounted
wealth, only as being the means of acquiring wealth in a material sense;
and any qualities not tending visibly to that object are scarcely so
regarded at all. A country would hardly be said to be richer, except by
a metaphor, however precious a possession it might have in the genius,
the virtues, or the accomplishments of its inhabitants; unless indeed
these were looked upon as marketable articles, by which it could attract
the material wealth of other countries, as the Greeks of old, and
several modern nations have done. While, therefore, I should prefer,
were I constructing a new technical language, to make the distinction
turn upon the permanence rather than upon the materiality of the
product, yet when employing terms which common usage has taken complete
possession of, it seems advisable so to employ them as to do the least
possible violence tod usage; since any improvement in terminology
obtained by straining the received meaning of a popular phrase, is
generally purchased beyond its value, by the obscurity arising from the
conflict between new and old associations.

I shall, therefore, in this treatise, when speaking of wealth,
understand by it only what is called material wealth, and by productive
labour only those kinds of exertion which produce utilities embodied in
material objects. But in limiting myself to this sense of the word, I
mean to avail myself of the full extent of that restricted acceptation,
and I shall not refuse the appellation productive, to labour which
yields no material product as its direct result, provided that an
increase of material products is its ultimate consequence. Thus, labour
expended in the acquisition of manufacturing skill, I class as
productive, not in virtue of the skill itself, but of the manufactured
products created by the skill, and to the creation of which the labour
of learning the trade is essentially conducive. The labour of officers
of government in affording the protection which, afforded in some manner
or other, is indispensable to the prosperity of industry, must be
classed as productive even of material wealth, because without it,
material wealth, in anything like its present abundance, could not
exist. Such labour may Edition: current; Page: [50] be said to be
productive indirectly or mediately, in opposition to the labour of the
ploughman and the cotton-spinner, which are productive immediately. They
are all alike in this, that they leave the community richer in material
products than they found it; they increase, or tend to increase,
material wealth.

§ 4. [All other labour, however useful, is classed as unproductive] By
Unproductive Labour, on the contrary, will be understood labour which
does not terminate in the creation of material wealth; which, however
largely or successfully practised, does not render the community, and
the world at large, richer in material products, but poorer by all that
is consumed by the labourers while so employed.

All labour isa, in the language of political economy,a unproductive,
which ends in immediate enjoyment, without any increase of the
accumulated stock of permanent means of enjoyment. And ballb labour,
according to our present definition, must be classed as unproductive,
which terminates in a permanent benefit, however important, provided
that an increase of material products forms no part of that benefit. The
labour of saving a friend’s life is not productive, unless the friend is
a productive labourer, and produces more than he consumes. To a
religious person the saving of a soul must appear a far more important
service than the saving of a life; but he will not therefore call a
missionary or a clergyman productive labourers, unless they teach, as
the South Sea Missionaries have in some cases done, the arts of
civilization in addition to the doctrines of ctheirc religion. It is, on
the contrary, evident that the greater number of missionaries or
clergymen a nation maintains, the less it has to expend on other things;
while the more it expends judiciously in keeping agriculturists and
manufacturers at work, the more it will have for every other purpose. By
the former it diminishes, cæteris paribus, its stock of material
products; by the latter, it increases them.

Unproductive may be as useful as productive labour; it may be more
useful, even in point of permanent advantage; or its use may consist
only in pleasurable sensation, which when gone leaves no trace; or it
may not afford even this, but may be absolute waste. In any case society
or mankind grow no richer by it, but poorer. All material products
consumed by any one while he produces nothing, are so much subtracted,
for the time, from the material products which society would otherwise
have possessed. But though society grows no richer by unproductive
labour, the individual may. An unproductive labourer may receive for his
labour, from those Edition: current; Page: [51] who derive pleasure or
benefit from it, a remuneration which may be to him a considerable
source of wealth; but his gain is balanced by their loss; they may have
received a full equivalent for their expenditure, but they are so much
poorer by it. When a tailor makes a coat and sells it, there is a
transfer of the price from the customer to the tailor, and a coat
besides which did not previously exist; but what is gained by an actor
is a mere transfer from the spectator’s funds to his, leaving no article
of wealth for the spectator’s indemnification. Thus the community
collectively gains nothing by the actor’s labour; and it loses, of his
receipts, all that portion which he consumes, retaining only that which
he lays by. A community, however, may add to its wealth by unproductive
labour, at the expense of other communities, as an individual may at the
expense of other individuals. The gains of Italian opera singers,
dGermand governesses, French ballet dancers, &c., are a source of
wealth, as far as they go, to their respective countriese, if they
return thithere. The petty states of Greece, especially the ruder and
more backward of those states, were nurseries of soldiers, who hired
themselves to the princes and satraps of the East to carry on useless
and destructive wars, and returned with their savings to pass their
declining years in their own country: these were unproductive labourers,
and the pay they received, together with the plunder they took, was an
outlay without return to the countries which furnished it; but, though
no gain to the world, it was a gain to Greece. At a later period the
same country and its colonies supplied the Roman empire with another
class of adventurers, who, under the name of philosophers or of
rhetoricians, taught to the youth of the higher classes what were
esteemed the most valuable accomplishments: these were mainly
unproductive labourers, but their ample recompense was a source of
wealth to their own country. In none of these cases was there any
accession of wealth to the world. The services of the labourers, if
useful, were obtained at a sacrifice to the world of a portion of
material wealth; if useless, all that these labourers consumed was fto
the worldf waste.

To be wasted, however, is a liability not confined to unproductive
labour. Productive labour may equally be gwastedg, if more of it is
expended than really conduces to production. If defect of skill in
labourers, or of judgment in those who direct them, causes a
misapplication of productive industry; if a farmer hpersistsh in
ploughing with three horses and two men, when experience has shown that
two horses and one man are sufficient, the surplus labour, though
employed for purposes of production, is wasted. If a new process is
adopted which proves no better, or not so good as those Edition:
current; Page: [52] before in use, the labour expended in perfecting the
invention and in carrying it into practice, though iemployed for a
productive purposei, is wasted. Productive labour may render a nation
poorer, if the wealth it produces, that is, the increase it makes in the
stock of useful or agreeable things, be of a kind not immediately
wanted: as when a commodity is unsaleable, because produced in a
quantity beyond the present demand; or when speculators build docks and
warehouses before there is any trade. jSome of thej States of North
America, kby makingk premature railways and canals, lare thought tol
have made this kind of mistake; and it mwas for some time doubtfulm
whether England, in the disproportionate development of railway
enterprise, nhadn noto, in some degree,o followed the example. Labour
sunk in expectation of a distant return, when the great exigencies or
limited resources of the community require that the return be rapid, may
leave the country not only poorer in the meanwhile, by all which those
labourers consume, but less rich even ultimately than if immediate
returns had been sought in the first instance, and enterprises for
distant profit postponed.

§ 5. [Productive and Unproductive Consumption] The distinction of
Productive and Unproductive is applicable to consumption as well as to
labour. All the members of the community are not labourers, but all are
consumers, and consume either unproductively or productively. Whoever
contributes nothing directly or indirectly to production, is an
unproductive consumer. The only productive consumers are productive
labourers; the labour of direction being of course included, as well as
that of execution. But the consumption even of productive labourers is
not all of it productive consumption. There is unproductive consumption
by productive consumers. What they consume in keeping up or improving
their health, strength, and capacities of work, or in arearinga other
productive labourers to succeed them, is productive consumption. But
consumption on pleasures or luxuries, whether by the idle or by the
industrious, since production is neither its object nor is in any way
advanced by it, must be reckoned unproductive: with a reservation
perhaps of a certain quantum of enjoyment which may be classed among
necessaries, since anything short of it would not be consistent with the
greatest efficiency of labour. That alone is productive consumption,
which goes to maintain and increase the productive powers Edition:
current; Page: [53] of the community; either those residing in its soil,
in its materials, in the number and efficiency of its instruments of
production, or in its people.

There are numerous products which bmay be said not tob admit of being
consumed otherwise than unproductively. The annual consumption of gold
lace, pine apples, or champagne, cmust be reckonedc unproductive, since
these things dgive no assistance to production, nor any support to life
or strength, but what would equally be given by things much less
costlyd. Hence it might be supposed that the labour employed in
producing etheme ought not to be regarded as productive, fin the sense
in which the term is understood by political economistsf. I grant that
no labour gtends to the hpermanenth enrichment of society, which is
employed in producing things for the use of unproductive consumers. The
tailor who makes a coat for a man who produces nothing, is a productive
labourer; but in a few weeks or months the coat is worn out, while the
wearer has not produced anything to replace it, and the community is
then no richer by the labour of the tailor, than if the same sum had
been paid for a istalli at the opera. Nevertheless, society has been
richer by the labour while the coat lasted, that is, until society,
through one of its unproductive members, chose to consume the produce of
the labour unproductively. The case of the gold lace or the pine apple
is no further different, than that jthey are still further removed than
the coat from the character of necessariesj. These things also are
wealth until they have been consumed.

§ 6. [Labour for the supply of Productive Consumption, and labour for
the supply of Unproductive Consumption] We see, however, by this, that
there is a distinction, more important to the wealth of a community than
even that between productive and unproductive labour; the distinction,
namely, between labour for the supply of productive, and for the supply
of unproductive, consumption; between labour employed in keeping up or
in adding to the productive resources of the country, and that which is
employed otherwise. Of the produce of the country, a part only is
destined to be consumed productively; the remainder supplies the
unproductive consumption of producers, and the entire consumption of the
unproductive Edition: current; Page: [54] classes. Suppose that the
proportion of the annual produce applied to the first purpose amounts to
half; then one-half the productive labourers of the country are all that
are employed in the operations on which the permanent wealth of the
country depends. The other half are occupied from year to year and from
generation to generation in producing things which are consumed and
disappear without return; and whatever this half consume is as
completely lost, as to any permanent effect on the national resources,
as if it were consumed unproductively. Suppose that this second half of
the labouring population ceased to work, and that the government or
their parishes maintained them in idleness for a whole year: the first
half would suffice to produce, as they had done before, their own
necessaries and the necessaries of the second half, and to keep the
stock of materials and implements undiminished: the unproductive
classes, indeed, would be either starved or obliged to produce their own
subsistence, and the whole community would be reduced during a year to
bare necessaries; but the sources of production would be unimpaired, and
the next year there would not necessarily be a smaller produce than if
no such interval of inactivity had occurred; while if the case had been
reversed, if the first half of the labourers had suspended their
accustomed occupations, and the second half had continued theirs, the
country at the end of the twelvemonth would have been entirely
impoverished.

It would be a great error to regret the large proportion of the annual
produce, which in an opulent country goes to supply unproductive
consumption. It would be to lament that the community has so much to
spare from its necessities, for its pleasures and for all higher uses.
This portion of the produce is the fund from which all the wants of the
community, other than that of mere living, are provided for; the measure
of its means of enjoyment, and of its power of accomplishing all
purposes not productive. That so great a surplus should be available for
such purposes, and that it should be applied to them, acan only be a
subjecta of congratulation. The things to be regretted, and bwhich are
not incapable of beingb remedied, are the prodigious inequality with
which this surplus is distributed, cthe little worth of the objects to
which the greater part of it is devoted,c and the large share which
falls to the lot of persons who render no equivalent service in returnd.

Edition: current; Page: [55]


CHAPTER IV: Of Capital

§ 1. [Capital is wealth appropriated to reproductive employment] It has
been seen in the preceding chapters that besides the primary and
universal requisites of production, labour and natural agents, there is
another requisite without which no productive operations, beyond the
rude and scanty beginnings of primitive industry, are possible: namely,
a stock, previously accumulated, of the products of former labour. This
accumulated stock of the produce of labour is termed Capital. The
function of Capital in production, it is of the utmost importance
thoroughly to understand, since a number of the erroneous notions with
which our subject is infested, originate in an imperfect and confused
apprehension of this point.

Capital, by persons wholly unused to reflect on the subject, is supposed
to be synonymous with money. To expose this misapprehension, would be to
repeat what has been said in the introductory chapter. Money is no more
synonymous with capital than it is with wealth. Money cannot in itself
perform any part of the office of capital, since it can afford no
assistance to production. To do this, it must be exchanged for other
things; and anything, which is susceptible of being exchanged for other
things, is capable of contributing to production in the same degree.
What capital does for production, is to afford the shelter, protection,
tools and materials which the work requires, and to feed and otherwise
maintain the labourers during the process. These are the services which
present labour requires from past, and from the produce of past, labour.
Whatever things are destined for this use—destined to supply productive
labour with these various prerequisites—are Capital.

To familiarize ourselves with the conception, let us consider what is
done with the capital invested in any of the branches of business which
compose the productive industry of a country. A manufacturer, for
example, has one part of his capital in the form of buildings, fitted
and destined for carrying on ahisa branch of manufacture. Another part
he has in the form of machinery. A third consists, if he be a spinner,
of raw cotton, flax, or wool; if a weaver, of flaxen, woollen, silk, or
cotton, thread; and the like, according to the nature of the
manufacture. Food and clothing for his Edition: current; Page: [56]
operatives, it is not the custom of the present age that he should
directly provide; and few capitalists, except the producers of food or
clothing, have any portion worth mentioning of their capital in that
shape. Instead of this, each capitalist has money, which he pays to his
workpeople, and so enables them to supply themselves: he has also
finished goods in his warehouses, by the sale of which he obtains more
money, to employ in the same manner, as well as to replenish his stock
of materials, bto keep his buildings and machinery in repair, and to
replace themb when worn out. His money and finished goods, however, are
not wholly capital, for he does not wholly devote them to these
purposes: he employs a part of the one, and of the proceeds of the
other, in supplying his personal consumption and that of his family, or
in hiring grooms and valets, or maintaining hunters and hounds, or in
educating his children, or in paying taxes, or in charity. What then is
his capital? Precisely that part of his possessions, whatever it be,
which cis to constitute his fund forc carrying on fresh production. It
is of no consequence that a part, or even the whole of it, is in a form
in which it cannot directly supply the wants of labourers.

Suppose, for instance, that dthed capitalist is a hardware manufacturer,
and that his stock in trade, over and above his machinery, consists at
present wholly in iron goods. Iron goods cannot feed labourers.
Nevertheless, by a mere change of the destination of these iron goods,
he can cause labourers to be fed. Suppose that with a portion of the
proceeds he intended to maintain a pack of hounds, or an establishment
of servants; and that he changes his intention, and employs it in his
business, paying it in wages to additional workpeople. These workpeople
are enabled to buy and consume the food which would otherwise have been
consumed by the hounds or by the servants; and thus without the
employer’s having seen or touched one particle of the food, his conduct
has determined that so much more of the food existing in the country has
been devoted to the use of productive labourers, and so much less
consumed in a manner wholly unproductive. Now vary the hypothesis, and
suppose that what is thus paid in wages would otherwise have been laid
out not in feeding servants or ehoundse, but in buying plate and jewels;
and in order to render the effect perceptible, let us suppose that the
change takes place on a considerable scale, and that a large sum is
diverted from buying plate and jewels to employing productive labourers,
whom we shall suppose to have been previously, like the Irish peasantry,
only half employed and half fed. The labourers, on receiving their
increased wages, will not lay them out in plate Edition: current; Page:
[57] and fjewels,f but in food. There is not, however, additional food
in the country; nor any unproductive labourers or animals, as in the
former case, whose food is set free for productive purposes. Food will
therefore be imported if possible; if not possible, the labourers will
remain for a season on their short allowance: but the consequences of
this change in the demand for commodities, occasioned by the change in
the expenditure of capitalists from unproductive to productive, is that
next year more food will be produced, and less plate and jewellery. So
that again, without having had anything to do with the food of the
labourers directly, the conversion by individuals of a portion of their
property, no matter of what sort, from an unproductive destination to a
productive, has had the effect of causing more food to be appropriated
to the consumption of productive labourers. The distinction, then,
between Capital and Not-capital, does not lie in the kind of
commodities, but in the mind of the capitalist—in his will to employ
them for one purpose rather than another; and all property, however ill
adapted in itself for the use of labourers, is a part of capital, so
soon as it, or the value to be received from it, is set apart for
productive greinvestmentg. The sum of all the values so destined by
their respective possessors, composes the capital of the country.
Whether all those values are in a shape directly applicable to
productive uses, makes no difference. hTheir shape, whatever it may be,
is a temporary accident: but once destined for productionh, they do not
fail to find a way of transforming themselves into things icapable of
beingi applied to it.

§ 2. [More capital devoted to production than actually employed in it]
As whatever of the produce of the country is devoted to production is
capital, so, conversely, the whole of the capital of the country is
devoted to production. This second proposition, however, must be taken
with some limitations and explanations. A fund may be seeking for
productive employment, and find none, adapted to the inclinations of its
possessor: it then is capital still, but unemployed capital. Or the
stock may consist of unsold goods, not susceptible of direct application
to productive uses, and not, at the moment, marketable: these, until
sold, are in the condition of unemployed capital. Again, artificial or
accidental circumstances may render it necessary to possess a larger
stock in advance, that is, a larger capital before entering on
production, than is required by the nature of things. Suppose that the
government lays a tax on the production in one of its earlier stages, as
for instance by taxing the material. The manufacturer Edition: current;
Page: [58] has to advance the tax, before commencing the manufacture,
and is therefore under a necessity of having a larger accumulated afunda
than is required for, or is actually employed in, the production which
he carries on. He must have a larger capital, to maintain the same
quantity of productive labour; or (what is equivalent) with a given
capital he maintains less labour. This mode of levying taxes, therefore,
limits unnecessarily the industry of the country: a portion of the fund
destined by its owners for production being diverted from its purpose,
and kept in a constant state of advance to the government.

For another example: a farmer may enter on his farm at such a time of
the year, that he may be required to pay one, two, or even three
quarters’ rent before obtaining any return from the produce. This,
therefore, bmust be paidb out of his capital. Now rent, when paid for
the land itself, and not for improvements made in it by labour, is not a
productive expenditure. It is not an outlay for the support of labour,
or for the provision of implements or materials the produce of labour.
It is the price paid for the use of an appropriated natural agent.
cThisc natural agent is indeed as indispensable (and even more so) as
any implement: but the having to pay a price for it, is not. In the case
of the implement (a thing produced by labour) a price of some sort is
the necessary condition of its existence: but the land exists by nature.
The payment for it, therefore, is not one of the expenses of production;
and the necessity of making dthed payment out of capital, makes it
requisite that there should be a greater capital, a greater antecedent
accumulation of the produce of past labour, than is naturally necessary,
or than is needed where land is occupied on a different system. This
extra capital, though intended by its owners for production, is in
reality employed unproductively, and annually replaced, not from any
produce of its own, but from the produce of the labour supported by the
remainder of the farmer’s capital.

Finally, that large portion of the productive capital of a country which
is employed in paying the wages and salaries of labourers, evidently is
not, all of it, strictly and indispensably necessary for production. As
much of it as exceeds the actual necessaries of life and health (an
excess which in the case of skilled labourers is usually considerable)
is not expended in supporting labour, but in remunerating it, and the
labourers could wait for this part of their remuneration until the
production is completed; it needs not necessarily pre-exist as capital:
and if they unfortunately had to forego it altogether, the same amount
of production might take place. In order Edition: current; Page: [59]
that the whole remuneration of the labourers should be advanced to them
in daily or weekly payments, there must exist in advance, and be
appropriated to productive use, a greater stock, or capital, than would
suffice to carry on the existing extent of production: greater, by
whatever amount of remuneration the labourers receive, beyond what the
self-interest of a prudent slave-master would assign to ehise slaves. In
truth, it is only after an abundant capital had already been
accumulated, that the practice of paying in advance any remuneration of
labour beyond a bare subsistence, could possibly have arisen: since
whatever is so paid, is not really applied to production, but to the
unproductive consumption of productive labourers, indicating a fund for
production sufficiently ample to admit of habitually diverting a part of
it to a mere convenience.

It will be observed that I have assumed, that the labourers are always
subsisted from capital: and this is obviously the fact, though the
capital needs not necessarily be furnished by a person called a
capitalist. When the labourer maintains himself by funds of his own, as
when a peasant-farmer or proprietor lives on the produce of his land, or
an artisan works on his own account, they are still supported by
capital, that is, by funds provided in advance. The peasant does not
subsist this year on the produce of this year’s harvest, but on that of
the last. The artisan is not living on the proceeds of the work he has
in hand, but on those of work previously executed and disposed of. Each
is supported by a small capital of his own, which he periodically
replaces from the produce of his labour. The large capitalist is, in
like manner, maintained from funds provided in advance. If he personally
conducts his operations, as much of his fpersonal or household
expendituref as does not exceed a fair remuneration of his labour at the
market price, must be considered ga part of his capital, expended, like
any other capital, for production: and his personal consumption, so far
as it consists of necessaries, is productive consumption.

§ 3. [Examination of some cases illustrative of the idea of Capital] At
the risk of being tedious, I must add a few more illustrations, to bring
out into a still aclearer and strongera light the idea of Capital. As M.
Say truly remarks, it is on the very elements of our subject that
illustration is most usefully bestowed, since the greatest errors which
prevail in it may be traced to the want of a thorough mastery over the
elementary ideas. Nor is this surprising: a branch may be diseased and
all the rest healthy, but unsoundness at the root diffuses unhealthiness
through the whole tree.

Edition: current; Page: [60]
Let us therefore consider whether, and in what cases, the property of
those who live on the interest of what they possess, without being
personally engaged in production, can be regarded as capital. It is so
called in common language and, with reference to the individual, not
improperly. All funds from which the possessor derives an income, which
income he can use without sinking and dissipating the fund itself, are
to him equivalent to capital. But to transfer hastily and
inconsiderately to the general point of view, propositions which are
true of the individual, has been a source of innumerable errors in
political economy. In the present instance, that which is virtually
capital to the individual, is or is not capital to the nation, according
as the fund which by the supposition he has not dissipated, has or has
not been dissipated by somebody else.

For example, let property of the value of ten thousand pounds belonging
to A, be lent to B, a farmer or manufacturer, and employed profitably in
B’s occupation. It is as much capital as if it belonged to B. A is
really a farmer or manufacturer, not personally, but in respect of his
property. bCapital worthb ten thousand pounds is employed in
production—in maintaining labourers and providing tools and materials;
which capital belongs to A, while B takes the trouble of employing it,
and receives for his remuneration the difference between the profit
which it yields and the interest he pays to A. This cis the simplest
casec.

Suppose next that A’s ten thousand pounds, instead of being lent to B,
are lent on mortgage to C, a landed proprietor, dby whom they ared
employed in improving the productive powers of his estate, by fencing,
draining, road-making, or permanent manures. This is productive
employment. The ten thousand pounds are sunk, but not dissipated. They
yield a permanent return; the land now affords an increase of produce,
sufficient, in a few years, if the outlay has been judicious, to replace
the amount, and in time to multiply it manifold. Here, then, is a value
of ten thousand pounds, employed in increasing the produce of the
country. This constitutes a capital, for which C, if he lets his land,
receives the returns in the nominal form of increased rent; and the
mortgage entitles A to receive from these returns, in the shape of
interest, such annual sum as has been agreed eone We will now vary the
circumstances, and suppose that C does not employ the loan in improving
his land, but in paying off a former fmortgage, or in making a provision
for children. Whether the ten thousand pounds thus employed are capital
or gnotg, will depend on what is done with the amount Edition: current;
Page: [61] by the ultimate receiver. If the children invest their
fortunes in a productive employment, or the mortgagee on being paid off
lends the amount to another hlandholderh to improve his land, or to a
manufacturer to extend his business, it is still capital, because
productively employed.

Suppose, however, that C, the borrowing landlord, is a spendthrift, who
burdens his land not to increase his fortune but to squander it,
expending the amount in equipages and entertainments. In a year or two
it is dissipated, and without return. A is as rich as before; he has no
longer his ten thousand pounds, but he has a lien on the land, which he
could still sell for that amount. C, however, is 10,000l. poorer than
formerly; and nobody is richer. It may be said that those are richer who
have made profit out of the money while it was being spent. No doubt if
C lost it by gaming, or was cheated of it by his servants, that is a
mere transfer, not a destruction, and those who have gained the amount
may employ it productively. But if C has received the fair value for his
expenditure in articles of subsistence or luxury, which he has consumed
on himself, or by means of his servants or guests, these articles have
ceased to exist, and nothing has been produced to replace them: while if
the same sum had been employed in farming or manufacturing, the
consumption which would have taken place would have been more than
balanced at the end of the year by new products, created by the ilabouri
of those who would in that case have been the consumers. By C’s
prodigality, that which would have been consumed with a return, is
consumed without return. C’s tradesmen may have made a profit during the
process; but if the capital had been expended productively, an
equivalent profit would have been made by builders, fencers,
tool-makers, and the tradespeople who supply the consumption of the
labouring classes; while at the expiration of the time (to say nothing
of any increase), C would have had the ten thousand pounds or its value
replaced to him, which now he has not. There is, therefore, on the
general result, a difference to the disadvantage of the community, of at
least ten thousand pounds, being the amount of C’s unproductive
expenditure. To A, the difference is not material, since his income is
secured to him, and while the security is good, and the market rate of
interest the same, he can always sell the mortgage at its original
value. To A, therefore, the lien of ten thousand pounds on C’s estate,
is virtually a capital of that amount; but is it so in reference to the
community? It is not. A had a capital of ten thousand pounds, but this
has been extinguished—dissipated and destroyed by C’s prodigality. A now
receives his income, not from the produce of his capital, but from some
other source of income belonging to C, probably from the rent of his
land, that is, from payments made to him by farmers Edition: current;
Page: [62] out of the produce of their capital. The national capital is
diminished by ten thousand pounds, and the national income by all which
those ten thousand pounds, employed as capital, would have produced. The
loss does not fall on the owner of the destroyed capital, since the
destroyer has agreed to indemnify him for it. But his loss is only a
small portion of that sustained by the community, since what was devoted
to the use and consumption of the proprietor was only the interest; the
capital itself was, or would have been, employed in the perpetual
maintenance of an equivalent number of labourers, regularly reproducing
what they consumed: and of this maintenance they are deprived without
compensation.

Let us now vary the hypothesis still further, and suppose that the money
is borrowed, not by a landlord, but by the State. A lends his capital to
Government to carry on a war: he buys from the State what are called
government securities; that is, obligations jonj the government to pay a
certain annual income. If the government employed the money in making a
railroad, this might be a productive employment, and A’s property would
still be used as capital; but since it is employed in war, that is, in
the pay of officers and soldiers who produce nothing, and in destroying
a quantity of gunpowder and bullets without return, the government is in
the situation of C, the spendthrift landlord, and A’s ten thousand
pounds are so much national capital which once existed, but exists no
longer: virtually thrown into the sea, as far as wealth or production is
concerned; though for other reasons the employment of it may have been
justifiable. A’s subsequent income is derived, not from the produce of
his own capital, but from taxes drawn from the produce of the remaining
capital of the community; to whom his capital is not yielding any
return, to indemnify them for the payment; it is lost and gone, and what
he now possesses is a claim on the returns to other people’s capital and
industry. This claim he can sell, and get back the equivalent of his
capital, which he may afterwards employ productively. True; but he does
not get back his own capital, or anything which it has produced; that,
and all its possible returns, are extinguished: what he gets is the
capital of some other person, which that person is willing to exchange
for his lien on the taxes. Another capitalist substitutes himself for A
as a mortgagee of the public, and A substitutes himself for the other
capitalist as the possessor of a fund employed in production, or
available for it. By this exchange the productive powers of the
community are neither increased nor diminished. The breach in the
capital of the country was made when the government kspentk A’s money:
whereby a value of ten thousand pounds was withdrawn or withheld from
productive employment, placed in the fund for unproductive consumption,
and destroyed without equivalent.

Edition: current; Page: [63]


CHAPTER V: Fundamental Propositions Respecting Capital

§ 1. [Industry is limited by Capital] If the preceding explanations have
answered their purpose, they have given not only a sufficiently complete
possession of the idea of Capital according to its definition, but a
sufficient familiarity with it in the concrete, and amidst the obscurity
with which the complication of individual circumstances surrounds it, to
have prepared even the unpractised reader for certain elementary
propositions or theorems respecting capital, the full comprehension of
which is already a considerable step out of darkness into light.

The first of these propositions is, That industry is limited by capital.
This is so obvious as to be taken for granted in many common forms of
speech; but to see a truth occasionally is one thing, to recognise it
habitually, and admit no propositions inconsistent with it, is another.
The axiom was until lately almost universally disregarded by legislators
and political writers; and doctrines irreconcileable with it are still
very commonly professed and inculcated.

The following are common expressions, implying its truth. The act of
directing industry to a particular employment is described by the phrase
“applying capital” to the employment. To employ industry on the land is
to apply capital to the land. To employ labour in a manufacture is to
invest capital in the manufacture. This implies that industry cannot be
employed to any greater extent than there is capital to invest. The
proposition, indeed, must be assented to as soon as it is distinctly
apprehended. The expression “applying capital” is of course
metaphorical: what is really applied is labour; capital being an
indispensable condition. Again, we often speak of the “productive powers
of capital.” This expression is not literally correct. The only
productive powers are those of labour and natural agents; or if any
portion of capital can by a stretch of language be said to have a
productive power of its own, it is only tools and machinery, which, like
wind or water, may be said to co-operate with labour. The food of
labourers and the materials of production have no productive power; but
labour cannot exert its productive power unless provided with them.
There can be no Edition: current; Page: [64] more industry than is
supplied with materials to work up and food to eat. Self-evident as the
thing is, it is often forgotten that the people of a country are
maintained and have their wants supplied, not by the produce of present
labour, but of past. They consume what has been produced, not what is
about to be produced. Now, of what has been produced, a part only is
allotted to the support of productive labour; and there will not and
cannot be more of that labour than the portion so allotted (which is the
capital of the country) can feed, and provide with the materials and
instruments of production.

Yet, in disregard of a fact so evident, it long continued to be believed
that laws and governments, without creating capital, could create
industry. Not by making the people more laborious, or increasing the
efficiency of their labour; these are objects to which the government
can, in some degree, aindirectlya contribute. But bwithout cany increase
in the skill or energy of the labourers, and without causing any persons
to labour who had previously been maintained in idlenessb, it was still
thought that the government, without providing additional funds, could
create additional employment. A government would, by prohibitory laws,
put a stop to the importation of some commodity; and when by this it had
caused the commodity to be produced at home, it would plume itself upon
having enriched the country with a new branch of industry, would parade
in statistical tables the amount of produce yielded and labour employed
in the production, and take credit for the whole of this as a gain to
the country, obtained through the prohibitory law. Although this sort of
political arithmetic has fallen a little into discredit in England, it
still flourishes in the nations of Continental Europe. Had legislators
been aware that industry is limited by capital, they would have seen
that, the aggregate capital of the country not having been increased,
any portion of it which they by their laws had caused to be embarked in
the newly-acquired branch of industry must have been withdrawn or
withheld from some other; in which it gave, or would have given,
employment to probably about the same quantity of labour which it
employs in its new occupation.*

Edition: current; Page: [65]
§ 2. [Industry is limited by Capital, but does not always come up to
that limit] Because industry is limited by capital, we are not however
to infer that it always reaches that limit. aCapital may be temporarily
unemployed, as in the case of unsold goods, or funds that have not yet
found an investment: during this interval it does not set in motion any
industry. Or therea may not be as many labourers obtainable, as the
capital would maintain and employ. This has been known to occur in new
colonies, where capital has sometimes perished uselessly for want of
labour: the Swan River settlement b(now called Western Australia)b, in
the first years after its foundation, was an instance. There are many
persons maintained from existing capital, who produce nothing, or who
might produce much more than they do. If the labourers were reduced to
lower wages, or induced to work more hours for the same wages, or if
their families, who are already maintained from capital, were employed
to a greater extent than they now are in adding to the produce, a given
capital would afford employment to more industry. The unproductive
consumption of productive labourers, the whole of which is now supplied
cbyc capital, might cease, or be postponed until the produce came in;
and additional productive labourers might be maintained with the amount.
By such means society might obtain from its existing resources a greater
quantity of produce: and to such means it has been driven, when the
sudden destruction of some large portion of its capital rendered the
employment of the remainder with the greatest possible effect, a matter
of paramount consideration for the time.

dWhend industry has not come up to the limit imposed by capital,
governments may, in various ways, for example by importing additional
labourers, bring it nearer to that limit: as ebye the importation of
Coolies Edition: current; Page: [66] and free Negroes into fthe West
Indiesf. There is another way in which governments can create additional
industry. They can create capital. They may lay on taxes, and employ the
amount productivity. They may do what is nearly equivalent; they may lay
taxes on income or expenditure, and apply the proceeds towards paying
off the public debts. The fundholder, when paid off, would still desire
to draw an income from his property, most of which therefore would find
its way into productive employment, while a great part of it would have
been drawn from the fund for unproductive expenditure, since people do
not gwhollyg pay their taxes from what they would have saved, but
partly, if not chiefly, from what they would have spent. It may be
added, that any increase in the productive power of capital (or, more
properly speaking, of labour) by improvement in the arts of life, or
otherwise, tends to increase the employment for labour; since, when
there is a greater produce altogether, it is always probable that some
portion of the increase will be saved and converted into capital;
especially when the increased returns to productive industry hold out an
additional temptation to the conversion of funds from an unproductive
destination to a productive.

§ 3. [Increase of capital gives increased employment to labour, without
assignable bounds] While, on the one hand, industry is limited by
capital, so on the other, every increase of capital gives, or is capable
of giving, additional employment to industry; and this without
assignable limit. I do not mean to deny that the capital, or part of it,
may be so employed as not to support labourers, being fixed in
machinery, buildings, improvement of land, and the like. In any large
increase of capital a considerable portion will generally be thus
employed, and will only co-operate with labourers, not maintain them.
What I do intend to assert is, that the portion which is destined to
their maintenance, may (supposing no alteration in anything else) be
indefinitely increased, without creating an impossibility of finding
them employment: in other words, that if there are human beings capable
of work, and food to feed them, they may always be employed in producing
something. This proposition requires to be somewhat dwelt upon, being
one of those which it is exceedingly easy to assent to when presented in
general terms, but somewhat difficult to keep fast hold of, in the crowd
and confusion of the actual facts of society. It is also very much
opposed to common doctrines. There is not an opinion more general among
mankind than this, that the unproductive expenditure of the rich is
necessary to the employment of the poor. Before Adam Smith, the doctrine
had hardly been questioned; and even since his time, authors of the
highest name and of Edition: current; Page: [67] great merit* have
contended, that if consumers were to save and convert into capital more
than a limited portion of their income, and were not to devote to
unproductive consumption an amount of means bearing a certain ratio to
the capital of the country, the extra accumulation would be merely so
much waste, since there would be no market for the commodities which the
capital so created would produce. I conceive this to be one of the many
errors arising in political economy, from the practice of not beginning
with the examination of simple cases, but rushing aat once into the
complexity of concrete phenomenaa.

Every one can see that if a benevolent government possessed all the
food, and all the implements and materials, of the community, it could
exact productive labour from all bcapable of it,b to whom it allowed a
share in the food, and could be in no danger of wanting a field for the
employment of this productive labour, since as long as there was a
single want unsaturated (which material objects could supply), of any
one individual, the labour of the community could be turned to the
production of something capable of satisfying that want. Now, the
individual possessors of capital, when they add to it by fresh
accumulations, are doing precisely the same thing which we suppose to be
done by cac benevolent government. As it is allowable to put any case by
way of hypothesis, let us imagine the most extreme case conceivable.
Suppose that every capitalist came to be of opinion that not being more
meritorious than a well-conducted labourer, he ought not to fare better;
and accordingly laid by, from conscientious motives, the surplus of his
profits; or dsuppose this abstinence not spontaneous, but imposed by law
or opinion upon all capitalists, and upon landowners likewise.
Unproductive expenditure is now reduced to its lowest limit: and it is
asked, how is the increased capital to find employment? Who is to buy
the goods which it will produce? There are no longer customers even for
those which were produced before. The goods, therefore, e(it is said)e
will remain unsold; they will perish in the warehouses; until capital is
brought down to what it was originally, or rather to as much less, as
the demand of the consumers has lessened. But this is seeing only
one-half of the matter. In the case supposed, there would no longer be
any demand for luxuries, on the part of capitalists and landowners. But
when these classes turn their income into capital, they do not thereby
annihilate their power of consumption; they do but transfer it from
themselves to the labourers to whom they Edition: current; Page: [68]
give employment. Now, there are two possible suppositions in regard to
the labourers; either there is, or there is not, an increase of their
numbers, proportional to the increase of capital. If there is, the case
offers no difficulty. The production of necessaries for the new
population, takes the place of the production of luxuries for a portion
of the old, and supplies exactly the amount of employment which has been
lost. But suppose that there is no increase of population. The whole of
what was previously expended in luxuries, by capitalists and landlords,
is distributed among the existing labourers, in the form of additional
wages. We will assume them to be already sufficiently supplied with
necessaries. What follows? That the labourers become consumers of
luxuries; and the capital previously employed in the production of
luxuries, is still able to employ itself in the same manner: the
difference being, that the luxuries are shared among the community
generally, instead of being confined to a few. The increased
accumulation and increased production, might, rigorously speaking,
continue, until every labourer had every indulgence of wealth,
consistent with continuing to work; fsupposing that the power of their
labour weref physically sufficient to produce all this amount of
indulgences for their whole number. Thus the limit of wealth is never
deficiency of consumers, but of producers and productive power. Every
addition to capital gives to labour either additional employment, or
additional remuneration; enriches either the country, or the labouring
class. If it finds additional hands to set to work, it increases the
aggregate produce: if only the same hands, it gives them a larger share
of it; and perhaps even in this case, by stimulating them to greater
exertion, augments the produce itself.

§ 4. [Capital is the result of saving] A second fundamental theorem
respecting Capital, relates to the source from which it is derived. It
is the result of saving. The evidence of this lies abundantly in what
has been already said on the subject. But the proposition needs some
further illustration.

If all persons were to expend in personal indulgences all that they
produce, and all the income they receive from what is produced by
others, capital could not increase. All capital, with a trifling
exception, was originally the result of saving. I say, with a trifling
exception; because a person who labours on his own account, may spend on
his own account all he produces, without becoming destitute; and the
provision of necessaries on which he subsists until he has reaped his
harvest, or sold his commodity, though a real capital, cannot be said to
have been saved, since it is all used for the supply of his own wants,
and aperhaps as speedily as if it had been Edition: current; Page: [69]
consumed in idlenessa. We may imagine a number of individuals or
families settled on as many separate pieces of land, each living on what
their own labour produces, and consuming the whole produce. But even
these must save (that is, spare from their personal consumption) as much
as is necessary for seed. Some saving, therefore, there must have been,
even in this simplest of all states of economical relations; people must
have produced more than they used, or used less than they produced.
Still more must they do so before they can employ other blabourersb, or
increase their production beyond what can be accomplished by the work of
their own hands. All that any one employs in supporting and carrying on
any other labour than his own, must have been originally brought
together by saving; somebody must have produced it and forborne to
consume it. We may say, therefore, without material inaccuracy, that all
capital, and especially all addition to capital, are the result of
saving.

In a rude and violent state of society, it continually happens that the
person who has capital is not the very person who has saved it, but some
one who, being stronger, or belonging to a more powerful community, has
possessed himself of it by plunder. And even in a state of things cin
which property was protectedc, the increase of capital has usually
beend, for a long time, mainlyd derived from privations which, though
essentially the same with saving, are not generally called by that name,
because not voluntary. The actual producers have been slaves, compelled
to produce as much as force could extort from them, and to consume as
little as the self-interest or the usually very slender humanity of
their etaskmasterse would permit. This kind of compulsory saving,
however, would not have caused any increase of capital, unless a part of
the amount had been saved over again, voluntarily, by the master. If all
that he made his slaves produce and forbear to consume, had been
consumed by him on personal indulgences, he would not have increased his
capital, nor been enabled to maintain an increasing number of slaves. To
maintain any slaves at all, implied a previous saving; a stock, at least
of food, provided in advance. This saving may not, however, have been
made by any self-imposed privation of the master; but more probably by
that of the slaves themselves while free; the rapine or war, which
deprived them of their personal liberty, having transferred also their
accumulations to the conqueror.

There are other cases in which the term saving, with the associations
usually belonging to it, does not exactly fit the operation by which
capital is increased. If it were said, for instance, that the only way
to accelerate the Edition: current; Page: [70] increase of capital is by
increase of saving, the idea would probably be suggested of greater
abstinence, and increased privation. But it is obvious that whatever
increases the productive power of labour, creates an additional fund to
make savings from, and enables capital to be enlarged not only without
additional privation, but concurrently with an increase of personal
consumption. Nevertheless, there is here an increase of saving, in the
scientific sense. Though there is more consumed, there is also more
spared. There is a greater excess of production over consumption. It is
consistent with correctness to call this a greater saving. Though the
term is not unobjectionable, there is no other which is not liable to as
great objections. To consume less than is produced, is saving; and that
is the process by which capital is increased; not necessarily by
consuming less, absolutely. We must not allow ourselves to be so much
the slaves of words, as to be unable to use the word saving in this
sense, without being in danger of forgetting that to increase capital
there is another way besides consuming less, namely, to produce more.

§ 5. [All capital is consumed] A third fundamental theorem respecting
Capital, closely connected with the one last discussed, is, that
although saved, and the result of saving, it is nevertheless consumed.
The word saving does not imply that what is saved is not consumed, anor
even necessarily that its consumption is deferred; but only that, if
consumed immediately,a it is not consumed by the person who saves it. If
merely laid by for future use, it is said to be hoarded; and while
hoarded, is not consumed at all. But if employed as capital, it is all
consumed; bthough notb by the capitalistc. Part is exchanged for tools
or machinery, which are worn out by use; part for seed or materials,
which are destroyed as such by being sown or wrought up, and destroyed
altogether by the consumption of the ultimate product. The remainder is
paid in wages to productive labourers, who consume it for their daily
wants; or if they in their turn save any part, this also is not,
generally speaking, hoarded, but (through savings banks, benefit clubs,
or some other channel) re-employed as capital, and consumed.

The principle now stated is a strong example of the necessity of
attention to the most elementary truths of our subject: for it is one of
the most elementary of them all, and yet no one who has not bestowed
some thought on the matter is habitually aware of it, and most are not
even willing to admit it when first stated. To the vulgar, it is not at
all apparent that what is saved is consumed. To them, every one who
saves, appears in the light Edition: current; Page: [71] of a person who
hoards: they may think such conduct permissible, or even laudable, when
it is to provide for a family, and the like; but they have no conception
of it as doing good to other people: saving is to them another word for
keeping a thing to oneself; while spending appears to them to be
distributing it among others. The person who expends his fortune in
unproductive consumption, is looked upon as diffusing benefits all
around; and is an object of so much favour, that some portion of the
same popularity attaches even to him who spends what does not belong to
him; who not only destroys his own capital, if he ever had any, but
under pretence of borrowing, and on promise of repayment, possesses
himself of capital belonging to others, and destroys that likewise.

This popular error comes from attending to a small portion only of the
consequences that flow from the saving or the spending; all dthe effects
of either which ared out of sight, being out of mind. The eye follows
what is saved, into an imaginary strong-box, and there loses sight of
it; what is spent, it follows into the hands of etradespeoplee and
dependents; but without reaching the ultimate destination in either
case. Saving (for productive investment), and spending, coincide very
closely in the first stage of their operations. The effects of both
begin with consumption; with the destruction of a certain portion of
wealth; only the things consumed, and the persons consuming, are
different. There is, in the one case, a wearing out of tools, a
destruction of material, and a quantity of food and clothing supplied to
labourers, which they destroy by use: in the other case, there is a
consumption, that is to say, a destruction, of wines, equipages, and
furniture. Thus far, the consequence to the national wealth has been
much the same; an equivalent quantity of it has been destroyed in both
cases. But in the spending, this first stage is also the final stage;
that particular amount of the produce of labour has disappeared, and
there is nothing left; while, on the contrary, the saving person, during
the whole time that the destruction was going on, has had labourers at
work repairing it; who are ultimately found to have replaced, with an
increase, the equivalent of what has been consumed. And as this
operation admits of being repeated indefinitely without any fresh act of
saving, a saving once made becomes a fund to maintain a corresponding
number of labourers in perpetuity, reproducing annually their own
maintenance with a profit.

It is the intervention of money which obscures, to an unpractised
apprehension, the true character of these phenomena. Almost all
expenditure being carried on by means of money, the money comes to be
looked upon as the main feature in the transaction; and since that does
not perish, but only changes hands, people overlook the destruction
which takes place in Edition: current; Page: [72] the case of
unproductive expenditure. The money being merely transferred, they think
the wealth also has only been handed over from the spendthrift to other
people. But this is simply confounding money with wealth. The wealth
which has been destroyed was not the money, but the wines, equipages,
and furniture which the money purchased; and these having been destroyed
without return, society collectively is poorer by the amount. It may be
said, perhaps, that wines, equipages, and furniture, are not
subsistence, tools, and materials, and could not in any case have been
applied to the support of labour; that they are adapted for no other
than unproductive consumption, and that the detriment to the wealth of
the community was when they were produced, not when they were consumed.
I am willing to allow this, as far as is necessary for the argument, and
the remark would be very pertinent if these expensive luxuries were
drawn from an existing stock, never to be replenished. But since, on the
contrary, they continue to be produced as long as there are consumers
for them, and are produced in increased quantity to meet an increased
demand; the choice made by a consumer to expend five thousand a year in
luxuries, keeps a corresponding number of labourers employed from year
to year in producing things which can be of no use to production; their
services being lost so far as regards the increase of the national
wealth, and the tools, materials, and food which they annually consume
being so much subtracted from the general stock of the community
applicable to productive purposes. In proportion as any class is
improvident or luxurious, the industry of the country takes the
direction of producing luxuries for their use; while not only the
employment for productive labourers is diminished, but the subsistence
and instruments which are the means of such employment do actually exist
in smaller quantity.

Saving, in short, enriches, and spending impoverishes, the community
along with the individual; which is but saying in other words, that
society at large is richer by what it expends in maintaining and aiding
productive labour, but poorer by what it consumes in its enjoyments.*

Edition: current; Page: [73]
§ 6. [Capital is kept up, not by preservation, but by perpetual
reproduction] To return to our fundamental theorem. Everything which is
produced is consumed: both what is saved and what is said to be spent;
and the former quite as rapidly as the latter. All the ordinary forms of
language tend to disguise this. When apeoplea talk of the ancient wealth
of a country, of riches inherited from ancestors, and similar
expressions, the idea suggested is, that the riches so transmitted were
produced long ago, at the time when they are said to have been first
acquired, and that no portion of the capital of the country was produced
this year, except as much as may have been this year added to the total
amount. The fact is far otherwise. The greater part, in value, of the
wealth now existing in England has been produced by human hands within
the last twelve months. A very small proportion indeed of that large
aggregate was in existence ten years ago;— Edition: current; Page: [74]
of the present productive capital of the country scarcely any part,
except farm-houses and bmanufactoriesb, and a few ships and machines;
and even these would not in most cases have survived so long, if fresh
labour had not been employed within that period in putting them into
repair. The land subsists, and the land is almost the only thing that
subsists. Everything which is produced perishes, and most things very
quickly. Most kinds of capital are not fitted by their nature to be long
preserved. There are a few, and but a few productions, capable of a very
prolonged existence. Westminster Abbey has lasted many centuries, with
occasional repairs; some cGrecianc sculptures have existed above two
thousand years; the Pyramids perhaps double or treble that time. But
these were objects devoted to unproductive use. If we except bridges and
aqueducts (to which may din some countriesd be added tanks and
embankments), there are few instances of any edifice applied to
industrial purposes which has been of great duration; such buildings do
not hold out against wear and tear, nor is it good economy to construct
them of the solidity necessary for permanency. Capital is kept in
existence from age to age not by preservation, but by perpetual
reproduction: every part of it is used and destroyed, generally very
soon after it is produced, but those who consume it are employed
meanwhile in producing more. The growth of capital is similar to the
growth of population. Every individual who is born, dies, but in each
year the number born exceeds the number who die: the population,
therefore, always increases, though not one person of those composing it
was alive until a very recent date.

§ 7. [Why countries recover rapidly from a state of devastation] This
perpetual consumption and reproduction of capital affords the
explanation of what has so often excited wonder, the great rapidity with
which countries recover from a state of devastation; the disappearance,
in a short time, of all traces of the mischiefs done by earthquakes,
floods, hurricanes, and the ravages of war. An enemy lays waste a
country by fire and sword, and destroys or carries away nearly all the
moveable wealth existing in it: all the inhabitants are ruined, and yet
in a few years after, everything is much as it was before. This vis
medicatrix naturæ has been a subject of sterile astonishment, or has
been cited to exemplify the wonderful strength of the principle of
saving, which can repair such enormous losses in so brief an interval.
There is nothing at all wonderful in the matter. What the enemy have
destroyed, would have been destroyed in a little time by the inhabitants
themselves: the wealth which they so rapidly reproduce, would have
needed Edition: current; Page: [75] to be reproduced and would have been
reproduced in any case, and probably in as short aa timea. Nothing is
changed, except that during the reproduction they have not now the
advantage of consuming what had been produced previously. The
possibility of a rapid repair of their disasters, mainly depends on
whether the country has been depopulated. If its effective population
have not been extirpated at the time, and are not starved afterwards;
then, with the same skill and knowledge which they had before, with
their land and its permanent improvements undestroyed, and the more
durable buildings probably unimpaired, or only partially injured, they
have nearly all the requisites for their former amount of production. If
there is as much of food left to them, or of valuables to buy food, as
enables them by any amount of privation to remain alive and in working
condition, they will in a short time have raised as great a produce, and
acquired collectively as great wealth and as great a capital, as before;
by the mere continuance of that ordinary amount of exertion which they
are accustomed to employ in their occupations. Nor does this evince any
strength in the principle of saving, in the popular sense of the term,
since what takes place is not intentional abstinence, but involuntary
privation.

Yet so fatal is the habit of thinking through the medium of only one set
of technical phrases, and so little reason have studious men to value
themselves on being exempt from the very same mental infirmities which
beset the vulgar, that this simple explanation was never given (so far
as I am aware) by any political economist before Dr. Chalmers; a writer
many of whose opinions I think erroneous, but who has always the merit
of studying phenomena at first hand, and expressing them in a language
of his own, which often uncovers aspects of the truth that the received
phraseologies only tend to hide.

§ 8. [Effects of defraying government expenditure by loans] The same
author carries out this train of thought to some important conclusions
on another closely connected subject, that of government loans for war
purposes or other unproductive expenditure. These loans, being drawn
from capital (in lieu of taxes, which would generally have been paid
from income, and made up in part or altogether by increased economy)
must, according to the principles we have laid down, tend to impoverish
the country: yet the years in which expenditure of this sort has been on
the greatest scale, have often been years of great apparent prosperity:
the wealth and resources of the country, instead of diminishing, have
given every sign of rapid increase during the process, and of greatly
expanded dimensions after its close. This was confessedly the case with
Great Edition: current; Page: [76] Britain during the last alonga
Continental war; and it would take some space to enumerate all the
unfounded theories in political economy, to which that fact gave rise,
and to which it secured temporary credence; almost all tending to exalt
unproductive expenditure, at the expense of productive. Without entering
into all the causes which operated, and which commonly do operate, to
prevent these extraordinary drafts on the productive resources of a
country from being so much felt as it might seem reasonable to expect,
we will suppose the most unfavourable case possible: that the whole
amount borrowed and destroyed by the government, was abstracted by the
lender from a productive employment in which it had actually been
invested. The capital, therefore, of the country, is this year
diminished by so much. But unless the amount abstracted is something
enormous, there is no reason in the nature of the case why next year the
national capital should not be as great as ever. The loan cannot have
been taken from that portion of the capital of the country which
consists of tools, machinery, and buildings. It must have been wholly
drawn from the portion employed in paying labourers: and the labourers
will suffer accordingly. But if none of them are starved; if their wages
can bear such an amount of reduction, or if charity interposes between
them and absolute destitution, there is no reason that their labour
should produce less in the next year than in the year before. If they
produce as much as usual, having been paid less by so many millions
sterling, btheseb millions are gained by their employers. The breach
made in the capital of the country is thus instantly repaired, but
repaired by the privations and often the real misery of the labouring
class. Here is ample reason why such periods, even in the most
unfavourable circumstances, may easily be times of great gain to those
whose prosperity usually passes, in the estimation of society, for
national prosperity.c*

Edition: current; Page: [77]
This leads to the vexed question to which Dr. Chalmers has very
particularly adverted; whether the funds required by a government for
extraordinary unproductive expenditure, are best raised by loans, the
interest only being provided by taxes, or whether taxes should be at
once laid on to the whole amount; which is called in the financial
vocabulary, raising the whole of the supplies within the year. Dr.
Chalmers is strongly for the latter method. He says, the common notion
is that in calling for the whole amount in one year, you require what is
either impossible, or very inconvenient; that the people cannot, without
great hardship, pay the whole at once out of their yearly income; and
that it is much better to require of them a small payment every year in
the shape of interest, than so great a sacrifice once for all. To which
his answer is, that the sacrifice is made equally in either case.
Whatever is spent, cannot but be drawn from yearly income. The whole and
every part of the wealth dproducedd in the country, forms, or helps to
form, the yearly income of somebody. The privation which it is supposed
must result from taking the amount in the shape of taxes is not avoided
by taking it in a loan. The suffering is not averted, but only thrown
upon the labouring classes, the least able, and who least ought, to bear
it: while all the inconveniences, physical, moral, and political,
produced by maintaining taxes for the perpetual payment of the interest,
are incurred in pure loss. Whenever capital is withdrawn from
production, or from the fund destined for production, to be lent to the
State, and expended unproductively, that whole sum is withheld from the
labouring classes: the loan, therefore, is in truth paid off the same
year; the whole of the sacrifice necessary for paying it off is actually
made: only it is paid to the wrong persons, and therefore does not
extinguish the claim; and paid by the very worst of taxes, a tax
exclusively on the labouring class. And after having, in this most
painful and unjust ewaye, gone through the whole effort necessary for
extinguishing the debt, the country remains charged with it, and with
the payment of its interest in perpetuity.

Edition: current; Page: [78]
These views appear to me strictly just, in so far as the value absorbed
in loans would otherwise have been employed in productive industry
within the country. The practical state of the case, however, seldom
exactly corresponds with this supposition. The loans of the less wealthy
countries are made chiefly with foreign capital, which would not,
perhaps, have been brought in to be invested on any less security than
that of the government: while those of rich and prosperous countries are
generally made, not with funds withdrawn from productive employment, but
with the new accumulations constantly making from income, and often with
a part of them which, if not so taken, would have migrated to colonies,
or sought other investments abroad. In these cases (which will be more
particularly examined hereafter*), the sum wanted may be obtained fby
loanf without detriment to the labourers, or derangement of the national
industry, and even perhaps with g advantage to both, in comparison with
raising the amount by taxation, since taxes, especially when heavy, are
almost always partly paid at the expense of what would otherwise have
been saved and added to capital. hBesidesh, in a country which makes so
great yearly additions to its wealth that a part can be taken and
expended unproductively without diminishing capital, or even preventing
a considerable increase, it is evident that even if the whole of what is
so taken would have become capital, and obtained employment in the
country, the effect on the labouring classes is far less prejudicial,
and the case against the loan system much less strong, than in the case
first supposed. This brief anticipation of a discussion which will find
its proper place elsewhere, appeared necessary to prevent false
inferences from the premises previously laid down.

§ 9. [Demand for commodities is not demand for labour] We now pass to a
fourth fundamental theorem respecting Capital, which is, perhaps,
oftener overlooked or misconceived than even any of the foregoing. What
supports and employs productive labour, is the capital expended in
setting it to work, and not the demand of purchasers for the produce of
the labour when completed. Demand for commodities is not demand for
labour. The demand for commodities determines in what particular branch
aof production thea labour and capital shall be employed; it determines
the direction of the labour; but not the more or less of the labour
itself, or of the maintenance or payment of the labour. bThese dependb
on the amount of the capital, or other funds directly devoted to the
sustenance and remuneration of labour.

Edition: current; Page: [79]
Suppose, for instance, that there is a demand for velvet; a fund ready
to be laid out in buying velvet, but no capital to establish the
manufacture. It is of no consequence how great the demand may be; unless
capital is attracted into the occupation, there will be no velvet made,
and consequently none bought; unless, indeed, the desire of the
intending purchaser for it is so strong, that he employs part of the
price he would have paid for it, in making advances to work-people, that
they may employ themselves in making velvet; that is, unless he converts
part of his income into capital, and invests that capital in the
manufacture. Let us now reverse the hypothesis, and suppose that there
is plenty of capital ready for making velvet, but no demand. Velvet will
not be made; but there is no particular preference on the part of
capital for making velvet. Manufacturers and their labourers do not
produce for the pleasure of their customers, but for the supply of their
own wants, and having still the capital and the labour which are the
essentials of production, they can either produce something else which
is in demand, or if there be no other demand, they themselves have one,
and can produce the things which they want for their own consumption. So
that the cemployment afforded to labour does not depend on the
purchasers, but on the capital.c I am, of course, not taking into
consideration the effects of a sudden change. If the demand ceases
unexpectedly, after the commodity to supply it is already produced,
dthis introduces a different element into the questiond: the capital has
actually been consumed in producing something which nobody wants or
uses, and it has therefore perished, and the employment which it gave to
labour is at an end, not because there is no longer a demand, but
because there is no longer a capital. This case therefore does not test
the principle. The proper test is, to suppose that the change is gradual
and foreseen, and is attended with no waste of capital, the manufacture
being discontinued by merely not replacing the machinery as it wears
out, and not reinvesting the money as it comes in from the sale of the
produce. The capital is thus ready for a new employment, in which it
will maintain as much labour as before. The manufacturer and his
work-people lose the benefit of the skill and knowledge which they had
acquired in the particular business, and which can only be partially of
use to them in any other; and that is the amount of loss to the
community by the change. But the labourers can still work, and the
capital which previously employed them will, either in the same hands,
or by being lent to others, employ either those labourers or an
equivalent number in some other occupation.

This etheorem, that to purchase produce is not to employe labour; that
Edition: current; Page: [80] the demand for labour is constituted by the
wages which precede the production, and not by the demand which may
exist for the commodities resulting from the production; is a
proposition which greatly needs all the illustration it can receive. It
is, to common apprehension, a paradox; and even among political
economists of reputation, I can hardly point to any, except Mr. Ricardo
and M. Say, who have kept it constantly and steadily in view. Almost all
others occasionally express themselves as if a person who buys
commodities, the produce of labour, was an employer of labour, and
created a demand for it as really, and in the same sense, as if he
bought the labour itself directly, by the payment of wages. It is no
wonder that political economy advances slowly, when such a question as
this still remains open at its very threshold. fI apprehend, that if by
demand for labour be meant the demand by which wages are raised, or the
number of labourers in employment increased, demand for commodities does
not constitute demand for labour. I conceive that a person who buys
commodities and consumes them himself, does no good to the labouring
classes; and that it is only by what he abstains from consuming, and
expends in direct payments to labourers in exchange for labour, that he
benefits the labouring classes, or adds anything to the amount of their
employment.f

For the better illustration of gtheg principle, let us put the following
case. A consumer may expend his income either in buying services, or
commoditiesh. Heh may employ part of it in hiring journeymen bricklayers
to build a house, or excavators to dig artificial lakes, or labourers to
make plantations and lay out pleasure grounds; or, instead of this, he
may expend the same value in buying velvet and lace. The question is,
whether the difference between these two modes of expending his income
affects the interest of the labouring classes. It is plain that in the
first of the two cases he employs labourers, who will be out of
employment, or at least out of that employment, in the opposite case.
But those from whom I differ say that this is of no consequence, because
in buying velvet and lace he equally employs labourers, namely, those
who make the velvet and lace. iI contend, however, that in this last
case he does not employ labourers; but merely decides in what kind of
work some other person shall employ themi. The consumer does not with
his own funds pay to the weavers and Edition: current; Page: [81]
lacemakers their day’s wages. He buys the finished commodity, which has
been produced by labour and capital, the labour not being paid nor the
capital furnished by him, but jby the manufacturerj. Suppose that he had
been in the habit of expending this portion of his income in hiring
journeymen bricklayers, who laid out the amount of their wages in food
and clothing, which were also produced by labour and capital. He,
however, determines to prefer velvet, for which he thus creates an extra
demand. This demand cannot be satisfied without an extra supply, nor can
the supply be produced without an extra capital: where, then, is the
capital to come from? There is nothing in the consumer’s change of
purpose which makes the capital of the country greater than it otherwise
was. It appears, then, that the increased demand for velvet could not
for the present be supplied, were it not that the very circumstance
which gave rise to it has set at liberty a capital of the exact amount
required. The very sum which the consumer now employs in buying velvet,
formerly passed into the hands of journeymen bricklayers, who expended
it in food and necessaries, which they now either go without, or squeeze
by their competition, from the shares of other labourers. The labour and
capital, therefore, which formerly produced necessaries for the use of
these bricklayers, are deprived of their market, and must look out for
other employment; and they find it in making velvet for the new demand.
I do not mean that the very same labour and capital which produced the
necessaries turn themselves to producing the velvet; but, in some one or
other of a hundred modes, they take the place of that which does. There
was capital in existence to do one of two things—to make the velvet, or
to produce necessaries for the journeymen bricklayers; but not to do
both. It was at the option of the consumer which of the two should
happen; kandk if he chooses the velvet, they go without the necessaries.

lFor further illustration, let us suppose the same case reversed. The
consumer has been accustomed to buy velvet, but resolves to discontinue
that expense, and to employ the same annual sum in hiring bricklayers.
If the Edition: current; Page: [82] common opinion be correct, this
change in the mode of his expenditure gives no additional employment to
labour, but only transfers employment from velvet-makers to bricklayers.
On closer inspection, however, it will be seen that there is an increase
of the total sum applied to the remuneration of labour. The velvet
manufacturer, supposing him aware of the diminished demand for his
commodity, diminishes the production, and sets at liberty a
corresponding portion of the capital employed in the manufacture. This
capital, thus withdrawn from the maintenance of velvet-makers, is not
the same fund with that which the customer employs in maintaining
bricklayers; it is a second fund. There are, therefore, two funds to be
employed in the maintenance and remuneration of labour, where before
there was only one. There is not a transfer of employment from
velvet-makers to bricklayers; there is a new employment created for
bricklayers, and a transfer of employment from velvet-makers to some
other labourers, most probably those who produce the food and other
things which the bricklayers consume.

mIn answer to this it is said, that thoughm money laid out in buying
velvet is not ncapital, it replaces a capital; that though it does not
create a new demand for labour, it is the necessary means of enabling
the existing demand to be kept up. The funds (it may be said) of the
manufacturer, while locked up in velvet, cannot be directly applied to
the maintenance of labour; they do not begin to constitute a demand for
labour until the velvet is sold, and the capital which made it replaced
from the outlay of the purchaser; and thus, it may be said, the
velvet-maker and the velvet-buyer have not two capitals, but only one
capital between them, which by the act of purchase the buyer transfers
to the manufacturer, and if instead of buying velvet he buys labour, he
simply transfers this capital elsewhere, extinguishing as much demand
for labour in one quarter as he creates in another.

The premises of this argument are not denied. To set free a capital
which would otherwise be locked up in a form useless for the support of
labour, is, no doubt, the same thing to the interests of labourers as
the creation of a new capital. It is perfectly true that if I expend
1000l. in buying velvet, I enable the manufacturer to employ 1000l. in
the maintenance of labour, which could not have been so employed while
the velvet remained unsold: and if it would have remained unsold for
ever unless I bought it, then by changing my purpose, and hiring
bricklayers instead, I undoubtedly create no new demand for labour: for
while I employ 1000l. in hiring labour on the one hand, I annihilate for
ever 1000l. of the velvet-maker’s capital on the other. But this is
confounding the effects arising from the mere suddenness Edition:
current; Page: [83] of a change with the effects of the change itself.
If when the buyer ceased to purchase, the capital employed in making
velvet for his use necessarily perished, then his expending the same
amount in hiring bricklayers would be no creation, but merely a
transfer, of employment. The increased employment which I contend is
given to labour, would not be given unless the capital of the
velvet-maker could be liberated, and would not be given until it was
liberated. But every one knows that the capital invested in an
employment can be withdrawn from it, if sufficient time be allowed. If
the velvet-maker had previous notice, by not receiving the usual order,
he will have produced 1000l. less velvet, and an equivalent portion of
his capital will have been already set free. If he had no previous
notice, and the article consequently remains on his hands, the increase
of his stock will induce him next year to suspend or diminish his
production until the surplus is carried off. When this process is
complete, the manufacturer will find himself as rich as before, with
undiminished power of employing labour in general, though a portion of
his capital will now be employed in maintaining some other kind of it.
Until this adjustment has taken place, the demand for labour will be
merely changed, not increased: but as soon as it has taken place, the
demand for labour is increased. Where there was formerly only one
capital employed in maintaining weavers to make 1000l. owortho of
velvet, there is now that same capital employed in making something
else, and 1000l. distributed among bricklayers besides. There are now
two capitals employed in remunerating two sets of labourers; while
before, one of those capitals, that of the customer, only served as a
wheel in the machinery by which the other capital, that of the
manufacturer, carried on its employment of labour from year to year.

The proposition for which I am contending is in reality equivalent to
the following, which to some minds will appear a truism, though to
others it is a paradox: that a person does good to labourers, not by
what he consumes on himself, but solely by what he does not so consume.
If instead of laying out 100l. in wine or silk, I expend it in wagesp,
the demand for commodities is precisely equal in both cases: in the one,
it is a demand for 100l. worth of wine or silk, in the other, for the
same value of bread, beer, labourers’ clothing, fuel, and indulgences:
but the labourers of the community have in the latter case the value of
100l. more of the produce of the community distributed among them. I
have consumed that much less, and made over my consuming power to them.
If it were not so, my having consumed less would not leave more to be
consumed by others; which is a manifest contradiction. When less is not
produced, what one person forbears to consume is necessarily added to
the share of those to whom he transfers his power of purchase. In the
case supposed I do not Edition: current; Page: [84] necessarily consume
less ultimately, since the labourers whom I pay may build a house for
me, or make something else for my future consumption. But I have at all
events postponed my consumption, and have turned over part of my share
of the present produce of the community to the labourers. If after an
interval I am indemnified, it is not from the existing produce, but from
a subsequent addition made to it. I have therefore left more of the
existing produce to be consumed by others; and have put into the
possession of labourers the power to consume it.q

rThere cannot be a better reductio ad absurdum of the opposite doctrine
than that afforded by the Poor Law. If it be equally for the benefit of
the labouring classes whether I consume my means in the form of things
purchased for my own use, or set aside a portion in the shape of wages
or alms for their direct consumption, on what ground can the policy be
justified of taking my money from me to support paupers? since my
unproductive expenditure would have equally benefited them, while I
should have enjoyed it too. If society can both eat its cake and have
it, why should it not be allowed the double indulgence? But common sense
tells every one in his own case (though he does not see it on the larger
scale), that the poor rate which he pays is really subtracted from his
own consumption, and that no shifting of payment backwards and forwards
will enable two persons to eat the same food. If he had not been
required to pay the rate, and had consequently laid out the amount on
himself, the poor would have had as much less for their share of the
total produce of the country, as he himself would have consumed more.rl*

Edition: current; Page: [85]
sIt appears, then,s that a demand delayed until the work is completed,
and furnishing no advances, but only reimbursing advances made by
others, contributes nothing to the demand for labour; and that what is
so expended, is, in all its effects, so far as regards the employment of
the labouring class, a mere nullity; it does not and cannot create any
employment except at the expense of other employment which existed
before.

Edition: current; Page: [86]
tBut thought a demand for velvet does nothing more in regard to the
employment uforu labour and capital, than to determine so much of the
employment vwhichv already existed, into that particular channel instead
of any other; still, to the producers already engaged in the velvet
manufacture, and not intending to quit it, this is of the utmost
importance. To them, a falling off in the demand is a real loss, and one
which, even if none of their goods finally perish unsold, may mount to
any height, up to that which would make them choose, as the smaller
evil, to retire from the business. On the contrary, an increased demand
enables them to extend their transactions—to make a profit on a larger
capital, if they have it, or can borrow it; and, turning over their
capital more rapidly, they wwillw employ their labourers more
constantly, or employ a greater number than before. So that an increased
demand for a commodity does really, in the particular department, often
cause a greater employment to be given to labour by the same capital.
The mistake lies in not perceiving that in the cases supposed, this
advantage is given to labour and capital in one Edition: current; Page:
[87] department, only by being withdrawn from another; and that when the
change has produced its natural effect of attracting into the employment
additional capital proportional to the increased demand, the advantage
itself ceases.

xThe grounds of a proposition, when well understood, usually give a
tolerable indication of the limitations of it. The general principle,
now stated, is that demand for commodities determines merely the
direction of labour, and the kind of wealth produced, but not the
quantity or efficiency of the labour, or the aggregate of wealth. But to
this there are two exceptions. First, when labour is supported, but not
fully occupied, a new demand for something which it can produce, may
stimulate the labour thus supported to increased exertions, of which the
result may be an increase of wealth, to the advantage of the labourers
themselves and of others. Work which can be done in the spare hours of
persons subsisted from some other source, can (as before remarked) be
undertaken without withdrawing capital from other occupations, beyond
the amount (often very small) required to cover the expense of tools and
materials, and even this will often be provided by savings made
expressly for the purpose. The reason of our theorem thus failing, the
theorem itself fails, and employment of this kind may, by the springing
up of a demand for the commodity, be called into existence without
depriving labour of an equivalent amount of employment in any other
quarter. The demand does not, even in this case, operate on labour any
otherwise than through the medium of an existing capital, but it affords
an inducement which causes that capital to set in motion a greater
amount of labour than it did before.x

yThe second exception, of which I shall speak at length in a subsequent
chapter, consists in the known effect of an extension of the market for
a commodity, in rendering possible an increased development of the
division of labour, and hence a more effective distribution of the
productive forces Edition: current; Page: [88] of society. This, like
the former, is more an exception in appearance than it is in reality. It
is not the money paid by the purchaser, which remunerates the labour; it
is the capital of the producer: the demand only determines in what
manner that capital shall be employed, and what kind of labour it shall
remunerate; but if it determines that the commodity shall be produced on
a large scale, it enables the same capital to produce more of the
commodity, and may by an indirect effect in causing an increase of
capital, produce an eventual increase of the remuneration of the
labourer.y

The demand for commodities is a consideration of importance rather in
the theory of exchange, than in that of production. Looking at things in
the aggregate, and permanently, the remuneration of the producer is
derived from the productive power of his own capital. The sale of the
produce for money, and the subsequent expenditure of the money in buying
other commodities, are a mere exchange of equivalent values for mutual
accommodation. It is true that, the division of employments being one of
the principal means of increasing the productive power of labour, the
power of exchanging gives rise to a great increase of the produce; but
even then it is production, not exchange, which remunerates labour and
capital. We cannot too strictly represent to ourselves the operation of
exchange, whether conducted by barter or through the medium of money, as
the mere mechanism by which each person transforms the remuneration of
his labour or of his capital into the particular shape in which it is
most convenient to him to possess it; but in no wise the source of the
remuneration itself.

§ 10. [Fallacy respecting Taxation] The preceding principles demonstrate
the fallacy of many popular arguments and doctrines, which are
continually reproducing themselves in new forms. For example, it has
been contended, and by some from whom better things might have been
expected, that the argument for the income-tax, grounded on its falling
on the higher and middle classes only, and sparing the poor, is an
error; some have gone so far as to say, an imposture; because in taking
from the rich what they would have expended among the poor, the tax
injures the poor as much as if it had been directly levied from them. Of
this doctrine we now know what to think. So far, indeed, as what is
taken from the rich in taxes, would, if not so taken, have been saved
and converted into capital, or even expended in the maintenance and
wages of servants or of any class of unproductive labourers, to that
extent the demand for labour is no doubt diminished, and the poor
injuriously affected, by athea tax on the rich; and as these effects are
almost always produced in a greater or less degree, it is impossible so
to tax the rich as that no portion whatever of the tax can fall Edition:
current; Page: [89] on the poor. But even here the question arises,
whether the government, after receiving the amount, will not lay out as
great a portion of it in the direct purchase of labour, as the taxpayers
would have done. In regard to all that portion of the tax, which, if not
paid to the government, would have been consumed in the form of
commodities (or even expended in services if the payment has been
advanced by a capitalist), this, according to the principles we have
investigated, falls definitively on the rich, and not at all on the
poor. There is exactly the same demand for labour, so far as this
portion is concerned, after the tax, as before it. The capital which
hitherto employed the labourers of the country, remains, and is still
capable of employing the same number. There is the same amount of
produce paid in wages, or allotted to defray the feeding and clothing of
labourers.

If those against whom I am now contending were in the right, it would be
impossible to tax anybody except the poor. If it is taxing the
labourers, to tax what is laid out in the produce of labour, the
labouring classes pay all the taxes. The same argument, however, equally
proves, that it is impossible to tax the labourers at all; since the
tax, being laid out either in labour or in commodities, comes all back
to them; so that taxation has the singular property of falling on
nobody. On the same showing, it would do the labourers no harm to take
from them all they have, and distribute it among the other members of
the community. It would all be “spent among them,” which on this theory
comes to the same thing. The error is produced by not looking directly
at the realities of the phenomena, but attending only to the outward
mechanism of paying and spending. If we look at the effects produced not
on the money, which merely changes hands, but on the commodities which
are used and consumed, we see that, in consequence of the income-tax,
the classes who pay it do really diminish their consumption. Exactly so
far as they do this, they are the persons on whom the tax falls. It is
defrayed out of what they would otherwise have used and enjoyed. So far,
on the other hand, as the burthen falls, not on what they would have
consumed, but on what they would have saved to maintain production, or
spent in maintaining or paying unproductive labourers, to that extent
the tax forms a deduction from what would have been used and enjoyed by
the labouring classes. But if the government, as is probably the fact,
expends fully as much of the amount as the tax-payers would have done in
the direct employment of labour, as in hiring sailors, soldiers, and
policemen, or in paying off debt, by which last operation it even
increases capital; the labouring classes not only do not lose any
employment by the tax, but may possibly gain some, and the whole of the
tax falls exclusively where it was intended.

All that portion of the produce of the country which any oneb, not a
Edition: current; Page: [90] labourer,b actually and literally consumes
for his own use, does not contribute in the smallest degree to the
maintenance of labour. No one is benefited by mere consumption, except
the person who consumes. And a person cannot cbothc consume his income
himself, and make it over to be consumed by others. Taking away a
certain portion by taxation cannot deprive both him and them of it, but
only him or them. To know which is the sufferer, we must understand
whose consumption will have to be retrenched in consequence: this,
whoever it be, is the person on whom the tax really falls.

Edition: current; Page: [91]


CHAPTER VI: aOna Circulating and Fixed Capital

§ 1. [Fixed and Circulating Capital, what] To complete our explanations
on the subject of capital, it is necessary to say something of the two
species into which it is usually divided. The distinction is very
obvious, and though not named, has been often adverted to, in the btwob
preceding chapters: but it is now proper to define it accurately, and to
point out a few of its consequences.

Of the capital engaged in the production of any commodity, there is a
part which, after being once used, exists no longer as capital; is no
longer capable of rendering service to production, or at least not the
same service, cnorc to the same sort of production. Such, for example,
is the portion of capital which consists of materials. The tallow and
alkali of which soap is made, once used in the manufacture, are
destroyed as alkali and tallow; and cannot be employed any further in
the soap manufacture, though in their altered condition, as soap, they
are capable of being used as a material or an instrument in other
branches of manufacture. In the same division must be placed the portion
of capital which is paid as the wages, or consumed as the subsistence,
of labourers. dThed part of the capital of a cotton-spinner which he
pays away to his work-people, once so paid, exists no longer as his
capital, or as a cotton-spineer’s capital: such portion of it as the
workmen consume, no longer exists as capital at all: even if they save
any part, it emay now be more properly regardede as a fresh capital, the
result of a second act of accumulation. Capital which in this manner
fulfils the whole of its office in the production in which it is
engaged, by a single use, is called Circulating Capital. The term, which
is not very appropriate, is derived from the circumstance, that this
portion of capital requires to be constantly renewed by the sale of the
finished product, and when renewed is perpetually parted with in buying
materials and paying wages; so that it does its work, not by being kept,
but by changing hands.

Edition: current; Page: [92]
Another large portion of capital, however, consists in instruments of
production, of a more or less permanent character; which produce their
effect not by being parted with, but by being kept; and the efficacy of
which is not exhausted by a single use. To this fclassf belong
buildings, machinery, and all or most things known by the name of
implements or tools. The durability of some of these is considerable,
and their function as productive instruments is prolonged through many
repetitions of the productive operation. In this class must likewise be
included capital sunk (as the expression is) in permanent improvements
of land. So also the capital expended once for all, in the commencement
of an undertaking, to prepare the way for subsequent operations: the
expense of opening a mine, for example: of cutting canals, of making
roads or docks. Other examples might be added, but these are sufficient.
Capital which exists in any of these durable shapes, and the return to
which is spread over a period of corresponding duration, is called Fixed
Capital.

Of fixed capital, some kinds require to be occasionally or periodically
renewed. Such are all implements and buildings: they require, at
intervals, partial renewal by means of repairs, and are at last entirely
worn out, and cannot be of any further service as buildings and
implements, but fall back into the class of materials. In other cases,
the capital does not, unless as a consequence of some unusual accident,
require entire renewal: but there is always some outlay needed, either
regularly or at least occasionally, to keep it up. A dock or a canal,
once made, does not require, like a machine, to be made again, unless
purposely destroyed, or unless an earthquake gor some similar
catastropheg has filled it up: but regular and frequent outlays are
necessary to keep it in repair. The cost of opening a mine needs not be
incurred a second time; but unless some one goes to the expense of
keeping the mine clear of water, it is soon rendered useless. The most
permanent of all kinds of fixed capital is that employed in giving
increased productiveness to a natural agent, such as land. The draining
of marshy or inundated tracts like the Bedford Level, the reclaiming of
land from the sea, or its protection by embankments, are improvements
calculated for perpetuity; but drains and dykes require frequent
repairs. The same character of perpetuity belongs to the improvement of
land by subsoil draining, which adds so much to the productiveness of
the clay soils; or by permanent manures, that is, by the addition to the
soil, not of the substances which enter into the composition of
vegetables, and which are therefore consumed by vegetation, but of those
which merely alter the relation of the soil to air and water; as sand
and lime on the heavy soils, clay and marl on the light. Even such
works, however, require some, though it may be very little, occasional
outlay to maintain their full effect.

Edition: current; Page: [93]
These improvements, however, by the very fact of their deserving that
title, produce an increase of return, which, after defraying all
expenditure necessary for keeping them up, still leaves a surplus. This
surplus forms the return to the capital sunk in the first instance, and
that return does not, as in the case of machinery, terminate by the
wearing out of the machine, but continues for ever. The land, thus
increased in productiveness, bears a value in the market, proportional
to the increase: and hence it is usual to consider the capital which was
invested, or sunk, in making the improvement, as still existing in the
increased value of the land. There must be no mistake, however. The
capital, like all other capital, has been consumed. It was consumed in
maintaining the labourers who executed the improvement, and in the wear
and tear of the tools by which they were assisted. But it was consumed
productively, and has left a permanent result in the improved
productiveness of an appropriated natural agent, the land. We may call
the increased produce the joint result of the land and of a capital
fixed in the land. But as the capital, having in reality been consumed,
cannot be withdrawn, its productiveness is thenceforth indissolubly
blended with that arising from the original qualities of the soil; and
the remuneration for the use of it thenceforth depends, not upon the
laws which govern the returns to labour and capital, but upon those
which govern the recompense for natural agents. What these are, we shall
see hereafter.*

§ 2. [Increase of fixed capital, when at the expense of circulating,
might be detrimental to the labourers] There is a great difference
between the effects of circulating and those of fixed capital, on the
amount of the gross produce of the country. Circulating capital being
destroyed as such, or at any rate finally lost to the owner, by a single
use; and the product resulting from that one use being the only source
from which the owner can replace the capital, or obtain any remuneration
for its productive employment; the product must of course be sufficient
for those purposes, or in other words, the result of a single use must
be a reproduction equal to the whole amount of the circulating capital
used, and a profit besides. This, however, is by no means necessary in
the case of fixed capital. Since machinery, for example, is not wholly
consumed by one use, it is not necessary that it should be wholly
replaced from the product of that use. The machine answers the purpose
of its owner if it brings in, during each interval of time, enough to
cover the expense of repairs, and the deterioration in value which the
machine has sustained during the same time, with a surplus sufficient to
yield the ordinary profit on the entire value of the machine.

From this it follows that all increase of fixed capital, when taking
place Edition: current; Page: [94] at the expense of circulating, must
be, at least temporarily, prejudicial to the interests of the labourers.
This is true, not of machinery alone, but of all improvements by which
capital is sunk; that is, rendered permanently incapable of being
applied to the maintenance and remuneration of labour. Suppose that a
person farms his own land, with a capital of two thousand quarters of
corn, employed in maintaining labourers during one year (for simplicity
we omit the consideration of seed and tools), whose labour produces him
annually two thousand four hundred quarters, being a profit of twenty
per cent. This profit we shall suppose that he annually consumes,
carrying on his operations from year to year on the original capital of
two thousand quarters. Let us now suppose that by the expenditure of
half his capital he effects a permanent improvement of his land, which
is executed by half his labourers, and occupies them for a year, after
which he will only require, for the effectual cultivation of ahisa land,
half as many labourers as before. The remainder of his capital he
employs as usual. In the first year there is no difference in the
condition of the labourers, except that part of them have received the
same pay for ban operation onb the land, which they previously obtained
for ploughing, sowing, and reaping. At the end of the year, however, the
improver has not, as before, a capital of two thousand quarters of corn.
Only one thousand quarters of his capital have been reproduced in the
usual way: he has now only those thousand quarters and his improvement.
He will employ, in the next and in each following year, only half the
number of labourers, and will divide among them only half the former
quantity of subsistence. The loss cwillc soon be made up to them if the
improved land, with the diminished quantity of labour, dproducesd two
thousand four hundred quarters as before, because so enormous an
accession of gain ewille probably induce the improver to save a part,
add it to his capital, and become a larger employer of labour. fBut it
is conceivable that this may notf be the case; for (supposing, as we may
do, that the improvement will last indefinitely, without any outlay
worth mentioning to keep it up) the improver will have gained largely by
his improvement if the land now yields, not two thousand four hundred,
but one thousand five hundred quarters; since this will replace the one
thousand quarters forming his present circulating capital, with a profit
of twenty-five per cent (instead of twenty as before) on the whole
capital, fixed and circulating together. The improvement, therefore, may
be a very profitable one to him, and yet very injurious to the
labourers.

Edition: current; Page: [95]
gThe supposition, in the terms in which it has been stated, is purely
ideal; or at most applicable only to such a case as that of the
conversion of arable land into pasture, which, though formerly a
hfrequenth practice, is regarded by modern agriculturists as the reverse
of an improvement.* iBut this does not affect the substance of the
argument. Suppose that the improvement does not operate in the manner
supposed—does not enable a part of the labour previously employed on the
land to be dispensed with—but only enables the same labour to raise a
greater produce.g Suppose, too, that the greater produce, which by means
of the improvement can be raised from the soil with the same labour, is
all wanted, and will find purchasers. The improver will in that case
require the same number of labourers as before, at the same wages. But
where will he find the means of paying them? He has no longer his
original capital of two thousand quarters disposable for the purpose.
One thousand of them are lost and gone—consumed in making the
improvement. If he is to employ as many labourers as before, and pay
them as highly, he must borrow, or obtain from some other source, a
thousand quarters to supply the deficit. But these thousand quarters
already maintained, or were destined to maintain, an equivalent quantity
of labour. They are not a fresh creation; their destination is only
changed from one productive employment to another; and though the
agriculturist has made up the deficiency in his own circulating capital,
the breach in the circulating capital of the community remains
unrepaired.

Edition: current; Page: [96]
fThef argument relied on by most of those who contend that machinery can
never be injurious to the labouring class, kisk, that by cheapening
production it creates such an increased demand for the commodity, as
enables, ere long, a greater number of persons than ever to find
employment in producing it. lThis argument does not seem to me to have
the weight commonly ascribed to it.l The fact, though too broadly
stated, is, no doubt, often true. The copyists who were thrown out of
employment by the invention of printing, were doubtless soon outnumbered
by the compositors and pressmen who took their place; and the number of
labouring persons now occupied in the cotton manufacture is many times
greater than were so occupied previously to the inventions of Hargreaves
and Arkwright, which shows that besides the enormous fixed capital now
embarked in the manufacture, it also employs a far larger circulating
capital than at any former time. But if this capital was drawn from
other employments; if the funds which took the place of the capital sunk
in costly machinery, were supplied not by manym additional saving
consequent on the improvements, but by drafts on the general capital of
the community; what better nweren the labouring classes for the mere
transfer? In what manner owaso the loss they sustained by the conversion
of circulating into fixed capital made up to them by a mere shifting of
part of the remainder of the circulating capital from its old
employments to a new one?

All attempts to make out that the labouring classes as a collective body
cannot suffer ptemporarilyp by the introduction of machinery, or by the
sinking of capital in permanent improvements, are, I conceive,
necessarily fallacious. That they would suffer in the particular
department of industry to which the change qappliesq, is generally
admitted, and obvious to common sense; but it is often said, that though
employment is withdrawn from labour in one department, an exactly
equivalent employment is opened for it in others, because what the
consumers save in the increased cheapness of one particular article
enables them to augment their consumption of others, thereby increasing
the demand for other kinds of labour. This is plausible, but, as rwas
shownr in the last chapter, involves a fallacy; demand for commodities
being a totally different thing from demand for labour. It is true, the
consumers have now additional smeans of buyings other things; but this
will not create the other things, unless there is capital to produce
them, and the improvement has not set at liberty any capital, if even it
has not absorbed some from other employments. The supposed increase of
production and of employment for labour in other departments therefore
Edition: current; Page: [97] will not take place; and the increased
demand for commodities by some consumers, will be balanced by a
cessation of demand on the part of others, namely, the labourers who
were superseded by the improvement, and who will now be maintained, if
at all, by sharing, either in the way of competition or of charity, in
what was previously consumed by other people.

§ 3. [But this detriment to the labourers seldom if ever occurs]
Nevertheless, I do not believe that as things are actually transacted,
improvements in production are often, if ever, injurious, even
temporarily, to the labouring classes in the aggregate. They would be so
if they took place suddenly to a great amount, because much of the
capital sunk must necessarily in that case be provided from funds
already employed as circulating capital. But improvements are always
introduced very gradually, and are seldom or never made by withdrawing
circulating capital from actual production, but aare madea by the
employment of the annual increase. bThere are few if any examplesb of a
great increase of fixed capital, at a time and place where circulating
capital was not rapidly increasing likewise. It is not in poor or
backward countries that great and costly improvements in production are
made. To sink capital in land for a permanent return—to introduce
expensive machinery—are acts involving immediate sacrifice for distant
objects; and indicate, in the first place, tolerably complete security
of property; in the second, cconsiderable activity of industrial
enterprise; and in the third, a high standard of what has been called
the “effective desire of accumulation:” which three things are the
elements of a society rapidly progressive in its amount of capital.
Although, therefore, the labouring classes must suffer, not only if the
increase of fixed capital takes place at the expense of circulating, but
even if it is so large and rapid as to retard that ordinary increase to
which the growth of population has habitually adapted itself; yet, in
point of fact, this is very unlikely to happen, since there is probably
no country whose fixed capital increases in a ratio more than
proportional to its circulating. If the whole of the railways whichd,
during the speculative madness of 1845,d obtained the sanction of
Parliament, ehad beene constructed in the times fixed for the completion
of each, this improbable contingency would, most likely, fhave beenf
realized; but this very case ghas afforded a strikingg example of the
difficulties which oppose the diversion into new channels, of any
hconsiderableh portion of the capital that supplies the old:
difficulties generally much more than Edition: current; Page: [98]
sufficient to prevent enterprises that involve the sinking of capital,
from extending themselves with such rapidity as to impair the sources of
the existing employment for labour.

To these considerations must be added, that even if improvements did for
a time decrease the aggregate produce and the circulating capital of the
community, they would not the less tend in the long run to augment both.
They increase the return to capital; and of this increase the benefit
must necessarily accrue either to the capitalist in greater profits, or
to the icustomeri in diminished prices; affording, in either case, an
augmented fund from which accumulation may be made, while enlarged
profits also hold out an increased inducement to accumulation. In the
case we before selected, in which the immediate result of the
improvement was to diminish the gross produce from two thousand four
hundred quarters to one thousand five hundred, yet the profit of the
capitalist being now five hundred quarters instead of four hundred, the
extra one hundred quarters, if regularly saved, jwouldj in a few years
replace the one thousand quarters subtracted from his circulating
capital. Now the extension of business which almost certainly follows in
any department in which an improvement has been made, affords a strong
inducement to those engaged in it to add to their capital; and hence, at
the slow pace at which improvements are usually introduced, a great part
of the capital which the improvement ultimately absorbs, is drawn from
the increased profits and increased savings which it has itself called
forth.

This tendency of improvements in production to cause increased
accumulation, and thereby ultimately to increase the gross produce, even
if temporarily diminishing it, will assume a still more decided
character if it should appear that there are assignable limits both to
the accumulation of capital, and to the increase of production from the
land, which limits once attained, all further increase of produce must
stop; but that improvements in production, whatever may be their other
effects, tend to throw one or both of these limits farther off. Now,
these are truths which will appear in the clearest light in a subsequent
stage of our investigation. It will be seen, that the quantity of
capital which will, or even which can, be accumulated in any country,
and the amount of gross produce which will, or even which can, be
raised, bear a proportion to the state of the arts of production there
existing; and that every improvement, even if for the time it diminish
the circulating capital and the gross produce, ultimately makes room for
a larger amount of both, than could possibly have existed otherwise. It
is this which is the conclusive answer to the objections against
machinery; and the proof thence arising of the ultimate kbenefitk lto
labourers of mechanical Edition: current; Page: [99] inventions even in
the existing state of societyl, will hereafter be seen to be
conclusive.* But this does not discharge governments from the obligation
of alleviating, and if possible preventing, the evils of which this
source of ultimate benefit is or may be productive to an existing
generation. If the sinking or fixing of capital in machinery or useful
works were ever to proceed at such a pace as to impair materially the
funds for the maintenance of labour, it would be incumbent on
legislators to take measures for moderating its rapidity: and since
improvements which do not diminish employment on the whole, almost
always throw some particular class of labourers out of it, there cannot
be a more legitimate object of the legislator’s care than the interests
of those who are thus sacrificed to the gains of their fellow-citizens
and of posterity.

To return to the theoretical distinction between fixed and circulating
capital. Since all wealth which is destined to be employed for
reproduction comes within the designation of capital, there are parts of
capital which do not agree with the definition of either species of it;
for instance, the stock of finished goods which a manufacturer or dealer
at any time possesses unsold in his warehouses. But this, though capital
as to its destination, is not yet capital in actual exercise: it is not
engaged in production, but has first to be sold or exchanged, that is,
converted into an equivalent value of some other commodities; and
therefore is not yet either fixed or circulating capital; but will
become either one or the other, or be eventually divided between them.
With the proceeds of his finished goods, a manufacturer will partly pay
his work-people, partly replenish his stock of the materials of his
manufacture, and partly provide new buildings and machinery, or repair
the old; but how much will be devoted to one purpose, and how much to
another, depends on the nature of the manufacture, and the requirements
of the particular moment.

It should be observed further, that the portion of capital mconsumed in
the form of seed or material, though, unlike fixed capital, it requires
to be at once replaced from the gross produce, stands yet in the same
relation to the employment of labour, as fixed capital does. What is
expended in materials is as much withdrawn from the maintenance and
remuneration of labourers, as what is fixed in machinery; and if capital
now expended in wages were diverted to the providing of materials, the
effect on the labourers would be as prejudicial as if it were converted
into fixed capital. This, however, is a kind of change which nseldom, if
ever,n takes place. The tendency of improvements in production is always
to economize, never to increase, the expenditure of seed or material for
a given produce; and the interest of the labourers has no detriment to
apprehend from this source.

Edition: current; Page: [100]


CHAPTER VII: On What Depends the Degree of Productiveness of Productive Agents

§ 1. [Land, labour, and capital, are of different productiveness at
different times and places] We have concluded our general survey of the
requisites of production. We have found that they may be reduced to
three: labour, capital, and the materials and motive forces afforded by
nature. Of these, labour and the raw material of the globe are primary
and indispensable. Natural motive powers may be called in to the
assistance of labour, and are a help, but not an essential, of
production. The remaining requisite, capital, is itself the product of
labour: its instrumentality in production is therefore, in reality, that
of labour in an indirect shape. It does not the less require to be
specified separately. A previous application of labour to produce the
capital required for consumption during the work, is no less essential
than the application of labour to the work itself. Of capital, again,
one, and by far the largest, portion, conduces to production only by
sustaining in existence the labour which produces: the remainder, namely
the instruments and materials, contribute to it directly, in the same
manner with natural agents, and the materials supplied by nature.

We now advance to the second great question in political economy; on
what the degree of productiveness of these agents depends. For it is
evident that their productive efficacy varies greatly at various times
and places. With the same population and extent of territory, some
countries have a much larger amount of production than others, and the
same country at one time a greater amount than itself at another.
Compare England either with a similar extent of territory in Russia, or
with an equal population of Russians. Compare England now with England
in the Middle Ages; Sicily, Northern Africa, or Syria at present, with
the same countries aata the time of their greatest prosperity, before
the Roman Conquest. Some of the causes which contribute to this
difference of productiveness are obvious; others not so much so. We
proceed to specify several of them.

Edition: current; Page: [101]
§ 2. [Causes of superior productiveness. Natural advantages] The most
evident cause of superior productiveness is what are called natural
advantages. These are various. Fertility of soil is one of the
principal. In this there are great varieties, from the deserts of Arabia
to the alluvial plains of the Ganges, the Niger, and the Mississippi. A
favourable climate is even more important than a rich soil. There are
countries capable of being inhabited, but too cold to be compatible with
agriculture. Their inhabitants cannot pass beyond the nomadic state;
they must live, like the Laplanders, by the domestication of the
rein-deer, if not by hunting or fishing, like the miserable Esquimaux.
There are countries where oats will ripen, but not wheat, such as the
North of Scotland; others where wheat can be grown, but from excess of
moisture and want of sunshine, affords but a precarious crop; as in
parts of Ireland. With each advance towards the asoutha, or, in the
European temperate region, towards the east, some new branch of
agriculture becomes first possible, then advantageous; the vine, maize,
bsilk, figs, olivesb, rice, dates, successively present themselves,
until we come to the sugar, coffee, cotton, spices, &c. of climates
which also afford, of the more common agricultural products, and with
only a slight degree of cultivation, two or even three harvests in a
year. Nor is it in agriculture alone that differences of climate are
important. Their influence is felt in many other branches of production:
in the durability of all work which is exposed to the air; of buildings,
for example. If the temples of Karnac and Luxor had not been injured by
men, they might have subsisted in their original perfection almost for
ever, for the inscriptions on some of them, though anterior to all
authentic history, are fresher than is in our climate an inscription
fifty years old: while at St. Petersburg, the most massive works,
solidly executed in granite hardly a generation ago, are already, as
travellers tell us, almost in a state to require reconstruction, from
calternate exposure toc summer heat and intense frost. The superiority
of the woven fabrics of Southern Europe over those of England in the
richness and clearness of many of their colours, is ascribed to the
superior quality of the atmosphere, for which neither the knowledge of
chemists nor the skill of dyers has been able to provide, in our hazy
and damp climate, a complete equivalent.

Another part of the influence of climate consists in lessening the
physical requirements of the producers. In hot regions, mankind can
exist in comfort with less perfect housing, less clothing; fuel, that
dabsoluted necessary of life in cold climates, they can almost dispense
with, except for industrial usese. They alsoe require less aliment; as
experience had proved, long before Edition: current; Page: [102] theory
had accounted for it by ascertaining that most of what we consume as
food is not required for the actual nutrition of the organs, but for
keeping up the animal heat, and for supplying the necessary stimulus to
the vital functions, which in hot climates is almost sufficiently
supplied by air and sunshine. Much, therefore, of the labour elsewhere
expended to procure the mere necessaries of life, not being required,
more remains disposable for its higher uses and its enjoyments; if the
character of the inhabitants does not rather induce them to use up these
advantages in over-population, or in the indulgence of repose.

Among natural advantages, besides soil and climate, must be mentioned
abundance of mineral productions, in convenient situations, and capable
of being worked with moderate labour. Such are the coal-fields of Great
Britain, which do so much to compensate its inhabitants for the
disadvantages of climate; and the scarcely inferior fresourcef possessed
by this country and the United States, in a copious supply of an easily
reduced iron ore, at no great depth below the earth’s surface, and in
close proximity to coal deposits available for working it. In mountain
and hill districts, the abundance of natural water-power makes
considerable amends for the usually inferior fertility of those regions.
But perhaps a greater advantage than all these is a maritime situation,
especially when accompanied with good natural harbours; and, next to it,
great navigable rivers. These advantages consist indeed wholly in saving
of cost of carriage. But few who have not considered the subject, have
any adequate notion how great an extent of economical advantage this
comprises; nor, without having considered the influence exercised on
production by exchanges, and by what is called the division of labour,
can it be fully estimated. So important is it, that it often does more
than counterbalance sterility of soil, and almost every other natural
inferiority; especially in that early stage of industry in which labour
and science have not yet provided artificial means of communication
capable of rivalling the natural. In the ancient world, and in the
Middle Ages, the most prosperous communities were not those which had
the largest territory, or the most fertile soil, but rather those which
had been forced by natural sterility to make the utmost guse of a
convenient maritime situation; as Athens, Tyre, Marseilles, Venice, the
free cities on the Baltic, and the like.

§ 3. [Causes of superior productiveness. Greater energy of labour] So
much for natural advantages; the value of which, cæteris paribus, is too
obvious to be ever underrated. But experience testifies that natural
advantages scarcely ever do for a community, no more than fortune and
station Edition: current; Page: [103] do for an individual, anything
like what it lies in their nature, or in their capacity, to do. aNeither
now nor in former ages have the nations possessing the best climate and
soil, been either the richest or the most powerful; but (in so far as
regards the mass of the people) generally among the poorest, though, in
the midst of poverty, probably on the whole the most enjoying. Human
life in those countries can be supported on so little, that the poor
seldom suffer from anxiety, and in climates in which mere existence is a
pleasure, the luxury which they prefer is that of repose. Energy, at the
call of passion, they possess in abundance, but not that which is
manifested in sustained and persevering labour: and as they seldom
concern themselves enough about remote objects to establish good
political institutions, the incentives to industry are further weakened
by imperfect protection of its fruits. Successful production, like most
other kinds of success, depends more on the qualities of the human
agents, than on the circumstances in which they work: and it is
difficulties, not facilities, that nourish bodily and mental energy.
Accordingly the tribes of mankind who have overrun and conquered others,
and compelled them to labour for their benefit, have been mostly reared
amidst hardship. They have either been bred in the forests of northern
climates, or the deficiency of natural hardships has been supplied, as
among the Greeks and Romans, by the artificial ones of a rigid military
discipline. bFrom the time whenb the circumstances of modern society
cpermitted the discontinuance of that discipline, the South has no
longer produced conquering nations; military vigour, as well as
speculative thought and industrial energy, have all had their principal
seats in the less favoured North.

As the second, therefore, of the causes of superior productiveness, we
may rank the greater energy of labour. By this is not to be understood
occasional, but regular and habitual energy. No one undergoes, without
murmuring, a greater amount of occasional fatigue and hardship, or has
his dbodily powers, and such faculties of mind as he possesses,d kept
longer at their utmost stretch, than the North American Indian; yet his
indolence is proverbial, whenever he has a brief respite from the
pressure of present wants. Individuals, or enationse, do not differ so
much in the efforts they are able and willing to make under strong
immediate incentives, as in their capacity of present exertion for a
distant object; and in the thoroughness of Edition: current; Page: [104]
their application to work on ordinary occasions. fSome amount of these
qualities isf a necessary condition of any great improvement among
mankind. gTo civilize a savage, he must be inspired with new wants and
desires, even if not of a very elevated kind, provided that their
gratification can be a motive to hsteady and regularh bodily and mental
exertion. If the negroes of Jamaica and Demerara, after their
emancipation, had contented themselves, as it was predicted they would
do, with the necessaries of life, and abandoned all labour beyond the
little which in a tropical climate, with a thin population and
iabundance of the richest land, is sufficient to support existence, they
would have sunk into a condition more barbarous, though fless unhappyf,
than their previous state of slavery. The motive which was most relied
on for inducing them to work was their love of fine clothes and personal
ornaments. No one will stand up for this taste as kworthy of being
cultivated, and in most societies its indulgence tends to impoverish
rather Edition: current; Page: [105] than to enrich; but in the state of
mind of the negroes it lmightl have been the only incentive that could
make them voluntarily undergo systematic labour, and so acquire or
maintain habits of mvoluntarym industry which may be converted to more
valuable ends. nIn Englandn, it is not the desire of wealth that needs
to be taught, but the use of wealth, and appreciation of the objects of
desire which wealth cannot purchase, or for attaining which it is not
required. Every real improvement in the character of the Englisho,
whether it consist in giving them higher aspirations, or only pa juster
estimate of the value of their present objects of desire, must
necessarily moderate the ardour of their devotion to the pursuit of
wealth.p There is no need, however, that it should diminish qtheq
strenuous and businesslike application to the matter in hand, which ris
found in the best English workmen, and is their most valuable quality.r

sThe desirable medium is one which mankind have not often known how
Edition: current; Page: [106] to hit: when they tlabour, to do it with
all their might, and especially with all their mind; but to devote to
labour, for mere pecuniary gain, fewer hours in the day, fewer days in
the year, and fewer years of life.

§ 4. [Causes of superior productiveness. Superior skill and knowledge]
The third element which determines the productiveness of the labour of a
community, is the skill and knowledge therein existing; whether it be
the skill and knowledge of the labourers themselves, or of those who
direct their labour. No illustration is requisite to show how the
efficacy of industry is promoted by the manual dexterity of those who
perform mere routine processes; by the intelligence of those engaged in
operations in which the mind has a considerable part; and by the amount
of knowledge of natural powers and aofa the properties of objects, which
is turned to the purposes of industry. That the productiveness of the
labour of a people is limited by their knowledge of the arts of life, is
self-evident; and that any progress in those arts, any improved
application of the objects or powers of nature to industrial uses,
enables the same quantity and intensity of labour to raise a greater
produce.

One principal department of these improvements consists in the invention
and use of tools and machinery. The manner in which these serve to
increase production and to economize labour, needs not be specially
detailed in a work like the present: it will be found explained and
exemplified, in a manner at once scientific and popular, in Mr.
Babbage’s wellknown “Economy of Machinery and Manufactures.” An entire
chapter of Mr. Babbage’s book is composed of instances of the efficacy
of machinery in “exerting forces too great for human power, and
executing operations too delicate for human touch.”[*] But to find
examples of work which could not be performed at all by unassisted
labour, we need not go so far. Without pumps, worked by steam-engines or
otherwise, the water which collects in mines could not in many
situations be got rid of at all, and the mines, after being worked to a
little depth, must be abandoned: without ships or boats the sea could
never have been crossed; without tools of some sort, trees could not be
cut down, nor rocks excavated; a plough, or at least a bhoeb, is
necessary to any tillage of the ground. Very simple and rude
instruments, however, are sufficient to render literally possible most
works hitherto executed by cmankindc; and subsequent inventions have
chiefly served to enable the work to be performed in greater perfection,
and, above Edition: current; Page: [107] all, with a greatly diminished
quantity of labour: the labour thus saved becoming disposable for other
demploymentsd.

The use of machinery is far from being the only mode in which the
effects of knowledge in aiding production are exemplified. In
agriculture and horticulture, machinery eis only now beginning to show
that it can do anythinge of importance, beyond the invention and
progressive improvement of the plough and a few other simple
instruments. The greatest agricultural inventions have consisted in the
direct application of more judicious processes to the land itself, and
ftof the plants growing on it: such as rotation of crops, to avoid the
necessity of gleaving the land uncultivatedg for one season in every two
or three; improved manures, to renovate its fertility when exhausted by
cropping; hploughing and draining the subsoil as well as the surface;h
conversion iof bogs and marshes into cultivable land; such modes of
pruning, and of training and propping up plants and trees, as experience
has shown to deserve the preference; in the case of the more expensive
cultures, planting the jroots or seedsj further apart, and more
completely pulverizing the soil in which they are placed, &c. In
manufactures and commerce, some of the most important improvements
consist in economizing time; in making the return follow more speedily
upon the labour and outlay. There are others of which the advantage
consists in economy of material.

§ 5. [Causes of superior productiveness. Superiority of intelligence and
trustworthiness in the community generally] But the effects of the
increased knowledge of a community in increasing its wealth, need the
less illustration as they have become familiar to the most uneducated,
from such conspicuous instances as railways and steam-ships. A thing not
yet aso well understood and recognised, is the economical value of the
general diffusion of intelligence among the people. The number of
persons fitted to direct and superintend any industrial enterprise, or
even to execute any process which cannot be reduced almost to an affair
of memory and routine, is always far short of the demand; as is evident
from the enormous difference between the salaries paid to such persons,
and the wages of ordinary labour. The deficiency of practical good
sense, which renders the majority of the labouring class bsuch bad
calculators—which makes, for instance, their domestic economy so
improvident, lax, and irregular—must disqualify them for any but a low
grade of intelligent labour, and render their industry far less
productive than with equal energy it otherwise might be. The Edition:
current; Page: [108] importance, even in this limited aspect, of popular
education, is well worthy of the attention of politicians, especially in
England; since competent observers, accustomed to employ labourers of
various nations, testify that in the workmen of other countries they
often find great intelligence wholly apart from instruction, but that if
an English labourer is anything but a hewer of wood and cac drawer of
water, he is indebted dfor it to education, which in his case is almost
always self-education.d Mr. Escher, of Zurich (an engineer and cotton
manufacturer employing nearly two thousand working men of many different
nations), in his evidence annexed to the Report of the Poor Law
Commissioners, in 1840, on the training of pauper children, gives a
character of English as contrasted with Continental workmen, which all
persons of similar experience will, I believe, confirm.

“The Italians’ quickness of perception is shown in rapidly comprehending
any new descriptions of labour put into their handse, in a powere of
quickly comprehending the meaning of their employer, of adapting
themselves to new circumstances, much beyond what any other classes
have. The French workmen have the like natural characteristics, only in
a somewhat lower degree. The English, Swiss, German, and Dutch workmen,
we find, have all much slower natural comprehension. As workmen only,
the preference is undoubtedly due to the English; because, as we find
them, they are all trained to special branches, on which they have had
comparatively superior training, and have concentrated all their
thoughts. As men of business or of general usefulness, and as men with
whom an employer would best like to be surrounded, I should, however,
decidedly prefer the Saxons and the Swiss, but more especially the
Saxons, because they have had a very careful general education, which
has extended their capacities beyond any special employment, and
rendered them fit to take up, after a short preparation, any employment
to which they may be called. If I have an English workman engaged in the
erection of a steam-engine, he will understand that, and nothing else;
and for other circumstances or other branches of mechanics, however
closely allied, he will be comparatively helpless to adapt himself to
all the circumstances that may arise, to make arrangements for them, and
give sound advice or write clear statements and letters on his work in
the various related branches of mechanics.”

On the connexion between mental cultivation and moral trustworthiness in
the labouring class, the same witness says, “The better educated
workmen, Edition: current; Page: [109] we find, are distinguished by
superior moral habits in every respect. In the first place, they are
entirely sober; they are discreet in their enjoyments, which are of a
more rational and refined kind; they have a taste for much better
society, which they approach respectfully, and consequently find much
readier admittance to it; they cultivate music; they read; they enjoy
the pleasures of scenery, and make parties for excursions into the
country; they are economical, and their economy extends beyond their own
purse to the stock of their master; they are, consequently, honest and
trustworthy.” And in answer to a question respecting the English
workmen, “Whilst in respect to the work to which they have been
specially trained they are the most skilful, they are in conduct the
most disorderly, debauched, and unruly, and least respectable and
trustworthy of any nation whatsoever whom we have employed; and in
saying this, I express the experience of every manufacturer on the
Continent to whom I have spoken, and especially of the English
manufacturers, who make the loudest complaints. These characteristics of
depravity do not apply to the English workmen who have received an
education, but attach to the others in the degree in which they are in
want of it. When the uneducated English workmen are released from the
bonds of iron discipline in which they have been restrained by their
employers in England, and are treated with the urbanity and friendly
feeling which the more educated workmen on the Continent expect and
receive from their employers, they, the English workmen, completely lose
their balance: they do not understand their position, and after a
certain time become totally unmanageable and useless.”* fThis result of
observation is borne out by experience in England itself. As soon as any
idea of equality enters the mind of an guneducatedg English working man,
his head is turned by it. When he ceases to be servile, he becomes
insolent.f

The moral qualities of the labourers are fully as important to the
efficiency and worth of their labour, as the intellectual. Independently
of the effects of intemperance upon their bodily and mental faculties,
and of flighty, unsteady habits upon the energy and continuity of their
work (points so easily understood as not to require being insisted
upon), it is well worthy of meditation, how much of the aggregate effect
of their labour Edition: current; Page: [110] depends on their
trustworthiness. All the labour hnowh expended in watching that they
fulfil their engagement, or in verifying that they have fulfilled it, is
so much withdrawn from the real business of production, ito be devotedi
to a subsidiary function rendered needful not by the necessity of
things, but by the dishonesty of men. Nor are the greatest outward
precautions jmore than very imperfectly efficacious, where, as is now
almost invariably the case with hired labourers, the slightest
relaxation of vigilance is an opportunity eagerly seized for eluding
performance of their contract. The advantage to mankind of beingj able
to trust one another, penetrates into every crevice and cranny of human
life: the economical is perhaps the smallest part of it, yet even this
is incalculable. To consider only the kmost obvious part of thek waste
of wealth occasioned to society by human improbity; there is in all rich
communities a predatory population, who live lby pillaging or
overreaching other people; their numbers cannot be authentically
ascertained, but on the lowest estimate, in a country like England, it
is mvery largem. The support of these persons is a direct burthen on the
national industry. The police, and the whole apparatus of punishment,
and of criminal and partly of civil justice, are a second burthen
rendered necessary by the first. The nexorbitantly-paidn profession of
lawyerso, so far as their work is not created by defects in the law, of
their own contriving,o are required and supported principally by the
dishonesty of mankind. As the standard of integrity in a community
prises higher, all these expenses becomep less. But this positive saving
qwould beq far outweighed rby the immense increase in the produce of all
kinds of labour, and saving of time and expenditure, which would be
obtained if the labourers honestly performed what they undertake; andr
by the increased spirit, the feeling of power and confidence, with which
works of all sorts swould bes planned and carried on by those who tfeltt
that all whose aid uwasu required vwouldv do their part faithfully
according to their contracts. Conjoint action is possible just in
proportion as human beings can rely on each other. There are countries
in Europe, of first-rate industrial capabilities, where the most serious
impediment to conducting business concerns on a large scale, is the
rarity of persons who are supposed fit to be trusted with the receipt
and expenditure of large sums of money. There are nations whose
commodities are looked shily upon by merchants, because they cannot
depend on finding the quality of the article conformable to that
Edition: current; Page: [111] of the sample. Such short-sighted frauds
are far from unexampled win English exports. Every one has heard of
“devil’s dust:” and among other instances given by Mr. Babbage, is one
in which a branch of export trade was for a long time actually stopped
by the forgeries and frauds which had occurred in it. On the other hand,
the substantial advantage derived in business transactions from proved
trustworthiness, is not less remarkably exemplified in the same work.
“At one of our largest towns, sales and purchases on a very extensive
scale are made daily in the course of business without any of the
parties ever exchanging a written document.”[*] Spread over a xyear’s
transactions, how great a return, in saving of time, trouble, and
expense, is brought in to the producers and dealers of such a town from
their own integrity. “The influence of established character in
producing confidence operated in a very remarkable manner at the time of
the exclusion of British manufactures from the Continent during the last
war. One of our largest establishments had been in the habit of doing
extensive business with a house in the centre of Germany; but on the
closing of the Continental ports against our manufactures, heavy
penalties were inflicted on all those who contravened the Berlin and
Milan decrees. The English manufacturer continued, nevertheless, to
receive orders, with directions how to consign them, and appointments
for the time and mode of payment, in letters, the handwriting of which
was known to him, but which were never signed except by the Christian
name of one of the firm, and even in some instances they were without
any signature at all. These orders were executed, and in no instance was
there the least irregularity in the payments.”*y

Edition: current; Page: [112]
§ 6. [Causes of superior productiveness. Superior security] Among the
secondary causes which determine the productiveness of productive
agents, the most important is Security. By security I mean the
completeness of the protection which society affords to its members.
This consists of protection by the government, and protection against
the government. The latter is the more important. Where a person known
to possess anything worth taking away, can expect nothing but to have it
torn from him, with every circumstance of tyrannical violence, by the
agents of a rapacious government, it is not likely that many will exert
themselves to produce much more than necessaries. This is the
acknowledged explanation of the poverty of many fertile tracts of Asia,
which were once prosperous and populous. From this to the degree of
security enjoyed in the best governed Edition: current; Page: [113]
parts of Europe, there are numerous gradations. In amany provinces ofa
France, before the Revolution, a vicious system of taxation on the land,
and still more the absence of redress against the arbitrary exactions
which were made under colour of the taxes, rendered it the interest of
every cultivator to appear poor, and therefore to cultivate badly. The
only insecurity which is altogether paralysing to the active energies of
producers, is that arising from the government, or from persons invested
with its authority. Against all other depredators there is a hope of
defending oneself. Greece and the Greek colonies in the ancient world,
Flanders and Italy in the Middle Ages, by no means enjoyed what any one
with modern ideas would call security: the state of society was most
unsettled and turbulent; person and property were exposed to a thousand
dangers. But they were free countries; they were bin generalb neither
arbitrarily oppressed, nor systematically plundered by their
governments. Against other enemies Edition: current; Page: [114] the
individual energy which their institutions called forth, enabled them to
make successful resistance: their labour, therefore, was eminently
productive, and their riches, while they remained free, cwerec
constantly on the increase. The Roman despotism, putting an end to wars
and internal conflicts throughout the empire, relieved the subject
population from much of the former insecurity: but because it left them
under the grinding yoke of its own rapacity, they became enervated and
impoverished, until they were an easy prey to barbarous but free
invaders. They would neither fight nor labour, because they were no
longer suffered to enjoy that for which they fought and laboured.

Much of the security dofd person and property in modern nations is the
effect of manners and opinion rather than of law. There aree, or lately
were,e countries in Europe where the monarch fwasf nominally absolute,
but where, from the restraints imposed by established usage, no subject
gfeltg practically in the smallest danger of having his possessions
arbitrarily seized or a contribution levied on them by the government.
There must, however, be in such governments much petty plunder and other
tyranny by subordinate agents, for which redress is not obtained, owing
to the want of publicity which is the ordinary character of absolute
governments. In England the people are tolerably well protected, both by
institutions and manners, against the agents of government; but, for the
security they enjoy against other evil-doers, they are very little
indebted to their institutions. The laws cannot be said to afford
protection to property, when they afford it only at such a cost as
renders submission to injury in general the better calculation. The
security of property in England is owing (except as regards open
violence) to opinion, and the fear of exposure, much more than to hthe
direct operation ofh the law and the courts of justice.i

Independently of all imperfection in the bulwarks which society
purposely throws round what it recognises as property, there are various
other modes in which defective institutions impede the employment of the
productive resources of a country to the best advantage. We shall have
occasion for noticing many of these in the progress of our subject. It
is sufficient here to remark, that the efficiency of industry may be
expected to be great, in proportion as the fruits of industry are
insured to the person exerting it: and that all social arrangements are
conducive to useful exertion, according Edition: current; Page: [115] as
they provide that the reward of every one for his labour shall be
proportioned as much as possible to the benefit which it produces. All
laws or usages which favour one class or sort of persons to the
disadvantage of others; which chain up the efforts of any part of the
community in pursuit of their own good, or stand between those efforts
and their natural fruits—are (independently of all other grounds of
condemnation) violations of the fundamental principles of economical
policy; jtendingj to make the aggregate productive powers of the
community productive in a less degree than they would otherwise be.

Edition: current; Page: [116]


CHAPTER VIII: Of Co-operation, or the Combination of Labour

§ 1. [Combination of Labour a principal cause of superior
productiveness] In the enumeration of the circumstances which promote
the productiveness of labour, we have left one untouched, which, because
of its importance, and of the many topics of discussion which it
involves, requires to be treated apart. This is, co-operation, or the
combined action of numbers. Of this great aid to production, a single
department, known by the name of Division of Labour, has engaged a large
share of the attention of political economists; most deservedly indeed,
but to the exclusion of other cases and exemplifications of the same
comprehensive law. Mr. Wakefield was, I believe, the first to point out,
that a part of the subject had, with injurious effect, been mistaken for
the whole; that a more fundamental principle lies beneath that of the
division of labour, and comprehends it.

Co-operation, he observes,* is “of two distinct kinds: first, such
co-operation as takes place when several persons help each other in the
same employment; secondly, such co-operation as takes place when several
persons help each other in different employments. These may be termed
Simple Co-operation and Complex Co-operation.

“The advantage of simple co-operation is illustrated by the case of two
greyhounds running together, which, it is said, will kill more hares
than four greyhounds running separately. In a vast number of simple
operations performed by human exertion, it is quite obvious that two men
working together will do more than four, or four times four men, each of
whom should work alone. In the lifting of heavy weights, for example, in
the felling of trees, in the sawing of timber, in the gathering of much
hay or corn during a short period of fine weather, in draining a large
extent of land during the short season when such a work may be properly
conducted, Edition: current; Page: [117] in the pulling of ropes on
board ship, in the rowing of large boats, in some mining operations, in
the erection of a scaffolding for building, and in the breaking of
stones for the repair of a road, so that the whole of the road shall
always be kept in good order: in all these simple operations, and
thousands more, it is absolutely necessary that many persons should work
together, at the same time, in the same place, and in the same way. The
savages of New Holland never help each other, even in the most simple
operations; and their condition is hardly superior, in some respects it
is inferior, to that of the wild animals which they now and then catch.
Let any one imagine that the labourers of England should suddenly desist
from helping each other in simple employments, and he will see at once
the prodigious advantages of simple co-operation. In a countless number
of employments, the produce of labour is, up to a certain point, in
proportion to such mutual assistance amongst the workmen. This is the
first step in social improvement.” The second is, when “one body of men
having combined their labour to raise more food than they require,
another body of men are induced to combine their labour for the purpose
of producing more clothes than they require, and with those surplus
clothes buying the surplus food of the other body of labourers; while,
if both bodies together have produced more food and clothes than they
both require, both bodies obtain, by means of exchange, a proper capital
for setting more labourers to work in their respective occupations.” To
simple co-operation is thus superadded what Mr. Wakefield terms Complex
Co-operation. The one is the combination of several labourers to help
each other in the same set of operations; the other is the combination
of several labourers to help one another by a division of operations.

There is “an important distinction between simple and complex
co-operation. Of the former, one is always conscious at the time of
practising it: it is obvious to the most ignorant and vulgar eye. Of the
latter, but a very few of the vast numbers who practise it are in any
degree conscious. The cause of this distinction is easily seen. When
several men are employed in lifting the same weight, or pulling the same
rope, at the same time, and in the same place, there can be no sort of
doubt that they co-operate with each other; the fact is impressed on the
mind by the mere sense of sight; but when several men, or bodies of men,
are employed at different times and places, and in different pursuits,
their co-operation with each other, though it may be quite as certain,
is not so readily perceived as in the other case: in order to perceive
it, a complex operation of the mind is required.”[*]

In the present state of society the breeding and feeding of sheep is the
occupation of one set of people, dressing the wool to prepare it for
Edition: current; Page: [118] the spinner is that of another, spinning
it into thread of a third, weaving the thread into broadcloth of a
fourth, dyeing the cloth of a fifth, making it into a coat of a sixth,
without counting the multitude of carriers, merchants, factors, and
retailers, put in requisition at the successive stages of this progress.
All these persons, without knowledge of one another or previous
understanding, co-operate in the production of the ultimate result, a
coat. But these are far from being all who co-operate in it; for each of
these persons requires food, and many other articles of consumption, and
unless he could have relied that other people would produce these for
him, he could not have devoted his whole time to one step in the
succession of operations which produces one single commodity, a coat.
Every person who took part in producing food or erecting houses for this
series of producers, has, however unconsciously on his part, combined
his labour with theirs. It is by a real, though unexpressed, concert,
“that the body who raise more food than they want, can exchange with the
body who raise more clothes than they want; and if the two bodies were
separated, either by distance or disinclination—unless the two bodies
should virtually form themselves into one, for the common object of
raising enough food and clothes for the whole—they could not divide into
two distinct parts the whole operation of producing a sufficient
quantity of food and clothes.”[*]

§ 2. [Effects of separation of employments analyzed] The influence
exercised on production by the separation of employments, is more
fundamental than, from the mode in which the subject is usually treated,
a reader might be induced to suppose. It is not merely that when the
production of different things becomes the sole or principal occupation
of different persons, a much greater quantity of each kind of article is
produced. The truth is much beyond this. Without some separation of
employments, very few things would be produced at all.

Suppose a set of persons, or a number of families, all employed
aprecisely ina the same manner; each family settled on a piece of its
own land, on which it grows by its labour the food required for its own
sustenance, and as there are no persons to buy any surplus produce where
all are producers, each family bhas tob produce within itself whatever
other articles it consumes. In such circumstances, if the soil was
tolerably fertile, and population did not tread too closely on the heels
of subsistence, there would be, no doubt, some kind of domestic
manufactures; clothing for the family might perhaps be spun and woven
within it, by the labour probably of the women (a first step in the
separation of employments); and a dwelling of some sort would be erected
and kept in repair by their united labour. Edition: current; Page: [119]
But beyond simple food (precarious, too, from the variations of the
seasons), coarse clothing, and very imperfect lodging, it would be
scarcely possible that the family should produce anything more. They
would, in general, require their utmost exertions to accomplish so much.
Their power even of extracting food from the soil would be kept within
narrow limits by the quality of their tools, which would necessarily be
of the most wretched description. To do almost anything in the way of
producing for themselves articles of convenience or luxury, would
require too much time, and, in many cases, their presence in a different
place. Very few kinds of industry, therefore, would exist; and that
which did exist, namely the production of necessaries, would be
extremely inefficient, not solely from imperfect implements, but
because, when the ground and the domestic industry fed by it had been
made to supply the necessaries of a single family in tolerable
abundance, there would be little motive, while the numbers of the family
remained the same, to make either the land or the labour produce more.

But suppose an event to occur, which would amount to a revolution in the
circumstances of this little settlement. Suppose that a company of
artificers, provided with tools, and with food sufficient to maintain
them cforc a year, arrive in the country and establish themselves in the
midst of the population. These new settlers occupy themselves in
producing articles of use or ornament adapted to the taste of a simple
people; and before their food is exhausted they have produced these in
considerable quantity, and are ready to exchange them for more food. The
economical position of the landed population is now most materially
altered. They have an opportunity given them of acquiring comforts and
luxuries. Things which, while they depended solely on their own labour,
they never could have obtained, because they could not hve produced, are
now accessible to them if they can succeed in producing an additional
quantity of food and necessaries. They are thus incited to increase the
productiveness of their industry. Among the conveniences for the first
time made accessible to them, better tools are probably one: and apart
from this, they have a motive to labour more assiduously, and dtod adopt
contrivances for making their labour more effectual. By these means they
will generally succeed in compelling their land to produce, not only
food for themselves, but a surplus for the new comers, wherewith to buy
from them the products of their industry. The new settlers constitute
what is called a market for surplus agricultural produce: and their
arrival has enriched the settlement not only by the manufactured
earticlee which they produce, but by the food which would not have been
produced unless they had been there to consume it.

Edition: current; Page: [120]
There is no inconsistency between this doctrine, and the fproposition we
before maintainedf, that a market for commodities does not constitute
employment for labour.* The labour of the agriculturists was already
provided with employment; they are not indebted to the demand of the new
comers for being able to maintain themselves. What that demand does for
them is, to call their labour into increased vigour and efficiency; to
stimulate them, by new motives, to new exertions. Neither do the new
comers owe their maintenance and employment to the demand of the
agriculturists: with a year’s subsistence in store, they could have
settled side by side with the former inhabitants, and produced a similar
scanty stock of food and necessaries. Nevertheless we see of what
supreme importance to the productiveness of the labour of producers, is
the existence of other producers within reach, employed in a different
kind of industry. The power of exchanging the products of one kind of
labour for those of another, is a condition, but for which, there would
almost always be a smaller quantity of labour altogether. When a new
market is opened for any product of industry, and a greater quantity of
the article is consequently produced, the increased production is not
always obtained at the expense of some other product; it is often a new
creation, the result of labour which would otherwise have remained
unexerted; or of assistance rendered to labour by improvements or by
modes of co-operation to which recourse would not have been had if an
inducement had not been offered for raising a larger produce.

§ 3. [Combination of labour between town and country] From these
considerations it appears that a country will seldom have a productive
agriculture, unless it has a large town population, or the only
available substitute, a large export trade in agricultural produce to
supply a population elsewhere. I use the phrase town population for
shortness, to imply a population non-agricultural; which will generally
be collected in towns or large villages, for the sake of combination of
labour. The application of this truth by Mr. Wakefield to the theory of
colonization, has excited much attention, and is doubtless destined to
excite much more. It is one of those great practical discoveries, which,
once made, appears so obvious that the merit of making them seems less
than it is. Mr. Wakefield was the first to point out that the mode of
planting new settlements, then commonly practised—setting down a number
of families side by side, each on its piece of land, aall employing
themselves in exactly the same manner,—though binb favourable
circumstances it may assure to those families a rude Edition: current;
Page: [121] abundance of mere necessaries, can never be other than
unfavourable to great production or rapid growth: and his system
consists of arrangements for securing that every colony shall have from
the first a town population bearing due proportion to its agricultural,
and that the cultivators of the soil shall not be so widely scattered as
to be deprived by distance, of the benefit of that town population as a
market for their produce. The principle on which the scheme is founded,
does not depend on any theory respecting the csuperiorc productiveness
of land held in large portions, and cultivated by hired labour.
Supposing it true that land yields the greatest produce when divided
into small properties and cultivated by peasant proprietors, a town
population dwilld be just as necessary to induce those proprietors to
raise that larger produce: and if they were too far from the nearest
seat of non-agricultural industry to use it as a market for disposing of
their surplus, and thereby supplying their other wants, neither that
surplus nor any equivalent for it would, generally speaking, be
produced.

It is, above all, the deficiency of town population which limits the
productiveness of the industry of a country like India. The agriculture
of India is conducted entirely on the system of small holdings. There
is, however, a considerable amount of combination of labour. The village
institutions and customs, which are the real framework of Indian
society, make provision for joint action in the cases in which it is
seen to be necessary; or where they fail to do so, the government (when
tolerably well administered) steps in, and by an outlay from the
revenue, executes by combined labour the tanks, embankments, and works
of irrigation, which are indispensable. The implements and processes of
agriculture are however so wretched, that the produce of the soil, in
spite of great natural fertility and a climate highly favourable to
vegetation, is miserably small: and the land might be made to yield food
in abundance for many more than the present number of inhabitants,
without departing from the system of small holdings. But to this the
stimulus is wanting, which a large town population, connected with the
rural districts by easy and unexpensive means of communication, would
afford. That town population, again, does not grow up, because the few
wants and unaspiring spirit of the cultivators (joined until lately with
great insecurity of property, from military and fiscal rapacity) prevent
them from attempting to become consumers of town produce. In these
circumstances the best chance of an early development of the productive
resources of India, consists in the erapid growth of its export of
agricultural produce (cotton, indigo, sugar, coffee, &c.) to the markets
of Europe. The producers of these articles are consumers of food
Edition: current; Page: [122] supplied by their fellow-agriculturists in
India; and the market thus opened for surplus food will, if accompanied
by good government, raise up by degrees more extended wants and desires,
directed either towards European commodities, or towards things which
will require for their production in India a larger manufacturing
population.

§ 4. [The higher degrees of the division of labour] Thus far of the
separation of employments, a form of the combination of labour without
which there cannot be the first rudiments of industrial civilization.
But when this separation is thoroughly established; when it has become
the general practice for each producer to supply many others with one
commodity, and to be supplied by others with most of the things which he
consumes; reasons not less real, though less imperative, invite to a
further extension of the same principle. It is found that the productive
power of labour is increased by carrying the separation further and
further; by breaking down more and more every process of industry into
parts, so that each labourer shall confine himself to an ever smaller
number of simple operations. And thus, in time, arise those remarkable
cases of what is called the division of labour, with which all readers
on subjects of this nature are familiar. Adam Smith’s illustration from
pin-making, though so well known, is so much to the point, that I will
venture once more to transcribe it. “The business of making a pin is
divided into about eighteen distinct operations. aOne man draws out the
wire, another straights it, a third cuts it, a fourth points it, a fifth
grinds it at the top for receiving the head; to make the head requires
two or three distinct operations; to put it on, is a peculiar business;
to whiten the pins is another; it is even a trade by itself to put them
into the paper. . . . . I have seen a small manufactory where ten men
only were employed, and where some of them, consequently, performed two
or three distinct operations. But though they were very poor, and
therefore but indifferently accommodated with the necessary machinery,
they could, when they exerted themselves, make among them about twelve
pounds of pins in a day. There are in a pound upwards of four thousand
pins of a middling size. Those ten persons, therefore, could make among
them upwards of forty-eight thousand pins in a day. Each person,
therefore, making a tenth part of forty-eight thousand pins, might be
considered as making four thousand eight hundred pins in a day. But if
they had all wrought separately and independently, and without any of
them having been educated to this peculiar business, they certainly
could not each of them have made twenty, perhaps not one pin in a
day.”[*]

Edition: current; Page: [123]
M. Say furnishes a still stronger example of the effects of division of
labour—from a not very important branch of industry certainly, the
manufacture of playing cards. “It is said by those engaged in the
business, that each card, that is, a piece of pasteboard of the size of
the hand, before being ready for sale, does not undergo fewer than
seventy boperations,* every one of which might be the occupation of a
distinct class of workmen. And if there are not seventy classes of
work-people in each card manufactory, it is because the division of
labour is not carried so far as it might be; because the same workman is
charged with two, three, or four distinct operations. The influence of
this distribution of cemploymentc is immense. I have seen a card
manufactory where thirty workmen produced daily fifteen thousand five
hundred cards, being above five hundred cards for each labourer; and it
may be presumed that if each of these workmen were obliged to perform
all the operations himself, even supposing him a practised hand, he
would not perhaps complete two cards in a day: and the thirty workmen,
instead of fifteen thousand five hundred cards, would make only
sixty.”[*]

Edition: current; Page: [124]
In watchmaking, as Mr. Babbage observes, “it was stated in evidence
before a Committee of the House of Commons, that there are a hundred and
two distinct branches of this art, to each of which a boy may be put
apprentice; and that he only learns his master’s department, and is
unable, after his apprenticeship has expired, without subsequent
instruction, to work at any other branch. The watch-finisher, whose
business ditd is to put together the scattered parts, is the only one,
out of the hundred and two persons, who can work in any other department
than his own.”*

§ 5. [Analysis of the advantages of the division of labour] The causes
of the increased efficiency given to labour by the division of
employments are some of them too familiar to require specification; but
it is worth while to attempt a complete enumeration of them. By Adam
Smith they are reduced to three. “First, the increase of dexterity in
every particular workman; secondly, the saving of the time which is
commonly lost in passing from one species of work to another; and
lastly, the invention of a great number of machines which facilitate and
abridge labour, and enable one man to do the work of many.”[*]

Of these, the increase of dexterity of the individual workman is the
most obvious and universal. It does not follow that because a thing has
been done oftener it will be done better. That depends on the
intelligence of the workman, and on the degree in which his mind works
along with his hands. But it will be done more easily. The organs
themselves acquire greater power: the muscles employed grow stronger by
frequent exercise, the sinews more pliant, and the mental powers more
efficient, and less sensible of fatigue. What can be done easily has at
least a better chance of being done well, and is sure to be done more
expeditiously. What was at first done slowly comes to be done quickly;
what was at first done slowly with accuracy is at last done quickly with
equal accuracy. This is as true of mental operations as of bodily. Even
a child, after much practice, sums up a column of figures with a
rapidity which resembles intuition. The act of speaking any language, of
reading fluently, of playing music at sight, are cases as remarkable as
they are familiar. Among bodily acts, dancing, gymnastic exercises, ease
and brilliancy of execution on a musical instrument, are examples of the
rapidity and facility acquired by repetition. In simpler manual
operations the effect is of course still sooner produced. “The
rapidity,” Adam Smith observes, “with which some of the operations of
certain manufactures are performed, exceeds what the human hand could,
by those who had never seen them, be supposed capable of Edition:
current; Page: [125] acquiring.”* This skill is, naturally, attained
after shorter practice, in proportion as the division of labour is more
minute; and will not be attained in the same degree at all, if the
workman has a greater variety of operations to execute than allows of a
sufficiently frequent repetition of each. The advantage is not confined
to the greater efficiency ultimately attained, but includes also the
diminished loss of time, and waste of material, in learning the art. “A
certain quantity of material,” says Mr. Babbage,† “will in all cases be
consumed unprofitably, or spoiled, by every person who learns an art;
and as he applies himself to each new process, he will waste some of the
raw material, or of the partly manufactured commodity. But if each man
commit this waste in acquiring successively every process, the quantity
of waste will be much greater than if each person confine his attention
to one process.” And in general each will be much sooner qualified to
execute his one process, if he be not distracted while learning it, by
the necessity of alearninga others.

The second advantage enumerated by Adam Smith as arising from the
division of labour, is one on which I cannot help thinking that more
stress is laid by him and others than it deserves. To do full justice to
his opinion, I will quote his own exposition of it. “The advantage which
is gained by saving the time commonly lost in passing from one sort of
work to another, is much greater than we should at first view be apt to
imagine it. It is impossible to pass very quickly from one kind of work
to another, that is carried on in a different place, and with quite
different tools. A country weaver, who cultivates a small farm, must
lose a good deal of time in passing from his loom to the field, and from
the field to his loom. When the two trades can be carried on in the same
workhouse, the loss of time is no doubt much less. It is even in this
case, however, very considerable. A man commonly saunters a little in
turning his hand from one sort of employment to another. When he first
begins the new work, he is seldom very Edition: current; Page: [126]
keen and hearty; his mind, as they say, does not go to it, and for some
time he rather trifles than applies to good purpose. The habit of
sauntering and of indolent careless application, which is naturally, or
rather necessarily acquired by every country workman who is obliged to
change his work and his tools every half hour, and to apply his hand in
twenty different ways almost every day of his life, renders him almost
always slothful and lazy, and incapable of any vigorous application even
on the most pressing occasions.”[*] This is surely a most exaggerated
description of the inefficiency of country labour, where it has any
adequate motive to exertion. Few workmen change their work and their
tools oftener than a gardener; is he usually incapable of vigorous
application? Many of the higher description of artisans have to perform
a great multiplicity of operations with a variety of tools. They do not
execute each of these with the rapidity with which a factory workman
performs his single operation; but they are, except in a merely manual
sense, more skilful labourers, and in all senses whatever more
energetic.

Mr. Babbage, following in the track of Adam Smith, says, “When the human
hand, or the human head, has been for some time occupied in any kind of
work, it cannot instantly change its employment with full effect. The
muscles of the limbs employed have acquired a flexibility during their
exertion, and those not in action a stiffness during rest, which renders
every change slow and unequal in the commencement. Long habit also
produces in the muscles exercised a capacity for enduring fatigue to a
much greater degree than they could support under other circumstances. A
similar result seems to take place in any change of mental exertion; the
attention bestowed on the new subject not being so perfect at first as
it becomes after some exercise. The employment of different tools in the
successive processes, is another cause of the loss of time in changing
from one operation to another. If these tools are simple, and the change
is not frequent, the loss of time is not considerable; but in many
processes of the arts, the tools are of great delicacy, requiring
accurate adjustment every time they are used; and in many cases, the
time employed in adjusting bears a large proportion to that employed in
using the tool. The sliding-rest, the dividing and the drilling engine
are of this kind: and hence, in manufactories of sufficient extent, it
is found to be good economy to keep one machine constantly employed in
one kind of work: one lathe, for example, having a screw motion to its
sliding-rest along the whole length of its bed, is kept constantly
making cylinders; another, having a motion for equalizing the velocity
of the work at the point at which it passes the tool, is kept for facing
surfaces; whilst a third is constantly employed in cutting wheels.”[†]

Edition: current; Page: [127]
I am very far from implying that these different considerations are of
no weight; but I think there are counter-considerations which are
overlooked. If one kind of muscular or mental labour is different from
another, for that very reason it is to some extent a rest from that
other; and if the greatest vigour is not at once obtained in the second
occupation, neither could the first have been indefinitely prolonged
without some relaxation of energy. It is a matter of common experience
that a change of occupation will often afford relief where complete
repose would otherwise be necessary, and that a person can work many
more hours without fatigue at a succession of occupations, than if
confined during the whole time to one. Different occupations employ
different muscles, or different benergiesb of the mind, some of which
rest and are refreshed while others work. Bodily labour itself rests
from mental, and conversely. cThec variety itself has an invigorating
effect on what, for want of a more philosophical appellation, we must
term the animal spirits; so important to the efficiency of all work not
mechanical, and not unimportant even to that. The comparative weight due
to these considerations is different with different individuals; some
are more fitted than others for persistency in one occupation, and less
fit for change; they require longer to get the steam up (to use a
metaphor now common); the irksomeness of setting to work lasts longer,
and it requires more time to bring their faculties into full play, and
therefore when this is once done, they do not like to leave off, but go
on long without intermission, even to the injury of their health.
Temperament has something to do with these differences. There are people
whose faculties seem by nature to come slowly into action, and to
accomplish little until they have been a long time employed. Others,
again, get into action rapidly, but cannot, without exhaustion, continue
long. In this, however, as in most other things, though natural
differences are something, habit is much more. The habit of passing
rapidly from one occupation to another may be acquired, like other
habits, by early cultivation; and when it is acquired, there is none of
the sauntering which Adam Smith speaks of, after each change; no want of
energy and interest, but the workman comes to each part of his
occupation with a freshness and a spirit which he does not retain if he
persists in any one part (unless in case of unusual excitement) beyond
the length of time to which he is accustomed. Women are usually (at
least in their present social circumstances) of far greater versatility
than men; and the present topic is an instance among multitudes, how
little the ideas and experience of women have yet counted for, in
forming the opinions of mankind. There are few women who would not
reject the idea that work is made vigorous by being protracted, and is
inefficient for some time after changing to a new thing. Even in this
case, habit, I believe, much more than nature, is Edition: current;
Page: [128] the cause of the difference. The occupations of nine out of
every ten men are special, those of nine out of every ten women general,
embracing a multitude of details, each of which requires very little
time. Women are in the constant practice of passing quickly from one
manual, and still more from one mental operation to another, which
therefore rarely costs them either effort or loss of time, while a man’s
occupation generally consists in working steadily for a long time at one
thing, or one very limited class of things. But the situations are
sometimes reversed, and with them the characters. Women are not found
less efficient than men for the uniformity of factory work, or they
would not so generally be employed for it; and a man who has cultivated
the habit of turning his hand to many things, far from being the
slothful and lazy person described by Adam Smith, is usually remarkably
lively and active. It is dtrue, however,d that change of occupation may
be too frequent even for the most versatile. Incessant variety is even
more fatiguing than perpetual sameness.

The third advantage attributed by Adam Smith to the division of labour,
is, to a certain extent, real. Inventions tending to save labour in a
particular operation, are more likely to occur to any one in proportion
as his thoughts are intensely directed to that occupation, and
continually employed upon it. A person is not so likely to make
practical improvements in one department of things, whose attention is
very much diverted to others. But, in this, much more depends on general
intelligence and habitual activity of mind, than on exclusiveness of
occupation; and if that exclusiveness is carried to a degree
unfavourable to the cultivation of intelligence, there will be more lost
in this kind of advantage, than gained. We may add, that whatever may be
the cause of making inventions, when they are once made, the increased
efficiency of labour is owing to the invention itself, and not to the
division of labour.

The greatest advantage (next to the edexterity of the workmen) derived
from the minute division of labour which takes place in modern
manufacturing industry, is fone not mentioned by Adam Smith, but to
which attention has been drawn by Mr. Babbage; the more economical
distribution of labour, by classing the work-people according to their
capacity. Different parts of the same series of operations require
unequal degrees of skill and bodily strength; and those who have skill
enough for the most difficult, or strength enough for the hardest parts
of the labour, are made much more useful by being employed solely in
them; the operations gwhich everybody is capable ofg, being left to
those who are fit for no others. Edition: current; Page: [129]
Production is most efficient when the precise quantity of skill and
strength, which is required for each part of the process, is employed in
it, and no more. The operation of pin-making requires, it seems, in its
different parts, such different degrees of skill, that the wages earned
by the persons employed vary from fourpence halfpenny a day to six
shillings; and if the workman who is paid at that highest rate had to
perform the whole process, he would be working a part of his time with a
waste per day equivalent to the difference between six shillings and
fourpence halfpenny. Without reference to the loss sustained in quantity
of work done, and supposing even that he could make a pound of pins in
the same time in which ten workmen combining their labour can make ten
pounds, Mr. Babbage computes that they would cost, in making, three
times and three-quarters as much as they now do by hmeansh of the
division of labour. In needle-making, he adds, the difference would be
still greater, for in that, the scale of remuneration for different
parts of the process varies from sixpence to twenty shillings a day.

To the advantage which consists in extracting the greatest possible
amount of utility from skill, may be added the analogous one, of
extracting the utmost possible utility from tools. “If any man,” says an
able writer,* “had all the tools which many different occupations
require, at least three-fourths of them would constantly be idle and
useless. It were clearly then better, were any society to exist where
each man had all these tools, and alternately carried on each of these
occupations, that the members of it should, if possible, divide them
amongst them, each restricting himself to some particular employment.
iThe advantages of the change to the whole community, and therefore to
every individual in it, are great. In the first place, the various
implements being in constant employment, yield a better return for what
has been laid out in procuring them. In consequence their owners can
afford to have them of better quality and more complete construction.
The result of both events is, that a larger provision is made for the
future wants of the whole society.”

§ 6. [Limitations of the division of labour] The division of labour, as
all writers on the subject have remarked, is limited by the extent of
the market. If, by the separation of pin-making into ten distinct
employments, forty-eight thousand pins can be made in a day, this
separation will only be advisable if the number of accessible consumers
is such as to require, Edition: current; Page: [130] every day,
something like forty-eight thousand pins. If there is only a demand for
twenty-four thousand, the division of labour can only be advantageously
carried to the extent which will every day produce that smaller number.
This, therefore, is a further mode in which an accession of demand for a
commodity tends to increase the efficiency of the labour employed in its
production. The extent of the market may be limited by several causes:
too small a population; the population too scattered and distant to be
easily accessible; deficiency of roads and water carriage; or, finally,
the population too poor, that is, their collective labour too little
effective, to admit of their being large consumers. Indolence, want of
skill, and want of combination of labour, among those who would
otherwise be buyers of a commodity, limit, therefore, the apracticala
amount of combination of labour among its producers. In an early stage
of civilization, when the demand of any particular locality was
necessarily small, industry only flourished among those who by their
command of the sea-coast or of a navigable river, could have the whole
world, or all that part of it which lay on coasts or navigable rivers,
as a market for their productions. The increase of the general riches of
the world, when accompanied with freedom of commercial intercourse,
improvements in navigation, and inland communication by roads, canals,
or railways, tends to give increased productiveness to the labour of
every nation in particular, by enabling each locality to supply with its
special products so much larger a market, that a great extension of the
division of labour in their production is an ordinary consequence.

The division of labour is also limited, in many cases, by the nature of
the employment. Agriculture, for example, is not susceptible of so great
a division of occupations as many branches of manufactures, because its
different operations cannot possibly be simultaneous. One man cannot be
always ploughing, another sowing, and another reaping. A workman who
only practised one agricultural operation would be idle eleven months of
the year. The same person may perform them all in succession, and have,
in bmost climatesb, a considerable amount of unoccupied time. cTo
execute a great agricultural improvement, it is often necessary that
many labourers should work together; but in general, except the few
whose business is superintendence, they all work in the same manner. A
canal or a railway embankment cannot be made without a combination of
many labourers; but they are all excavators, except the dengineersd and
ea fewe clerks.

Edition: current; Page: [131]


CHAPTER IX: Of Production on a Large, and Production on a Small Scale

§ 1. [Advantages of the large system of production in manufactures] From
the importance of combination of labour, it is an obvious conclusion,
that there are many cases in which production is made much more
effective by being conducted on a large scale. Whenever it is essential
to the greatest efficiency of labour that many labourers should combine,
even though only in the way of Simple Co-operation, the scale of the
enterprise must be such as to bring many labourers together, and the
capital must be large enough to maintain them. Still more needful is
this when the nature of the employment allows, and the extent of the
possible market encourages, a considerable division of labour. The
larger the enterprise, the afarthera the division of labour may be
carried. This is one of the principal causes of large manufactories.
Even when no additional subdivision of the work would follow an
enlargement of the operations, there will be good economy in enlarging
them to the point at which every person to whom it is convenient to
assign a special occupation, will have full employment in that
occupation. This point is well illustrated by Mr. Babbage.*

“If machines be kept working through the twenty-four hours,” (which is
evidently the only economical mode of employing them,) “it is necessary
that some person shall attend to admit the workmen at the time they
relieve each other; and whether the porter or other bpersonb so employed
admit one person or twenty, his rest will be equally disturbed. It will
also be necessary occasionally to adjust or repair the machine; and this
can be done much better by a workman accustomed to machine-making, than
by the person who uses it. Now, since the good performance and the
duration of machines depend, to a very great extent, upon correcting
every shake or imperfection in their parts as soon as they appear, the
prompt attention of a workman resident on the spot will considerably
reduce the expenditure arising from the wear and tear of the machinery.
But in the case of a single Edition: current; Page: [132] lace-frame, or
a single loom, this would be too expensive a plan. Here then arises
another circumstance which tends to enlarge the extent of a factory. It
ought to consist of such a number of machines as shall occupy the whole
time of one workman in keeping them in order: if extended beyond that
number, the same principle of economy would point out the necessity of
doubling or tripling the number of machines, in order to employ the
whole time of two or three skilful workmen.

“cWhenc one portion of the workman’s labour consists in the exertion of
mere physical force, as in weaving, and in many similar arts, it will
soon occur to the manufacturer, that if that part were executed by a
steam-engine, the same man might, in the case of weaving, attend to two
or more looms at once: and, since we already suppose that one or more
operative engineers have been employed, the number of looms may be so
arranged that their time shall be fully occupied in keeping the
steam-engine and the looms in order.d

“Pursuing the same principles, the manufactory becomes gradually so
enlarged, that the expense of lighting during the night amounts to a
considerable sum: and as there are already attached to the establishment
persons who are up all night, and can therefore constantly attend to it,
and also engineers to make and keep in repair any machinery, the
addition of an apparatus for making gas to light the factory leads to a
new extension, at the same time that it contributes, by diminishing the
expense of lighting, and the risk of accidents from fire, to reduce the
cost of manufacturing.

“Long before a factory has reached this extent, it will have been found
necessary to establish an accountant’s department, with clerks to pay
the workmen, and to see that they arrive at their stated times; and this
department must be in communication with the agents who purchase the raw
produce, and with those who sell the manufactured article.” It will cost
these clerks and accountants little more time and trouble to pay a large
number of workmen than a small number; to check the accounts of large
transactions, than of small. If the business doubled itself, it would
probably be necessary to increase, but certainly not to double, the
number either of accountants, or of buying and selling agents. Every
increase of business would enable the whole to be carried on with a
eproportionatelye smaller amount of labour.

As a general rule, the expenses of a business do not increase by any
means proportionally to the quantity of business. Let us take as an
example, a set of operations which we are accustomed to see carried on
by one great establishment, that of the Post Office. Suppose that the
business, let us say Edition: current; Page: [133] only of the London
letter-post, instead of being centralized in a single concern, were
divided among five or six fcompeting companiesf. Each of these would be
obliged to maintain almost as large an establishment as is now
sufficient for the whole. Since each must arrange for receiving and
delivering letters in all parts of the town, each must send
letter-carriers into every street, and almost every alley, and this too
as many times in the day as is now done by the Post Office, if the
service is to be as well performed. Each must have an office for
receiving letters in every neighbourhood, with all subsidiary
arrangements for collecting the letters from the different offices and
re-distributing them. gTo this must be addedg the much greater number of
superior officers who would be required to check and control the
subordinates, implying not only a greater cost in salaries for such
responsible officers, but the necessity, perhaps, of being satisfied in
many instances with an inferior standard of qualification, and so
failing in the object.

Whether or not the advantages obtained by operating on a large scale
preponderate in any particular case over the more watchful attention,
and greater regard to minor gains and losses, usually found in small
establishments, can be ascertained, in a state of free competition, by
an unfailing test. Wherever there are large and small establishments in
the same business, that one of the two which in existing circumstances
carries on the production at greatest advantage will be able to
undersell the other. The power of permanently underselling can onlyh,
generally speaking,h be derived from increased effectiveness of labour;
and this, when obtained by a more extended division of employment, or by
a classification tending to a better economy of skill, always implies a
greater produce from the same labour, and not merely the same produce
from less labour: it increases not the surplus only, but the gross
produce of industry. If an increased quantity of the particular article
is not required, and ipart of the labourers in consequence lose their
employment, the capital which maintained and employed them is also set
at liberty; and the general produce of the country is increased by some
other application of their labour.

Another of the causes of large manufactories, however, is the
introduction of processes requiring expensive machinery. Expensive
machinery supposes a large capital; and is not resorted to except with
the intention of producing, and the hope of selling, as much of the
article as comes up to the full powers of the machine. For both these
reasons, wherever costly machinery jisj used, the large system of
production is inevitable. But the Edition: current; Page: [134] power of
underselling is not in this case so unerring a test as in the former, of
the beneficial effect on the total production of the community. The
power of underselling does not depend on the absolute increase of
produce, but on its bearing an increased proportion to the expenses;
which, as was shown in a former chapter,* it may do, consistently with
even a diminution of the gross annual produce. By the adoption of
machinery, a circulating capital, which was perpetually consumed and
reproduced, has been converted into a fixed capital, requiring only a
small annual expense to keep it up: and a much smaller produce will
suffice for merely covering that expense, and replacing the remaining
circulating capital of the producer. The machinery therefore kmightk
answer perfectly well to the manufacturer, and lenable him to undersell
his competitors, though the effect on the production of the country
mmightm be not an increase but a diminution. It is true, the article
will be sold cheaper, and therefore, of that single article, there will
probably be not a smaller, but a greater quantity sold; since the loss
to the community collectively has fallen upon the work-people, and they
are not the principal customers, if customers at all, of most branches
of manufacture. But though that particular branch of industry may extend
itself, it will be by replenishing its diminished circulating capital
from that of the community generally; and if the labourers employed in
that department escape loss of employment, it is because the loss will
spread itself over the labouring people at large. If any of them are
reduced to the condition of unproductive labourers, supported by
voluntary or legal charity, the gross produce of the country is to that
extent permanently diminished, until the ordinary progress of
accumulation makes it up; but if the condition of the labouring classes
enables them to bear a temporary reduction of wages, and the superseded
labourers become absorbed in other employments, their labour is still
productive, and the breach in the gross produce of the community is
repaired, though not the detriment to the labourers. I have restated
this exposition, which has already been made in a former place, to
impress more strongly the truth, that a mode of production does not of
necessity increase the productive effect of the collective labour of a
community, because it enables a particular commodity to be sold cheaper.
The one consequence generally accompanies the other, but not
necessarily. I will not here repeat the reasons I formerly gave, nor
anticipate those which will be given more fully hereafter, for deeming
the exception to be rather a case abstractedly possible, than one which
is frequently realized in fact.

A considerable part of the saving of labour effected by substituting the
Edition: current; Page: [135] large system of production for the small,
is the saving in the labour of the capitalists themselves. If a hundred
producers with small capitals carry on separately the same business, the
superintendence of each concern will probably require the whole
attention of the person conducting it, sufficiently at least to hinder
his time or thoughts from being disposable for anything else: while a
single manufacturer possessing a capital equal to the sum of theirs,
with ten or a dozen clerks, could conduct the whole of their amount of
business, and have leisure too for other occupations. The small
capitalist, it is true, generally combines with the business of
direction some portion of the details, which the other leaves to his
subordinates: the small farmer follows his own plough, the small
tradesman serves in his own shop, the small weaver plies his own loom.
But in this very union of functions there is, in a great proportion of
cases, a want of economy. The principal in the concern is either
wasting, in the routine of a business, qualities suitable for the
direction of it, or he is only fit for the former, and then the latter
will be ill done. I must observe, however, that I do not attach, to this
saving of labour, the importance often ascribed to it. There is
undoubtedly much more labour expended in the superintendence of many
small capitals than in that of one large capital. For this labour
however the small producers have generally a full compensation, in the
feeling of being their own masters, and not servants of an employer. It
may be said, that if they value this independence they will submit to
pay a price for it, and to sell at the reduced rates occasioned by the
competition of the great dealer or manufacturer. But they cannot always
do this and continue to gain a living. They thus gradually disappear
from society. After having consumed their little capital in prolonging
the unsuccessful struggle, they either sink into the condition of hired
labourers, or become dependent on others for support.

§ 2. [Advantages and disadvantages of the joint-stock principle]
Production on a large scale is greatly promoted by the practice of
forming a large capital by the combination of many small contributions;
or, in other words, by the formation of joint stock companies. The
aadvantagesa of the joint stock principle are numerous and important.

In the first place, many undertakings require an amount of capital
beyond the means of the richest individual or private partnership. No
individual could have made a railway from London to Liverpool; it is
doubtful if any individual could even work the traffic on it, now when
it is made. The government indeed could have done both; and in countries
where the practice of co-operation is only in the earlier stages of its
growth, the government can alone be looked to for any of btheb works for
which a great combination of means is requisite; because it can obtain
those means Edition: current; Page: [136] by compulsory taxation, and is
already accustomed to the conduct of large operations. For reasons,
however, which are tolerably well known, and of which we shall treat
fully hereafter, government agency for the conduct of industrial
operations is generally one of the least eligible of resources, when any
other is available.

Next, there are undertakings which individuals are not absolutely
incapable of performing, but which they cannot perform on the scale and
with the continuity which carec ever more and more required by the
exigencies of a society in an advancing state. Individuals are quite
capable of despatching ships from England to any or every part of the
world, to carry passengers and letters; the thing was done before joint
stock companies dfor the purposed were heard of. But when, from the
increase of population and transactions, as well as of means of payment,
the public will no longer content themselves with occasional
opportunities, but require the certainty that packets shall start
regularly, for some places once or even twice a day, for others once a
week, for others that a steam ship of egreate size and expensive
construction shall depart on fixed days twice in each month, it is
evident that to afford an assurance of keeping up with punctuality such
a circle of costly operations, requires a much larger capital and a much
larger staff of qualified subordinates than can be commanded by an
individual capitalist. There are other cases, again, in which though the
business might be perfectly well transacted with small or moderate
capitals, the guarantee of a great subscribed stock is necessary or
desirable as a security to the public for the fulfilment of pecuniary
engagements. This is especially the case when the nature of the business
requires that numbers of persons should be willing to trust the concern
with their money: as in the business of banking, and that of insurance:
to both of which the joint stock principle is eminently adapted. It is
an instance of the folly and jobbery of the rulers of mankind, that
until fa late periodf the joint stock principle, as a general resort,
was in this country interdicted by law to these two modes of business;
to banking altogether, and to insurance in the department of sea risks;
in order to bestow a lucrative monopoly on particular establishments
which the government was pleased exceptionally to license, namely the
Bank of England, and two insurance companies, the London and the Royal
Exchange.

gAnother advantage of joint stock or associated management, is its
incident of publicity. This is not an invariable, but it is a natural
consequence of the joint stock principle, and might be, as in some
important cases it Edition: current; Page: [137] already is, compulsory.
In banking, insurance, and other businesses which depend wholly on
confidence, publicity is a still more important element of success than
a large subscribed capital. A heavy loss occurring in a private bank may
be kept secret; even though it were of such magnitude as to cause the
ruin of the concern, the banker may still carry it on for years, trying
to retrieve its position, only to fall in the end with a greater crash:
but this cannot so easily happen in the case of a joint stock company,
whose accounts are published periodically. The accounts, even if cooked,
still exercise some check; and the suspicions of shareholders, breaking
out at the general meetings, put the public on their guard.g

These are some of the advantages of joint stock over individual
management. But if we look to the other side of the question, we shall
find that individual management has also hvery greath advantages over
joint stock. The chief of these is the much keener interest of the
managers in the success of the undertaking.

The administration of a joint stock association is, in the main,
administration by hired servants. Even the committee, or board of
directors, who are supposed to superintend the management, and who do
really appoint and remove the managers, have no pecuniary interest in
the good working of the concern beyond the shares they individually
hold, which are always a very small part of the capital of the
association, and in general but a small part of the fortunes of the
directors themselves; and the part they take in the management usually
divides their time with many other occupations, of as great or greater
importance to their own interest; the business being the principal
concern of no one except those who are hired to carry it on. But
experience shows, and proverbs, the expression of popular experience,
attest, how inferior is the quality of hired iservantsi, compared with
the ministration of those personally interested in the work, and how
indispensable, when hired service must be employed, is “the master’s
eye” to watch over it.

The successful conduct of an industrial enterprise requires two quite
distinct qualifications: fidelity, and zeal. The fidelity of the hired
managers of a concern it is possible to secure. When their work admits
of being reduced to a definite set of rules, the violation of these is a
matter on which conscience cannot easily blind itself, and on which
responsibility may be enforced by the loss of employment. But to carry
on a great business successfully, requires a hundred things which, as
they cannot be defined beforehand, it is impossible to convert into
distinct and positive obligations. First and principally, it requires
that the directing mind should be incessantly occupied with the subject;
should be continually laying schemes by Edition: current; Page: [138]
which greater profit may be obtained, or expense saved. This intensity
of interest in the subject it is seldom to be expected that any one
should feel, who is conducting a business as the hired servant and for
the profit of another. There are experiments in human jaffairs which
arej conclusive on the point. Look at the whole class of rulers, and
ministers of state. The work they are entrusted with, is among the most
interesting and exciting of all occupations; the personal share which
they themselves reap of the national benefits or misfortunes which befal
the state under their rule, is far from trifling, and the rewards and
punishments which they may expect from public estimation are of the
plain and palpable kind which are most keenly felt and most widely
appreciated. Yet how rare a thing is it to find a statesman in whom
mental indolence is not stronger than all these inducements. How
infinitesimal is the proportion kwho trouble themselves to form, or even
to attend to, plans of public improvement, unless lwhenl it is made
still more troublesome to them to remain inactive; or who have any other
real desire than that of rubbing on, so as to escape general blame. On a
smaller scale, all who have ever employed hired labour have had ample
experience of the efforts made to give as little labour in exchange for
the wages, as is compatible with not being turned off. The universal
neglect by domestic servants of their employer’s interests, wherever
these are not protected by some fixed rule, is matter of common remark;
unless where long continuance in the same service, and reciprocal good
offices, have produced either personal attachment, or some feeling of a
common interest.

Another of the disadvantages of joint stock concerns, which is in some
degree common to all concerns on a large scale, is disregard of small
gains and small savings. In the management of a great capital and great
transactions, especially when the managers have not much interest in it
of their own, small sums are apt to be counted for next to nothing; they
never seem worth the care and trouble which it costs to attend to them,
and the credit of liberality and openhandedness is cheaply bought by a
disregard of such trifling considerations. But small profits and small
expenses often repeated, amount to great gains and losses: and of this a
large capitalist is often a sufficiently good calculator to be
practically aware; and to arrange his business on a system, which if
enforced by a sufficiently vigilant superintendence, precludes the
possibility of the habitual waste, otherwise incident to a great
business. But the managers of a joint stock concern seldom devote
themselves sufficiently to the work, to enforce unremittingly, even if
introduced, through every detail of the business, a really economical
system.

From considerations of this nature, Adam Smith was led to enunciate as
Edition: current; Page: [139] a principle, that joint stock companies
could never be expected to maintain themselves without an exclusive
privilege, except in branches of business which, like banking,
insurance, and some others, admit of being, in a considerable degree,
reduced to fixed rules. This, however, is one of those over-statements
of a true principle, often met with in Adam Smith. In his days there
were few instances of joint stock companies which had been permanently
successful without a monopoly, except the class of cases which he
referred to; but since his time there have been many; and the regular
increase both of the spirit of combination and of the ability to
combine, will doubtless produce many more. Adam Smith fixed his
observation too exclusively on the superior energy and more unremitting
attention brought to a business in which the whole stake and the whole
gain belong to the persons conducting it; and he overlooked various
countervailing considerations which go a great way towards neutralizing
even that great point of superiority.

Of these one of the most important is that which relates to the
intellectual and active qualifications of the directing head. The
stimulus of individual interest mis some security form exertion, but
nexertion is of little avail if the intelligence exerted is of an
inferior order, which it must necessarily be in the majority of concerns
carried on by the persons chiefly interested in them. Where the concern
is large, and can afford a remuneration sufficient to attract a class of
candidates superior to the common average, it is possible to select for
the general management, and for all the skilled employments of a
subordinate kind, persons of a degree of acquirement and cultivated
intelligence which more than compensates for their inferior interest in
the result. Their greater perspicacity enables them, with even a part of
their minds, to see probabilities of advantage which never occur to the
ordinary run of men by the continued exertion of the whole of theirs;
oand their superior knowledge,o and phabitual rectitude of perception
and of judgment, qguardq them against blunders, the rfearr of which
would prevent the others from hazarding their interests in any attempt
out of the ordinary routine.

It must sbe furthers remarked, that it is not a necessary consequence of
joint stock management, that the persons employed, whether in superior
or in subordinate offices, should be paid wholly by fixed salaries.
There are modes of connecting more or less intimately the interest of
the employés with the pecuniary success of the concern. There is a long
series of intermediate positions, between working wholly on one’s own
account, and Edition: current; Page: [140] working by the day, week, or
year for an invariable payment. Even in the case of ordinary unskilled
labour, there is such a thing as task-work, or working by the piece: and
the superior efficiency of this is so well known, that judicious
employers always resort to it when the work admits of being put out in
definite portions, without the necessity of too troublesome a
surveillance to guard against inferiority in the execution. In the case
of the managers of joint stock companies, and of the superintending and
controlling officers in many private establishments, it is a common
enough practice to connect their pecuniary interest with the interest of
their employers, by giving them part of their remuneration in the form
of a percentage on the profits. The personal interest thus given to
hired servants is not comparable in intensity to that of the owner of
the capital; but it is sufficient to be a very material stimulus to zeal
and carefulness, and, when added to the advantage of superior
intelligence, often raises the quality of the service much above that
which the generality of masters are capable of rendering to themselves.
The ulterior extensions of which this principle of remuneration is
susceptible, being of great social as well as economical importance,
will be more particularly adverted to in a subsequent stage of the
present inquiry.

As I have already remarked of large establishments generally, when
compared with small ones, whenever competition is free its results will
show whether individual or joint stock agency is best adapted to the
particular case, since that which is most efficient and most economical
will always in the end succeed in underselling the other.

§ 3. [Conditions necessary for the large system of production] The
possibility of substituting the large system of production for the
small, depends, of course, in the first place, on the extent of the
market. The large system can only be advantageous when a large amount of
business is to be done: it implies, therefore, either a populous and
flourishing community, or a great opening for exportation. Again, this
as well as every other change in the system of production is greatly
favoured by a progressive condition of capital. It is chiefly when the
capital of a country is receiving a great annual increase, that there is
a large amount of capital seeking for investment: and a new enterprise
is much sooner and more easily entered upon by new capital, than by
withdrawing capital from existing employments. The change is also much
facilitated by the existence of large capitals in few hands. It is true
that the same amount of capital can be raised by bringing together many
small sums. But this (besides that it is not equally well suited to all
branches of industry) supposes a much greater degree of commercial
confidence and enterprise diffused through the community, and belongs
altogether to a more advanced stage of industrial progress.

Edition: current; Page: [141]
In the countries in which there are the largest markets, the widest
diffusion of commercial confidence and enterprise, the greatest annual
increase of capital, and the greatest number of large capitals owned by
individuals, there is a tendency to substitute more and more, in one
branch of industry after another, large establishments for small ones.
In England, the achiefa type of all these characteristics, there is ba
perpetual growth not onlyb of large manufacturing establishments, but
also, wherever a sufficient number of purchasers are assembled, of shops
and warehouses for conducting retail business on a large scale. These
are almost always able to undersell the smaller tradesmen, partly, it is
understood, by means of division of labour, and the economy occasioned
by limiting the employment of skilled agency to cases where skill is
required; and partly, no doubt, by the saving of labour arising from the
great scale of the transactions; as it costs no more time, and not much
more exertion of mind, to make a large purchase, for example, than a
small one, and very much less than to make a number of small ones.

With a view merely to production, and to the greatest efficiency of
labour, this change is wholly beneficial. In some cases it is attended
with drawbacks, rather social than economical, the nature of which has
been already hinted at. But whatever disadvantages may be supposed to
attend on the change from a small to a large system of production, they
are not applicable to the change from a large to a still larger. When,
in any employment, the régime of independent small producers has either
never been possible, or has been superseded, and the system of many
cwork-peoplec under one management has become fully established, from
that time any further enlargement in the scale of production is
generally an unqualified benefit. It is obvious, for example, how great
an economy of labour would be obtained if London were supplied by a
single gas or water company instead of the existing plurality. While
there are even as many as two, this implies double establishments of all
sorts, when one only, with a small increase, could probably perform the
whole operation equally well; double sets of machinery and works, when
the whole of the gas or water required could generally be produced by
one set only; even double sets of pipes, if the companies did not
prevent this needless expense by agreeing upon a division of the
territory. Were there only one establishment, it could make lower
charges, consistently with obtaining the rate of profit now realized.
But would it do so? Even if it did not, the community in the aggregate
would still be a gainer: since the shareholders are dad part of the
community, and they Edition: current; Page: [142] would obtain higher
profits ewhilee the consumers paid only the same. It is, however, an
error to suppose that the prices are fever permanentlyf kept down by the
competition of these companies. Where competitors are so few, they
always gend by agreeingg not to compete. They may run a race of
cheapness to ruin a new candidate, but as soon as he has established his
footing they come to terms with him. When, therefore, a business of real
public importance can only be carried on advantageously upon so large a
scale as to render the liberty of competition almost illusory, it is an
unthrifty dispensation of the public resources that several costly sets
of arrangements should be kept up for the purpose of rendering to the
community this one service. It is much better to treat it at once as a
public function; and if it be not such as the government itself could
beneficially undertake, it should be made over entire to the company or
association which will perform it on the best terms for the public. In
the case of railways, for example, no one can desire to see the enormous
waste of capital and land (not to speak of increased nuisance) involved
in the construction of a second railway to connect the same places
already united by an existing one; while the two would not do the work
better than it could be done by one, and after a short time hwould
probablyh be amalgamated. Only one isuchi line ought to be permitted,
but the control over that line never ought to be parted with by the
State, unless on a temporary concession, as in France; and the vested
right which Parliament has allowed to be acquired by the existing
companies, like all other proprietary rights which are opposed to public
utility, is morally valid only as a claim to compensation.

§ 4. [Large and small farming compared] The question between the large
and the small asystemsa of production as applied to agriculture—between
large and small farming, the grande and the petite culture—stands, in
many respects, on different grounds from the general question between
great and small industrial establishments. In its social aspect, and as
an element in the Distribution of Wealth, this question will occupy us
hereafter: but even as a question of production, the superiority of the
large system in agriculture is by no means so clearly established as in
manufactures.

I have already remarked, that the operations of agriculture are little
susceptible of benefit from the division of labour. There is but little
separation of employments even on the largest farm. The same persons may
not in general attend to the live stock, to the marketing, and to the
cultivation Edition: current; Page: [143] of the soil; but much beyond
that primary and simple classification the subdivision is not carried.
The combination of labour of which agriculture is susceptible, is
chiefly that which Mr. Wakefield terms Simple Co-operation; several
persons helping one another in the same work, at the same time and
place. But I confess it seems to me that this able writer attributes
more importance to that kind of co-operation, in reference to
agriculture properly so called, than it deserves. None of the common
farming operations require much of it. There is no particular advantage
in setting a bgreatb number of people to work together in ploughing or
digging or sowing the same field, or even in mowing or reaping it unless
time presses. A single family can generally supply all the combination
of labour necessary for these purposes. And in the works in which an
union of many efforts is really needed, there is seldom found any
impracticability in obtaining it where farms are small.

The waste of productive power by subdivision of the land often amounts
to a great evil, but this applies chiefly to a subdivision so minute,
that the cultivators have not enough land to occupy their time. Up to
that point the same principles which recommend large cmanufactoriesc are
applicable to agriculture. For the greatest productive efficiency, it is
generally desirable (though even this proposition must be received with
qualifications) that no family who have any land, should have less than
they could cultivate, or than will fully employ their cattle and tools.
These, however, are not the dimensions of large farms, but of what are
reckoned in England very small ones. The large farmer has some advantage
in the article of buildings. It does not cost so much to house a great
number of cattle in one building, as to lodge them equally well in
several buildings. There is also some advantage in implements. A small
farmer is not so likely to possess expensive instruments. But the
principal agricultural implements, even when of the best construction,
are not expensive. It may not answer to a small farmer to own a
threshing machine, for the small quantity of corn he has to thresh; but
there is no reason why such a machine should not in every neighbourhood
be owned in common, or provided by some person to whom the others pay a
consideration for its used; especially as, when worked by steam, they
are so constructed as to be moveabled.* The large farmer can Edition:
current; Page: [144] make some saving in cost of carriage. There is
nearly as much trouble in carrying a small portion of produce to market,
as a much greater produce; in bringing home a small, as a much larger
quantity of emanurese, and articles of daily consumption. There is also
the greater cheapness of buying things in large quantities. These
various advantages must count for something, but it does not seem that
they ought to count for very much. In England, for some generations,
there has been little experience of small farms; but in Ireland the
experience has been ample, not merely under the worst but under the best
management; and the highest Irish authorities may be cited in opposition
to the opinion which on this subject commonly prevails in England. Mr.
Blacker, for example, one of the most experienced agriculturists and
successful improvers in the North of Ireland, whose experience fwasf
chiefly in the best cultivated, which are also the most minutely divided
parts of the country, gwasg of opinion, that tenants holding farms not
exceeding from five to eight or ten acres, hcouldh live comfortably and
pay as high a rent as any large farmer whatever. “I am firmly
persuaded,” (he says,*) “that the small farmer who holds his own plough
and digs his own ground, if he follows a proper rotation of crops, and
feeds his cattle in the house, can undersell the large farmer, or in
other words can pay a rent which the other cannot afford; and in this I
am confirmed by the opinion of many practical men who have well
considered the subject. . . The English farmer of 700 to 800 acres is a
kind of man approaching to what is known by the name of a gentleman
farmer. He must have his horse to ride, and his gig, and perhaps an
overseer to attend to his labourers; he certainly cannot superintend
himself the labour going on in a farm of 800 acres.” After a few other
remarks, he adds, “Besides all these drawbacks, which the small farmer
knows little about, there is the great expense of carting out the manure
from the homestead to such a great distance, and again carting home the
crop. A single horse will consume the produce of more land than would
feed a small farmer and his wife and two children. And what is more than
all, the large farmer says to his labourers, go to your work; but when
the small farmer has occasion to hire them, he says, come; the
intelligent reader will, I dare say, understand the difference.”

One of the objections most urged against small farms is, that they do
not and cannot maintain, proportionally to their extent, so great a
number of cattle as large farms, and that this occasions such a
deficiency of manure, that a soil much subdivided must always be
impoverished. It will be found, Edition: current; Page: [145] however,
that subdivision only produces this effect when it throws the land into
the hands of cultivators so poor as not to possess the amount of live
stock suitable to the size of their farms. A small farm and a badly
stocked farm are not synonymous. To make the comparison fairly, we must
suppose the same amount of capital which is possessed by the large
farmers to be disseminated among the small ones. When this condition, or
even any approach to it, exists, and when stall feeding is practised
(and stall feeding now begins to be considered good economy even on
large farms), experience, far from bearing out the assertion that small
farming is unfavourable to the multiplication of cattle, conclusively
establishes the very reverse. The abundance of cattle, and copious use
of manure, on the small farms of Flanders, are the most striking
features in that Flemish agriculture which is the admiration of all
competent judges, whether in England or on the Continent.*

Edition: current; Page: [146]
The disadvantage, when disadvantage there is, of small or rather of
peasant farming, as compared with capitalist farming, must chiefly
consist in inferiority of skill and knowledge; but it is not true, as a
general fact, that such inferiority exists. Countries of small farms and
peasant farming, Flanders and Italy, had a good agriculture many
generations before England, and theirs is still, as a whole, probably
the best agriculture in the world. iThe empirical skill, which is the
effect of daily and close observation, Edition: current; Page: [147]
peasant farmers often possess in an eminent degree. The traditional
knowledge, for example, of the culture of the vine, possessed by the
peasantry of the countries where the best wines are produced, is
extraordinary. There is no doubt an absence of science, or at least of
theory; and to some extent a deficiency of the spirit of improvement, so
far as relates to the introduction of new processes. There is also a
want of means to make experiments, which can seldom be made with
advantage except by rich proprietors or capitalists. As for those
systematic improvements which operate on a large tract of country at
once (such as great works of draining or irrigation) or which for any
other jreasonsj do really require large numbers of workmen combining
their labour, these are not in general to be expected from small
farmers, or even small proprietors, though combination among them for
such purposes is by no means unexampled, and will become more common as
their intelligence is more developed.

Against these disadvantages is to be placed, where the tenure of land is
of the requisite kind, an ardour of industry absolutely unexampled in
any other condition of agriculture. This is a subject on which the
testimony of competent witnesses is unanimous. The working of the petite
culture Edition: current; Page: [148] cannot be fairly judged where the
small cultivator is merely a tenant, and not even a tenant on fixed
conditions, but (kas until lately ink Ireland) at a nominal rent greater
than can be paid, and therefore practically at a varying rent always
amounting to the utmost that can be paid. To understand the subject, it
must be studied where the cultivator is the proprietor, or at least a
métayer with a permanent tenure; where the labour he exerts to increase
the produce and value of the land avails wholly, or at least partly, to
his own benefit and that of his descendants. In another division of our
subject, we shall discuss at some length the important subject of
tenures of land, and I defer till then any citation of evidence on the
marvellous industry of peasant proprietors. It may suffice here to
appeal to the immense amount of gross produce which, even without a
permanent tenure, English labourers generally obtain from their little
allotments; a produce beyond comparison greater than a large farmer
extracts, or would find it his interest to extract, from the same piece
of land.

And this I take to be the true reason why large cultivation is generally
most advantageous as a mere investment for profit. Land occupied by a
large farmer is notl, in one sense of the word,l farmed so highly. There
is not nearly so much labour expended on it. This is not on account of
any economy arising from combination of labour, but because, by
employing less, a greater return is obtained in proportion to the
outlay. It does not answer to any one to pay others for exerting all the
labour which the peasant, or even the allotment-holder, gladly undergoes
when the fruits are to be wholly reaped by himself. This labour,
however, is not unproductive: it all adds to the gross produce. With
anything like equality of skill and knowledge, the large farmer does not
obtain nearly so much from the soil as the small proprietor, or the
small farmer with adequate motives to exertion: but though his returns
are less, the labour is less in a still greater degree, and as whatever
labour he employs must be paid for, it does not suit his purpose to
employ more.

But although the gross produce of the land is greatest, cœteris paribus,
under small cultivation, and although, therefore, a country is able on
that system to support a larger aggregate population, it is generally
assumed by English writers that what is termed the net produce, that is,
the surplus after feeding the cultivators, mmustm be smaller; that
therefore, the population disposable for all other purposes, for
manufactures, for commerce and navigation, for national defence, for the
promotion of knowledge, for the liberal professions, for the various
functions of government, for the arts and literature, all of which are
ndependent on this surplus for their existence as occupations, must be
less numerous; and that the nation, therefore (waving all question as to
the condition of the actual cultivators), must be Edition: current;
Page: [149] inferior in the principal elements of national power, and in
many of those of general well-being. This, however, has been taken for
granted much too readily. Undoubtedly the non-agricultural population
will bear a less ratio to the agricultural, under small than under large
cultivation. But that it will be less numerous absolutely, is by no
means a consequence. If the total population, agricultural and
non-agricultural, is greater, the non-agricultural portion may be more
numerous in itself, and may yet be a smaller proportion of the whole. If
the gross produce is larger, the net produce may be larger, and yet bear
a smaller ratio to the gross produce. Yet even Mr. Wakefield sometimes
oappears to confoundo these distinct ideas. In France it is computed
that two-thirds of the whole population are agricultural. In England, at
most, one-third. Hence Mr. Wakefield infers, that “as in France only
three people are supported by the labour of two cultivators, while in
England the labour of two cultivators supports six people, English
agriculture is twice as productive as French agriculture,” owing to the
superior efficiency of large farming through combination of labour. But
in the first place, the facts themselves are overstated. The labour of
two persons in England does not quite support six people, for there is
not a little food imported from foreign countries, and from Ireland. In
France, too, the labour of two cultivators does much more than supply
the food of three persons. It provides the three persons, and
occasionally foreigners, with flax, hemp, and to a certain extent with
silk, oils, tobacco, and latterly sugar, which in England are wholly
obtained from abroad; nearly all the timber used in France is of home
growth, nearly all which is used in England is imported; the principal
fuel of France is procured and brought to market by persons reckoned
among agriculturists, in England by persons not so reckoned. I do not
take into calculation hides and wool, these products being common to
both countries, nor wine or brandy produced for home consumption, since
England has a corresponding production of beer and spirits; but England
has no material export of either article, and a great importation of the
last, while France supplies wines and spirits to the whole world. I say
nothing of fruit, eggs, and such minor particles of agricultural
produce, in which the export trade of France is enormousp. But not to
lay undue stress on these abatements, we will take the statement as it
stands. Suppose that two persons, in England, do bonâ fide produce the
food of six, while in France, for the same purpose, the labour of four
is requisite. Does it follow that England must have a larger surplus for
the support of a non-agricultural population? No; but merely that she
can devote two-thirds of her whole produce to the purpose, instead of
one-third. Suppose the produce to be twice as great, and the one-third
will amount to as much as the two-thirds. The fact might be, that owing
Edition: current; Page: [150] to the greater quantity of labour employed
on the French system, the same land would produce food for twelve
persons which on the English system would only produce it for six: and
if this were so, which would be quite consistent with the conditions of
the hypothesis, then although the food for twelve was produced by the
labour of eight, while the six were fed by the labour of only two, there
would be the same number of hands disposable for other employment in the
one country as in the other. I am not contending that the fact is so. I
know that the gross produce per acre in France qas a whole (though not
in its most improved districts)q averages much less than in England, and
that, in proportion to the extent and fertility of the two countries,
England has, in the sense we are now speaking of, much the largest
disposable population. But the disproportion certainly is not rto be
measured by Mr. Wakefield’s simple criterionr. As well might it be said
that agricultural labour in the United States, where, by sa lates
census, four families in every five tappearedt to be engaged in
agriculture, must be still more inefficient than in France.

The inferiority of French cultivation (which, taking the country as a
whole, must be allowed to be real, though much exaggerated) is probably
more owing to the lower general average of industrial skill and energy
in that country, than to any special cause; and even if partly the
effect of minute subdivision, it does not prove that small farming is
disadvantageous, but only (what is undoubtedly the fact) that farms in
France are very frequently too small, and, what is worse, broken up into
an almost incredible number of patches or parcelles, most inconveniently
dispersed and parted from one another.

As a question, not of gross, but of net produce, the comparative merits
of the grande and the petite culture, especially when the small farmer
is also the proprietor, cannot be looked upon as decided. It is a
question on which good judges at present differ. The current of English
opinion is in favour of large farms: on the Continent, the weight of
authority seems to be on the other side. Professor Rau, of Heidelberg,
the author of one of the most comprehensive and elaborate of extant
treatises on political economy, and who has that large acquaintance with
facts and authorities on his own subject, which generally characterises
his countrymen, lays it down as a settled truth, that small or
moderate-sized farms yield not only a larger gross but a larger net
produce: though, he adds, it is desirable there should be some great
proprietors, to lead the way in new improvements.* Edition: current;
Page: [151] The most apparently impartial and discriminating judgment
that I have met with is that of M. Passy, who (always speaking with
reference to net produce) gives his verdict in favour of large farms for
grain and forage; but, for the kinds of culture which require much
labour and attention, places the advantage wholly on the side of small
cultivation; including in this description, not only the vine and the
olive, where a considerable amount of care and labour must be bestowed
on each individual plant, but also roots, leguminous plants, and those
which furnish the materials of manufactures. The small size, and
consequent multiplication, of farms, according to all authorities, are
extremely favourable to the abundance of many minor products of
agriculture.*

It is evident that every labourer who extracts from the land more than
his own food, and that of any family he may have, increases the means of
supporting a non-agricultural population. Even if his surplus is no more
than enough to buy uclothesu, the labourers who make the clothes are a
non-agricultural population, enabled to exist by food which he produces.
Every agricultural family, therefore, which produces its own
necessaries, adds to the net produce of agriculture; and so does every
person born on the land, who by employing himself on it, adds more to
its gross produce than the mere food which he eats. It is questionable
whether, even in the most subdivided districts of Europe which are
cultivated by the proprietors, the multiplication of hands on the soil
has approached, or tends to approach, within a great distance of this
limit. In France, though the subdivision is confessedly too great, there
is proof positive that it is far from having reached the point at which
it would begin to diminish the power of supporting a non-agricultural
population. This is demonstrated by the great increase of the towns;
which have of late increased in a much greater ratio than the population
generally,† showing (unless the condition of the town labourers is
becoming rapidly deteriorated, which there is no reason to believe) that
even by the unfair and inapplicable test of proportions, the
productiveness of agriculture must be on the increase. This, too,
concurrently with the amplest evidence that in the more improved
districts of France, and in some which, until lately, were among the
unimproved, there is a considerably increased consumption of country
produce by the country population itself.

Edition: current; Page: [152]
vImpressed with the conviction that, of all faults which can be
committed by a scientific writer on political and social subjects,
exaggeration, and wassertionw beyond the evidence, most require to be
guarded against, I limited myself in the early editions of this work to
the foregoing very moderate statements. I little knew how much stronger
my language might have been without exceeding the truth, and how much
the actual progress of French agriculture surpassed anything which I had
at that time sufficient grounds to affirm. The investigations of that
eminent authority on agricultural statistics, M. Léonce de Lavergne,
undertaken by desire of the Academy of Moral and Political Sciences of
the Institute of France, have led to the conclusion that since the
Revolution of 1789, the total produce of French agriculture has doubled;
profits and wages having both increased in about the same, and rent in a
still greater ratio. M. de Lavergne, whose impartiality is one of his
greatest merits, is, moreover, so far in this instance from the
suspicion of having a case to make out, that he is labouring to show,
not how much French agriculture has accomplished, but how much still
remains for it to do. “We have required” (he says) “no less than seventy
years to bring into cultivation two million hectares” (five million
English acres) “of waste land, to suppress half our fallows, double our
agricultural products, increase our population by 30 per cent, our wages
by 100 per cent, our rent by 150 per cent. At this rate we shall require
three quarters of a century more to arrive at the point which England
has already attained.”*

After this evidence, we have surely now heard the last of the
incompatibility of small properties and small farms with agricultural
improvement. The only question which remains open is one of degree; the
comparative xrapidityx of agricultural improvement under the two
systems; and it is the general opinion of those who are equally well
acquainted with both, that improvement is greatest under a due admixture
between them.v

In the present chapter, yIy do not enter on the question zbetween greatz
and small cultivation in any other respect than as a question of
production, and of the efficiency of labour. We shall return to it
hereafter as affecting the distribution of the produce, and the physical
and social well-being of the cultivators themselves; in which aspects it
deserves, and requires, a still more particular examination.

Edition: current; Page: [153]


CHAPTER X: Of the Law of the Increase of Labour

§ 1. [The law of the increase of production depends on those of three
elements, Labour, Capital, and Land] We have now successively considered
each of the agents or conditions of production, and of the means by
which the aefficacya of these various agents is promoted. In order to
come to an end of the questions which relate exclusively to production,
one more, of primary importance, remains.

Production is not a fixed, but an increasing thing. When not kept back
by bad institutions, or a low state of the arts of life, the produce of
industry has usually tended to increase; stimulated not only by the
desire of the producers to augment their means of consumption, but by
the increasing number of the consumers. Nothing in political economy can
be of more importance than to ascertain the law of this increase of
production; the conditions to which it is subject: whether it has
practically any limits, and what these are. There is also no subject in
political economy which is popularly less understood, or on which the
errors committed are of a character to produce, and do produce, greater
mischief.

We have seen that the essential requisites of production are
three—labour, capital, and natural agents; the term capital including
all external and physical requisites which are products of labour, the
term natural agents all those which are not. But among natural agents we
need not take into account those which, existing in unlimited quantity,
being incapable of appropriation, and never altering in their qualities,
are always ready to lend an equal degree of assistance to production,
whatever may be its extent; as air, and the light of the sun. Being now
about to consider the impediments to production, not the facilities for
it, we need advert to no other natural agents than those which are
liable to be deficient either in quantity or in productive power. These
may be all represented by the term land. Land, in the narrowest
acceptation, as the source of agricultural produce, is the chief of
them; and if we extend the term to mines and fisheries—to Edition:
current; Page: [154] what is found in the earth itself, or in the waters
which partly cover it, as well as to what is grown or fed on its
surface, it embraces everything with which we need at present concern
ourselves.

We may say, then, without a greater stretch of language than under the
necessary bexplanationb is permissible, that the requisites of
production are Labour, Capital, and Land. The increase of production,
therefore, depends on the properties of these elements. It is a result
of the increase either of the elements themselves, or of their
productiveness. The law of cthec increase of production must be a
consequence of the laws of these elements; the limits to the increase of
production must be the limits, whatever they are, set by those laws. We
proceed to consider the three elements successively, with reference to
this effect; or in other words, the law of the increase of production,
viewed in respect of its dependence, first on Labour, secondly on
Capital, and lastly on Land.

§ 2. [The Law of Population] The increase of labour is the increase of
mankind; of population. On this subject the discussions excited by athe
Essay of Mr. Malthusa have made the truth, though by no means
universally admitted, yet so fully known, that a briefer examination of
the question than would otherwise have been necessary will probably on
the present occasion suffice.

The power of multiplication inherent in all organic life may be regarded
as infinite. There is no one species of vegetable or animal, which, if
the earth were entirely abandoned to it, and to the things on which it
feeds, would not in a small number of years overspread every region of
the globe, of which the climate was compatible with its existence. The
degree of possible rapidity is different in different orders of beings;
but in all it is sufficient, for the earth to be very speedily filled
up. There are bmanyb species of vegetables of which a single plant will
produce in one year the germs of a thousand; if only two come to
maturity, in fourteen years the two will have multiplied to sixteen
thousand and more. cIt is but a moderate case of fecundity in animals to
be capablec of quadrupling their numbers in a single year; if they only
do as much in half a century, ten thousand will have swelled within two
centuries to upwards of two millions and a half. The capacity of
increase is necessarily in a geometrical progression: the numerical
ratio alone is different.

To this property of organized beings, the human species forms no
exception. Its power of increase is indefinite, and the actual
multiplication would be extraordinarily rapid, if dthed power were
exercised to the utmost. Edition: current; Page: [155] It never is
exercised to the utmost, and yet, in the most favourable circumstances
known to exist, which are those of a fertile region colonized from an
industrious and civilized community, population has continued, for
several generations, independently of fresh immigration, to double
itself in not much more than twenty years.* That ethe capacity of
multiplication in the human species exceedse even this, is evident if we
consider how great is the ordinary number of children to a family, where
the climate is good and early marriages usual; and how small a
proportion of them die before the age of maturity, in the present state
of hygienic knowledge, where the locality is healthy, and the family
adequately provided with the means of living. It is a very low estimate
of the capacity of increase, if we only assume, that in a good sanitary
condition of the people, each generation may be double the number of the
generation which preceded it.

Twenty or thirty years ago, these propositions might still have required
considerable enforcement and illustration; but the evidence of them is
so ample and incontestable, that they have made their way against all
kinds of opposition, and may now be regarded as axiomatic: though the
extreme reluctance felt to admitting them, every now and then gives
birth to some ephemeral theory, speedily forgotten, of a different law
of increase in different circumstances, through a providential
adaptation of the fecundity of the human species to the exigencies of
society.† The obstacle to a just Edition: current; Page: [156]
understanding of the subject does not arise from these theories, but
from too confused a notion of the causes which, at most times and
places, keep the actual increase of mankind so far behind the capacity.

§ 3. [By what checks the increase of population is practically limited]
Those causes, nevertheless, are in no way mysterious. What prevents the
population of hares and rabbits from overstocking the earth? Not want of
fecundity, but causes very different: many enemies, and insufficient
subsistence; not enough to eat, and liability to abea eaten. In the
human race, which is not generally subject to the latter inconvenience,
the equivalents for it are war and disease. If the multiplication of
mankind proceeded bonlyb, like that of the other animals, from a blind
instinct, it would be limited in the same manner with theirs; the births
would be as numerous as the physical constitution of the species
admitted of, and the population would be kept down by deaths.* But the
conduct of human creatures is Edition: current; Page: [157] cmore or
less influenced by foresight of consequences, and by dimpulses superior
to mere animal instincts: and they do not, therefore, propagate like
swine, but are capable, though in very unequal degrees, of being
withheld by prudence, or by the social affections, from giving existence
to beings born only to misery and premature death. In proportion as
mankind rise above the condition of ethee beasts, population is
restrained by the fear of want rather than by want itself. Even where
there is no question of starvation, fmanyf are similarly acted upon by
the apprehension of losing what have come to be regarded as the
decencies of their situation in life. Hitherto no other motives than
these two have been found strong enough, in the generality of mankind,
to counteract the tendency to increase. It has been the practice of a
great majority of the middle and the poorer classes, whenever free from
external control, to marry as early, and in most countries to have as
many children, as was consistent with maintaining themselves in the
condition of life which they were born to, or were accustomed to
consider as theirs. Among the middle classes, in many individual
instances, there is an additional restraint exercised from the desire of
doing more than maintaining their circumstances—of improving them; but
such a desire is rarely found, or rarely has that effect, in the
labouring classes. If they can bring up a family as they were themselves
brought up, even the prudent among them are usually satisfied. Too often
they do not think even of that, but rely on fortune, or on the resources
to be found in legal or voluntary charity.

In a very backward state of society, like that of Europe in the Middle
Ages, and many parts of Asia at present, population is kept down by
actual starvation. The starvation does not take place in ordinary years,
but in seasons of scarcity, which in those states of society are much
more frequent and more extreme than Europe is now accustomed to. In
these seasons actual want, or the maladies consequent on it, carry off
numbers of the population, which in a succession of favourable years
again expands, to be again cruelly decimated. In a more improved state,
few, even among the poorest of the people, are limited to gactualg
necessaries, and to a bare sufficiency of those: and the increase is
kept within bounds, not by excess of deaths, but by limitation of
births. The limitation is brought about in various ways. In some
countries, it is the result of prudent or conscientious self-restraint.
There is a condition to which the labouring people are habituated; they
perceive that by having too numerous families, they must sink below that
condition, or fail to transmit it to their children; and this they do
not choose to submit to. The countries in which, so far as is known, ha
greath degree of voluntary prudence ihas been longesti practised on this
Edition: current; Page: [158] subject, are Norway and parts of
Switzerland. Concerning both, there happens to be unusually authentic
information; many facts were carefully brought together by Mr. Malthus,
and much additional evidence has been obtained since his time. In both
these countries the increase of population is very slow; and what checks
it, is not multitude of deaths, but fewness of births. Both the births
and the deaths are remarkably few in proportion to the population; the
average duration of life is the longest in Europe; the population
contains fewer children, and a greater proportional number of persons in
the vigour of life, than is known to be the case in any other part of
the world. The paucity of births tends directly to prolong life, by
keeping the people in comfortable circumstances; and the same prudence
is doubtless exercised in avoiding causes of disease, as in keeping
clear of the principal jcausej of poverty. It is worthy of remark that
the two countries thus honourably distinguished, are countries of small
landed proprietors.

There are other cases in which the prudence and forethought, which
perhaps might not be exercised by the people themselves, are exercised
by the state for their benefit; marriage not being permitted until the
contracting parties can show that they have the prospect of a
comfortable support. Under these laws, of which I shall speak more fully
hereafter, the condition of the people is reported to be good, and the
illegitimate births not so numerous as might be expected. There are
places, again, in which the restraining cause seems to be not so much
individual prudence, as some general and perhaps even accidental habit
of the country. In the rural districts of England, during the last
century, the growth of population was very effectually repressed by the
difficulty of obtaining a cottage to live in. It was the custom for
unmarried labourers to lodge and board with their employers; it was the
custom for married labourers to have a cottage: and the rule of the
English poor laws by which a parish was charged with the support of its
unemployed poor, rendered landowners averse to promote marriage. About
the end of the century, the great demand for men in war and
manufactures, made it be thought a patriotic thing to encourage
population: and about the same time the growing inclination of farmers
to live like rich people, favoured as it was by a long period of high
prices, made them desirous of keeping inferiors at a greater distance,
and, pecuniary motives arising from abuses of the poor laws being
superadded, they gradually drove their labourers into cottages, which
the landlords now no longer refused permission to build. kIn some
countries an old standing custom that a girl should not marry until she
had spun and woven for Edition: current; Page: [159] herself an ample
trousseau l(destined for the supply of her whole subsequent life,)l is
said to have acted as a substantial check to population. In England, at
present, the influence of prudence in keeping down multiplication is
seen by the diminished number of marriages in the manufacturing
districts in years when trade is bad.

But whatever be the causes by which population is anywhere limited to a
comparatively slow rate of increase, man acceleration of the rate very
speedily follows any diminution of the motives to restraintm. It is but
rarely that improvements in the condition of the labouring classes do
anything more than give a temporary margin, speedily filled up by an
increase of their numbers. The use they commonly choose to make of any
advantageous change in their circumstances, is to take it out in the
form which, by augmenting the population, deprives the succeeding
generation of the benefit. Unlessn, either by their general improvement
in intellectual and moral culture, or at least by raising their habitual
standard of comfortable living, they can be taught to make a better use
of favourable circumstancesn, nothing permanent can be done for them;
the most promising schemes end only in having a more numerous, but not a
happier people. By their habitual standard, I mean that o(when any such
there is)o down to which they will multiply, but not lower. Every
advance they make in education, civilization, and social improvement,
tends to raise this standard; and there is no doubt that it is
gradually, though slowly, rising in the more advanced countries of
Western Europe. Subsistence and employment in England have never
increased more rapidly than in the last pfortyp years, but qevery census
since 1821 showed a smaller proportional increase of population than
that of the period precedingq; and the produce of French agriculture and
industry is increasing in a progressive ratio, while the population
exhibits in every quinquennial census, a smaller proportion of births to
the population.

The subject, however, of population, in its connexion with the condition
of the labouring classes, will be considered in another place: in the
present we have to do with it solely as one of the elements of
Production: and in that character we could not dispense with pointing
out the unlimited extent of its natural powers of increase, and the
causes owing to which so small a portion of that unlimited power is for
the most part actually exercised. After this brief indication, we shall
proceed to the other elements.

Edition: current; Page: [160]


CHAPTER XI: Of the Law of the Increase of Capital

§ 1. [Means and motives to saving, on what dependent] The requisites of
production being labour, capital, and land, it has been seen from the
preceding chapter that the impediments to the increase of production do
not arise from the first of these elements. On the side of labour there
is no obstacle to an increase of production, indefinite in extent and of
unslackening rapidity. Population has the power of increasing in an
uniform and rapid geometrical ratio. If the only essential condition of
production were labour, the produce might, and naturally would, increase
in the same ratio; and there would be no limit, until the numbers of
mankind were brought to a stand from actual want of space.

But production has other requisites, and of these, the one which we
shall next consider is Capital. There cannot be more people in any
country, or in the world, than can be supported from the produce of past
labour until that of present labour comes in. There will be no greater
number of productive labourers in any country, or in the world, than can
be supported from that portion of the produce of past labour, which is
spared from the enjoyments of its possessor for purposes of
reproduction, and is termed Capital. We have next, therefore, to inquire
into the conditions of the increase of capital: the causes by which the
rapidity of its increase is determined, and the necessary limitations of
that increase.

Since all capital is the product of saving, that is, of abstinence from
present consumption for the sake of a future good, the increase of
capital must depend upon two things—the amount of the fund from which
saving can be made, and the strength of the dispositions which prompt to
it.

The fund from which saving can be made, is the surplus of the produce of
labour, after supplying the necessaries of life to all concerned in the
production: (including those employed in replacing the materials, and
keeping the fixed capital in repair.) More than this surplus cannot be
saved under any circumstances. As much as this, though it never is
saved, always might be. This surplus is the fund from which the
enjoyments, as distinguished Edition: current; Page: [161] from the
necessaries, of the producers are provided; it is the fund from which
all are subsisted, who are not themselves engaged in production; and
from which all additions are made to capital. It is the real net produce
of the country. The phrase, net produce, is often taken in a more
limited sense, to denote only the profits of the capitalist and the rent
of the landlord, under the idea that nothing can be included in the net
produce of capital, but what is returned to the owner of the capital
after replacing his expenses. But this is too narrow an acceptation of
the term. The capital of the employer forms the revenue of the
labourers, and if this exceeds the necessaries of life, it gives them a
surplus which they may either expend in enjoyments, or save. For every
purpose for which there can be occasion to speak of the net produce of
industry, this surplus ought to be included in it. When this is
included, and not otherwise, the net produce of the country is the
measure of its effective power; of what it can spare for any apurposesa
of public utility, or private indulgence; the portion of its produce of
which it can dispose at pleasure; which can be drawn upon to attain any
ends, or gratify any wishes, either of the government or of individuals;
which it can either spend for its satisfaction, or save for future
advantage.

The amount of this fund, this net produce, this excess of production
above the physical necessaries of the producers, is one of the elements
that determine the amount of saving. The greater the produce of labour
after supporting the labourers, the more there is which can be saved.
The same thing also partly contributes to determine how much will be
saved. A part of the motive to saving consists in the prospect of
deriving an income from savings; in the fact that capital, employed in
production, is capable of not only reproducing itself but yielding an
increase. The greater the profit that can be made from capital, the
stronger is the motive to its accumulation. That indeed which forms the
inducement to save, is not the whole of the fund which supplies the
means of saving, not the whole net produce of the land, capital, and
labour of the country, but only a part of it, the part which forms the
remuneration of the capitalist, and is called profit of stock. It will
however be readily enough understood, even previously to the
explanations which will be given hereafter, that when the general
productiveness of labour and capital is great, the returns to the
capitalist are likely to be large, and that some proportion, though not
an uniform one, will commonly obtain between the two.

§ 2. [Causes of diversity in the effective strength of the desire of
accumulation] But the disposition to save does not wholly depend on the
external inducement to it; on the amount of profit to be made from
savings. Edition: current; Page: [162] With the same pecuniary
inducement, the inclination is very different, in different persons, and
in different communities. The aeffective desire of accumulationa is of
unequal strength, not only according to the varieties of individual
character, but to the general state of society and civilization. Like
all other moral attributes, it is one in which the human race exhibits
great differences, conformably to the diversity of its circumstances and
the stage of its progress.

On topics which if they were to be fully investigated would exceed the
bounds that can be allotted to them in this treatise, it is satisfactory
to be able to refer to other works in which the necessary developments
have been presented more at length. On the subject of Population this
valuable service has been rendered by the celebrated Essay of Mr.
Malthus; and on the point which now occupies us I can refer with equal
confidence to another, though a less known work, “New Principles of
Political Economy,” by bDr.b Rae.* In no other book known to me is so
much light thrown, both from principle and history, on the causes which
determine the accumulation of capitalc.

All accumulation involves the sacrifice of a present, for the sake of a
future good. But the expediency of such a sacrifice varies very much in
Edition: current; Page: [163] different states of circumstances; and
dthed willingness to make it, varies still more.

In weighing the future against the present, the uncertainty of all
things future is a leading element; and that uncertainty is of very
different degrees. “All circumstances” therefore, “increasing the
probability of the provision we make for futurity being enjoyed by
ourselves or others, tend” justly and reasonably “to give strength to
the effective desire of accumulation. Thus a healthy climate or
occupation, by increasing the probability of life, has a tendency to add
to this desire. When engaged in safe occupations, and living in healthy
countries, men are much more apt to be frugal, than in unhealthy or
hazardous occupations, and in climates pernicious to human life. Sailors
and soldiers are prodigals. In the West Indies, New Orleans, the East
Indies, the expenditure of the inhabitants is profuse. The same people,
coming to reside in the healthy parts of Europe, and not getting into
the vortex of extravagant fashion, live economically. War and pestilence
have always waste and luxury among the other evils that follow in their
train. For similar reasons, whatever gives security to the affairs of
the community is favourable to the strength of this principle. In this
respect the general prevalence of law and order, and the prospect of the
continuance of peace and tranquillity, have considerable influence.”*
The more perfect the security, the greater will be the effective
strength of the desire of accumulation. Where property is less safe, or
the vicissitudes ruinous to fortunes are more frequent and severe, fewer
persons will save at all, and of those who do, many will require the
inducement of a higher rate of profit on capital, to make them prefer a
doubtful future to the etemptatione of present enjoyment.

These are considerations which affect the expediency, in the eye of
reason, of consulting future interests at the expense of present. But
fthef inclination to make gtheg sacrifice does not solely depend upon
its expediency. The disposition to save is often far short of what
reason would dictate: and at other times is liable to be in excess of
it.

hDeficient strength of the desire of accumulation may arise from
improvidence, or from want of interest in others. Improvidence may be
connected with intellectual as well as moral causes.h Individuals and
communities of a very low state of intelligence are always improvident.
A Edition: current; Page: [164] certain measure of intellectual
development seems necessary to enable absent things, and especially
things future, to act with any force on the imagination and will. iThe
effect of want of interest in others in diminishing accumulation will be
admitted, if we considered how much saving at present takes place,
whichi has for its object the interest of others rather than of
ourselves; the education of children, their advancement in life, the
future interests of other personal connexions, the jpowerj of promoting,
by the bestowal of money or time, objects of public or private
usefulness. If mankind were generally in the state of mind to which some
approach was seen in the declining period of the Roman Empire—caring
nothing for their heirs, as well as nothing for friends, the public, or
any object which survived them—they would seldom deny themselves any
kindulgence for the sake of savingl, beyond what was necessary for their
own future years; which they would placel in life annuities, or in some
other form which would make its existence and their lives terminate
together.

§ 3. [Examples of deficiency in the strength of the desire of
accumulation] From athese various causesa, intellectual and moral, there
is, in different portions of the human race, a greater diversity than is
usually adverted to, in the strength of the effective desire of
accumulation. A backward state of general civilization is often more the
effect of deficiency in this particular, than in many others which
attract more attention. bIn the circumstances, for example, of a hunting
tribe, “bman may be said to be necessarily improvident, and regardless
of futurity, because, in cthis Edition: current; Page: [165] statec, the
future presents nothing which can be with certainty either foreseen or
governedd. . . . . .d Besides a want of the motives exciting to provide
for the needs of futurity through means of the abilities of the present,
there is a want of the habits of perception and action, leading to a
constant connexion in the mind of those distant points, and of the
series of events serving to unite them. Even, therefore, if motives be
awakened capable of producing the exertion necessary to effect this
connexion, there remains the task of training the mind to think and act
so as to establish it.”

For instance: “Upon the banks of the St. Lawrence there are several
little Indian villages. They are surrounded, in general, by a good deal
of land, from which the wood seems to have been long extirpated, and
have, besides, attached to them, extensive tracts of forest. The cleared
land is rarely, I may almost say never, cultivated, nor are any inroads
made in the forest for such a purpose. The soil is, nevertheless,
fertile, and were it not, manure lies in heaps by their houses. Were
every family to inclose half an acre of ground, till it, and plant eit
ine potatoes and maize, it would yield a sufficiency to support them one
half the year. They suffer, too, every now and then, extreme want,
insomuch that, joined to occasional intemperance, it is rapidly reducing
their numbers. This, to us, so strange apathy proceeds not, in any great
degree, from repugnance to labour; on the contrary, they apply very
diligently to it when its reward is immediate. Thus, besides their
peculiar occupations of hunting and fishing, in which they are ever
ready to engage, they are much employed in the navigation of the St.
Lawrence, and may be seen labouring at the oar, or setting with the
pole, in the large boats used for the purpose, and always furnish the
greater part of the additional hands necessary to conduct rafts through
some of the rapids. Nor is the obstacle aversion to agricultural labour.
This is no doubt a prejudice of theirs; but mere prejudices always
yield, principles of action cannot be created. When the returns from
agricultural labour are speedy and great, they are also agriculturists.
Thus, some of the little islands on Lake St. Francis, near the Indian
village of St. Regis, are favourable to the growth of maize, a plant
yielding a return of a hundredfold, and forming, even when half ripe, a
pleasant and substantial repast. Patches of the best land on these
islands are therefore every year cultivated by them for this purpose. As
their situation renders them inaccessible to cattle, no fence is
required; were this additional outlay necessary, I suspect they would be
neglected, like the commons adjoining their village. These had
apparently, at one time, been under crop. The cattle of the neighbouring
settlers would now, however, destroy any crop not securely fenced, and
this additional necessary outlay consequently bars their culture. It
removes them to an order of instruments of slower return than that which
corresponds to the strength of the effective desire of accumulation in
this little society.

Edition: current; Page: [166]
“It is here deserving of notice, that what instruments of this kind they
do form, are completely formed. The small spots of corn they cultivate
are thoroughly weeded and hoed. A little neglect in this part would
indeed reduce the crop very much; of this experience has made them
perfectly aware, and they act accordingly. It is evidently not the
necessary labour that is the obstacle to more extended culture, but the
distant return from that labour. I am assured, indeed, that among some
of the more remote tribes, the labour thus expended much exceeds that
given by the whites. The same portions of ground being cropped without
remission, and manure not being used, they would scarcely yield any
return, were not the soil most carefully broken and pulverized, both
with the hoe and the hand. In such a situation a white man would clear a
fresh piece of ground. It would perhaps scarce repay his labour the
first year, and he would have to look for his reward in succeeding
years. On the Indian, succeeding years are too distant to make
sufficient impression; though, to obtain what labour may bring about in
the course of a few months, he toils even more assiduously than the
white man.”*

This view of things is confirmed by the experience of the Jesuits, in
their interesting feffortsf to civilize the Indians of Paraguay. They
gained the confidence of these savages in a most extraordinary degree.
They acquired influence over them sufficient to make them change their
whole manner of life. They obtained their absolute submission and
obedience. They established peace. They taught them all the operations
of European agriculture, and many of the more difficult arts. There were
everywhere to be seen, according to Charlevoix, “workshops of gilders,
painters, sculptors, goldsmiths, watchmakers, carpenters, joiners,
dyers,”[*] &c. These occupations were not practised for the personal
gain of the artificers: the produce was at the absolute disposal of the
missionaries, who ruled the people by a voluntary despotism. The
obstacles arising from aversion to labour were therefore very completely
overcome. The real difficulty was the improvidence of the people; their
inability to think for the future: and the necessity accordingly of the
most unremitting and minute superintendence on the part of their
instructors. “Thus at first, if these gave up to them the care of the
oxen with which they ploughed, their indolent thoughtlessness would
probably leave them at evening still yoked to the implement. Worse than
this, instances occurred where they cut them up for supper, thinking,
when reprehended, that they sufficiently excused themselves by saying
they were hungry. . . . These fathers, says Ulloa, have to visit the
houses, to examine what is really wanted: for without this care, the
Indians would never look after anything. Edition: current; Page: [167]
They must be present, too, when animals are slaughtered, not only that
the meat may be equally divided, but that nothing may be lost.” “But
notwithstanding all this care and superintendence,” says Charlevoix,
“and all the precautions which are taken to prevent any want of the
necessaries of life, the missionaries are sometimes much embarrassed. It
often happens that they” (the Indians,) “do not reserve to themselves a
sufficiency of grain, even for seed. As for their other provisions, were
they not well looked after, they would soon be without wherewithal to
support life.”*

As an example intermediate, in the strength of the effective desire of
accumulation, between the state of things thus depicted and that of
modern Europe, gthe case of the Chinese deserves attention. Fromg
various circumstances in their personal habits and social hcondition,h
it might be anticipated that they would possess a degree of prudence and
self-control greater than other Asiatics, but inferior to most European
nationsi; and the following evidence is adducedi of the fact.

“Durability is one of the chief qualities, marking a high degree of the
effective desire of accumulation. The testimony of travellers ascribes
to the instruments formed by the Chinese, ja very inferior durability to
similar instruments constructed by Europeans. The houses, we are told,
unless of the higher ranks, are in general of unburnt bricks, of clay,
or of hurdles plastered with earth; the roofs, of reeds fastened to
laths. We can scarcely conceive more unsubstantial or temporary fabrics.
Their partitions are of paper, requiring to be renewed every year. A
similar observation may be made concerning their implements of
husbandry, and other utensils. They are almost entirely of wood, the
metals entering but very sparingly into their construction; consequently
they soon wear out, and require frequent renewals. A greater degree of
strength in the effective desire of accumulation, would cause them to be
constructed of materials requiring a greater present expenditure but
being far more durable. From the same cause, much land, that in other
countries would be cultivated, lies waste. All travellers take notice of
large tracts of klandsk, chiefly swamps, which continue in a state of
nature. To bring a swamp into tillage is generally a process, to
complete which, requires several years. It must be previously drained,
the surface long exposed to the sun, and many operations performed,
before it can be made capable of bearing a crop. Though yielding,
probably, a very Edition: current; Page: [168] considerable return for
the labour bestowed on it, that return is not made until a long time has
elapsed. The cultivation of such land implies a greater strength of the
effective desire of accumulation than exists in the empire.

“The produce of the harvest is, as we have remarked, always an
instrument of some order or another; it is a provision for future want,
and regulated by the same laws as those to which other means of
attaining a similar end conform. It is there chiefly rice, of which
there are two harvests, the one in June, the other in October. The
period then of eight months between October and June, is that for which
provision is made each year, and the different estimate they make of
to-day and this day eight months will appear in the self-denial they
practise now, in order to guard against want then. The amount of this
self-denial would seem to be small. The father Parennin, indeed, (who
seems to have been one of the most intelligent of the Jesuits, and spent
a long life among the Chinese of all classes,) asserts, that it is their
great deficiency in forethought and frugality in this respect, which is
the cause of the scarcities and famines that frequently occur.”

That it is defect of providence, not defect of industry, that limits
production among the Chinese, is still more obvious than in the case of
the semi-agriculturized Indians. “Where the returns are quick, where the
instruments formed require but little time to bring the events for which
they were formed to an issue,” it is well known that “the great progress
which has been made in the knowledge of the arts suited to the nature of
the country and the wants of its inhabitants” makes industry energetic
and effective. “The warmth of the climate, the natural fertility of the
country, the knowledge which the inhabitants have acquired of the arts
of agriculture, and the discovery and gradual adaptation to every soil
of the most useful vegetable productions, enable them very speedily to
draw from almost any part of the surface, what is there esteemed an
equivalent to much more than the labour bestowed in tilling and cropping
it. They have commonly double, sometimes treble harvests. These, when
they consist of a grain so productive as rice, the usual crop, can
scarce fail to yield to their skill, from almost any portion of soil
that can be at once brought into culture, very ample returns.
Accordingly there is no spot that labour can immediately bring under
cultivation that is not made to yield to it. Hills, even mountains, are
ascended and formed into terraces; and water, in that country the great
productive agent, is led to every part by drains, or carried up to it by
the ingenious and simple hydraulic machines which have been in use from
time immemorial among this singular people. They effect this the more
easily, from the soil, even in these situations, being very deep and
covered with much vegetable mould. But what yet more than this marks the
readiness with which labour is forced to form the most difficult
materials into instruments, Edition: current; Page: [169] where these
instruments soon bring to an issue the events for which they are formed,
is the frequent occurrence on many of their lakes and rivers, of
structures resembling the floating gardens of the Peruvians, rafts
covered with vegetable soil and cultivated. Labour in this way draws
from the materials on which it acts very speedy returns. Nothing can
exceed the luxuriance of vegetation when the quickening powers of a
genial sun are ministered to by a rich soil and abundant moisture. It is
otherwise, as we have seen, in cases where the lreturnl, though copious,
is distant. European travellers are surprised at meeting these little
floating farms by the side of swamps which only require draining to
render them tillable. It seems to them strange that labour should not
rather be bestowed on the solid earth, where its fruits might endure,
than on structures that must decay and perish in a few years. The people
they are among think not so much of future years as of the present time.
The effective desire of accumulation is of very different strength in
the one, from what it is in the other. The views of the European extend
to a distant futurity, and he is surprised at the Chinese, condemned
through improvidence, and want of sufficient prospective care, to
incessant toil, and as he thinks, insufferable wretchedness. The views
of the Chinese are confined to narrower bounds; he is content mto live
from day to day, and has learnt to conceive even a life of toil a
blessing.”*

When a country has carried production as far as in the existing state of
knowledge it can be carried with an amount of return corresponding to
the average strength of the effective desire of accumulation in that
country, it has reached what is called the stationary state; the state
in which no further addition will be made to capital, unless there takes
place either some improvement in the arts of production, or an increase
in the strength of the desire to accumulate. In the stationary state,
though capital does not on the whole increase, some persons grow richer
and others poorer. Those whose degree of providence is below the usual
standard, become impoverished, their capital perishes, and makes room
for the savings of those whose effective desire of accumulation exceeds
the average. These become the natural purchasers of the lands,
manufactories, and other instruments of production owned by their less
provident countrymen.

What the causes are which make the return to capital greater in one
country than in another, and which, in certain circumstances, make it
impossible for any additional capital to find investment unless at
diminished returns, will appear clearly hereafter. In China, if that
country has really attained, as it is supposed to have done, the
stationary state, accumulation has stopped when the returns to capital
are still as high as is indicated by a rate of interest legally twelve
per cent, and practically varying (it is said) Edition: current; Page:
[170] between eighteen and thirty-six. It is to be presumed therefore
that no greater amount of capital than the country already possesses,
can find employment at this high rate of profit, and that any lower rate
does not hold out to a Chinese sufficient temptation to induce him to
abstain from present enjoyment. What a contrast with Holland, where,
during the most flourishing period of its history, the government was
able habitually to borrow at two per cent, and private individuals, on
good security, at three. Since China is not a country like Burmah or the
native states of India, where an enormous interest is but an
indispensable compensation for the risk incurred from the bad faith or
poverty of the state, and of almost all private borrowers; the fact, if
fact it be, that the increase of capital has come to a stand while the
returns to it are still so large, denotes a much less degree of the
effective desire of accumulation, in other words a much lower estimate
of the future relatively to the present, than that of most European
nations.

§ 4. [Exemplification of excess in the strength of the desire of
accumulation] We have hitherto spoken of countries in which the average
strength of the desire to accumulate is short of that which, aina
circumstances of any tolerable security, reason and sober calculation
would approve. We have now to speak of others in which it decidedly
surpasses that standard. In the more prosperous countries of Europe,
bthere are to be found abundance of prodigals;b in some of them (and in
none more than cEngland) the ordinary degree of economy and providence
among those who live by manual labour cannot be considered high: still,
in a very numerous portion of the community, the professional,
manufacturing, and trading classes, being those who, generally speaking,
unite more of the means with more of the motives for saving than any
other class, the spirit of accumulation is so strong, that the signs of
rapidly increasing wealth meet every eye: and the great amount of
capital seeking investment excites astonishment, whenever peculiar
circumstances turning much of it into some one channel, such as railway
construction or foreign speculative adventure, dbringd the largeness of
the total amount into evidence.

There are many circumstances, which, in England, give a peculiar force
to the accumulating propensity. The long exemption of the country from
the ravages of war, and the far earlier period than elsewhere at which
property was secure from military violence or arbitrary spoliation, have
produced a long-standing and hereditary confidence in the safety of
funds when trusted out of the owner’s hands, which in most other
countries is of much more Edition: current; Page: [171] recent origin,
and less firmly established. The geographical causes which have made
industry rather than war the natural source of power and importance to
Great Britain, have turned an unusual proportion of the most
enterprising and energetic characters into the direction of manufactures
and commerce; into supplying their wants and gratifying their ambition
by producing and saving, rather than by appropriating what has been
produced and saved. Much also depended on the better political
institutions of this country, which by the scope they have allowed to
individual freedom of action, have encouraged personal activity and
self-reliance, while by the liberty they confer of association and
combination, they facilitate industrial enterprise on a large scale. The
same institutions in another of their aspects, give a most direct and
potent stimulus to the desire of acquiring wealth. The earlier decline
of feudalism having removed or much weakened einvidious distinctions
between the originally trading classes and those who had been accustomed
to despise them; and a polity having grown up which made wealth the real
source of political influence; its acquisition was invested with a
ffactitiousf value, independent of its intrinsic utility. It became
synonymous with power; and since power with the common herd of mankind
gives power, wealth became the chief source of personal consideration,
and the measure and stamp of success in life. To get out of goneg rank
in society into the next above it, is the great aim of English
hmiddle-classh life, and the acquisition of wealth the means. And
inasmuch as to be rich without industry, ihas always hitherto
constitutedi a step in the social scale above those who are rich by
means of industry, it becomes the object of ambition to save not merely
as much as will afford a large income while in business, but enough to
retire from business and live in affluence on realized gains. These
causes fhave, in England, beenf greatly aided by that extreme
kincapacity of the people fork personal enjoyment, which is a
characteristic of lcountries over which puritanism has passed. But if
accumulation is, on one hand, rendered easier by the absence of a taste
for pleasure, it is, on the other, made more difficult by the presence
of a very real taste for expense. So strong is the association between
personal consequence and the signs of wealth, that the silly desire for
the appearance of a large expenditure mhas the force ofm a passion,
among large classes of a nation which derives less pleasure than perhaps
any other in the world from what it Edition: current; Page: [172]
spends. Owing to this circumstance, the effective desire of accumulation
has never reached so high a pitch in England as it did in Holland,
where, there being no rich idle class to set the example of a reckless
expenditure, and the mercantile classes, who possessed the substantial
power on which social influence always waits, being left to establish
their own scale of living and standard of propriety, their habits
remained frugal and unostentatious.

In England and Holland, then, for a long time past, and now in most
other countries ninn Europe (which are rapidly following England in the
same race), the desire of accumulation does not require, to make it
effective, the copious returns which it requires in Asia, but is
sufficiently called into action by a rate of profit so low, that instead
of slackening, accumulation seems now to proceed more rapidly than ever;
and the second requisite of increased production, increase of capital,
shows no tendency to become deficient. So far as that element is
concerned, production is susceptible of an increase without any
assignable bounds.

oThe progress of accumulation would no doubt be considerably checked, if
the returns to capital were to be reduced still lower than at present.
But why should any possible increase of capital have that effect? This
question carries the mind forward to the remaining one of the three
requisites of production. The limitation to production, not consisting
in any necessary limit to the increase of the other two elements, labour
and capital, must turn upon the properties of the only element which is
inherently, and in itself, limited in quantity. It must depend on the
properties of land.

Edition: current; Page: [173]


CHAPTER XII: Of the Law of the Increase of Production from Land

§ 1. [The limited quantity and limited productiveness of land are the
real limits to production] Land differs from the other elements of
production, labour and capital, in not being susceptible of indefinite
increase. Its extent is limited, and the extent of the more productive
kinds of it more limited still. It is also evident that the quantity of
produce capable of being raised on any given piece of land is not
indefinite. This limited quantity of land, and limited productiveness of
it, are the real limits to the increase of production.

That they are the ultimate limits, must always have been clearly seen.
But since the final barrier has never in any instance been reached;
since there is no country in which all the land, capable of yielding
food, is so highly cultivated that a larger produce could not (even
without supposing any fresh advance in agricultural knowledge) be
obtained from it, and since a large portion of the earth’s surface still
remains entirely uncultivated; it is commonly thought, and is very
natural at first to suppose, that for the present all limitation of
production or population from this source is at an indefinite distance,
and that ages must elapse before any practical necessity arises for
taking the limiting principle into serious consideration.

I apprehend this to be not only an error, but the most serious one, to
be found in the whole field of political economy. The question is more
important and fundamental than any other; it involves the whole subject
of the causes of poverty, in a rich and industrious community: and
unless this one matter be thoroughly understood, it is to no purpose
proceeding any further in our inquiry.

§ 2. [The law of production from the soil is a law of diminishing return
in proportion to the increased application of labour and capital] The
limitation to production from the properties of the soil, is not like
the obstacle opposed by a wall, which stands immovable in one particular
spot, and offers no hindrance to motion short of stopping it entirely.
We may rather compare it to a highly elastic and extensible band, which
is Edition: current; Page: [174] hardly ever so violently stretched that
it could not possibly be stretched any more, yet the pressure of which
is felt long before the final limit is reached, and felt more severely
the nearer that limit is approached.

After a certain, and not very advanced, stage in the progress of
aagriculture, ita is the law of production from the land, that in any
given state of agricultural skill and knowledge, by increasing the
labour, the produce is not increased in an equal degree; doubling the
labour does not double the produce; or, to express the same thing in
other words, every increase of produce is obtained by a more than
proportional increase in the application of labour to the land.

This general law of agricultural industry is the most important
proposition in political economy. Were the law different, nearly all the
phenomena of the production and distribution of wealth would be other
than they are. The most fundamental errors which still prevail on our
subject, result from not perceiving this law at work underneath the more
superficial agencies on which attention fixes itself; but mistaking
those agencies for the ultimate causes of effects of which they may
influence the form and mode, but of which it alone determines the
essence.

When, for the purpose of raising an increase of produce, recourse is had
to inferior land, it is evident that, so far, the produce does not
increase in the same proportion with the labour. The very meaning of
inferior land, is land which with equal labour returns a smaller amount
of produce. Land may be inferior either in fertility or in situation.
The one requires a greater proportional amount of labour for growing the
produce, the other for carrying it to market. If the land A yields a
thousand quarters of wheat, to a given outlay in wages, manure, &c., and
in order to raise another thousand recourse must be had to the land B,
which is either less fertile or more distant from the market, the two
thousand quarters will cost more than twice as much labour as the
original thousand, and the produce of agriculture will be increased in a
less ratio than the labour employed in procuring it.

Instead of cultivating the land B, it would be possible, by higher
cultivation, to make the land A produce more. It might be ploughed or
harrowed twice instead of once, or three times instead of twice; it
might be dug instead of being ploughed; after ploughing, it might be
gone over with a hoe instead of a harrow, and the soil more completely
pulverized; it might be oftener or more thoroughly weeded; bthe
implements used might be of higher finish, corc more elaborate
construction; a greater quantity or more Edition: current; Page: [175]
expensive kinds of manure might be applied, or when applied, they might
be more carefully mixed and incorporated with the soil. These are some
of the modes by which the same land may be made to yield a greater
produce; and when a greater produce must be had, some of these are among
the means usually employed for obtaining it. But, that it is obtained at
a more than proportional increase of expense, is evident from the fact
that inferior lands are cultivated. Inferior lands, or lands at a
greater distance from the market, of course yield an inferior return,
and an increasing demand cannot be supplied from them unless at an
augmentation of cost, and therefore of price. If the additional demand
could continue to be supplied from the superior lands, by applying
additional labour and capital, at no greater proportional cost than that
at which they yield the quantity first demanded of them, the owners or
farmers of those lands could undersell all others, and engross the whole
market. Lands of a lower degree of fertility or in a more remote
situation, might indeed be cultivated by their proprietors, for the sake
of subsistence or independence; but it never could be the interest of
any one to farm them for profit. That a profit can be made from them,
sufficient to attract capital to such an investment, is a proof that
cultivation on the more eligible lands has reached a point, beyond which
any greater application of labour and capital would yield, at the best,
no greater return than can be obtained at the same expense from less
fertile or less favourably situated lands.

The careful cultivation of a well-farmed district of England or Scotland
is a symptom and an effect of the more unfavourable terms which the land
has begun to exact for any increase of its fruits. Such elaborate
cultivation costs much more in proportion, and requires a higher price
to render it profitable, than farming on a more superficial system; and
would not be adopted if access could be had to land of equal fertility,
previously unoccupied. Where there is the choice of raising the
increasing supply which society requires, from fresh land of as good
quality as that already cultivated, no attempt is made to extract from
land anything approaching to what it will yield on what are esteemed the
best European modes of dcultivatingd. The land is tasked up to the point
at which the greatest return is obtained in proportion to the labour
employed, but no further: any additional labour is carried elsewhere.
“It is long,” says ean intelligent travellere in the United States,*
“before an English eye becomes reconciled Edition: current; Page: [176]
to the lightness of the crops and the careless farming (as we should
call it) which is apparent. One forgets that where land is so plentiful
and labour so dear as it is here, a totally different principle must be
pursued to that which prevails in populous countries, and that the
consequence will of course be a want of tidiness, as it were, and
finish, about everything which requires labour.” fOf the two causes
mentioned, the plentifulness of land seems to me the true explanation,
rather than the dearness of labourf; for, however dear labour may be,
when food is wanted, labour will always be applied to producing it in
preference to anything else. But this labour is more effective for its
end by being applied to fresh soil, than if it were employed in bringing
the soil already occupied into higher cultivation. Only when no soils
remain to be broken up but such as either from distance or inferior
quality require a considerable rise of price to render their cultivation
profitable, can it become advantageous to apply the high farming of
Europe to any American lands; except, perhaps, in the immediate vicinity
of towns, where saving in cost of carriage may compensate for great
inferiority in the return from the soil itself. As American farming is
to English, so is the gordinaryg English to that of Flanders, Tuscany,
or the Terra di Lavoro; where by the application of a far greater
quantity of labour there is obtained a considerably larger gross
produce, but on such terms as would never be advantageous to a mere
speculator for profit, unless made so by much higher hprices of
agricultural produce.

The principle which has now been stated must be received, no doubt, with
certain explanations and limitations. Even after the land is so highly
cultivated that the mere application of additional labour, or iofi an
additional amount of ordinary dressing, would yield no return
proportioned to the expense, it may still happen that the application of
a much greater additional labour and capital to improving the soil
itself, by draining or permanent manures, would be as liberally
remunerated by the produce, as any portion of the labour and capital
already employed. It would sometimes be much more amply remunerated.
This could not be, if capital always sought and found the most
advantageous employment; but if the most advantageous employment has to
wait longest for its remuneration, it is only in a rather advanced stage
of industrial development that the preference will be given to it; and
even in that advanced stage, the laws or usages connected with property
in land and the tenure of farms, are often such as to prevent the
disposable capital of the country from flowing freely into the channel
of agricultural improvement: and hence the increased Edition: current;
Page: [177] supply, required by increasing population, is sometimes
raised at an augmenting cost by higher cultivation, when the means of
producing it without increase of cost are known and accessible. There
can be no doubt, that if capital were forthcoming to execute, within the
next year, all known and recognised improvements in the land foff the
United Kingdom which would pay kat the existing prices, that is, which
would increase the produce in as great or a greater ratio than the
expense; the result would be such (especially if we include Ireland in
the supposition) that inferior land would not for a long time require to
be brought under tillage: probably a considerable part of the less
productive lands now cultivated, which are not particularly favoured by
situation, would go out of culture; or (as the improvements in question
are not so much applicable to good land, but operate rather by
converting bad land into good) the contraction of cultivation might
principally take place by a less high dressing and less elaborate
tilling of land generally; a falling back to something nearer the
character of American farming; such only of the poor lands being
altogether abandoned as were not found susceptible of improvement. And
thus the aggregate produce of the whole cultivated land would bear a
larger proportion than before to the labour expended on it; and the
general law of diminishing return from land would have undergone, to
that extent, a temporary supersession. No one, however, can suppose that
even in these circumstances, the whole produce required for the country
could be raised exclusively from the best lands, together with those
possessing advantages of situation to place them on a par with the best.
Much would undoubtedly continue to be produced under less advantageous
conditions, and with a smaller proportional return, than that obtained
from the best soils and situations. And lin proportion as the further
increase of population requiredl a still greater addition to the supply,
the general law would resume its course, and the further augmentation
would be obtained at a more than proportionate expense of labour and
capital.

§ 3. [Antagonist principle to the law of diminishing return; the
progress of improvements in production] That the produce of land
increases, cæteris paribus, in a diminishing ratio to the increase in
the labour employed, is aa truth more often ignored or disregarded than
actually Edition: current; Page: [178] denied. It has, however, met with
a direct impugner in the well-known American political economist, Mr. H.
C. Carey, who maintains that the real law of agricultural industry is
the very reverse; the produce increasing in a greater ratio than the
labour, or in other words affording to labour a perpetually increasing
return. To substantiate this assertion, he argues that cultivation does
not begin with the better soils, and extend from them, as the demand
increases, to the poorer, but begins with the poorer, and does not, till
long after, extend itself to the more fertile. Settlers in a new country
invariably commence on the high and thin lands; the rich but swampy
soils of the river bottoms cannot at first be brought into cultivation,
by reason of their unhealthiness, and of the great and prolonged labour
required for clearing and draining them. As population and wealth
increase, cultivation travels down the hill sides, clearing them as it
goes, and the most fertile soils, those of the low grounds, are
generally (he even says universally) the latest cultivated. These
propositions, with the inferences which Mr. Carey draws from them, are
set forth at much length in his latest and most elaborate treatise,
“Principles of Social Science;” and he considers them as subverting the
very foundation of what he calls the English political economy, with all
its practical consequences, especially the doctrine of free trade.

As far as words go, Mr. Carey has a good case against several of the
highest authorities in political economy, who certainly did enunciate in
too universal a manner the law which they laid down, not remarking that
it is not true of the first cultivation in a newly settled country.
Where population is thin and capital scanty, land which requires a large
outlay to render it fit for tillage must remain untilled; though such
lands, when their time has come, often yield a greater produce than
those earlier cultivated, not only absolutely, but proportionally to the
labour employed, even if we include that which had been expended in
originally fitting them for culture. But it is not pretended that the
law of diminishing return was operative from the very beginning of
society: and though some political economists may have believed it to
come into operation earlier than it does, it begins quite early enough
to support the conclusions they founded on it. Mr. Carey will hardly
assert that in any old country—in England or France, for example—the
lands left waste are, or have for centuries been, more naturally fertile
than Edition: current; Page: [179] those under tillage. Judging even by
his own imperfect test, that of local situation—how imperfect I need not
stop to point out—is it true that in England or France at the present
day the uncultivated part of the soil consists of the plains and
valleys, and the cultivated, of the hills? Every one knows, on the
contrary, that it is the high lands and thin soils which are left to
nature, and when the progress of population demands an increase of
cultivation, the extension is from the plains to the hills. Once in a
century, perhaps, a Bedford Level may be drained, or a Lake of Harlem
pumped out: but these are slight and transient exceptions to the normal
progress of things; and in old countries which are at all advanced in
civilization, little of this sort remains to be done.*

Mr. Carey himself unconsciously bears the strongest testimony to the
reality of the law he contends against: for one of the propositions most
strenuously maintained by him is, that the raw products of the soil, in
an advancing community, steadily tend to rise in price. Now, the most
elementary truths of political economy show that this could not happen,
unless the cost of production, measured in labour, of those products,
tended to rise. If the application of additional labour to the land was,
as a general rule, attended with an increase in the proportional return,
the price of produce, instead of rising, must necessarily fall as
society advances, unless the cost of production of gold and silver fell
still more: a case so rare, that there are only two periods in all
history when it is known to have taken place; the one, that which
followed the opening of the Mexican and Peruvian mines; the other, that
in which we now live. At all known periods, except these two, the cost
of production of the precious metals has been either stationary or
rising. If, therefore, it be true that the tendency of agricultural
produce is to rise in money price as wealth and population increase,
there needs no other evidence that the labour required for raising it
from the soil tends to augment when a greater quantity is demanded.

I do not go so far as Mr. Carey: I do not assert that the cost of
production, and consequently the price, of agricultural produce, always
and necessarily rises as population increases. It tends to do so; but
the tendency may be, and sometimes is, even during long periods, held in
check. The effect does not depend on a single principle, but on two
antagonizing principles. There is another agencya, in habitual
antagonism to the law of diminishing return from land; and to the
consideration of this we shall now proceed. It is no other than the
progress of civilization. I use this general Edition: current; Page:
[180] and somewhat vague expression, because the things to be included
are so various, that hardly any term of a more restricted signification
would comprehend them all.

Of these, the most obvious is the progress of agricultural knowledge,
skill, and invention. Improved processes of agriculture are of two
kinds: some enable the land to yield a greater absolute produce, without
an equivalent increase of labour; others have not the power of
increasing the produce, but have that of diminishing the labour and
expense by which it is obtained. Among the first are to be reckoned the
disuse of fallows, by means of the rotation of crops; and the
introduction of new articles of cultivation capable of entering
advantageously into the rotation. The change made in British agriculture
towards the close of the last century, by the introduction of turnip
husbandry, is spoken of as amounting to a revolution. These improvements
operate not only by enabling the land to produce a crop every year,
instead of remaining idle one year in every two or three to renovate its
powers, but also by direct increase of its productiveness; since the
great addition made to the number of cattle by the increase of their
food, affords more abundant manure to fertilize the corn lands. Next in
order comes the introduction of new articles of food, containing a
greater amount of sustenance, like the potato, or more productive
species or varieties of the same plant, such as the Swedish turnip. In
the same class of improvements must be placed a better knowledge of the
properties of manures, and of the most effectual bmodesb of applying
them; the introduction of new and more powerful fertilizing agents, such
as guano, and the conversion to the same purpose, of substances
previously wasted; inventions like subsoil-ploughing or tile-drainingc;
improvements in the breed or feeding of labouring cattle; augmented
stock of the animals which consume and convert into human food what
would otherwise be wasted; and the like. The other sort of improvements,
those which diminish labour, but without increasing the capacity of the
land to produce, are such as the improved construction of tools; the
introduction of new instruments which spare manual labour, as the
winnowing and threshing machines; a more skilful and economical
application of muscular exertion, such as the introduction, so slowly
accomplished in England, of Scotch ploughing, with two horses abreast
and one man, instead of three or four horses in a team and two men, &c.
These improvements do not add to the productiveness of the land, but
they are equally calculated with the former to counteract the tendency
in the cost of production of agricultural produce, to rise with the
progress of population and demand.

Edition: current; Page: [181]
Analogous in effect to this second class of agricultural improvements,
are improved means of communication. Good roads are equivalent to good
tools. It is of no consequence whether the economy of labour takes place
in extracting the produce from the soil, or in conveying it to the place
where it is to be consumed. Not to say in addition, that the labour of
cultivation itself is diminished by whatever lessens the cost of
bringing manure from a distance, or facilitates the many operations of
transport from place to place which occur within the bounds of the farm.
Railways and canals are virtually a diminution of the cost of production
of all things sent to market by them; and literally so of all those, the
appliances and aids for producing which, they serve to transmit. By
their means land can be cultivated, which dcouldd not otherwise have
remunerated the cultivators without a rise of price. Improvements in
navigation have, with respect to food or materials brought from beyond
sea, a corresponding effect.

From similar considerations, it appears that many purely mechanical
improvements, which ehave, apparently at least,e no peculiar connexion
with agriculture, nevertheless enable a given amount of food to be
obtained with a smaller expenditure of labour. A great improvement in
the process of smelting iron, would tend to cheapen agricultural
implements, diminish the cost of railroads, of waggons and carts, ships,
and perhaps buildings, and many other things to which iron is not at
present applied, because it is too costly; and would thence diminish the
cost of production of ffood. The same effect would follow from gang
improvement in those processes of what may be termed manufacture, to
which the material of food is subjected after it is separated from the
ground. The first application of wind or water power to grind corn,
tended to cheapen bread as much as a very important discovery in
agriculture would have done; and any great improvement in the
construction of corn-mills, would have, in proportion, a similar
influence. The effects of cheapening locomotion have been already
considered. There are also engineering inventions which facilitate all
great operations on the earth’s surface. An improvement in the art of
taking levels is of importance to draining, not to mention canal and
railway making. The fens of Holland, and of some parts of England, are
drained by pumps worked by the wind or by steam. Where hcanalsh of
irrigation, or where tanks or embankments are necessary, mechanical
skill is a great resource for cheapening production.

Those manufacturing improvements which cannot be made instrumental to
facilitate, in any of its stages, the actual production of food, and
therefore do not help to counteract or retard the diminution of the
proportional return Edition: current; Page: [182] to labour from the
soil, have, however, another effect, which is practically equivalent.
What they do not prevent, they yet, in some degree, compensate for.

The materials of imanufacturei being all drawn from the land, and many
of them from agriculture, which supplies in particular the entire
material of clothing; the general law of production from the land, the
law of diminishing return, must in the last resort be applicable to
manufacturing as well as to agricultural jhistoryj. As population
increases, and the power of the land to yield increased produce is
strained harder and harder, any additional supply of material, as well
as of food, must be obtained by a more than proportionally increasing
expenditure of labour. But the cost of the material kforming generally a
very small portion of the entire cost of the manufacture,k the
agricultural labour concerned in the production of manufactured goods is
but a small fraction of the whole labour worked up in the commodity. All
the rest of the labour tends constantly and strongly towards diminution,
as the amount of production increases. Manufactures are vastly more
susceptible than agriculture, of mechanical improvements, and
contrivances for saving labour; and it has already been seen how greatly
the division of labour, and its skilful and economical distribution,
depend on the extent of the market, and on the possibility of production
in large masses. In manufactures, accordingly, the causes tending to
increase the productiveness of industry, preponderate greatly over the
one cause which tends to diminish it: and the increase of production,
called forth by the progress of society, takes place, not at an
increasing, but latl a continually diminishing proportional cost. This
fact has manifested itself in the progressive fall of the prices and
values of almost every kind of manufactured goods during two centuries
past; a fall accelerated by the mechanical inventions of the last
mseventy or eightym years, and susceptible of being prolonged and
extended beyond any limit which it would be safe to specify.

Now it is quite conceivable that the efficiency of agricultural labour
might be undergoing, with the increase of produce, a gradual diminution;
that the price of food, in consequence, might be progressively rising,
and an ever growing proportion of the population might be needed to
raise food for the whole; while yet the productive power of labour in
all other branches of industry might be so rapidly augmenting, that the
required amount of labour could be spared from manufactures, and
nevertheless a greater produce be obtained, and the aggregate wants of
the community be on the whole better supplied, than before. The benefit
might even extend to the Edition: current; Page: [183] poorest class.
The increased cheapness of clothing and lodging might make up to them
for the augmented cost of their food.

There is, thus, no possible improvement in the arts of production which
does not in one or another mode exercise an antagonist influence to the
law of diminishing return to agricultural labour. Nor is it only
industrial improvements which have this effect. Improvements in
government, and almost every kind of moral and social nadvancementn,
operate in the same omannero. Suppose a country in the condition of
France before the Revolution: taxation imposed palmostp exclusively on
the qindustrialq classes, and on such a principle as to be an actual
penalty on production; and no redress obtainable for any injury to
property or person, when inflicted by people of rank, or court
influence. Was not the hurricane which swept away this system of things,
even if we look no further than to its effect in augmenting the
productiveness of labour, equivalent to many industrial inventions? The
removal of a fiscal burthen on agriculture, such as rtithe, has the same
effect as if the labour necessary for obtaining the existing produce
were suddenly reduced one-tenth. The abolition of corn laws, or of any
other restrictions which prevent commodities from being produced where
sthe cost of theirs production is lowest, amounts to a vast improvement
in production. When fertile land, previously reserved as hunting ground,
or for any other purpose of amusement, is set free for culture, the
aggregate productiveness of agricultural industry is increased. It is
well known what has been the effect in England of badly administered
poor laws, and the still worse effect in Ireland of a bad system of
tenancy, in rendering agricultural labour slack and ineffective. No
improvements toperatet more directly upon the productiveness of labour,
than those in the tenure of farms, and in the laws relating to landed
property. The breaking up of entails, the cheapening of the transfer of
property, and whatever else promotes the natural tendency of land in a
system of freedom, to pass out of hands which can make little of it into
those which can make more; the substitution of long leases for tenancy
at will, and of any tolerable system of tenancy whatever for the
wretched cottier system; above all, the acquisition of a upermanentu
interest in the soil by the cultivators of it; all these things are as
real, and some of them as great, improvements in production, as the
invention of the spinning-jenny or the steam-engine.

We may say the same of improvements in education. The intelligence of
the workman is a most important element in the productiveness of labour.
So low, in some of the most civilized countries, is the present standard
Edition: current; Page: [184] of vintelligence, that there is hardly any
source from which a more indefinite amount of improvement may be looked
for in productive power, than by endowing with brains those who now have
only hands. The carefulness, economy, and general trustworthiness of
labourers are as important as their intelligence. Friendly relations,
and a community of interest and feeling between labourers and employers,
are eminently so: I should rather say, would be: for I know not where
any such sentiment of friendly alliance now exists. Nor is it only in
the labouring class that improvement of mind and character operates with
beneficial effect even on industry. In the rich and idle classes,
increased mental energy, more solid instruction, and stronger feelings
of wconscience, public spiritw, or philanthropy, would qualify them to
originate and promote the most valuable improvements, both in the
economical resources of their country, and in its institutions and
customs. To look no further than the most obvious phenomena; the
backwardness of French agriculture in the precise points in which
benefit might be expected from the influence of an educated class, is
partly accounted for by the exclusive devotion of the richer landed
proprietors to town interests and town pleasures. There is scarcely any
possible amelioration of human affairs which would not, among its other
benefits, have a favourable operation, direct or indirect, upon the
productiveness of industry. The intensity of devotion to industrial
occupations would indeed in many cases be moderated by a more liberal
and genial mental culture, but the labour actually bestowed on those
occupations would almost always be rendered more effective.

xBefore pointing out the principal inferences to be drawnx from the
nature of the two antagonist forces by which the productiveness of
agricultural industry is determined, we must observe that what we have
said of agriculture, is true with little variation, of the other
occupations which it represents; of all the arts which extract materials
from the globe. Mining industry, for example, usually yields an increase
of produce at a more than proportional increase of expense. It does
worse, for even its customary annual produce requires to be extracted by
a greater and greater expenditure of labour and capital. As a mine does
not reproduce the coal or yore taken from it, not only are all mines at
last exhausted, but even when they as yet show no signs of exhaustion,
they must be worked at za continuallyz increasing cost; shafts must be
sunk deeper, galleries driven farther, greater power applied to keep
them clear of water; the produce must be lifted from a greater depth, or
conveyed a greater distance. The law of diminishing return applies
therefore to mining, in a still more unqualified sense than to Edition:
current; Page: [185] agriculture: but the antagonizing agency, that of
improvements in production, also applies in a still greater degree.
Mining operations are more susceptible of mechanical improvements than
agricultural: the first great application of the steam-engine was to
mining; and there are unlimited possibilities of improvement in the
chemical processes by which the metals are extracted. There is another
contingency, of no unfrequent occurrence, which avails to counterbalance
the progress of all existing mines towards exhaustion: this is, the
discovery of new ones, equal or superior in richness.

To resume; all natural agents which are limited in quantity, are not
only limited in their ultimate productive power, but, long before that
power is stretched to the utmost, they yield to any additional demands
on progressively harder terms. This law may however be suspended, or
temporarily controlled, by whatever adds to the general power of mankind
over nature; and especially by any extension of their knowledge, and
their consequent command, of the properties and powers of natural
agents.

Edition: current; Page: [186]


CHAPTER XIII: Consequences of the Foregoing Laws

§ 1. [Remedies when the limit to production is the weakness of the
principle of accumulation] From the preceding exposition it appears that
the limit to the increase of production is two-fold; from deficiency of
capital, or of land. Production comes to a pause, either because the
effective desire of accumulation is not sufficient to give rise to any
further increase of capital, or because, however disposed the possessors
of surplus income may be to save a portion of it, the limited land at
the disposal of the community does not permit additional capital to be
employed with such a return, as would be an equivalent to them for their
abstinence.

In countries where the principle of accumulation is as weak as it is in
the various nations of Asia; where people will neither save, nor work to
obtain the means of saving, unless under the inducement of enormously
high profits, nor even then if it is necessary to wait aa considerable
time for them; where either productions remain scanty, or drudgery
great, because there is neither capital forthcoming nor forethought
sufficient for the adoption of the contrivances by which natural agents
are made to do the work of human labour; the desideratum for such a
country, economically considered, is an increase of industry, and of the
effective desire of accumulation. The means are, first, a better
government: more complete security of property; moderate taxes, and
freedom from arbitrary exaction under the name of taxes; a more
permanent and more advantageous tenure of land, securing to the
cultivator as far as possible the undivided benefits of the industry,
skill, and economy he may exert. Secondly, improvement of the public
intelligence: the decay of usages or superstitions which interfere with
the effective employment of industry; and the growth of bmental
activity, making the people alive to new objects of desire. Thirdly, the
introduction of foreign arts, which raise the returns derivable from
additional capital, to a rate corresponding to the low strength of the
desire of accumulation: and the importation of foreign capital, which
renders the increase of production Edition: current; Page: [187] no
longer exclusively dependent on the thrift or providence of the
inhabitants themselves, while it places before them a stimulating
example, and by instilling new ideas and breaking the chains of habit,
if not by improving the actual condition of the population, tends to
create in them new wants, increased ambition, and greater thought for
the future. These considerations apply more or less to all the Asiatic
populations, and to the less civilized and industrious parts of Europe,
as Russia, cTurkeyc, Spain, and Ireland.

§ 2. [Necessity of restraining population not confined to a state of
inequality of property] But there are other countries, and England is at
the head of them, in which neither the spirit of industry nor the
effective desire of accumulation need any encouragement; where the
people will toil hard for a small remuneration, and save much for a
small profit; where, though the general thriftiness of the labouring
class is much below what is desirable, the spirit of accumulation in the
more prosperous part of the community requires abatement rather than
increase. In these countries there would never be any deficiency of
capital, if its increase were never checked or brought to a stand by too
great a diminution of its returns. It is the tendency of the returns to
a progressive diminution, which causes the increase of production to be
aoften attended with a deterioration in the condition of the producers;
and this tendency, which would in time put an end to increase of
production altogether, is a result of the necessary and inherent
conditions of production from the land.

In all countries which have passed bbeyond a ratherb early stage in the
progress of agriculture, every increase in the demand for food,
occasioned by increased population, will always, unless there is a
simultaneous improvement in production, diminish the share which on a
fair division would fall to each individual. An increased production, in
cdefaultc of unoccupied tracts of fertile land, dor of fresh
improvements tending tod cheapen commodities, can never be obtained but
by increasing the labour in more than the same proportion. The
population must either work harder, or eat less, or obtain their usual
food by sacrificing ea parte of their other fcustomaryf comforts.
Whenever this necessity is postponed, gnotwithstanding an increase of
population,g it is because the improvements which facilitate production
hcontinue progressiveh; because the contrivances of mankind for Edition:
current; Page: [188] making their labour more effective, keep up an
equal struggle with nature, and extort fresh resources from her
reluctant powers as fast as human necessities occupy and engross the
old.

From this, results the important corollary, that the necessity of
restraining population is not, as many persons believe, peculiar to a
condition of great inequality of property. A greater number of people
cannot, in any given state of civilization, be collectively so well
provided for as a smaller. The niggardliness of nature, not the
injustice of society, iisi the cause of the penalty attached to
over-population. An unjust distribution of wealth does not even
aggravate the evil, but, at most, causes it to be somewhat earlier felt.
It is in vain to say, that all mouths which the increase of mankind
calls into existence, bring jwith themj hands. The new mouths require as
much food as the old ones, and the hands do not produce as much. If all
instruments of production were held in joint property by the whole
people, and the produce divided with perfect equality among them, and
if, in a society thus constituted, industry were as energetic and the
produce as ample as at present, there would be enough to make all the
existing population extremely comfortable; but when that population had
doubled itself, as, with the existing habits of the people, under such
an encouragement, it undoubtedly would in little more than twenty years,
what would then be their condition? Unless the arts of production were
in the same time improved in kan almost unexampled degree,k the inferior
soils which must be resorted to, and the more laborious and scantily
remunerative cultivation which must be employed on the superior lsoilsl,
to procure food for so much larger a population, would, by an
insuperable necessity, render every individual in the community poorer
than before. If the population continued to increase at the same rate, a
time would soon arrive when no one would have more than mere
necessaries, and, soon after, a time when no one would have a
sufficiency of those, and the further increase of population would be
arrested by death.

Whether, at the present or any other time, the produce of industry
proportionally to the labour employed, is increasing or diminishing, and
the average condition of the people improving or deteriorating, depends
upon whether population is advancing faster than improvement, or
improvement than population. After a degree of density has been
attained, sufficient to allow the principal benefits of combination of
labour, all further increase tends in itself to mischief, so far as
regards the average condition of the people; but the progress of
improvement has a counteracting operation, and Edition: current; Page:
[189] allows of increased numbers without any deterioration, and even
consistently with a higher average of comfort. Improvement must here be
understood in a wide sense, including not only new industrial
inventions, or an extended use of those already known, but improvements
in institutions, education, opinions, and human affairs generally,
provided they tend, as almost all improvements do, to give new motives
or new facilities to production. If the productive powers of the country
increase as rapidly as advancing numbers call for an augmentation of
produce, it mis not necessary to obtain that augmentation by nthe
cultivation ofn soils more sterile than the worst already under culture,
ooro by applying additional labour to the old soils at a diminished
advantage; or at all events this loss of power is compensated by the
increased efficiency with which, in the progress of improvement, labour
is employed in manufactures. In one way or the other, the increased
population is provided for, and all are as well off as before. But if
the growth of human power over nature is suspended or slackened, and
population does not slacken its increase; if, with only the existing
command over natural agencies, those agencies are called upon for an
increased produce; pthisp greater produce will not be afforded to the
increased population, without either demanding on the average a greater
effort from each, or on the average reducing each to a smaller ration
out of the aggregate produce.

As a matter of fact, at some periods the progress of population has been
the qmoreq rapid of the two, at others that of improvement. In England
during a long interval preceding the French Revolution, population
increased slowly; but the progress of improvement, at least in
agriculture, would seem to have been still slower, since though nothing
occurred to lower the value of the precious metals, the price of corn
rose considerably, and England, from an exporting, became an importing
country. This evidence, however, is rshort ofr conclusive, inasmuch as
the extraordinary number of abundant seasons during the first half of
the centurys, not continuings during the last, was a cause of increased
price in the tlatert period, uextrinsic to the ordinary progress of
society. Whether during the same period improvements in manufactures, or
diminished cost of imported commodities, made amends for the diminished
productiveness of labour on the land, is uncertain. But ever since the
great mechanical inventions of Watt, Arkwright, and their
vcotemporariesv, the return to labour has probably increased as fast as
the population; and would whave outstripped Edition: current; Page:
[190] it, if that very augmentation of return had not called forth an
additional portion of the xinherentx power of multiplication in the
human species. During the ytwenty or thirtyy years last elapsed, so
rapid has been the extension of improved processes of agriculture, that
even the land yields a greater produce in proportion to the labour
employed; the average price of corn zhad becomez decidedly lower, aeven
before the repeal of the corn laws had so materially lightened, for the
time being, the pressure of population upon productiona. But though
improvement may during bab certain space of time keep up with, or even
surpass, the actual increase of population, it assuredly never comes up
to the rate of increase of which population is capable; and nothing
could have prevented a general deterioration in the condition of the
human race, were it not that population has in fact been restrained. Had
it been restrained still more, and the same improvements taken place,
there would have been a larger dividend than there now is, for the
nation or the species at large. The new ground wrung from nature by the
cimprovementsc would not have been all used up in the support of mere
numbers. Though the gross produce would not have been so great, there
would have been a greater produce per head of the population.

§ 3. [Necessity of restraining population not superseded by free trade
in food] When the growth of numbers outstrips the progress of
improvement, and a country is driven to obtain the means of subsistence
on terms more and more unfavourable, by the inability of its land to
meet additional demands except on more onerous conditions; there are two
expedients by which it may hope to mitigate that disagreeable necessity,
even though no change should take place in the habits of the people with
respect to their rate of increase. One of these expedients is the
importation of food from abroad. The other is emigration.

The admission of cheaper food from a foreign country, is equivalent to
an agricultural invention by which food could be raised at a similarly
diminished cost at home. It equally increases the productive power of
labour. The return was before, so much food for so much labour employed
in the growth of food: the return is now, a greater quantity of food,
for the same labour employed in producing cottons or hardware or some
other Edition: current; Page: [191] commodity, to be given in exchange
for afooda. The one improvement, like the other, throws back the decline
of the productive power of labour by a certain distance: but in the one
case as in the other, it immediately resumes its course; the tide which
has receded, instantly begins to re-advance. It might seem, indeed, that
when a country draws its supply of food from so wide a surface as the
whole habitable globe, so little bimpressionb can be produced on that
great expanse by any increase of mouths in one small corner of it, that
the inhabitants of the country may double and treble their numbers,
without feeling the ceffectc in any increased tension of the springs of
production, or any enhancement of the price of food throughout the
world. But in this calculation several things are overlooked.

In the first place, the foreign regions from which corn can be imported
do not comprise the whole globe, but those parts of it dprincipallyd
which are in the immediate neighbourhood of coasts or navigable rivers.
The coast is the part of most countries which is earliest and most
thickly peopled, and has seldom any food to spare. The chief source of
supply, therefore, is the strip of country along the banks of some
navigable river, as the Nile, the Vistula, or the Mississippi; and of
such there is not, in the productive regions of the earth, so great a
multitude as to suffice during an indefinite time for a rapidly growing
demand, without an increasing strain on the productive powers of the
soil. To obtain auxiliary supplies of corn from the interior in any
abundance, eise, in the existing state of the communications, fin most
cases impracticablef. By improved roads, and gby canals and railways,
the obstacle will eventuallyg be so reduced as not to be insuperable:
but this is a slow progress; in all the food-exporting countries except
America, a very slow progress; and one which cannot keep pace with
population, unless the increase of the last is very effectually
restrained.

In the next place, even if the supply were drawn from the whole instead
of a small part of the surface of the exporting countries, the quantity
of food would still be limited, which could be obtained from them
without an increase of the proportional cost. The countries which export
food may be divided into two classes; those in which the effective
desire of accumulation is strong, and those in which it is weak. In
Australia and the United States of America, the effective desire of
accumulation is strong; capital increases fast, and the production of
food might be very rapidly extended. Edition: current; Page: [192] But
in such countries population also increases with extraordinary rapidity.
Their agriculture has to provide for their own expanding numbers, as
well as for those of the importing countries. They must, therefore, from
the nature of the case, be rapidly driven, if not to less fertile, at
least what is equivalent, to remoter and less accessible lands, and to
modes of cultivation like those of old countries, less productive in
proportion to the labour and expense.

But the countries which have at the same time cheap food and great
industrial prosperity are few, being only those in which the arts of
civilized life have been transferred full-grown to a rich and
uncultivated soil. Among old countries, those which are able to export
food, are able only because their industry is in a very backward state;
because capital, and hence population, have never increased sufficiently
to make food rise to a higher price. Such countries are Russia, Poland,
and hthe plains of the Danubeh. In those regions the effective desire of
accumulation is weak, the arts of production most imperfect, capital
scanty, and its increase, especially from domestic sources, slow. When
an increased demand arose for food to be exported to iother countriesi,
it would only be very gradually that food could be produced to meet it.
The capital needed could not be obtained by transfer from other
employments, for such do not exist. The jcottonsj or hardware which
would be received from England in exchange for corn, the Russians and
Poles do not now produce in the country: they go without them. Something
might in time be expected from the increased exertions to which
producers would be stimulated by the market opened for their produce;
but to such increase of exertion, the khabitsk of countries whose
agricultural population consists of serfs, lor of peasants mwho have but
just emerged from am servile condition,l are the reverse of favourable,
and even in this age of movement these nhabitsn do not rapidly change.
If a greater outlay of capital is relied on as the source from which the
produce is to be increased, the means must either be obtained by the
slow process of saving, under the impulse given by new commodities oando
more extended intercourse (and in that case the population would most
likely increase as fast), or must be brought in from foreign countries.
If England is to obtain a rapidly increasing supply of corn from Russia
or Poland, English capital must go there to produce it. This, however,
is attended with so many difficulties, as are equivalent to great
positive disadvantages. It is opposed by pdifferencesp of language,
differences of manners, and a thousand obstacles arising from the
institutions and social relations of the country; and after Edition:
current; Page: [193] all it would inevitably so stimulate population on
the spot, that nearly all the increase of food produced by its means
would qprobablyq be consumed without leaving the country: so that, if it
were not the almost only mode of introducing foreign arts and ideas, and
giving an effectual spur to the backward civilization of those
countries, little reliance could be placed on it for increasing the
exports, and supplying other countries with a progressive and indefinite
increase of food. But to improve the civilization of a country is a slow
process, and gives time for so great an increase of population both in
the country itself, and in those supplied from it, that its effect in
keeping down the price of food against the increase of demand, is not
likely to be more decisive on the scale of all Europe, than on the
smaller one of a particular nation.

The law, therefore, of diminishing return to industry, whenever
population makes a more rapid progress than improvement, is not solely
applicable to countries which are fed from their own soil, but in
substance applies quite as much to those which are willing to draw their
food from any accessible quarter that can afford it cheapest. rA sudden
and great cheapening of food, indeed, in whatever manner produced,
would, like any other sudden improvement in the arts of life,r throw the
natural tendency of affairs a stage or two further back, sthough
withouts altering its course. tThere is one contingencyt connected with
freedom of importation, which may uyetu produce temporary effects
vgreaterv than were ever contemplated either by the bitterest enemies or
the most ardent adherents of free-trade in food. Maize, or Indian corn,
is a product capable of being supplied in quantity sufficient to feed
the whole country, at a cost, allowing for difference of nutritive
quality, cheaper even than the potato. If maize should ever substitute
itself for wheat as the staple food of the poor, the productive power of
labour in obtaining food would be so enormously increased, and the
expense of maintaining a family so diminished, that it Edition: current;
Page: [194] would require perhaps some generations for population, even
if it started forward at an American pace, to overtake this great
accession to the facilities of its support.

§ 4. [Necessity of restraining population not ain generala superseded by
emigration] Besides the importation of corn, there is another resource
which can be invoked by a nation whose increasing numbers press hard,
not against their capital, but against the productive capacity of their
land: I mean Emigration, especially in the form of Colonization. Of this
remedy the efficacy as far as it goes is real, since it consists in
seeking elsewhere those unoccupied tracts of fertile land, which if they
existed at home would enable the demand of an increasing population to
be met without any falling off in the productiveness of labour.
Accordingly, when the region to be colonized is near at hand, and the
habits and tastes of the people sufficiently migratory, this remedy is
completely effectual. The migration from the older parts of the American
Confederation to the new territories, which is to all intents and
purposes colonization, is what enables population to go on unchecked
throughout the Union without having yet diminished the return to
industry, or increased the difficulty of earning a subsistence. If
Australia or the interior of Canada were as near to Great Britain as
Wisconsin and Iowa to New York; if the superfluous people could remove
to it without bcrossing the seab, and were of as adventurous and
restless a character, and as little addicted to staying at home, as
their kinsfolk of New England, those unpeopled continents would render
the same service to the United Kingdom which the old states of America
derive from the new. But, these things being as they are—though a
judiciously conducted emigration is a most important resource for
suddenly lightening the pressure of population by a single effort—cand
though in such an extraordinary case as that of Ireland under the
threefold operation of the potato failure, the poor law, and the general
turning out of tenantry throughout the country, spontaneous emigration
may at a particular crisis remove greater multitudes than it was ever
proposed to remove at once by any national scheme;c dit still remains to
be shown by experience whether a permanent stream of emigration cand be
kept up, sufficient to take off, as in America, all that portion of the
annual increase (when proceeding at its greatest rapidity) which being
in excess of the progress made during the same short period in the arts
of life, tends to render living more difficult for every
averagely-situated individual in the community. And unless this Edition:
current; Page: [195] can be done, emigration cannote, even in an
economical point of view,e dispense with the necessity of checks to
population. Further than this we have not to speak of it in this place.
The general subject of colonization as a practical question, its
importance to fold countriesf, and the principles on which it should be
conducted, will be gdiscussed at some length in a subsequent portion of
this Treatiseg.

Edition: current; Page: [196] Edition: current; Page: [197]


BOOK II: DISTRIBUTION

Edition: current; Page: [198] Edition: current; Page: [199]


CHAPTER I: Of Property

§ 1. [Introductory remarks] The principles which have been set forth in
the first part of this Treatise, are, in certain respects, strongly
distinguished from those, on the consideration of which we are now about
to enter. The laws and conditions of the production of wealth partake of
the character of physical truths. There is nothing optional or arbitrary
in them. Whatever mankind produce, must be produced in the modes, and
under the conditions, imposed by the constitution of external things,
and by the inherent properties of their own bodily and mental structure.
Whether they like it or not, their aproductionsa will be limited by the
amount of their previous accumulation, and, that being given, it will be
proportional to their energy, their skill, the perfection of their
machinery, and their judicious use of the advantages of combined labour.
Whether they like it or not, a double quantity of labour will not raise,
on the same land, a double quantity of food, unless some improvement
takes place in the processes of cultivation. Whether they like it or
not, the unproductive expenditure of individuals will pro tanto tend to
impoverish the community, and only their productive expenditure will
enrich it. The opinions, or the wishes, which may exist on these
different matters, do not control the things themselves. We cannot,
indeed, foresee to what extent the modes of production may be altered,
or the productiveness of labour increased, by future extensions of our
knowledge of the laws of nature, suggesting new processes of industry of
which we have at present no conception. But howsoever we may succeed in
making for ourselves more space within the limits set by the
constitution of things, bwe know that there must be limits. We cannot
alter the ultimate properties either of matter or mind, but can only
employ those properties more or less successfully, to bring about the
events in which we are interestedb.

It is not so with the Distribution of Wealth. That is a matter of human
institution solely. The things once there, mankind, individually or
collectively, can do with them as they like. They can place them at the
disposal Edition: current; Page: [200] of whomsoever they please, and on
whatever terms. Further, in the social state, in every state except
total solitude, any disposal whatever of them can only take place by the
cconsent of societyd, or rather of those who dispose of its active
forced. Even what a person has produced by his individual toil, unaided
by any one, he cannot keep, unless eby the permission of societye. Not
only can society take it from him, but individuals could and would take
it from him, if society only remained passive; if it did not either
interfere en masse, or employ and pay people for the purpose of
fpreventingf him from being disturbed in the possession. The
distribution of wealth, therefore, depends on the laws and customs of
society. The rules by which it is determined, are what the opinions and
feelings gof the ruling portiong of the community make them, and are
very different in different ages and countries; and might be still more
different, if mankind so chose.

The opinions and feelings of mankind, doubtless, are not a matter of
chance. They are consequences of the fundamental laws of human nature,
hcombined with the existing state of knowledge and experience, and the
existing condition of social institutions and intellectual and moral
cultureh. But the laws of the generation of human opinions are not
within our present subject. They are part of the general theory of human
progress, a far larger and more difficult subject of inquiry than
political economy. We have here to consider, not the causes, but the
consequences, of the rules according to which wealth may be distributed.
Those, at least, are as little arbitrary, and have as much the character
of physical laws, as the laws of production. Human beings can control
their own acts, but not the consequences of their acts ieither to
themselves or to othersi. Society can subject the distribution of wealth
to whatever rules it thinks best: but what practical results jwillj flow
from the operation of those rules, kmust be discovered, like any other
physical or mental truths, by observation and reasoningk.

We proceed, then, to the consideration of the different modes of
distributing the produce of land and labour, which have been adopted in
practice, or may be conceived in theory. Among these, our attention is
first claimed by that primary and fundamental institution, on which,
unless in some exceptional and very limited cases, the economical
arrangements of society have always rested, though in its secondary
features it has varied, Edition: current; Page: [201] and is liable to
vary. I mean, of course, the institution of individual property.

§ 2. [Statement of the question concerning Property] Private property,
as an institution, did not owe its origin to any of those considerations
of utility, which plead afor the maintenance of it when established.
Enough is known of rude ages, both from history and from analogous
states of society in our own time, to show, that tribunals (which always
precede laws) were originally established, not to determine rights, but
to repress violence and terminate quarrels. With this object chiefly in
view, they naturally enough gave legal effect to first occupancy, by
treating as the aggressor the person who first commenced violence, by
turning, or attempting to turn, another out of possession. The
preservation of the peace, which was the original object of civil
government, was thus attained; while by confirming, to those who already
possessed it, even what was not the fruit of personal exertion, a
guarantee was incidentally given to them and others that they would be
protected in what was so.

In considering the institution of property as a question in social
philosophy, we must leave out of consideration its actual origin in any
of the existing nations of Europeb. Web may suppose a community
unhampered by any previous possession; a body of colonists, occupying
for the first time an uninhabited country; bringing nothing with them
but what belonged to them in common, and having a clear field for the
adoption of the institutions and polity which they judged most
expedient; crequiredc, therefore, to choose whether they would conduct
the work of production on the principle of individual property, or on
some system of common ownership and collective agency.

If private property were adopted, we must presume that it would be
accompanied by none of the initial inequalities and injustices which
obstruct the beneficial operation of the principle in old societies.
Every full grown man or woman, we must suppose, would be secured in the
unfettered use and disposal of his or her bodily and mental faculties;
and the instruments of production, the land and tools, would be divided
fairly among them, so that all might start, in respect to outward
appliances, on equal terms. It is dpossible alsod to conceive that in
this original apportionment, compensation might be made for the injuries
of nature, and the balance redressed by assigning to the less robust
members of the community advantages in the distribution, sufficient to
put them on a par with the rest. But the division, once made, would not
again be interfered with; individuals would be left to their own
exertions and to the ordinary chances, for making Edition: current;
Page: [202] an advantageous use of what was assigned to them. If
individual property, on the contrary, were excluded, the plan which must
be adopted would be to hold the land and all instruments of production
as the joint property of the community, and to carry on the operations
of industry on the common account. The direction of the labour of the
community would devolve upon a magistrate or magistrates, whom we may
suppose elected by the suffrages of the community, and whom we must
assume to be voluntarily obeyed by them. The division of the produce
would in like manner be a public act. The principle might either be that
of complete equality, or of apportionment to the necessities or deserts
of individuals, in whatever manner might be conformable to the ideas of
justice or policy prevailing in the community.

Examples of such associations, on a small scale, are the monastic
orders, the Moravians, the followers of Rapp, and others: and from the
ehopes which they hold out of relief frome the miseries and iniquities
of a state of much inequality of wealth, schemes for a larger
application of the same idea have reappeared and become popular at all
periods of active speculation on the first principles of society. In an
age like the present, when a general reconsideration of all first
principles is felt to be inevitable, and when fmore than at any former
period of history thef suffering portions of the community have a voice
in the discussion, it was impossible but that ideas of this nature
should spread far and wide. gThe late revolutions in Europe have thrown
up a great amount of speculation of this character, and an unusual share
of attention has consequently been drawn to the various forms which
these ideas have assumedh: nor is this attention likely to diminish, but
on the contrary, to increase more and moreh.

The assailants of the principle of individual property may be divided
into Edition: current; Page: [203] two classes: those whose scheme
implies absolute equality in the distribution of the physical means of
life and enjoyment, and those who admit inequality, but grounded on some
principle, or supposed principle, of justice or general expediency, and
not, like so many of the existing social inequalities, dependent on
accident alone. At the head of the first class, as the earliest iof
those belonging to the present generation, must be placed Mr. Owen and
his followers. M. Louis Blanc and M. Cabet have more recently become
conspicuous as apostles of similar doctrines (though the former
advocates equality of distribution only as a transition to a still
higher standard of jjustice, that all should work according to their
capacity, and receive according to their wants). The characteristic name
for this economical system is Communism, a word of continental origin,
only of late introduced into this country. The word Socialism, which
originated among the English Communists, and was assumed by them as a
name to designate their own doctrine, is now, on the Continent, employed
in a larger sense; not necessarily implying Communism, or the entire
abolition of private property, but applied to any system which requires
that the land and the instruments of production should be the property,
not of individuals, but of communities or associations, or of the
government. Among such systems, the two of highest intellectual
pretension are those which, from the names of their real or kreputedk
authors, have been called St. Simonism and Fourierism; the former
defunct as a system, but which during the few years of its public
promulgation, sowed the seeds of nearly all the Socialist tendencies
which have since spread so widely in France: the second, lstilll
flourishing in the number, talent, and zeal of its adherents.g

a§ 3. [Examination of Communism] Whatever may be the merits or defects
of these various schemes, they cannot be truly said to be impracticable.
No reasonable person can doubt that a village community, composed of a
few thousand inhabitants cultivating in joint ownership the same extent
of land which at present feeds that number of people, and producing by
combined labour and the most improved processes the manufactured
articles which they required, could raise an amount of productions
sufficient to maintain them in comfort; and would find the means of
obtaining, and if need be, exacting, the quantity of labour necessary
for this purpose, from every member of the association who was capable
of work.

The objection ordinarily made to a system of community of property
Edition: current; Page: [204] and equal distribution of the produce,
that each person would be incessantly occupied in evading his fair share
of the work, points, undoubtedly, to a real difficulty. But those who
urge this objection, forget to how bgreatb an extent the same difficulty
exists under the system on which nine-tenths of the business of society
is now conducted. The objection supposes, that honest and efficient
labour is only to be had from those who are themselves individually to
reap the benefit of their own exertions. But how small a part of all the
labour performed in England, from the lowest-paid to the highest, is
done by persons working for their own cbenefit.c From the Irish reaper
or hodman to the chief justice or the minister of state, nearly all the
work of society is remunerated by day wages or fixed salaries. A factory
operative has less personal interest in his work than a member of a
Communist association, since he is not, like him, working for a
partnership of which he is himself a member. It will no doubt be dsaidd,
that though the labourers themselves have not, in most cases, a personal
interest in their work, they are watched and superintended, and their
labour directed, and the mental part of the labour performed, by persons
who have. Even this, however, is far from being universally the fact. In
all public, and many of the largest and most successful private
undertakings, not only the labours of detail but the control and
superintendence are entrusted to salaried officers. And though the
“master’s eye,” when the master is vigilant and intelligent, is of
proverbial value, it must be remembered that in a Socialist farm or
manufactory, each labourer would be under the eye not of one master, but
of the whole community. In the extreme case of obstinate perseverance in
not performing the due share of work, the community would have the same
resources which society now has for compelling conformity to the
necessary conditions of the association. Dismissal, the only remedy at
present, is no remedy when any other labourer who may be engaged does no
better than his predecessor: the power of dismissal only enables an
employer to obtain efrom his workmene the customary amount of labour,
but that customary labour may be of any degree of inefficiency. Even the
labourer who loses his employment by idleness or negligence, has nothing
worse to suffer, in the most unfavourable case, than the discipline of a
workhouse, and if the desire to avoid this be a sufficient motive in the
one system, it would be sufficient in the other. I am not undervaluing
the strength of the incitement given to labour when the whole or a large
share of the benefit of extra exertion belongs to the labourer. But
under the present system of industry this incitement, in the great
majority of cases, does not exist. If Communistic labour might be less
vigorous than that of a peasant proprietor, or a workman labouring on
his own account, it would Edition: current; Page: [205] probably be more
energetic than that of a labourer for hire, who has no personal interest
in the matter at all. The neglect by the uneducated classes of labourers
for hire, of the duties which they engage to perform, is in the present
state of society most flagrant. Now it is an admitted condition of the
Communist scheme that all shall be educated: and this being supposed,
the duties of the members of the association would doubtless be as
diligently performed as those of the generality of salaried officers in
the middle or higher classes; who are not supposed to be necessarily
unfaithful to their trust, because so long as they are not dismissed,
their pay is the same in however lax a manner their duty is fulfilled.
Undoubtedly, as a general rule, remuneration by fixed salaries does not
in any class of functionaries produce the maximum of zeal: and this is
as much as can be reasonably alleged against Communistic labour.

That even this finferiority would necessarily existf, is by no means so
certain as is assumed by those who are little used to carry their minds
beyond the state of things with which they are familiar. Mankind are
capable of a far greater amount of public spirit than the present age is
accustomed to suppose possible. History bears witness to the success
with which large bodies of human beings may be trained to feel the
public interest their own. And no soil could be more favourable to the
growth of such a feeling, than a Communist association, since all the
ambition, and the bodily and mental activity, which are now exerted in
the pursuit of separate and self-regarding interests, would require
another gsphereg of employment, and would naturally find it in the
pursuit of the general benefit of the community. The same cause, so
often assigned in explanation of the devotion of the Catholic priest or
monk to the interest of his order—that he has no interest apart from
it—would, under Communism, attach the citizen to the community. And
independently of the public motive, every member of the association
would be amenable to the most universal, and one of the strongest, of
personal motives, that of public opinion. The force of this motive in
deterring from any act or omission positively reproved by the community,
no one is likely to deny; but the power also of emulation, in exciting
to the most strenuous exertions for the sake of the approbation and
admiration of others, is borne witness to by experience in every
situation in which human beings publicly compete with one another, even
if it be in things frivolous, or from which the public derive no
benefit. A contest, who can do most for the common good, is not the kind
of competition which Socialists repudiate. To what extent, therefore,
the energy of labour would be diminished by Communism, or whether in the
long run it would be diminished at all, must be considered for the
present an undecided question.

Edition: current; Page: [206]
Another of the objections to Communism is similar to that, so often
urged against poor-laws: that if every member of the community were
assured of subsistence for himself and any number of children, on the
sole condition of willingness to work, prudential restraint on the
multiplication of mankind would be at an end, and population would start
forward at a rate which would reduce the community, through successive
stages of increasing discomfort, to actual starvation. There would
certainly be much ground for this apprehension if Communism provided no
motives to restraint, equivalent to those which it would take away. But
Communism is precisely the state of things in which opinion might be
expected to declare itself with greatest intensity against this kind of
selfish intemperance. Any augmentation of numbers which diminished the
comfort or increased the toil of the mass, would then cause (which now
it does not) immediate and unmistakeable inconvenience to every
individual in the association; inconvenience which could not then be
imputed to the avarice of employers, or the unjust privileges of the
rich. In such altered circumstances opinion could not fail to reprobate,
and if reprobation did not suffice, to repress by penalties of some
description, this or any other culpable self-indulgence at the expense
of the community. The Communistic scheme, instead of being peculiarly
open to the objection drawn from danger of over-population, has the
recommendation of tending in an especial degree to the prevention of
that evil.

A more real difficulty is that of fairly apportioning the labour of the
community among its members. There are many kinds of work, and by what
standard are they to be measured one against another? Who is to judge
how much cotton spinning, or distributing goods from the stores, or
bricklaying, or chimney sweeping, is equivalent to so much ploughing?
The difficulty of making the adjustment between different qualities of
labour is so strongly felt by Communist writers, that they have usually
thought it necessary to provide that all should work by turns at every
description of useful labour: an arrangement which, by putting an end to
the division of employments, would sacrifice so much of the advantage of
co-operative production as greatly to diminish the productiveness of
labour. Besides, even in the same kind of work, nominal equality of
labour would be so great a real inequality, that hthe feeling ofh
justice would revolt against its being enforced. All persons are not
equally fit for all labour; and the same quantity of labour is an
unequal burthen on the weak and the strong, the hardy and the delicate,
the quick and ithei slow, the dull and the intelligent.

But these difficulties, though real, are not jnecessarilyj insuperable.
The apportionment of work to the strength and capacities of individuals,
the mitigation of a general rule to provide for cases in which it would
operate Edition: current; Page: [207] harshly, are not problems to which
human intelligence, guided by a sense of justice, would be inadequate.
And the worst and most unjust arrangement which could be made of these
points, under a system aiming at equality, would be so far short of the
inequality and injustice with which labour (not to speak of
remuneration) is now apportioned, as to be scarcely worth counting in
the comparison. We must remember too, that Communism, as a system of
society, exists only in idea; that its difficulties, at present, are
much better understood than its resources; and that the intellect of
mankind is only beginning to contrive the means of organizing it in
detail, so as to overcome the one and derive the greatest advantage from
the other.k

Ifl, therefore,l the choice were to be made between Communism with all
its chances, and the present state of society with all its sufferings
and injustices; if the institution of private property necessarily
carried with it as a consequence, that the produce of labour should be
apportioned as we now see it, almost in an inverse ratio to the
labour—the largest portions to those who have never worked at all, the
next largest to those whose work is almost nominal, and so in a
descending scale, the remuneration dwindling as the work grows harder
and more disagreeable, until the most fatiguing and exhausting bodily
labour cannot count with certainty on being able to earn even the
necessaries of life; if this or Communism were the alternative, all the
difficulties, great or small, of Communism would be but as dust in the
balance. But to make the comparison applicable, we must compare
Communism at its best, with the régime of individual property, not as it
is, but as it might be made. The principle of private property has never
yet had a fair trial in any country; and less so, perhaps, in this
country than in some others. The social arrangements of modern Europe
commenced from a distribution of property which was the result, not of
just partition, or acquisition by industry, but of conquest and
violence: and notwithstanding what industry has been doing for many
centuries to modify the work of force, the system still retains many and
large traces of its origin. The laws of property have never yet
conformed to the principles on which the justification of private
property rests. They have made property of things which never ought to
be property, and absolute property where only a qualified property ought
to exist. They have not held the balance fairly between human beings,
but have heaped impediments upon some, to give advantage to others; they
have purposely fostered inequalities, and prevented all from starting
fair in the race. That all should indeed start on perfectly equal terms,
is inconsistent with any law of private property: but Edition: current;
Page: [208] if as much pains as has been taken to aggravate the
inequality of chances arising from the natural working of the principle,
had been taken to temper that inequality by every means not subversive
of the principle itself; if the tendency of legislation had been to
favour the diffusion, instead of the concentration of wealth—to
encourage the subdivision of the large masses, instead of striving to
keep them together; the principle of individual property would have been
found to have no necessary connexion with the physical and social evils
which almost all Socialist writers assume to be inseparable from it.

Private property, in every defence made of it, is supposed to mean, the
guarantee to individuals of the fruits of their own labour and
abstinence. The guarantee to them of the fruits of the labour and
abstinence of others, transmitted to them without any merit or exertion
of their own, is not of the essence of the institution, but a mere
incidental consequence, which, when it reaches a certain height, does
not promote, but conflicts with, the ends which render private property
legitimate. To judge of the final destination of the institution of
property, we must suppose everything rectified, which causes the
institution to work in a manner opposed to that equitable principle, of
proportion between remuneration and exertion, on which in every
vindication of it that will bear the light, it is assumed to be
grounded. We must also suppose two conditions realized, without which
neither Communism nor any other laws or institutions could make the
condition of the mass of mankind other than degraded and miserable. One
of these conditions is, universal education; the other, a due limitation
of the numbers of the community. With these, there could be no poverty,
even under the present social institutions: and these being supposed,
the question of Socialism is not, as generally stated by Socialists, a
question of flying to the sole refuge against the evils which now bear
down humanity; but a mere question of comparative advantages, which
futurity must determine. We are too ignorant either of what individual
agency in its best form, or Socialism in its best form, can accomplish,
to be qualified to decide which of the two will be the ultimate form of
human society.

If a conjecture may be hazarded, the decision will probably depend
mainly on one consideration, viz. which of the two systems is consistent
with the greatest amount of human liberty and spontaneity. After the
means of subsistence are assured, the next in strength of the personal
wants of human beings is liberty; and (unlike the physical wants, which
as civilization advances become more moderate and more amenable to
control) it increases instead of diminishing in intensity, as the
intelligence and the moral faculties are more developed. The perfection
both of social arrangements and of practical morality would be, to
secure to all persons complete independence and freedom of action,
subject to no restriction but that of not Edition: current; Page: [209]
doing injury to others: and the education which taught or the social
institutions which required them to exchange the control of their own
actions for any amount of comfort or affluence, or to renounce liberty
for the sake of equality, would deprive them of one of the most elevated
characteristics of human nature. It remains to be discovered how far the
preservation of this characteristic would be found compatible with the
Communistic organization of society. No doubt, this, like all the other
objections to the Socialist schemes, is vastly exaggerated. The members
of the association need not be required to live together more than they
do now, nor need they be controlled in the disposal of their individual
share of the produce, and of the probably large amount of leisure which,
if they limited their production to things really worth producing, they
would possess. Individuals need not be chained to an occupation, or to a
particular locality. The restraints of Communism would be freedom in
comparison with the present condition of the majority of the human race.
The generality of labourers in this and most other countries, have as
little choice of occupation or freedom of locomotion, are practically as
dependent on fixed rules and on the will of others, as they could be on
any system short of actual slavery; to say nothing of the entire
domestic subjection of one half the species, to which it is the signal
honour of Owenism and most other forms of Socialism that they assign
equal rights, in all respects, with those of the hitherto dominant sex.
But it is not by comparison with the present bad state of society that
the claims of Communism can be estimated; nor is it sufficient that it
should promise greater personal and mental freedom than is now enjoyed
by those who have not enough of either to deserve the name. The question
is, whether there would be any asylum left for individuality of
character; whether public opinion would not be a tyrannical yoke;
whether the absolute dependence of each on all, and surveillance of each
by all, would not grind all down into a tame uniformity of thoughts,
feelings, and actions. This is already one of the glaring evils of the
existing state of society, notwithstanding a much greater diversity of
education and pursuits, and a much less absolute dependence of the
individual on the mass, than would exist in the Communistic régime. No
society in which eccentricity is a matter of reproach, can be in a
wholesome state. It is yet to be ascertained whether the Communistic
scheme would be mconsistent withm that multiform development of human
nature, those manifold unlikenesses, that diversity of tastes and
talents, and variety of intellectual points of view, which not only form
a great part of the interest of human life, but by bringing intellects
into stimulating collision, and by presenting to each innumerable
notions that he would not have conceived of himself, are the mainspring
of mental and moral progression.

Edition: current; Page: [210]
§ 4. [Examination of St. Simonism and Fourierism] I have thus far
confined my observations to the Communistic doctrine, which forms the
extreme limit of Socialism; according to which not only the instruments
of production, the land and capital, are the joint property of the
community, but the produce is divided and the labour apportioned, as far
as possible, equally. The objections, whether well or ill grounded, to
which Socialism is liable, apply to this form of it in their greatest
force. The other varieties of Socialism mainly differ from Communism, in
not relying solely on what M. Louis Blanc calls the point of honour of
industry, but retaining more or less of the incentives to labour derived
from private pecuniary interest. Thus it is already a modification of
the strict theory of Communism, when the principle is professed of
proportioning remuneration to labour. The attempts which have been made
ain Francea to carry Socialism into practical effect, by associations of
workmen manufacturing on their own account, bmostly began by sharing the
remuneration equally, without regard to the quantity of work done by the
individual: but in almost every case this plan was after a short time
abandoned, and recourse was had to working by the piece. The original
principle appeals to a higher standard of justice, and is adapted to a
much higher moral condition of human nature. The proportioning of
remuneration to work done, is really just, only in so far as the more or
less of the work is a matter of choice: when it depends on natural
difference of strength or capacity, this principle of remuneration is in
itself an injustice: it is giving to those who have; assigning most to
those who are already most favoured by nature. Considered, however, as a
compromise with the selfish type of character formed by the present
standard of morality, and fostered by the existing social institutions,
it is highly expedient; and until education shall have been entirely
regenerated, is far more likely to prove immediately successful, than an
attempt at a higher ideal.

The two elaborate forms of non-communistic Socialism known as St.
Simonism and Fourierism, are totally free from the objections usually
urged against Communism; and though they are open to others of their
own, yet by the great intellectual power which in many respects
distinguishes them, and by their large and philosophic treatment of some
of the fundamental problems of society and morality, they may justly be
counted among the most remarkable productions of the past and present
age.

The St. Simonian scheme does not contemplate an equal, but an unequal
division of the produce; it does not propose that all should be occupied
alike, but differently, according to their vocation or capacity; the
function of each being assigned, like grades in a regiment, by the
choice of the Edition: current; Page: [211] directing authority, and the
remuneration being by salary, proportioned to the importance, in the
eyes of that authority, of the function itself, and the merits of the
person who fulfils it. For the constitution of the ruling body,
different plans might be adopted, consistently with the essentials of
the system. It might be appointed by popular suffrage. In the idea of
the original authors, the rulers were supposed to be persons of genius
and virtue, who obtained the voluntary adhesion of the rest by the force
of mental superiority. That the scheme might in some peculiar states of
society work with advantage, is not improbable. There is indeed a
successful experiment, of a somewhat similar kind, on record, to which I
have once alluded; that of the Jesuits in Paraguay. A race of savages,
belonging to a portion of mankind more averse to consecutive exertion
for a distant object than any other authentically known to us, was
brought under the mental dominion of civilized and instructed men who
were united among themselves by a system of community of goods. To the
absolute authority of these men they reverentially submitted themselves,
and were induced by them to learn the arts of civilized life, and to
practise labours for the community, which no inducement that could have
been offered would have prevailed on them to practise for themselves.
This social system was of short duration, being prematurely destroyed by
diplomatic arrangements and foreign force. That it could be brought into
action at all was probably owing to the immense distance in point of
knowledge and intellect which separated the few rulers from the whole
body of the ruled, without any intermediate orders, either social or
intellectual. In any other circumstances it would probably have been a
complete failure. It supposes an absolute despotism in the heads of the
association; which would probably not be much improved if the
depositaries of the despotism (contrary to the views of the authors of
the system) were varied from time to time according to the result of a
popular canvass. But to suppose that one or a few human beings,
howsoever selected, could, by whatever machinery of subordinate agency,
be qualified to adapt each person’s work to his capacity, and proportion
each person’s remuneration to his merits—to be, in fact, the dispensers
of distributive justice to every member of a community; or that any use
which they could make of this power would give general satisfaction, or
would be submitted to without the aid of force—is a supposition almost
too chimerical to be reasoned against. A fixed rule, like that of
equality, might be acquiesced in, and so might chance, or an external
necessity; but that a handful of human beings should weigh everybody in
the balance, and give more to one and less to another at their sole
pleasure and judgment would not be borne, unless from persons believed
to be more than men, and backed by supernatural terrors.

The most skilfully combined, and with the greatest foresight of
objections, Edition: current; Page: [212] of all the forms of Socialism,
is that commonly known as Fourierism. This system does not contemplate
the abolition of private property, nor even of inheritance; on the
contrary, it avowedly takes into consideration, as an element in the
distribution of the produce, capital as well as labour. It proposes that
the operations of industry should be carried on by associations of about
two thousand members, combining their labour on a district of about a
square league in extent, under the guidance of chiefs selected by
themselves. In the distribution, a certain minimum is first assigned for
the subsistence of every member of the community, whether capable or not
of labour. The remainder of the produce is shared in certain
proportions, to be determined beforehand, among the three elements,
Labour, Capital, and Talent. The capital of the community may be owned
in unequal shares by different members, who would in that case receive,
as in any other joint-stock company, proportional dividends. The claim
of each person on the share of the produce apportioned to talent, is
estimated by the grade or rank which the individual occupies in the
several groups of labourers to which he or she belongs; these grades
being in all cases conferred by the choice of his or her companions. The
remuneration, when received, would not of necessity be expended or
enjoyed in common; there would be separate ménages for all who preferred
them, and no other community of living is contemplated, than that all
the members of the association should reside in the same pile of
buildings; for saving of labour and expense, not only in building, but
in every branch of domestic economy; and in order that, the whole cof
thec buying and selling operations of the community being performed by a
single agent, the enormous portion of the produce of industry now
carried off by the profits of mere distributors might be reduced to the
smallest amount possible.

This system, unlike Communism, does not, in theory at least, withdraw
any of the motives to exertion which exist in the present state of
society. On the contrary, if the arrangement worked according to the
intentions of its contrivers, it would even strengthen those motives;
since each person would have much more certainty of reaping individually
the fruits of increased skill or energy, bodily or mental, than under
the present social arrangements can be felt by any but those who are in
the most advantageous positions, or to whom the chapter of accidents is
more than ordinarily favourable. The Fourierists, however, have still
another resource. They believe that they have solved the great and
fundamental problem of rendering labour attractive. That this is not
impracticable, they contend by very strong arguments; in particular by
one which they have in common with the Owenites, viz., that scarcely any
labour, however severe, undergone by human beings for the sake of
subsistence, exceeds in intensity that which Edition: current; Page:
[213] other human beings, whose subsistence is already provided for, are
found ready and even eager to undergo for pleasure. This certainly is a
most significant fact, and one from which the student in social
philosophy may draw important instruction. But the argument founded on
it may easily be stretched too far. If occupations full of discomfort
and fatigue are freely pursued by many persons as amusements, who does
not see that they are amusements exactly because they are pursued
freely, and may be discontinued at pleasure? The liberty of quitting a
position often makes the whole difference between its being painful and
pleasurable. Many a person remains in the same town, street, or house
from January to December, without a wish or a thought tending towards
removal, who, if confined to that same place by the mandate of
authority, would find the imprisonment absolutely intolerable.

According to the Fourierists, scarcely any kind of useful labour is
naturally and necessarily disagreeable, unless it is either regarded as
dishonourable, or is immoderate in degree, or destitute of the stimulus
of sympathy and emulation. Excessive toil needs not, they contend, be
undergone by any one, in a society in which there would be no idle
class, and no labour wasted, as so enormous an amount of labour is now
wasted, in useless things; and where full advantage would be taken of
the power of association, both in increasing the efficiency of
production, and in economizing consumption. The other requisites for
rendering labour attractive would, they think, be found in the execution
of all labour by social groups, to any number of which the same
individual might simultaneously belong, at his or her own choice: their
grade in each being determined by the degree of service which they were
found capable of rendering, as appreciated by the suffrages of their
comrades. It is inferred from the diversity of tastes and talents, that
every member of the community would be attached to several groups,
employing themselves in various kinds of occupation, some bodily, others
mental, and would be capable of occupying a high place in some one or
more; so that a real equality, or something more nearly approaching to
it than might at first be supposed, would practically result: not, from
the compression, but, on the contrary, from the largest possible
development, of the various natural superiorities residing in each
individual.

Even from so brief an outline, it must be evident that this system does
no violence to any of the general laws by which human action, even in
the present imperfect state of moral and intellectual cultivation, is
influenced; and that it would be extremely rash to pronounce it
incapable of success, or unfitted to realize a great part of the hopes
founded on it by its partisans. With regard to this, as to all other
varieties of Socialism, the thing to be desired, and to which they have
a just claim, is opportunity of trial. They are all capable of being
tried on a moderate scale, and at no risk, either Edition: current;
Page: [214] personal or pecuniary, to any except those who try them. It
is for experience to determine how far or how soon any one or more of
the possible systems of community of property will be fitted to
substitute itself for the “organization of industry” based on private
ownership of land and capital. In the meantime we may, without
attempting to limit the ultimate capabilities of human nature, affirm,
that the political economist, for a considerable time to come, will be
chiefly concerned with the conditions of existence and progress
belonging to a society founded on private property and individual
competition; and that the object to be principally aimed at in the
present stage of human improvement, is not the subversion of the system
of individual property, but the improvement of it, and the full
participation of every member of the community in its benefits.

Edition: current; Page: [215]


CHAPTER II: The Same Subject Continued

§ 1. [The institution of property implies freedom of acquisition by
contract] It is next to be considered, what is included in the idea of
private property, and by what considerations the aapplicationa of the
principle bshould beb bounded.

The institution of property, cwhen limitedc to its essential elements,
consists in the recognition, in each person, of a right to the exclusive
disposal of what he or she have produced by their own exertions, or
received deitherd by gift or ebye fair agreement, without force or
fraud, from those who produced it. The foundation of the whole is, the
right of producers to what they themselves have produced. It may be
objected, therefore, fto the institution as it now exists, that itf
recognises rights of property in individuals over things which they have
not produced. For example (it may be said) the operatives in a
manufactory create, by their labour and skill, the whole produce; yet,
instead of its belonging to them, the law gives them only their
stipulated hire, and transfers the produce to some one who has merely
supplied the funds, without perhaps contributing anything to the work
itself, even in the form of superintendence. The answer to this is, that
the labour of manufacture is only one of the conditions which must
combine for the production of the commodity. The labour cannot be
carried on without materials and machinery, nor without a stock of
necessaries provided in advance, to maintain the labourers during the
production. All these things are the fruits of previous labour. If the
labourers were possessed of them, they would not need to divide the
produce with any one; but gwhileg they have them not, an equivalent must
be given to those who have, both for the antecedent labour, and for the
abstinence by which the produce of that labour, instead of being
expended on indulgences, has been reserved for this use. The capital may
not have been, and in most Edition: current; Page: [216] cases was not,
created by the labour and abstinence of the present possessor; but it
was created by the labour and abstinence of some former person, who hmay
indeed have been wrongfully dispossessed of it, but who, in the present
age of the world, much more probably transferred his claims to the
present capitalist by gift or voluntary contract:h and the abstinence at
least must have been continued by each successive owner, down to the
present. iIf it be said, as it may with truth, that those who have
inherited the savings of others have an advantage which they may have in
no way deserved, over the industrious whose predecessors have not left
them anything; I not only admit, but strenuously contend, that this
unearned advantage should be curtailed, as much as is consistent with
justice to those who thought fit to dispose of their savings by giving
them to their descendants. But while it is true that the labourers are
at a disadvantage compared with those whose predecessors have saved, it
is also true that the labourers are far better off than if those
predecessors had not saved. They share in the advantage, though not to
an equal extent with the inheritors.i The terms of co-operation between
present labour and the fruits of past labour jand savingj, are a subject
for adjustment between the two parties. Each is necessary to the other.
The kcapitalistsk can do nothing without labourers, nor the labourers
without capital. lIf the labourers compete for employment, the
capitalists on their part compete for labour, to the full extent of the
circulating capital of the country. mCompetition is often spoken of as
if it were necessarily a cause of misery and degradation to the
labouring class; as if high wages were not precisely as much a product
of competition as low wages. The remuneration of labour is as much the
result of the law of competition in the United States, as it is in
Irelandn, and much more completely so than in Englandn.m

Edition: current; Page: [217]
The right of property includes then, the freedom of acquiring by
contract. The right of each to what he has produced, implies a right to
what has been produced by others, if obtained by their free consento;
since the producers must either have given it from good will, or
exchanged it for what they esteemed an equivalent, and to prevent them
from doing so would be to infringe their right of property in the
product of their own industry.

§ 2. [The institution of property implies the validity of prescription]
Before proceeding to consider the things which the principle of
individual property does anota include, we must specify one more thing
which it does include: and this is that a title, after a certain period,
should be given by prescription. According to the fundamental idea of
property, indeed, nothing ought to be treated as such, which has been
acquired by force or fraud, or appropriated in ignorance of a prior
title vested in some other person; but it is necessary to the security
of rightful possessors, that they should not be molested by charges of
wrongful acquisition, when by the lapse of time witnesses must have
perished or been lost sight of, and the real character of the
transaction can no longer be cleared up. Possession which has not been
legally questioned within a moderate number of years, ought to be, as by
the laws of all nations it is, a complete title. Even when the
acquisition was wrongful, the dispossession, after a generation has
elapsed, of the probably bonâ fide possessors, by the revival of a claim
which had been long dormant, would generally be a greater injustice, and
almost always a greater private and public mischief, than leaving the
original wrong without atonement. It may seem hard that a claim,
originally just, should be defeated by mere lapse of time; but there is
a time after which (even looking at the individual case, and without
regard to the general effect on the security of possessors), the balance
of hardship turns the other way. With the injustices of men, as with the
convulsions and disasters of nature, the longer they remain unrepaired,
the greater become the obstacles to repairing them, arising from the
aftergrowths which would have to be torn up or broken through. In no
human transactions, not even in the simplest and clearest, does it
follow that a thing is fit to be done now, because it was fit to be done
sixty years ago. It is scarcely needful to remark, that these reasons
for not disturbing acts of injustice of old date, cannot apply to unjust
systems or institutions; since a bad law or usage is not one bad act, in
the remote past, but a perpetual repetition of bad actsb, asb long as
the law or usage lasts.

Such, then, being the essentials of private property, it is now to be
considered, to what extent the forms in which the institution has
existed in Edition: current; Page: [218] different states of society, or
still exists, are necessary consequences of its principles, or are
recommended by the reasons on which it is grounded.

§ 3. [The institution of property implies the power of bequest, but not
the right of inheritance. Question of inheritance examined] Nothing is
implied in property but the right of each to his a(or her)a own
faculties, to what he can produce by them, and to whatever he can get
for them in a fair market; together with his right to give this to bany
otherb person if he chooses, and the right of that other to receive and
enjoy it.

It follows, therefore, that although the right of bequest, or gift after
death, forms part of the idea of private property, the right of
inheritance, as distinguished from bequest, does not. That the property
of cpersons who havec made no disposition of it during dtheird lifetime,
should pass first to etheire children, and failing them, to fthef
nearest relations, may be a proper arrangement or not, but is no
consequence of the principle of private property. Although there belong
to the decision of such questions many considerations besides those of
political economy, it is not foreign to the plan of this work to
suggest, for the judgment of thinkers, the view of them which most
recommends itself to the writer’s mind.

No presumption in favour of existing ideas on this subject is to be
derived from their antiquity. In early ages, the property of a deceased
person passed to his children and nearest relatives by so natural and
obvious an arrangement, that no other gwas likely to be eveng thought of
in competition with it. In the first place, they were usually present on
the spot: they were in possession, and if they had no other title, had
that, so important in an early state of society, of first occupancy.
Secondly, they were already, in a manner, joint owners of his property
during his life. If the property was in land, it had generally been
conferred by the State on a family rather than on an individual: if it
consisted of cattle or moveable goods, it had probably been acquired,
and was certainly protected and defended, by the united efforts of all
members of the family who were of an age to work or fight. Exclusive
individual property in the modern sense, scarcely entered into the ideas
of the time; and when the first magistrate of the association died, he
really left nothing vacant but his own share in the division, which
devolved on the member of the family who succeeded to his authority. To
have disposed of the property otherwise, would have been to break up a
little commonwealth, united by ideas, interest, and habits, and to cast
them adrift on the world. These considerations, though rather felt than
reasoned about, had so great an influence on the minds of mankind,
Edition: current; Page: [219] as to create the idea of an inherent right
in the children to the possessions of their ancestor; a right which it
was not competent to himself to defeat. Bequest, in a primitive state of
society, was seldom recognised; a clear proof, were there no other, that
property was conceived in a manner totally different from the conception
of it in the present time.*

But the feudal family, the last historical form of patriarchal life, has
long perished, and the unit of society is not now the family or clan,
composed of all the reputed descendants of a common ancestor, but the
individual; or at most a pair of individuals, with their unemancipated
children. Property is now inherent in individuals, not in families: the
children when grown up do not follow the occupations or fortunes of the
parent: if they participate in hthe parent’sh pecuniary means it is at
his ior heri pleasure, and not by a voice in the ownership and
government of the whole, but generally by the exclusive enjoyment of a
part; and in this country at least (except as far as entails or
jsettlements are an obstacle) it is in kthe power of parentsk to
disinherit even ltheirl children, and leave mtheirm fortune to
strangers. More distant relatives are in general almost as completely
detached from the family and its interests as if they were in no way
connected with it. nThen only claim they are supposed to have on their
richer relations, is to a preference, cæteris paribus, in good offices,
and some aid oin case of actual necessity.

So great a change in the constitution of society must make a
considerable difference in the grounds on which the disposal of property
by inheritance should rest. The reasons usually assigned by modern
writers for giving the property of a person who dies intestate, to the
children, or nearest relatives, are, first, the supposition that in so
disposing of it, the law is more likely than in any other mode to do
what the proprietor pwould have done, if he had done anything; and
secondly, the hardship, to those who lived with their qparentsq and
partook in rtheirr opulence, of being cast down from the enjoyments of
wealth into poverty and privation.

There is ssomes force in both these arguments. The law tought, no
doubt,t to do for the children or dependents of an intestate, whatever
it was the Edition: current; Page: [220] duty of the parent or protector
to have done, uso far as this can be known by any one besides himself.
Since, however, the law cannot decide on individual claims, but must
proceed by general rules, it is next to be considered what these rules
should beu.

We may first remark, that in regard to collateral vrelativesv, it is
not, unless won grounds personal to the particular individualw, the duty
of any one to make a pecuniary provision for them. No one now expects
it, unless there happen to be no direct heirs; nor would it be expected
even then, if the expectation were not created by the xprovisions of the
law in case of intestacyx. I see, therefore, no reason why collateral
inheritance should exist at all. Mr. Bentham long ago proposed, and
other high authorities have agreed in the opinion, that if there are no
heirs either in the descending or in the ascending line, the property,
in case of intestacy, should escheat to the State. yWith respect to the
more remote degrees of collateral relationship, the point is not very
likely to be disputed. Few will maintain that there is anyy good reason
why the accumulations of some childless miser should on his death (as
every now and then happens) go to enrich a distant relative who never
saw him, who perhaps never knew himself to be related to him until there
was something to be gained by it, and who had no moral claim upon him of
any kind, more than the most entire stranger. zBut the reason of the
case applies alike to all collaterals, even in the nearest degree.
Collaterals have no real claims, but asuch as may be equallya strong in
the case of non-relatives; and in the one case as in the other, where
bvalidb claims exist, the proper mode of paying regard to them is by
bequest.z

The claims of children are of a different nature: they are real, and
indefeasible. But even of these, I venture to think that the measure
usually Edition: current; Page: [221] taken is an erroneous one: what is
due to children is in some respects underrated, in others, as it appears
to me, exaggerated. One of the most binding of all obligations, that of
not bringing children into the world unless they can be maintained in
comfort cduring childhoodc, and brought up with a likelihood of
dsupporting themselves when of full aged, is both disregarded in
practice and made light of in theory in a manner disgraceful to human
intelligence. On the other hand, when the parent possesses property, the
claims of the children upon it seem to me to be the subject of an
opposite error. Whatever fortune a parent may have inherited, or still
more, may have acquired, I cannot admit that he owes to his children,
merely because they are his children, to leave them rich, without the
necessity of any exertion. I could not admit it, even if to be so left
were always, and certainly, for the good of the children themselves. But
this is in the highest degree uncertain. It depends on individual
character. Without supposing extreme cases, it may be affirmed that in a
majority of instances the good not only of society but of the
individuals would be better consulted by bequeathing to them a moderate,
than a large provision. This, which is a commonplace of moralists
ancient and modern, is felt to be true by many intelligent parents, and
would be acted upon much more frequently, if they did not allow
themselves to consider less what really is, than what will be thought by
others to be, advantageous to the children.

The duties of parents to their children are those which are indissolubly
attached to the fact of causing the existence of a human being. The
parent owes to society to endeavour to make the child a good and
valuable member of it, and owes to ethee children to provide, so far as
depends on him, such education, and such appliances and means, as will
enable them to start with a fair chance of fachieving by their own
exertionsf a successful life. To this every child has a claim; and I
cannot admit, that as a child he has a claim to more. There is a case in
which these obligations present themselves gin their true lightg,
without any extrinsic circumstances to disguise or confuse them: it is
that of han illegitimate child. To such a child it is generally felt
that there is due from the parent, the amount of provision for his
welfare which will ienable him to make his life on the wholei a
desirable one. I hold that to no child, merely as such, anything more is
due, than what is admitted to be due to an illegitimate child: and that
no child for whom thus much has been done, has, unless on the score of
previously raised expectations, any grievance, if the remainder of the
parent’s fortune is devoted to Edition: current; Page: [222] public
uses, or to the benefit of individuals on whom in the parent’s opinion
it is better bestowed.

In order to give the children that fair chance of a desirable existence,
to which they are entitled, it is generally necessary that they should
not be brought up from childhood in habits of luxury which they will not
have the means of indulging in after-life. This, again, is a duty often
flagrantly violated by possessors of terminable incomes, who have little
property to leave. When the children of rich parents have lived, as jit
is natural they should do, in habits corresponding to the scale of
expenditure in which the parents indulge, it is generally the duty of
the parents to make a greater provision for them, than would suffice for
children otherwise brought up. I say generally, because even here there
is another side to the question. It is a proposition quite capable of
being maintained, that to a strong nature which has to make its way
against narrow circumstances, to have known early some of the feelings
and experiences of wealth, is kan advantage both in the formation of
character and in the happiness of life. But lallowingl that children
have a just ground of complaint, who have been brought up mto require
luxuries which they are not afterwards likely to obtain, and that theirm
claim, therefore, is good to a provision bearing some relation to the
mode of their bringing upn; thisn, too, is a claim which ois
particularly liable to be stretched further than its reasons warrant.
The case is exactly that of the younger children of the nobility and
landed gentry, the bulk of whose fortune passes to the eldest son. The
other sons, who are usually numerous, are brought up in the same habits
of luxury as the future heir, and they receive as a younger brother’s
portion, generally what the reason of the case dictates, namely, enough
to support, in the habits of life to which they are accustomed,
themselves, but not a wife porp children. It really is no grievance to
any man, that for the means of marrying and of supporting a family, he
has to depend on his own exertions.

A provision, then, such as is admitted to be reasonable in the case of
illegitimate children, qforq younger children, wherever in short the
justice of the case, and the real interests of the individuals and of
society, are the only things considered, is, I conceive, all that
parents owe to their children, and all, therefore, which the State owes
to the children of those who die intestate. The surplus, if any, I hold
that it may rightfully appropriate Edition: current; Page: [223] to the
general purposes of the community. I would not, however, rbe supposed to
recommend that parents should snevers do more for their children than
what, merely as children, they have a moral right to. In some cases it
is imperative, in many laudable, and in all allowable, to do much more.
For this, however, the means are afforded by the liberty of bequest. It
is due, not to the children but to the parents, that they should have
the power of showing marks of affection, of requiting services and
sacrifices, and of bestowing their wealth according to their own
preferences, or their own judgment of fitness.

§ 4. [Should the right of bequest be limited, and how?] Whether the
power of bequest should itself be subject to limitation, is an ulterior
question of agreata importance. Unlike inheritance ab intestato, bequest
is one of the attributes of property: the ownership of a thing cannot be
looked upon as complete without the power of bestowing it, at death or
during life, at the owner’s pleasure: and all the reasons, which
recommend that private property should exist, recommend pro tanto this
extension of it. But property is only a means to an end, not itself the
end. Like all other proprietary rights, and even in a greater degree
than most, the power of bequest bmay be so exercised as to conflict with
the permanent interests of the human raceb. It does so, when, not
content with bequeathing an estate to A, the testator prescribes that on
A’s death it shall pass to his eldest son, and to that son’s son, and so
on for ever. No doubt, persons have occasionally exerted themselves more
strenuously to acquire a fortune from the hope of founding a family in
perpetuity; but the mischiefs to society of such perpetuities outweigh
the value of this incentive to exertion, and the incentives in the case
of those who have the opportunity of making large fortunes are strong
enough without it. A similar abuse of the power of bequest is committed
when a person who does the meritorious act of leaving property for
public uses, attempts to prescribe the details of its application in
perpetuity; when in founding a place of education (for instance) he
dictates, for ever, what doctrines shall be taught. It being impossible
that any one should know what doctrines will be fit to be taught after
he has been dead for centuries, the law ought cnotc to give effect to
such dispositions of property, dunlessd subject to the perpetual
revision (after a certain interval has elapsed) of a fitting authority.

These are obvious limitations. But even the simplest exercise of the
right Edition: current; Page: [224] of bequest, that of determining the
person to whom property shall pass immediately on the death of the
testator, has always been reckoned among the privileges which might be
limited or varied, according to views of expediency. The limitations,
hitherto, have been almost solely in favour of children. In England the
right is in principle unlimited, almost the only impediment being that
arising from a settlement by a former proprietor, in which case the
holder for the time ebeinge cannot indeed bequeath his possessions, but
only because there is nothing to bequeath, he having merely a life
interest. By the Roman law, on which the civil legislation of the
Continent of Europe is principally founded, bequest originally was not
permitted at all, and even after it was introduced, a legitima portio
was compulsorily reserved for each child; and such is still the law in
some of the Continental nations. By the French law since the Revolution,
the parent can only dispose by will, of a portion equal to the share of
one child, each of the children taking an equal portion. This entail, as
it may be called, of the bulk of every one’s property upon the children
collectively, seems to me as little defensible in principle as an entail
in favour of one child, though it does not shock so directly the fideaf
of justice. gI cannot admit that parents should be compelledg to leave
to their children even that provision which, as children, I have
contended that they have a moral claim to. Children may forfeit that
claim by general unworthiness, or particular ill-conduct to the parents:
they may have other resources or prospects: what has been previously
done for them, in the way of education and advancement in life, may
fully satisfy their moral claim; or others may have claims superior to
theirs.h

The extreme restriction of the power of bequest in French law, was
adopted as a democratic expedient, to break down the custom of
primogeniture, and counteract the tendency of inherited property to
collect in large masses. I agree in thinking these objects eminently
desirable; but the means used are not, I think, the most judicious. Were
I framing a code of laws according to what seems to me best in itself,
without regard to existing Edition: current; Page: [225] opinions and
sentiments, I should prefer to restrict, not what any one might
bequeath, but what any one should be permitted to acquire, by bequest or
inheritance. Each person should have power to dispose by will of his ior
heri whole property; but not to lavish it in enriching some one
individual, beyond a certain maximum, which should be fixed sufficiently
high to afford the means of comfortable independence. The inequalities
of property which arise from unequal industry, frugality, perseverance,
talents, and jto a certain extentj even opportunities, are inseparable
from the principle of private property, and if we accept the principle,
we must bear with these consequences of it: but I see nothing
objectionable in fixing a limit to what any one may acquire by the mere
favour of others, without any exercise of his faculties, and in
requiring that if he desires any further accession of fortune, he shall
work for it.* I do not conceive that the degree of limitation which this
would impose on the right of bequest, would be felt as a burthensome
restraint by any testator who estimated a large fortune at its true
value, that of the pleasures and advantages that can be purchased with
it: on even the most extravagant estimate of which, it must be apparent
to every one, that the difference to the happiness of the possessor
between a moderate independence and five times as much, is insignificant
when weighed against the enjoyment that might be given, and the
permanent benefits diffused, by some other disposal of the four-fifths.
So long indeed as the opinion practically prevails, that the best thing
which can be done for kobjectsk of affection is to heap on ltheml to
satiety mthose intrinsically worthless things on which large fortunes
are mostly expendedm, there might be little use in enacting such a law,
even if it were possible to get it passed, since if there were the
inclination, there would generally be the power of evading it. The law
would be unavailing unless the popular sentiment went energetically
along with it; which (judging from the tenacious adherence of public
opinion in France to the law of compulsory division) it would Edition:
current; Page: [226] in some states of society and government be very
likely to do, however much the contrary may be the fact in England and
at the present time. If the restriction could be made practically
effectual, the benefit would be great. Wealth which could no longer be
employed in nover-nenriching a few, would either be devoted to objects
of public usefulness, or if bestowed on individuals, would be
distributed among a larger number. While those enormous fortunes which
no one needs for any opersonalo purpose but ostentation or improper
power, would become much less numerous, there would be a great
multiplication of ppersonsp in easy circumstances, with the advantages
of leisure, and all the real enjoyments which wealth can give, except
those of vanity; a class by whom the services which a nation qhaving
leisured classes is entitled to expect from themq, either by their
direct exertions or by the tone they give to the feelings and tastes of
the public, would be rendered in a much more beneficial manner than at
present. A large portion also of the accumulations of successful
industry would probably be devoted to public uses, either by direct
bequests to the State, or by the endowment of institutions; as is
already done very largely in the United States, where the ideas and
practice in the matter of inheritance seem to be unusually rational and
beneficial.*

§ 5. [Grounds of property in land are different from those of property
in moveables] The next point to be considered is, whether the reasons on
which the institution of property rests, are applicable to all things in
which Edition: current; Page: [227] a right of exclusive ownership is at
present recognised; and if not, on what other grounds the recognition is
defensible.

The essential principle of property being to assure to all persons what
they have produced by their labour and accumulated by their abstinence,
this principle cannot apply to what is not the produce of labour, the
raw material of the earth. If the land derived its productive power
wholly from nature, and not at all from industry, or if there were any
means of discriminating what is derived from each source, it not only
would not be necessary, but it would be the height of injustice, to let
the gift of nature be engrossed by aindividualsa. The use of the land in
agriculture must indeed, for the time being, be of necessity exclusive;
the same person who has ploughed and sown must be permitted to reap: but
the land might be occupied bfor one season onlyb, as among the ancient
Germans; or might be periodically redivided as population increased: or
the State might be the universal landlord, and the cultivators tenants
under it, either on lease or at will.

But though land is not the produce of industry, most of its valuable
qualities are so. Labour is not only requisite for using, but almost
equally so for fashioning, the instrument. Considerable labour is often
required at the commencement, to clear the land for cultivation. In many
cases, even when cleared, its productiveness is wholly the effect of
labour and art. The Bedford Level produced little or nothing until
artificially drained. The bogs of Ireland, until the same thing is done
to them, can produce little besides fuel. One of the barrenest soils in
the world, composed of the material of the Goodwin Sands, the Pays de
Waes in Flanders, has been so fertilized by industry, as to have become
one of the most productive in Europe. Cultivation also requires
buildings and fences, which are wholly the produce of labour. The fruits
of this industry cannot be reaped in a short period. The labour and
outlay are immediate, the benefit is spread over many years, perhaps
over all future time. A holder will not incur this labour and outlay
when cstrangersc and not himself will be benefited by it. If he
undertakes such improvements, he must have a dsufficientd period before
him in which to profit by them: and ehe is in no way so sure of having
always a sufficient period as when his tenure ise perpetual.*

Edition: current; Page: [228]
§ 6. [Grounds of property in land are only valid on certain conditions,
which are not always realized. The limitations considered] These are the
reasons which form the justification in an economical point of view, of
property in land. It is seen, that they are only valid, in so far as the
proprietor of land is its improver. Whenever, in any country, the
proprietor, generally speaking, ceases to be the improver, political
economy has nothing to say in defence of landed property, as there
established. In no sound theory of private property was it ever
contemplated that the proprietor of land should be merely a sinecurist
quartered on it.

In Great Britain, the landed proprietor is not unfrequently an improver.
But it cannot be said that he is generally so. And in the majority of
cases he grants the liberty of cultivation on such terms, as to prevent
improvements from being made by any one else. In the southern parts of
the island, as there are usually no leases, permanent improvements can
scarcely be made except by the landlord’s capital; accordingly the
South, compared with the North of England, and with the Lowlands of
Scotland, is astilla extremely backward in agricultural improvement. The
truth is, that any very general improvement of land by the landlords, is
hardly compatible with Edition: current; Page: [229] ba law orb custom
of primogeniture. When the land goes wholly to the heir, it generally
goes to him severed from the pecuniary resources which would enable him
to improve it, the personal property being absorbed by the provision for
younger children, and the land itself often heavily burthened for the
same purpose. There is therefore but a small proportion of landlords who
have the means of making expensive improvements, unless they do it with
borrowed money, and by adding to the mortgages with which in most cases
the land was already burthened when they received it. But the position
of the owner of a deeply mortgaged estate is so precarious; economy is
so unwelcome to one whose apparent fortune greatly exceeds his real
means, and the vicissitudes of rent and price which only trench upon the
margin of his income, are so formidable to one who can call little more
than cthec margin his own, that it is no wonder if few landlords find
themselves in a condition to make immediate sacrifices for the sake of
future profit. Were they ever so much inclined, those alone can
prudently do it, who have seriously studied the principles of scientific
agriculture: and great landlords have seldom seriously studied anything.
They might at least hold out inducements to the farmers to do what they
will not or cannot do themselves; but even in granting leases, it is in
England a general complaint that they tie up their tenants by covenants
grounded on the practices of an obsolete and exploded agriculture; while
most of them, by withholding leases altogether, and giving the farmer no
guarantee of possession beyond a single harvest, keep the land on a
footing little more favourable to improvement than in the time of our
barbarous ancestors,

-   

    — immetata quibus jugera liberas
-   

    Fruges et Cererem ferunt,
-   

    Nec cultura placet longior annuâ.

Landed property in England is thus very far from completely fulfilling
the conditions which render its existence economically justifiable. But
if insufficiently realized even in England, in Ireland those conditions
are not complied with at all. With individual exceptions (some of them
very honourable ones), the owners of Irish estates do nothing for the
land but drain it of its produce. What has been epigrammatically said in
the discussions on “peculiar burthens” is literally true when applied to
them; that the greatest “burthen on land” is the landlords. Returning
nothing to the soil, they consume its whole produce, minus the potatoes
strictly necessary to keep the inhabitants from dying of famine; and
when they have any dpurposed of improvement, ethe preparatory step
usuallye consists in not leaving even this pittance, but turning out the
people to beggary if not to Edition: current; Page: [230] starvation.*
When landed property has placed itself upon this footing it ceases to be
defensible, and the time has come for making some new arrangement of the
matter.

When the “sacredness of property” is talked of, it should always be
remembered, that fany suchf sacredness does not belong in the same
degree to landed property. No man made the land. It is the original
inheritance of the whole species. gIts appropriation is wholly a
question of general expediency. When private property in land is not
expedient, it is unjust.g It is no hardship to any one, to be excluded
from what others have produced: they were not bound to produce it for
his use, and he loses nothing by not sharing in what otherwise would not
have existed at all. But it is some hardship to be born into the world
and to find all nature’s gifts previously engrossed, and no place left
for the new-comer. To reconcile people to this, after they have once
admitted into their minds the idea that any moral rights belong to them
as human beings, it will always be necessary to convince them that the
exclusive appropriation is good for mankind on the whole, themselves
included. But this is what no sane human being could be persuaded of, if
the relation between the landowner and the cultivator were the same
everywhere as it hhas beenh in Ireland.

Landed property is felt, even by those most tenacious of its rights, to
be a different thing from other property; and where the bulk of the
community have been disinherited of their share of it, and it has become
the exclusive attribute of a small minority, men have generally tried to
reconcile it, at least in theory, to their sense of justice, by
endeavouring to attach duties to it, and erecting it into a sort of
magistracy, either moral or legal. But if the state is at liberty to
treat the possessors of land as public functionaries, it is only going
one step further to say, that it is at liberty to discard them. The
claim of the landowners to the land is altogether subordinate to the
general policy of the state. The principle of property gives them no
right to the land, but only a right to compensation for whatever portion
of their interest in the land it may be the policy of the state to
deprive them of. To that, their claim is indefeasible. It is due to
landowners, and to owners of any property whatever, recognised as such
by the state, that they should not be dispossessed of it without
receiving iitsi pecuniary value, Edition: current; Page: [231] or an
annual income equal to what they derived from it. This is due on the
general principles on which property rests. If the land was bought with
the produce of the labour and abstinence of themselves or their
ancestors, compensation is due to them on that ground; even if
otherwise, it is still due on the ground of prescription. Nor can it
ever be necessary for accomplishing an object by which the community
altogether will gain, that a particular portion of the community should
be immolated. When the property is of a kind to which peculiar
affections attach themselves, the compensation ought to exceed a bare
pecuniary equivalent. But, subject to this proviso, the state is at
liberty to deal with landed property as the general interests of the
community may require, even to the extent, if it so happen, of doing
with the whole, what is done with a part whenever a bill is passed for a
railroad or a new street. jThe community has too much at stake in the
proper cultivation of the land, and in the conditions annexed to the
occupancy of it, to leave these things to the discretion of a class of
persons called landlords, when they have shown themselves unfit for the
trust. The legislature, which if it pleased might convert the whole body
of landlords into fundholders or pensioners, might, à fortiori, commute
the average receipts of Irish landowners into a fixed rent charge, and
raise the tenants into proprietors; supposing always kthat the full
market value of the land was tendered to the landlords, in case they
preferred that to accepting the conditions proposed.

There will be another place for discussing the various modes of landed
property and tenure, and the advantages and inconveniences of each; in
this chapter our concern is with the right itself, the grounds which
justify it, and (as a corollary from lthesel) the conditions by which it
should be limited. To me it seems almost an axiom that property in land
should be interpreted strictly, and that the balance in all cases of
doubt should incline against the proprietor. The reverse is the case
with property in moveables, and in all things the product of labour:
over these, the owner’s power both of use and of exclusion should be
absolute, except where positive evil to mothersm would result from it:
but in the case of land, no exclusive right should be permitted in any
individual, which cannot be Edition: current; Page: [232] shown to be
productive of positive good. To be allowed any exclusive right at all,
over a portion of the common inheritance, while there are others who
have no portion, is already a nprivilege. No quantity of moveable goods
which a person can acquire by his labour, prevents others from acquiring
the like by the same means; but from the very nature of the case,
whoever owns land, keeps oothers out of the enjoyment of ito. The
privilege, or monopoly, is only defensible as a necessary evil; it
becomes an injustice when carried to any point to which the compensating
good does not follow it.

For instance, the exclusive right to the land for purposes of
cultivation does not imply an exclusive right to it for purposes of
access; and no such right ought to be recognised, except to the extent
necessary to protect the produce against damage, and the owner’s privacy
against invasion. The pretension of two Dukes to shut up a part of the
Highlands, and exclude the rest of mankind from many square miles of
mountain scenery to prevent disturbance to wild animals, is an abuse; it
exceeds the legitimate bounds pof the rightp of landed property. When
land is not intended to be cultivated, no good reason can in general be
given for its being private property at all; and if any qoneq is
permitted to call it his, he ought to know that he holds it by
sufferance of the community, and on an implied condition that his
ownership, since it cannot possibly do them any good, at least shall not
deprive them of any, which could have derived from the land if it had
been unappropriated. Even in the case of cultivated land, a man whom,
though only one among millions, the law permits to hold thousands of
acres as his single share, is not entitled to think that all this is
given to him to use and abuse, and deal with as if it concerned nobody
but himself. The rents or profits which he can obtain from it are rat
his sole disposalr; but with regard to the land, in everything which he
does with it, and in everything which he abstains from doing, he is
morally bound, and should whenever the case admits be legally compelled,
to make his interest and pleasure consistent with the public good. The
species at large still retains, of its original claim to the soil of the
planet which it inhabits, as much as is compatible with the purposes for
which it has parted with the remainder.

§ 7. [Rights of property in abuses] Besides property in the produce of
labour, and property in land, there are other things which are or have
been subjects of property, in which no proprietary rights ought to exist
at all. Edition: current; Page: [233] But as the civilized world has in
general made up its mind on most of these, there is no necessity for
dwelling on them in this place. At the head of them, is property in
human beings. It is almost superfluous to observe, that this institution
can have no place in any society even pretending to be founded on
justice, or on fellowship between human creatures. But, iniquitous as it
is, yet when the state has expressly legalized it, and human beings, for
generations, have been bought, sold, and inherited under sanction of
law, it is another awrong, in abolishing the property, not to makea full
compensation. This wrong was avoided by the great measure of justice in
1833, bone of the most virtuous actsb, as well as cthe most practically
beneficent, ever done collectively by a nation. Other examples of
property which ought not to have been created, are properties in public
trusts; such as judicial offices under the old French régime, and the
heritable jurisdictions which, in countries not wholly emerged from
feudality, pass with the land. Our own country affords, as cases in
point, that of a commission in the army, and of an advowson, or right of
nomination to an ecclesiastical benefice. A property is also sometimes
created in a right of taxing the public; in a monopoly, for instance, or
other exclusive privilege. These abuses prevail most in semibarbarous
countries but are not without example in the most civilized. In France
there are several important trades and professions, including notaries,
attorneys, brokers, appraisers, printers, dand (until lately) bakers and
butchersd, of which the numbers are limited by law. The brevet or
privilege of one of the permitted number consequently brings a high
price in the market. eWhen such is the casee, compensation probably
could not with justice be refused, on the abolition of the privilege.
There are other cases in which this would be more doubtful. The question
would turn upon what, in the peculiar circumstances, was sufficient to
constitute prescription; and whether the legal recognition which the
abuse had obtained, was sufficient to constitute it an institution, or
amounted only to an occasional licence. It would be absurd to claim
compensation for losses caused by changes in a tariff, a thing
confessedly variable from year to year; or for monopolies like those
granted to individuals by fthe Tudorsf, favours of a despotic authority,
which the power that gave was competent at any time to recal.

Edition: current; Page: [234]
So much on the institution of property, a subject of which, for the
purposes of political economy, it was indispensable to treat, but on
which we could not usefully confine ourselves to economical
considerations. We have now to inquire on what principles and with what
results the distribution of the produce of land and labour is effected,
under the relations which this institution creates among the different
members of the community.g

Edition: current; Page: [235]


CHAPTER III: Of the Classes Among Whom the Produce Is Distributed

§ 1. [The produce is sometimes shared among three classes] Private
property being assumed as a fact, we have next to enumerate the
different classes of persons to whom it gives rise; whose concurrence,
or at least whose permission, is necessary to production, and who are
therefore able to stipulate for a share of the produce. We have to
inquire, according to what laws the produce distributes itself among
these classes, by the spontaneous action of the interests of those
concerned: after which, a further question will be, what effects are or
might be produced by laws, institutions, and measures of government, in
superseding or modifying that spontaneous distribution.

The three requisites of production, as has been so often repeated, are
labour, capital, and land: understanding by capital, the means and
appliances which are the accumulated results of previous labour, and by
land, the materials and instruments supplied by nature, whether
contained in the interior of the earth, or constituting its surface.
Since each of these elements of production may be separately
appropriated, the industrial community may be considered as divided into
landowners, capitalists, and productive labourers. Each of these
classes, as such, obtains a share of the produce: no other person or
class obtains anything, except by concession from them. The remainder of
the community is, in fact, supported at their expense, giving, if any
equivalent, one consisting of unproductive services. These three
classes, therefore, are considered in political economy as making up the
whole community.

§ 2. [The produce sometimes belongs undividedly to one] But although
these three sometimes exist as separate classes, dividing the produce
among them, they do not necessarily or always so exist. The fact is so
much otherwise, that there are only one or two communities in which the
complete separation of these classes is the general rule. England and
Scotland, with parts of Belgium and Holland, are almost the only
countries in the world, where the land, capital, and labour employed in
agriculture, are generally Edition: current; Page: [236] the property of
separate owners. The ordinary case is, that the same person owns either
two of these requisites, or all three.

The case in which the same person owns all three, embraces the two
extremes of aexistinga society, in respect to the independence and
dignity of the labouring class. First, when the labourer himself is the
proprietor. This is the commonest case in the Northern States of the
American Union; one of the commonest in France, Switzerland, the three
Scandinavian kingdoms, and parts of Germany;* and a common case in parts
of Italy and in Belgium. In all these countries there are, no doubt,
large landed properties, and a still greater number which, without being
large, require the occasional or constant aid of hired labourers. Much,
however, of the land is owned in portions too small to require any other
labour than that of the peasant and his family, or fully to occupy even
that. The capital employed is not always that of the peasant proprietor,
many of these small properties being mortgaged to obtain the means of
cultivating; but the capital is invested at bthe peasant’sb risk, and
though he pays interest for it, it gives to no one any right of
interference, except, perhaps, eventually to take possession of the
land, if the interest ceases to be paid.

The other case in which the land, labour, and capital, belong to the
same person, is the case of slave countries, in which the labourers
themselves Edition: current; Page: [237] are owned by the landowner. Our
West India colonies before emancipation, and the sugar colonies of the
nations by whom a similar act of justice is still unperformed, are
examples of large establishments for agricultural and manufacturing
labour (the production of sugar and rum is a combination of both) in
which the land, the factories (if they may be so called), the machinery,
and the degraded labourers, are all the property of a capitalist. In
this case, as well as in its extreme opposite, the case of the peasant
proprietor, there is no division of the produce.

§ 3. [The produce is sometimes divided between two] When the three
requisites are not all owned by the same person, it often happens that
two of them are so. Sometimes the same person owns the capital and the
land, but not the labour. The landlord makes his engagement directly
with the labourer, and supplies athe whole or part ofa the stock
necessary for cultivation. This system is the usual one in those parts
of Continental Europe, in which the labourers are neither serfs on the
one hand, nor proprietors on the other. It was bvery commonb in France
before the Revolution, and is still much practised in some parts of that
country, when the land is not the property of the cultivator. It
prevails generally in the level districts of Italy, except those
cprincipallyc pastoral, such as the Maremma of Tuscany and the Campagna
of Rome. On this system the division of the produce is between two
classes, the landowner and the labourer.

In other cases again the labourer does not own the land, but owns the
little stock employed on it, the landlord not being in the habit of
supplying any. This dsystemd generally prevails in Ireland. It is nearly
universal in India, and in most countries of the East; whether the
government retains, as it generally does, the ownership of the soil, or
allows portions to become, either absolutely or in a qualified sense,
the property of individuals. In India, however, things are so far better
than in Ireland, that the owner of land is in the habit of making
advances to the cultivators, if they cannot cultivate without them. From
these advances the native landed proprietor usually demands high
interest; but the principal landowner, the government, makes them
gratuitously, recovering the advance after the harvest, together with
the rent. The produce is here divided as before, between the same two
classes, the landowner and the labourer.

These are the principal variations in the classification of those among
whom the produce of agricultural labour is distributed. In the case of
Edition: current; Page: [238] manufacturing industry there never are
more than two classes, the labourers and the capitalists. The original
artisans in all countries were either slaves, or the women of the
family. In the manufacturing establishments of the ancients, whether on
a large or on a small scale, the labourers were eusuallye the property
of the fcapitalistf. gIn general, ifg any manual labour was thought
compatible with the dignity of a freeman, it was only agricultural
labour. The converse system, in which the capital was owned by the
labourer, was coeval with free labour, and under it the first great
advances of manufacturing industry were achieved. The artisan owned the
loom or the few tools he used, and worked on his own account; or at
least ended by doing so, though he usually worked for another, first as
apprentice and next as journeyman, for a certain number of years before
he could be admitted a master. But the status of a permanent journeyman,
all his life a hired labourer and nothing more, had no place in the
crafts and guilds of the middle ages. In country villages, where a
carpenter or a blacksmith cannot live and support hired labourers on the
returns of his business, he is even now his own workman; and shopkeepers
in similar circumstances are their own shopmen, or shopwomen. But
wherever the extent of the market admits of it, the distinction is now
fully established between the class of capitalists, or employers of
labour, and the class of labourers; the capitalists, in general,
contributing no other labour than that of direction and superintendence.

Edition: current; Page: [239]


CHAPTER IV: Of Competition, and Custom

§ 1. [Competition is not the sole regulator of the division of the
produce] Under the rule of individual property, the division of the
produce is the result of two determining agencies: Competition, and
Custom. It is important to ascertain the amount of influence which
belongs to each of these causes, and in what manner the operation of one
is modified by the other.

Political economists generally, and English political economists above
others, ahave beena accustomed to lay almost exclusive stress upon the
first of these agencies; to exaggerate the effect of competition, and
btob take into little account the other and conflicting principle. They
are apt to express themselves as if they thought that competition
actually does, in all cases, whatever it can be shown to be the tendency
of competition to do. This is partly intelligible, if we consider that
only through the principle of competition has political economy any
pretension to the character of a science. So far as rents, profits,
wages, prices, are determined by competition, laws may be assigned for
them. Assume competition to be their exclusive regulator, and principles
of broad generality and scientific precision may be laid down, according
to which they will be regulated. The political economist justly deems
this his proper business: and as an abstract or hypothetical science,
political economy cannot be required to doc, and indeed cannot do,c
anything more. But it would be a great misconception of the actual
course of human affairs, to suppose that competition exercises in fact
this unlimited sway. I am not speaking of monopolies, either natural or
artificial, or of any interferences of authority with the liberty of
production or exchange. Such disturbing causes have always been allowed
for by political economists. I speak of cases in which there is nothing
to restrain competition; no hindrance to it either in the nature of the
case or in artificial obstacles; yet in which the result is not
determined by competition, but by custom or usage; competition either
not taking place at all, or producing its effect in quite a different
manner from that which is ordinarily assumed to be natural to it.

Edition: current; Page: [240]
§ 2. [Influence of custom on rents, and on the tenure of land]
Competition, in fact, has only become in any considerable degree the
governing principle of contracts, at a comparatively modern period. The
farther we look back into history, the more we see all transactions and
engagements under the influence of fixed customs. The reason is evident.
Custom is the most powerful protector of the weak against the strong;
their sole protector where there are no laws or government adequate to
the purpose. Custom is a barrier which, even in the most oppressed
condition of mankind, tyranny is forced in some degree to respect. To
the industrious population, in a turbulent military community, freedom
of competition is a vain phrase; they are never in a condition to make
terms for themselves by it: there is always a master who throws his
sword into the scale, and the terms are such as he imposes. But though
the law of the strongest decides, it is not the interest nor in general
the practice of the strongest to strain that law to the utmost, and
every relaxation of it has a tendency to become a custom, and every
custom to become a right. Rights thus originating, and not competition
in any shape, determine, in a rude state of society, the share of the
produce enjoyed by those who produce it. The relations, more especially,
between the landowner and the cultivator, and the payments made by the
latter to the former, are, in all states of society but the most modern,
determined by the usage of the country. Never until late times have the
conditions of the occupancy of land been (as a general rule) an affair
of competition. The occupier for the time has very commonly been
considered to have a right to retain his holding, while he fulfils the
customary requirements; and has thus become, in a certain sense, a
co-proprietor of the soil. Even where the holder has not acquired this
fixity of tenure, the terms of occupation have often been fixed and
invariable.

In India, for example, and other Asiatic communities similarly
constituted, the ryots, or peasant-farmers, are not regarded as tenants
at will, anora even as tenants by virtue of a lease. In most villages
there are indeed some ryots on this precarious footing, consisting of
those, or the descendants of those, who have settled in the place at a
known and comparatively recent period; but all who are looked upon as
descendants or representatives of the original inhabitants, band even
many mere tenants of ancient date,b are thought entitled to retain their
land, as long as they pay the customary rents. What these customary
rents are, or ought to be, has indeed, in most cases, become a matter of
obscurity; usurpation, tyranny, and foreign conquest having to a great
degree obliterated the evidences of them. But when an old and purely
Hindoo principality falls under the dominion of the British Government,
or the management of its officers, Edition: current; Page: [241] and
when the details of the revenue system come to be inquired into, it is
cusuallyc found that though the demands of the great landholder, the
State, have been swelled by fiscal rapacity until all limit is
practically lost sight of, it has yet been thought necessary to have a
distinct name and a separate pretext for each increase of exaction; so
that the demand has sometimes come to consist of thirty or forty
different items, in addition to the nominal rent. This circuitous mode
of increasing the payments assuredly would not have been resorted to, if
there had been an acknowledged right in the landlord to increase the
rent. Its adoption is a proof that there was once an effective
limitation, a real customary rent; and that the understood right of the
ryot to the land, so long as he paid rent according to custom, was at
some time or other more than nominal.* The British Government of India
always simplifies the tenure by consolidating the various assessments
into one, thus making the rent nominally as well as really an arbitrary
thing, or at least a matter of specific agreement: but it scrupulously
respects the right of the ryot to the land, dthough euntil the reforms
of the present generation (reforms even now only partially carried into
effect) it seldom lefte him much more than a bare subsistencef.

In modern Europe the cultivators have gradually emerged from a state of
personal slavery. The barbarian conquerors of the Western Empire found
that the easiest mode of managing their conquests would be to leave gthe
occupation ofg the land in the hands in which they found it, and to save
themselves a labour so uncongenial as the superintendence of troops of
slaves, by allowing the slaves to retain in a certain degree the control
of their own actions, under an obligation to furnish the lord with
provisions and labour. A common expedient was to assign to the serf, for
his exclusive use, as much land as was thought sufficient for his
support, and to make him work on the other lands of his lord whenever
required. By degrees these indefinite obligations were transformed into
a definite one, of supplying a fixed quantity of provisions or a fixed
quantity of labour: and as the lords, in time, became inclined to employ
their income in the purchase of luxuries rather than in the maintenance
of retainers, the payments in kind were commuted for payments in money.
Each concession, at first voluntary Edition: current; Page: [242] and
revocable at pleasure, gradually acquired the force of custom, and was
at last recognised and enforced by the tribunals. In this manner the
serfs progressively rose into a free tenantry, who held their land in
perpetuity on fixed conditions. The conditions were sometimes very
onerous, and the people very miserable. But their obligations were
determined by the usage or law of the country, and not by competition.

Where the cultivators had never been, strictly speaking, in personal
bondage, or after they had ceased to be so, the exigencies of a poor and
little advanced society gave rise to another arrangement, which in some
parts of Europe, even highly improved parts, has been found sufficiently
advantageous to be continued to the present day. I speak of the métayer
system. Under this, the land is divided, in small farms, among single
families, the landlord generally supplying the stock which the
agricultural system of the country is considered to require, and
receiving, in lieu of rent and profit, a fixed proportion of the
produce. This proportion, which is generally paid in kind, is usually,
(as is implied in the words métayer, mezzaiuolo, and medietarius,)
one-half. There are places, however, such as the rich volcanic soil of
the province of Naples, where the landlord takes two-thirds, and yet the
cultivator by means of an excellent agriculture contrives to live. But
whether the proportion is two-thirds or one-half, it is a fixed
proportion; not variable from farm to farm, or from tenant to tenant.
The custom of the country is the universal rule; nobody thinks of
raising or lowering rents, or of letting land on other than the
customary conditions. Competition, as a regulator of rent, has no
existence.

§ 3. [Influence of custom on prices] Prices, whenever there was no
monopoly, came earlier under the influence of competition, and are much
more universally subject to it, than rents: but that influence is by no
means, even in the present aactivity of mercantilea competition, so
absolute as is sometimes assumed. There is no proposition which meets us
in the field of political economy oftener than this—that there cannot be
two prices in the same market. Such undoubtedly is the natural effect of
unimpeded competition; yet every one knows that there are, balmost
alwaysb, two prices in the same market. Not only are there in every
large town, and in almost every trade, cheap shops and dear shops, but
the same shop often sells the same article at different prices to
different customers: and, as a general rule, each retailer adapts his
scale of prices to the class of customers whom he expects. The wholesale
trade, in the great articles of commerce, is really under the dominion
of competition. There, the buyers as well as sellers are traders or
manufacturers, and their purchases are not influenced by indolence
Edition: current; Page: [243] or vulgar finery, cnor depend on the
smaller motives of personal convenience,c but are business transactions.
In the wholesale markets therefore it is true as a general proposition,
that there are not two prices at one time for the same thing: there is
at each time and place a market price, which can be quoted in a
price-current. But retail price, the price paid by the actual consumer,
seems to feel very slowly and imperfectly the effect of competition; and
when competition does exist, it often, instead of lowering prices,
merely divides the gains of the high price among a greater number of
dealers. Hence it is that, of the price paid by the consumer, so large a
proportion is absorbed by the gains of retailers; and any one who
dinquires intod the amount which reaches the hands of those who made the
things he buys, will often be astonished at its smallness. When indeed
the market, being that of a great city, holds out a sufficient
inducement to large capitalists to engage in retail operations, it is
generally found a better speculation to attract a large business by
underselling others, than merely to divide the field of employment with
them. This influence of competition is making itself felt more and more
through the principal branches of retail trade in the large towns; and
the rapidity and cheapness of transport, by making consumers less
dependent on the dealers in their immediate neighbourhood, are tending
to assimilate more and more the whole country to a large town: but
hitherto it is only in the great centres of business that retail
transactions have been chiefly, or even much, determined, by
competition. Elsewhere it rather acts, when it acts at all, as an
occasional disturbing influence; the habitual regulator is custom,
modified from time to time by notions existing in the minds of
purchasers and sellers, of some kind of equity or justice.

In many trades the terms on which business is done are a matter of
positive arrangement among the trade, who use the means they always
possess of making the situation of any member of the body who departs
from its fixed customs, inconvenient or disagreeable. It is well known
that the bookselling trade ewas, until lately,e one of these, and that
notwithstanding the active spirit of rivalry in the trade, competition
fdidf not produce its natural effect in breaking down the trade rules.
All professional remuneration is regulated by custom. The fees of
physicians, surgeons, and barristers, the charges of attorneys, are
nearly invariable. Not certainly for want of abundant competition in
those professions, but because the competition operates by diminishing
each competitor’s chance of fees, not by lowering the fees themselves.

Edition: current; Page: [244]
Since custom stands its ground against competition to so considerable an
extent, even where, from the multitude of competitors and the general
energy in the pursuit of gain, the spirit of competition is strongest,
we may be sure that this is much more the case where people are content
with smaller gains, and estimate their pecuniary interest at a lower
rate when balanced against their ease or their pleasure. I believe it
will often be found, in Continental Europe, that prices and charges, of
some or of all sorts, are much higher in some places than in others not
far distant, without its being possible to assign any other cause than
that it has always been so: the customers are used to it, and acquiesce
in it. An enterprising competitor, with sufficient capital, might force
down the charges, and make his fortune during the process; but there are
no enterprising competitors; those who have capital prefer to leave it
where it is, or to make less profit by it in a more quiet way.

These observations must be received as a general correction to be
applied whenever relevant, whether expressly mentioned or not, to the
conclusions contained in the subsequent portions of this treatise. Our
reasonings must, in general, proceed as if the known and natural effects
of competition were actually produced by it, in all cases in which it is
not restrained by some positive obstacle. Where competition, though free
to exist, does not exist, or where it exists, but has its natural
consequences overruled by any other agency, the conclusions will fail
more or less of being applicable. To escape error, we ought, in applying
the conclusions of political economy to the actual affairs of life, to
consider not only what will happen supposing the maximum of competition,
but how far the result will be affected if competition falls short of
the maximum.

The states of economical relation which stand first in order to be
discussed and appreciated, are those in which competition has no part,
the arbiter of transactions being either brute force or established
usage. These will be the subject of the next four chapters.

Edition: current; Page: [245]


CHAPTER V: Of Slavery

§ 1. [Slavery considered in relation to the slaves] Among the forms
which society assumes under the influence of the institution of
property, there are, as I have already remarked, two, otherwise of a
widely dissimilar character, but resembling in this, that the ownership
of the land, the labour, and the capital, is in the same hands. One of
these cases is that of slavery, the other is that of peasant
proprietors. In the one, the landowner owns the labour, in the other the
labourer owns the land. We begin with the first.

In this system all the produce belongs to the landlord. The food and
other necessaries of his labourers are part of his expenses. The
labourers possess nothing but what he thinks fit to give them, and until
he thinks fit to take it back: and atheya work as hard as he chooses, or
is able, to compel them. Their wretchedness is only limited by his
humanity, or his bpecuniary interest.b With the first consideration, we
have on the present occasion nothing to do. What the second in so
detestable a constitution of society may dictate, depends on the
facilities for importing fresh slaves. If fullgrown able-bodied slaves
can be procured in sufficient numbers, and imported at a moderate
expense, cself-interest will recommend working the slaves to death, and
replacing them by importation in preference to the slow and expensive
process of breeding them. Nor are the slave-owners generally backward in
learning this lesson. It is notorious that such was the practice in our
dslave colonies, while the slave trade was legal; and it is said to be
so still ein Cubae.

When, as among the ancients, the slave-market could only be supplied by
captives either taken in war, or kidnapped from thinly scattered tribes
on the remote confines of the known world, it was generally more
profitable to keep up the number by breeding, which necessitates a far
better treatment of them; and for this reason, joined with several
others, the condition of slaves, notwithstanding occasional enormities,
was probably much less Edition: current; Page: [246] bad in the ancient
world, than in the colonies of modern nations. The Helots are usually
cited as the type of the most hideous form of personal slavery, but with
how little truth appears from the fact that they were regularly armed
(though not with the panoply of the hoplite) and formed an integral part
of the military strength of the State. They were doubtless an inferior
and degraded caste, but their slavery seems to have been one of the
least onerous varieties of serfdom. Slavery appears in far more
frightful colours among the Romans, during the period in which the Roman
aristocracy was gorging itself with the plunder of a newly-conquered
world. The Romans were a cruel people, and the worthless nobles sported
with the lives of their myriads of slaves with the same reckless
prodigality with which they squandered any other part of their
ill-acquired possessions. Yet, slavery is divested of one of its worst
features when it is compatible with hope: enfranchisement was easy and
common: enfranchised slaves obtained at once the full rights of
citizens, and instances were frequent of their acquiring not only
riches, but latterly even honours. By the progress of milder legislation
under the Emperors, much of the protection of law was thrown round the
slave, he became capable of possessing property, and the evil altogether
assumed a considerably gentler aspect. Until, however, slavery assumes
the mitigated form of villenage, in which not only the fslaves havef
property and legal rights, but gtheirg obligations are more or less
limited by usage, and hthey partly labour for theirh own benefit;
itheiri condition is seldom such as to produce a rapid growth jeither of
population or of production.

§ 2. [Slavery in relation to production] So long as slave countries arej
underpeopled in proportion to their cultivable land, the labour of the
slaves, aunder any tolerable management, produces much more than is
sufficient for their support; especially as the great amount of
superintendence Edition: current; Page: [247] dence which their labour
requires, preventing the dispersion of the population, insures some of
the advantages of combined labour. Hence, in a good soil and climate,
and with reasonable care of his own interests, the owner of many slaves
has the means of being rich. bThe influence, however, of such a state of
society on production, is perfectly well understood. It is a truism to
assert, that labour extorted by fear of punishment is inefficient and
unproductive. It is true that in some circumstances, human beings can be
driven by the lash to attempt, and even to accomplish, things which they
would not have undertaken for any payment which it could have been worth
while to an employer to offer them. And it is likely that productive
operations which require much combination of labour, the production of
sugar for example, would not have taken place so soon in the American
colonies, if slavery had not existed to keep masses of labour together.
There are also savage tribes so averse from regular industry, that
industrial life is scarcely able to introduce itself among them until
they are either conquered candc made slaves of, or become conquerors and
make others so. But after allowing the full value of these
considerations, it remains certain that slavery dis incompatible with
any high state of the arts of life, and any egreate efficiency of
labour. For all products which require much skill, slave countries are
fusuallyf dependent on foreigners. Hopeless slavery effectually
brutifies the intellect; and intelligence in the slaves, though often
encouraged in the ancient world and in the East, is in a more advanced
state of society a source of so much danger and an object of so much
dread to the masters, that in some gof the States of America it wasg a
highly penal offence to teach a slave to read. All processes carried on
by slave labour are conducted in the rudest and most unimproved manner.
And even the animal strength of the slave is, on an average, not half
exerted. hThe unproductiveness and wastefulness of the industrial system
in the Slave States iis instructively displayed in the valuable writings
of Mr. Olmsted.h The mildest form of slavery is certainly the condition
of the serf, who is attached to the soil, supports himself from his
jallotment, and works a certain number of days in the week for his lord.
Yet there is but one opinion on the extreme inefficiency of serf labour.
The following passage is from Professor Jones,* whose Essay on the
Distribution of Wealth (or rather on Rent), is a Edition: current; Page:
[248] copious repertory of valuable facts on the landed tenures of
different countries.

“The Russians, or rather those German writers who have observed the
manners and habits of Russia, state some strong facts on this point. Two
Middlesex mowers, they say, will mow in a day as much grass as six
Russian serfs, and in spite of the dearness of provisions in England and
their cheapness in Russia, the mowing a quantity of hay which would cost
an English farmer half a copeck, will cost a Russian proprietor three or
four copecks.* The Prussian counsellor of state, Jacob, is considered to
have proved, that in Russia, where everything is cheap, the labour of a
serf is doubly as expensive as that of a labourer in England. M. Schmalz
gives a startling account of the unproductiveness of serf labour in
Prussia, from his own knowledge and observation.† In Austria, it is
distinctly stated, that the labour of a serf is equal to only one-third
of that of a free hired labourer. This calculation, made in an able work
on agriculture (with some extracts from which I have been favoured), is
applied to the practical purpose of deciding on the number of labourers
necessary to cultivate an estate of a given magnitude. So palpable,
indeed, are the ill effects of labour rents on the industry of the
agricultural population, that in Austria itself, where proposals kofk
changes of any kind do not readily make their way, schemes and plans for
the commutation of labour rents are as popular as in the more stirring
German provinces of the North.”‡

What is wanting in the quality of the labour itself, is not made up by
any excellence in the direction and superintendence. As the same writer§
remarks, the landed proprietors “are necessarily, in their character of
cultivators of their own domains, the only guides and directors of the
industry of the agricultural population,” since there can be no
intermediate class of capitalist farmers where the labourers are the
property of the lord. Great landowners are everywhere an idle class, or
if they labour at all, addict themselves only to the more exciting kinds
of exertion; that lion’s Edition: current; Page: [249] share which
superiors always reserve for themselves. “It would,” as Mr. Jones
observes, “be hopeless and irrational to expect, that a race of noble
proprietors, fenced round with privileges and dignity, and attracted to
military and political pursuits by the advantages and habits of their
station, should ever become attentive cultivators as a body.” Even in
England, if the cultivation of every estate depended upon its
proprietor, any one lcanl judge what would be the result. There would be
a few cases of great science and energy, and numerous individual
instances of moderate success, but the general state of agriculture
would be contemptible.

§ 3. [Emancipation considered in relation to the interest of the
slave-owners] Whether the proprietors themselves would lose by the
emancipation of their slaves, is a different question from the
comparative effectiveness of free and slave labour to the community.
There has been much discussion of this question as an abstract thesis;
as if it could possibly admit of any universal solution. Whether slavery
or free labour is most profitable to the employer, depends on the wages
of the free labourer. These, again, depend on the numbers of the
labouring population, compared with the capital and the land. Hired
labour is generally so much more efficient than slave labour, that the
employer can pay a considerably greater value in wages, than the
maintenance of his slaves cost him before, and yet be a gainer by the
change: but he cannot do this without limit. The decline of serfdom in
Europe, and its adestructiona in the Western nations, bwereb doubtless
hastened by the changes which the growth of population must have made in
the pecuniary interests of the master. As population pressed harder upon
the land, without any improvement in agriculture, the maintenance of the
serfs necessarily became more costly, and their labour less valuable.
With the rate of wages such as it is in Ireland, or in England (where,
in proportion to its efficiency, clabour is quite as cheapc as in
Ireland), no one can for a moment imagine that slavery could be
profitable. If the Irish peasantry were slaves, their masters would be
as willing, as their landlords now are, to pay large sums merely to get
rid of them. In the rich and underpeopled soil of the West India
islands, there is just as little doubt that the balance of profits
between free and slave labour was greatly on the side of slavery, and
that the compensation granted to the slave-owners for its abolition was
not more, dperhaps evend less, than an equivalent for their loss.

Edition: current; Page: [250]
More needs not be said here on a cause so completely judged and decided
as that of slavery. eIts demerits are no longer a question requiring
argument; though the temper of mind manifested by the larger part of the
influential classes in Great Britain respecting the struggle fin
America, shows how grievously the feelings of the present generation of
Englishmen, on this subject, ghadg fallen behind the positive acts of
the generation which preceded them. That the sons of the deliverers of
the West Indian Negroes should hexpecth with complacency, and encourage
by their sympathies, the iestablishmenti of a great and powerful
military commonwealth, pledged by its principles and driven by its
strongest interests to be the armed propagator of slavery through every
region of the earth into which its power jcouldj penetrate, discloses a
mental state in the leading portion of our higher and middle classes
which it is melancholy to see, and will be a lasting blot in English
history. Fortunately they kstopped short of actually aiding, otherwise
than by words, the nefarious enterprise to which they lwerel not ashamed
of wishing success; and mat the expense of the best blood of the Free
States, but to their immeasurable elevation in mental and moral worth,
the curse of slavery nhas beenn cast out from the great American
republic, to find its last temporary refuge in Brazil and Cuba. No
European country, except Spain alone, any longer participates in the
enormity. Even Edition: current; Page: [251] serfage has now ceased to
have a legal existence in Europe. Denmark has the honour of being the
first Continental nation which imitated England in liberating its
colonial slaves; and the abolition of slavery was one of the earliest
acts of the heroic and calumniated Provisional Government of France. The
Dutch Government was not long behind, and its colonies and dependencies
are now, I believe without exception, free from actual slavery, though
forced labour for the public authorities is still a recognised
institution in Java, soon, we may hope, to be exchanged for complete
personal freedom.e

Edition: current; Page: [252]


CHAPTER VI: Of Peasant Proprietors

§ 1. [Difference between English and Continental opinions respecting
peasant properties] In the régime of peasant properties, as in that of
slavery, the whole produce belongs to a single owner, and the
distinction of rent, profits, and wages, does not exist. In all other
respects, the two states of society are the extreme opposites of each
other. The one is the state of greatest oppression and degradation to
the labouring class. The other is that in which they are the most
uncontrolled arbiters of their own lot.

The advantage, however, of small properties in land, is one of the most
disputed questions in the range of political economy. On the Continent,
though there are some dissentients from the prevailing opinion, the
benefit of having a numerous proprietary population exists in the minds
of most people in the form of an axiom. But English authorities are
either unaware of the judgment of Continental agriculturists, or are
content to put it aside, on the plea of their having no experience of
large properties in favourable circumstances: the advantage of large
properties being only felt where there are also large farms; and as
this, in arable districts, implies a greater accumulation of capital
than usually exists on the Continent, the great Continental estates,
except in the case of grazing farms, are mostly let out for cultivation
in small portions. There is some truth in this; but the argument admits
of being retorted; for if the Continent knows little, by experience, of
cultivation on a large scale and by large capital, the generality of
English writers are no better acquainted practically with peasant
proprietors, and have almost always the most erroneous ideas of their
social condition and mode of life. Yet the old traditions even of
England are on the same side with the general opinion of the Continent.
The “yeomanry” who were vaunted as the glory of England while they
existed, and have been so much mourned over since they disappeared, were
either small proprietors or small farmers, and if they were mostly the
last, the character they bore for sturdy independence is the more
noticeable. There is a part of England, unfortunately a very small part,
where peasant proprietors are still common; for such are the “statesmen”
of Cumberland and Westmoreland, though they pay, I believe, generally if
Edition: current; Page: [253] not universally, certain customary dues,
which, being fixed, no more affect their character of aproprietora, than
the land-tax does. There is but one voice, among those acquainted with
the country, on the admirable effects of this tenure of land in those
counties. No other agricultural population in England could have
furnished the originals of Wordsworth’s peasantry.*

The general system, however, of English cultivation, affording no
experience to render the nature and operation of peasant properties
familiar, and bEnglishmen being in general profoundly ignorant of the
agricultural economy of other countries,b the very idea of peasant
proprietors is strange to the English mind, and does not easily find
access to it. Even the forms of language stand in the way: the familiar
designation for owners of land being “landlords,” a term to which
“tenants” is always understood as a correlative. When, cat the time of
the faminec, the suggestion of peasant properties as a means of Irish
improvement found its way into parliamentary and newspaper discussions,
there were writers of pretension to whom Edition: current; Page: [254]
the word “proprietor” was so far from conveying any distinct idea, that
they mistook the small holdings of Irish cottier tenants for peasant
properties. The subject being so little understood, I think it
important, before entering into the theory of it, to do something
towards showing how the case stands as to dmatterd of fact; by
exhibiting, at greater length than would otherwise be admissible, some
of the testimony which exists respecting the state of cultivation, and
the comfort and happiness of the cultivators, in those countries and
parts of countries, in which the greater part of the land has neither
landlord nor farmer, other than the labourer who tills ethee soil.

§ 2. [Evidence respecting peasant properties in Switzerland] I lay no
stress on the condition of North America, where, as is well known, the
land, aexcept in the former Slave Statesa, is almost universally owned
by the same person who holds the plough. A country combining the natural
fertility of America with the knowledge and arts of modern Europe, is so
peculiarly circumstanced, that scarcely anything, except insecurity of
property or a tyrannical government, could materially impair the
prosperity of the industrious classes. I might, with Sismondi, insist
more strongly on the case of ancient Italy, especially Latium, that
Campagna which then swarmed with inhabitants in the very regions which
under a contrary régime have become uninhabitable from malaria. But I
prefer taking the evidence of the same writer on things known to him by
personal observation.

“C’est surtout la Suisse,” says M. de Sismondi, “qu’il faut parcourir,
qu’il faut étudier, pour juger du bonheur des paysans propriétaires.
C’est la Suisse qu’il faut apprendre à connaître pour se convaincre que
l’agriculture pratiquée par ceux-là même qui en recueillent les fruits
suffit pour procurer une grande aisance à une population très nombreuse;
une grande indépendance de caractère, fruit de l’indépendance des
situations; un grand commerce de consommation, conséquence du bien-être
de tous les habitans, même dans un pays dont le climat est rude, dont le
sol est médiocrement fertile, et où les gelées tardives et l’inconstance
des saisons détruisent souvent l’espoir du laboureur. On ne saurait voir
sans admiration ces maisons de bois du moindre paysan, si vastes, si
bien closes, si bien construites, si couvertes de sculpture. Dans
l’intérieur, de grands corridors dégagent chaque chambre de la nombreuse
famille; chaque chambre n’a qu’un lit, et il est abondamment pourvu de
rideaux, de couvertures, et du linge le plus blanc; des meubles soignés
l’entourent; les armoires sont remplies de linge, la laiterie est vaste,
aérée, et d’une netteté exquise; sous Edition: current; Page: [255] le
même toit on trouve de grands approvisionnemens de blé, de viande salée,
de fromage et de bois; dans les étables on voit le bétail le mieux
soigné et le plus beau de l’Europe; le jardin est planté de fleurs, les
hommes comme les femmes sont chaudement et proprement habillés, les
dernières conservent avec orgueil leur antique costume; tous portent sur
leur visage l’empreinte de la vigueur et de la santé. bQue d’autres
nations vantent leur opulence, la Suisse pourra toujours leur opposer
avec orgueil ses paysans.”*

The same eminent writer thus expresses his opinion on peasant
proprietorship in general.

“Partout où l’on retrouve les paysans propriétaires, on retrouve aussi
cette aisance, cette sécurité, cette confiance dans l’avenir, cette
indépendance qui assurent en même temps le bonheur et la vertu. Le
paysan qui fait avec ses enfans tout l’ouvrage de son petit héritage,
qui ne paie de fermage à personne au-dessus de lui, ni de salaire à
personne au-dessous, qui règle sa production sur sa consommation, qui
mange son propre blé, boit son propre vin, se revêt de son chanvre et de
ses laines, se soucie peu de connaître les prix du marché; car il a peu
à vendre et peu à acheter, et il n’est jamais ruiné par les révolutions
du commerce. Loin de craindre pour l’avenir, il le voit s’embellir dans
son espérance; car il met à profit pour ses enfans, pour les siècles qui
viendront, chacun des instans que ne requiert pas de lui le travail de
l’année. Il lui a suffi de donner peu de momens de travail pour mettre
en terre le noyau qui dans cent ans sera un grand arbre, pour creuser
l’aquéduc qui séchera à jamais son champ, pour former le conduit qui lui
amènera une source d’eau vive, pour améliorer par des soins souvent
répétés mais dérobés sur les instans perdus, toutes les espèces
d’animaux et de végétaux dont il s’entoure. Son petit patrimoine est une
vraie caisse d’épargnes, toujours prête à recevoir tous ses petits
profits, à utiliser tous ses momens de loisir. La puissance toujours
agissante de la nature les féconde, et les lui rend au centuple. Le
paysan a vivement le sentiment de ce bonheur attaché à la condition de
propriétaire. Aussi est-il toujours empressé de la terre à tout prix. Il
la paie plus qu’elle ne vaut, plus qu’elle ne lui rendra peut-être; mais
combien n’a-t-il pas raison d’estimer à un haut prix l’avantage de
placer désormais toujours avantageusement son travail, sans être obligé
de l’offrir au rabais; de trouver toujours au besoin son pain, sans être
obligé de le payer à l’enchère.

“Le paysan propriétaire est de tous les cultivateurs celui qui tire le
plus de parti du sol; parceque c’est celui qui songe le plus à l’avenir,
tout comme Edition: current; Page: [256] celui qui a été le plus éclairé
par l’expérience; c’est encore lui qui met le mieux à profit le travail
humain, parceque répartissant ses occupations entre tous les membres de
sa famille, il en réserve pour tous les jours de l’année, de manière à
ce qu’il n’y ait de chômage pour personne: de tous les cultivateurs il
est le plus heureux, et en même temps, sur un espace donné, la terre ne
nourrit bien, sans s’épuiser, et n’occupe jamais tant d’habitans que
lorsqu’ils sont propriétaires; enfin de tous les cultivateurs le paysan
propriétaire est celui qui donne le plus d’encouragement au commerce et
à l’industrie, parcequ’il est le plus riche.”*

This picture of unwearied assiduity, and what may be called affectionate
interest in the land, is borne out in regard to the more intelligent
Cantons of Switzerland by English observers. “In walking anywhere in the
neighbourhood of Zurich,” says Mr. Inglis, “in looking to the right or
to the left, one is struck with the extraordinary industry of the
inhabitants; and if we learn that a proprietor here has a return of ten
per cent, we are inclined to say, ‘he deserves it.’ I speak at present
of country labour, though I believe that in every kind of trade also,
the people of Zurich are remarkable for their assiduity; but in the
industry they show in the cultivation of their land I may safely say
they are unrivalled. When I used to open my casement between four and
five in the morning to look out upon the lake and the distant Alps, I
saw the labourer in the fields; and when I returned from an evening
walk, long after sunset, as late, perhaps, as half-past eight, there was
the labourer mowing his grass, or tying up his vines. . . . It is
impossible to look at a field, a garden, a hedging, scarcely even a
tree, a flower, or a vegetable, Edition: current; Page: [257] without
perceiving proofs of the extreme care and industry that are bestowed
upon the cultivation of the soil. If, for example, a path leads through
or by the side of a field of grain, the corn is not, as in England,
permitted to hang over the path, exposed to be pulled or trodden down by
every passer by; it is everywhere bounded by a fence, stakes are placed
at intervals of about a yard, and, about two, or three feet from the
ground, boughs of trees are passed longitudinally along. If you look
into a field towards evening, where there are large beds of cauliflower
or cabbage, you will find that every single plant has been watered. In
the gardens, which around Zurich are extremely large, the most
punctilious care is evinced in every production that grows. The
vegetables are planted with seemingly mathematical accuracy; not a
single weed is to be seen, cnotc a single stone. Plants are not earthed
up as with us, but are planted in a small hollow, into each of which a
little manure is put, and each plant is watered daily. Where seeds are
sown, the earth directly above is broken into the finest powder; every
shrub, every flower is tied to a stake, and where there is wall-fruit a
trellice is erected against the wall, to which the boughs are fastened,
and there is not a single dthingd that has not its appropriate resting
place.”*

Of one of the remote valleys of the High Alps the same writer thus
expresses himself.†

“In the whole of the Engadine the land belongs to the peasantry, who,
like the inhabitants of every other place where this state of things
exists, vary greatly in the extent of their possessions. . . . Generally
speaking, an Engadine peasant lives entirely upon the produce of his
land, with the exception of the few articles of foreign growth required
in his family, such as coffee, sugar, and wine. eFlax is grown,
prepared, spun, and woven, without ever leaving his house. He has also
his own wool, which is converted into a blue coat, without passing
through the hands of either the dyer or the tailor. The country is
incapable of greater cultivation than it has received. All has been done
for it that industry and an extreme love of gain can devise. There is
not a foot of waste land in the Engadine, the lowest part of which is
not much lower than the top of Snowdon. Wherever grass will grow, there
it is; wherever a rock will bear a blade, verdure is seen upon it;
wherever an ear of rye will ripen, there it is to be found. Barley
Edition: current; Page: [258] and oats have also their appropriate
spots; and wherever it is possible to ripen a little patch of wheat, the
cultivation of it is attempted. In no country in Europe will be found so
few poor as in the Engadine. In the village of Suss, which contains
about six hundred inhabitants, there is not a single individual who has
not wherewithal to live comfortably, not a single individual who is
indebted to others for one morsel that he eats.”

Notwithstanding the general prosperity of the Swiss peasantry, this
total absence of pauperism and (it may almost be said) of poverty,
cannot be predicated of the whole country; the largest and richest
canton, that of Berne, being an example of the contrary; for although,
in the parts of it which are occupied by peasant proprietors, their
industry is as remarkable and their ease and comfort as conspicuous as
elsewhere, the canton is burthened with a numerous pauper population,
through the operation of the worst regulated system of poor-law
administration in Europe, except that of England before the new Poor
Law.* Nor is Switzerland in some other respects a favourable example of
all that peasant properties might effect. There exists a series of
statistical accounts of the Swiss Cantons, drawn up mostly with great
care and intelligence, containing detailed information, of tolerably
recent date, respecting the condition of the land and of the people.
From these, the subdivision appears to be often so minute, that it can
hardly be supposed not to be excessive: and the indebtedness of the
proprietors in the flourishing canton of Zurich “borders,” as the writer
expresses it, “on the incredible;”† so that “only the intensest
industry, frugality, temperance, and complete freedom of commerce enable
them to stand their ground.” Yet the general conclusion deducible from
these books is that since the beginning of the century, and concurrently
with the subdivision of many great estates which belonged to nobles or
to the Edition: current; Page: [259] cantonal governments, there has
been a striking and rapid improvement in almost every department of
agriculture, as well as in the houses, the habits, and the food of the
people. The writer of the account of Thürgau goes so far as to say, that
since the subdivision of the feudal estates into peasant properties, it
is not uncommon for a third or a fourth part of an estate to produce as
much grain, and support as many head of cattle, as the whole estate did
before.*

§ 3. [Evidence respecting peasant properties in Norway] One of the
countries in which peasant proprietors are of oldest date, and most
numerous in proportion to the population, is Norway. Of the social and
economical condition of that country aana interesting account has been
given by Mr. Laing. His testimony in favour of small landed properties
both there and elsewhere, is given with great decision. I shall quote a
few passages.

“If small proprietors are not good farmers, it is not from the same
cause here which we are told makes them so in Scotland—indolence and
want of exertion. The extent to which irrigation is carried on in these
glens and valleys shows a spirit of exertion and co-operation” (I
request particular attention to this point), “to which the latter can
show nothing similar. Hay being the principal winter support of live
stock, and both it and corn, as well as potatoes, liable, from the
shallow soil and powerful reflexion of sunshine from the rocks, to be
burnt and withered up, the greatest exertions are made to bring water
from the head of each glen, along such a level as will give the command
of it to each farmer at the head of his fields. This is done by leading
it in wooden troughs (the half of a tree roughly scooped) from the
highest perennial stream among the hills, through woods, across ravines,
along the rocky, often perpendicular, sides of the glens, and from this
main trough giving a lateral one to each farmer in passing the head of
his farm. He distributes this supply by moveable troughs among btheb
fields; and at this season waters each rig successively with scoops like
those used by bleachers in watering cloth, laying his trough between
every two rigs. One would not believe, without seeing it, how very large
an extent of land is traversed expeditiously by these artificial
showers. The extent of the main troughs is very great. In one glen I
walked ten miles, and found it troughed on both sides: on one, the chain
is continued down the main valley for forty Edition: current; Page:
[260] miles.* Those may be bad farmers who do such things; but they are
not indolent, nor ignorant of the principle of working in concert, and
keeping up establishments for common benefit. They are undoubtedly, in
these respects, far in advance of any community of cottars in our
Highland glens. They feel as proprietors, who receive the advantage of
their own exertions. The excellent state of the roads and bridges is
another proof that the country is inhabited by people who have a common
interest to keep cthemc under repair. There are no tolls.”d†

Edition: current; Page: [261]
On the effects of peasant proprietorship on the Continent generally, the
same writer expresses himself as follows.*

“If we listen to the large farmer, the scientific agriculturist, the”
[English] “political economist, good farming must perish with large
farms; the very idea that good farming can exist, unless on large farms
cultivated with great capital, they hold to be absurd. Draining,
manuring, economical arrangement, cleaning the land, regular rotations,
valuable stock and implements, all belong exclusively to large farms,
worked by large capital, and by hired labour. This reads very well; but
if we raise our eyes from their books to their fields, and coolly
compare what we see in the best districts farmed in large farms, with
what we see in the best districts farmed in small farms, we see, and
there is no blinking the fact, better crops on the ground in Flanders,
East Friesland, Holstein, in short, on the whole line of the arable land
of equal quality of the Continent, from the Sound to Calais, than we see
on the line of British coast opposite to this line, and in the same
latitudes, from the eFrithe of Forth all round to Dover. Minute labour
on small portions of arable ground gives evidently, in equal soils and
climate, a superior productiveness, where these small portions belong in
property, as in Flanders, Holland, Friesland, and Ditmarsch in Holstein,
to the farmer. It is not pretended by our agricultural writers, that our
large farmers, even in Berwickshire, Roxburghshire, or the Lothians,
approach to the gardenlike cultivation, attention to manures, drainage,
and clean state of the land, or in productiveness from a small space of
soil not originally rich, which distinguish the small farmers of
Flanders, or their system. In the best-farmed parish in Scotland or
England, more land is wasted in the corners and borders of the fields of
large farms, in the roads through them, unnecessarily wide because they
are bad, and bad because they are wide, in neglected commons, waste
spots, useless belts and clumps of sorry trees, and such unproductive
areas, fthanf would maintain the poor of the parish, if they were all
laid together and cultivated. But large capital applied to farming is of
course only applied to the very best of the soils of a country. It
cannot touch the small unproductive spots which require more time and
labour to fertilize them than is consistent with a quick return of
capital. But although hired time and labour cannot be applied
beneficially to such cultivation, the owner’s own time and labour may.
He is working for no higher gtermsg at first from his land than a bare
living. But in the course of generations fertility and value are
produced; a better living, and even very Edition: current; Page: [262]
improved processes of husbandry, are attained. Furrow draining, stall
feeding all summer, liquid manures, are universal in the husbandry of
the small farms of Flanders, Lombardy, Switzerland. Our most improving
districts under large farms are but beginning to adopt them. Dairy
husbandry even, and the manufacture of the largest cheeses by the
co-operation of many small farmers,* the mutual assurance of property
against fire and hail-storms, by the co-operation of small farmers—the
most scientific and expensive of all agricultural operations in modern
times, the manufacture of beet-root sugar—the supply of the European
markets with flax and hemp, by the husbandry of small farmers—the
abundance of legumes, fruits, poultry, in the usual diet even of the
lowest classes abroad, and the total want of such variety at the tables
even of our middle classes, and this variety and abundance essentially
connected with the husbandry of small farmers—all these are features in
the occupation of a country by small proprietor-farmers, which must make
the inquirer pause before he admits the dogma of our land doctors at
home, that large farms worked by hired labour and great capital can
alone bring out the greatest productiveness of the soil and furnish the
greatest supply of the necessaries and conveniences of life to the
inhabitants of a country.”

§ 4. [Evidence respecting peasant properties in Germany] Among the many
flourishing regions of Germany in which peasant properties prevail, I
select the Palatinate, for the advantage of quoting, from an English
source, the results of recent personal observation of its agriculture
and its Edition: current; Page: [263] people. Mr. Howitt, a writer whose
habit it is to see all English objects and English socialities en beau,
and who, in treating of the Rhenish peasantry, certainly does not
aunderratea the rudeness of their implements, and the inferiority of
their ploughing, nevertheless shows that under the invigorating
influence of the feelings of proprietorship, they make up for the
imperfections of their apparatus by the intensity of their application.
“The peasant harrows and clears his land till it is in the nicest order,
and it is admirable to see the crops which he obtains.”* “The peasants†
are the great and everpresent objects of country life. They are the
great population of the country, because they themselves are the
possessors. This country is, in fact, for the most part, in the hands of
the people. It is parcelled out bamongb the multitude. . . . . . The
peasants are not, as with us, for the most part, totally cut off from
property in the soil they cultivate, totally dependent on the labour
afforded by others—they are themselves the proprietors. It is, perhaps,
from this cause that they are probably the most industrious peasantry in
the world. They labour busily, early and late, because they feel that
they are labouring for themselves. . . . . . The German peasants work
hard, but they have no actual want. Every man has his house, his
orchard, his roadside trees, commonly so heavy with fruit, that he is
obliged to prop and secure them all ways, or they would be torn to
pieces. He has his corn-plot, his plot for mangel-wurzel, for hemp, and
so on. He is his own master; and he, and every member of his family,
have the strongest motives to labour. You see the effect of this in that
unremitting diligence which is beyond that of the whole world besides,
and his economy, which is still greater. The Germans, indeed, are not so
active and lively as the English. You never see them in a bustle, or as
though they meant to knock off a vast deal in a little time. . . . . .
They are, on the contrary, slow, but for ever doing. They plod on from
day to day, and year to year—the most patient, untirable, and
persevering of animals. The English peasant is so cut off from the idea
of property, that he comes habitually to look upon it as a thing from
which he is warned by the laws of the large proprietors, and becomes, in
consequence, spiritless, purposeless. . . . . . The German bauer, on the
contrary, looks on the country as made for him and his fellow-men. He
feels himself a man; he has a stake in the country, as good as that of
the bulk of his neighbours; no man can threaten him with ejection, or
the workhouse, so long as he is active and economical. He walks,
therefore, Edition: current; Page: [264] with a bold step; he looks you
in the face with the air of a free man, but of a respectful one.”

Of their industry, the same writer thus further speaks: “There is not an
hour of the year in which they do not find unceasing occupation. In the
depth of winter, when the weather permits them by any means to get out
of doors, they are always finding something to do. They carry out their
manure to their lands while the frost is in them. If there is not frost,
they are busy cleaning ditches and felling old fruit trees, or such as
do not bear well. Such of them as are too poor to lay in a sufficient
stock of wood, find plenty of work in ascending into the mountainous
woods, and bringing thence fuel. It would astonish the English common
people to see the intense labour with which the Germans earn their
firewood. In the cdepthsc of frost and snow, go into any of their hills
and woods, and there you dwilld find them hacking up stumps, cutting off
branches, and gathering, by all means which the official wood-police
will allow, boughs, stakes, and pieces of wood, which they convey home
with the most incredible toil and patience.”* After a description of
their careful and laborious vineyard culture, he continues,† “In
England, with its great quantity of grass lands, and its large farms, so
soon as the grain is in, and the fields are shut up for hay grass, the
country seems in a comparative state of rest and quiet. But here they
are everywhere, and for ever, hoeing and mowing, planting and cutting,
weeding and gathering. They have a succession of crops like a
market-gardener. They have their carrots, poppies, hemp, flax,
saintfoin, lucerne, rape, colewort, cabbage, rotabaga, black turnips,
Swedish and white turnips, teazles, Jerusalem artichokes, mangel-wurzel,
parsnips, kidney-beans, field beans, and peas, vetches, Indian corn,
buckwheat, madder for the manufacturer, potatoes, their great crop of
tobacco, millet—all, or the greater part, under the family management,
in their own family allotments. They have had these things first to sow,
many of them to transplant, to hoe, to weed, to clear eofe insects, to
top; many of them to mow and gather in successive crops. They have their
water-meadows, of which kind almost all their meadows are, to flood, to
mow, and reflood; watercourses to reopen and to make anew: their early
fruits to gather, to bring to market with their green crops of
vegetables; their cattle, sheep, calves, foals, most of them prisoners,
and poultry to look after; their vines, as they shoot rampantly in the
summer heat, to prune, and thin out the leaves fwhenf they are too
thick: and any one may imagine what a scene of incessant labour it is.”

Edition: current; Page: [265]
This interesting sketch, to the general truth of which any observant
traveller in that highly cultivated and populous region can bear
witness, accords with the more elaborate delineation by a distinguished
inhabitant, Professor Rau, in his little treatise “On the Agriculture of
the Palatinate.”* gDr.g Rau bears testimony not only to the industry,
but to the skill and intelligence of the peasantry; their judicious
employment of manures, and excellent rotation of crops; the progressive
improvement of their agriculture for generations past, and the spirit of
further improvement which is still active. “The indefatigableness of the
country people, who may be seen in activity all the day and all the
year, and are never idle, because they make a good distribution of their
labours, and find for every interval of time a suitable occupation, is
as well known as their zeal is praiseworthy in turning to use every
circumstance which presents itself, in seizing upon every useful novelty
which offers, and even in searching out new and advantageous methods.
One easily perceives that the peasant of this district has reflected
much on his occupation: he can give reasons for his modes of proceeding,
even if those reasons are not always tenable; he is as exact an observer
of proportions as it is possible to be from memory, without the aid of
figures: he attends to such general signs of the times as appear to
augur him either benefit or harm.”†

hThe experience of all other parts of Germany is similar. “In Saxony,”
says Mr. Kay, “it is a notorious fact, that during the last thirty
years, and since the peasants became the proprietors of the land, there
has been a rapid and continual improvement in the condition of the
houses, in the manner of living, in the dress of the peasants, and
particularly in the culture of the land. I have twice walked through
that part of Saxony called Saxon Switzerland, in company with a German
guide, and on purpose to see the state of the villages and of the
farming, and I can safely challenge contradiction when I affirm that
there is no farming in all Europe superior to the laboriously careful
cultivation of the valleys of that part of Saxony. There, as in the
cantons of Berne, Vaud, and Zurich, and in the Rhine provinces, the
farms are singularly flourishing. They are kept in beautiful condition,
and are always neat and well managed. The ground is cleared as if it
were a garden. No hedges or brushwood encumber it. Scarcely a rush or
thistle or a bit of rank grass is to be seen. The meadows are well
watered every spring with liquid manure, saved from the drainings of the
farm yards. The grass is so free from weeds that the Saxon meadows
reminded me more of English lawns than of anything else I had seen. The
Edition: current; Page: [266] peasants endeavour to outstrip one another
in the quantity and quality of the produce, in the preparation of the
ground, and in the general cultivation of their respective portions. All
the little proprietors are eager to find out how to farm so as to
produce the greatest results: they diligently seek after improvements;
they send their children to the agricultural schools in order to fit
them to assist their fathers; and each proprietor soon adopts a new
improvement introduced by any of his neighbours.”* If this be not
overstated, it denotes a state of intelligence very different not only
from that of English labourers but of English farmers.

Mr. Kay’s book, published in 1850, contains a mass of evidence gathered
from observation and inquiries in many different parts of Europe,
together with attestations from many distinguished writers, to the
beneficial effects of peasant properties. Among the testimonies which he
cites respecting their effect on agriculture, I select the following.

“Reichensperger, himself an inhabitant of that part of Prussia where the
land is the most subdivided, has published a long and very elaborate
work to show the admirable consequences of a system of freeholds in
land. He expresses a very decided opinion that not only are the gross
products of any given number of acres held and cultivated by small or
peasant proprietors, greater than the gross products of an equal number
of acres held by a few great proprietors, and cultivated by tenant
farmers, but that the net products of the former, after deducting all
the expenses of cultivation, are also greater than the net products of
the latter. . . . He mentions one fact which seems to prove that the
fertility of the land in countries where the properties are small, must
be rapidly increasing. He says that the price of the land which is
divided into small properties in the Prussian Rhine provinces, is much
higher, and has been rising much more rapidly, than the price of land on
the great estates. He and Professor Rau both say that this rise in the
price of the small estates would have ruined the more recent purchasers,
unless the productiveness of the small estates had increased in at least
an equal proportion; and as the small proprietors have been gradually
becoming more and more prosperous notwithstanding the increasing prices
they have paid for their land, he argues, with apparent justness, that
this would seem to show that not only the gross profits of the small
estates, but the net profits also have been gradually increasing, and
that the net profits per acre, of land, when farmed by small
proprietors, are greater than the net profits per acre of land farmed by
a great proprietor. He says, Edition: current; Page: [267] with seeming
truth, that the increasing price of land in the small estates cannot be
the mere effect of competition, or it would have diminished the profits
and the prosperity of the small proprietors, and that this result has
not followed the rise.

“Albrecht Thaer, another celebrated German writer on the different
systems of agriculture, in one of his later works (Grundsätze der
rationellen Landwirthschaft) expresses his decided conviction, that the
net produce of land is greater when farmed by small proprietors than
when farmed by great proprietors or their tenants. . . . This opinion of
Thaer is all the more remarkable, as, during the early part of his life,
he was very strongly in favour of the English system of great estates
and great farms.”

Mr. Kay adds from his own observation, “The peasant farming of Prussia,
Saxony, Holland, and Switzerland is the most perfect and economical
farming I have ever witnessed in any country.”*h

§ 5. [Evidence respecting peasant properties in Belgium] But the most
decisive example in opposition to the English prejudice against
cultivation by peasant proprietors, is the case of Belgium. The soil is
originally one of the worst in Europe. “The provinces,” says Mr.
M‘Culloch,† “of West and East Flanders, and Hainault, form a far
stretching plain, of which the luxuriant vegetation indicates the
indefatigable care and labour bestowed upon its cultivation; for the
natural soil consists almost wholly of barren sand, and its great
fertility is entirely the result of very skilful management and
judicious application of various manures.” There exists a carefully
prepared aand comprehensivea treatise on Flemish Husbandry, in the
Farmer’s Series of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge.
The writer observes‡ that the Flemish agriculturists “seem to want
nothing but a space to work upon: whatever be the quality or texture of
the soil, in time they will make it produce something. The bsandsb in
the Campine can be compared to nothing but the csandc on the sea-shore,
which they probably were originally. It is highly interesting to follow
step by step the progress of improvement. Here you see a cottage and
rude cow-shed erected on a spot of the most unpromising aspect. The
loose white sand blown into irregular mounds is only kept together by
the roots of the heath: a small Edition: current; Page: [268] spot only
is levelled and surrounded by a ditch: part of this is covered with
young broom, part is planted with potatoes, and perhaps a small patch of
diminutive clover may show itself:” but manures, both solid and liquid,
are collecting, “and this is the nucleus from which, in a few years, a
little farm will spread around. . . . If there is no manure at hand, the
only thing that can be sown, on dpured sand, at first is broom: this
grows in the most barren soils; in three years it is fit to cut, and
produces some return in faggots for the bakers and brickmakers. The
leaves which have fallen have somewhat enriched the soil, and the fibres
of the roots have given a eslighte degree of compactness. It may now be
ploughed and sown with buckwheat, or even with rye without manure. By
the time this is reaped, some manure may have been collected, and a
regular course of cropping may begin. As soon as clover and potatoes
enable the farmer to keep cows and make manure, the improvement goes on
rapidly; in a few years the soil undergoes a complete change: it becomes
mellow and retentive of moisture, and enriched by the vegetable matter
afforded by the decomposition of the roots of clover and other plants. .
. . After the land has been gradually brought into a good state, and is
cultivated in a regular manner, there appears much less difference
between the soils which have been originally good, and those which have
been made so by labour and industry. At least the crops in both appear
more nearly alike at harvest, than is the case in soils of different
qualities in other countries. This is a great proof of the excellency of
the Flemish system; for it shows that the land is in a constant state of
improvement, and that the deficiency of the soil is compensated by
greater attention to tillage and manuring, especially the latter.”

The people who labour thus intensely fon their small properties or
farmsf, have practised for centuries those principles of rotation of
crops and economy of manures, which in England are counted among modern
discoveries: and even now the superiority of their agriculture, as a
whole, to that of England, is admitted by competent judges. “The
cultivation of a poor light soil, gor a moderate soilg,” says the writer
last quoted,* “is generally superior in Flanders to that of the most
improved farms of the same kind in Britain. We surpass the Flemish
farmer greatly in capital, in varied implements of tillage, in the
choice and breeding of cattle and sheep,” (though, according to the same
authority,† they are much “before us in the feeding of their cows,”)
“and the British farmer is in general a man of superior Edition:
current; Page: [269] education to the Flemish peasant. But in the minute
attention to the qualities of the soil, in the management and
application of manures of different kinds, in the judicious succession
of crops, and especially in the economy of land, so that every part of
it shall be in a constant state of production, we have still something
to learn from the Flemings,” and not from an instructed and enterprising
Fleming here and there, but from the general practice.

Much of the most highly cultivated part of the country consists of
peasant properties, managed by the proprietors, always either wholly or
partly by spade hindustryh.* “When the land is cultivated entirely by
the spade, and no horses are kept, a cow is kept for every three acres
of land, and entirely fed on artificial grasses and roots. This mode of
cultivation is principally adopted in the Waes district, where
properties are very small. All the labour is done by the different
members of the family;” children soon beginning “to assist in various
minute operations, according to their age and strength, such as weeding,
hoeing, feeding the cows. If they can raise rye and wheat enough to make
their bread, and potatoes, turnips, carrots and clover, for the cows,
they do well; and the produce of the sale of their rape-seed, their
flax, their hemp, and their butter, after deducting the expense of
manure purchased, which is always considerable, gives them a very good
profit. iSupposei the whole extent of the land to be six acres, which is
not an uncommon occupation, and which one man can manage;” then (after
describing the cultivation), “if a man with his wife and three young
children are considered as equal to three and a half grown up men, the
family will require thirty-nine bushels of grain, forty-nine bushels of
potatoes, a fat hog, and the butter and milk of one cow: an acre and a
half of land will produce the grain and potatoes, and allow some corn to
finish the fattening of the hog, which has the extra buttermilk: another
acre in clover, carrots, and potatoes, together with the stubble
turnips, will more than feed the cow; consequently two and a half acres
of land is sufficient to feed this family, and the produce of the other
three and a half may be sold to pay the rent or the interest of
purchase-money, wear and tear of implements, extra manure, and clothes
for the family. But these acres are the most profitable on the farm, for
the hemp, flax, and colza are included; and by having another acre in
clover and roots, a second cow can be kept, and its produce sold. We
have, therefore, a solution of the problem, how a family can live and
thrive on six acres of moderate land.” After showing by calculation that
this extent of land can be cultivated in the most perfect manner by the
family without any aid from hired labour, the writer continues, “In a
farm Edition: current; Page: [270] of ten acres entirely cultivated by
the spade, the addition of a man and a woman to the members of the
family will render all the operations more easy; and with fhorse and
cart to carry out the manure, and bring home the produce, and
occasionally draw the harrows, fifteen acres may be very well
cultivated. . . . Thus it will be seen,” (this is the result of some
pages of details and calculations,*) “that by spade husbandry, an
industrious man with a small capital, occupying only fifteen acres of
good light land, may not only live and bring up a family, paying a good
rent, but may accumulate a considerable sum in the course of his life.”
But the indefatigable industry by which he accomplishes this, and of
which so large a portion is expended not in the mere cultivation, but in
the improvement, for a distant return, of the soil itself—has that
industry no connexion with not paying rent? Could it exist, without
presupposing keither a virtually permanent tenure, or the certain
prospect, by labour and economy on hired land, of becoming one day a
landed proprietork?

As to their mode of living, “the Flemish farmers and labourers live much
more economically than the same class in England: they seldom eat meat,
except on Sundays and in harvest: buttermilk and potatoes with brown
bread is their daily food.”[*] It is on this kind of evidence that
English travellers, as they hurry through Europe, pronounce the
peasantry of every Continental country poor and miserable, its
agricultural and social system a failure, and the English the only
régime under which labourers are well off. It is, truly enough, the only
régime under which labourers, whether well off or not, never attempt to
be better. So little are English llabourersl accustomed to consider it
possible that a labourer should not spend all he earns, that they
habitually mistake the signs of economy for those of poverty. Observe
the true interpretation of the phenomena.

“Accordingly they are gradually acquiring capital, and their great
ambition is to have land of their own. They eagerly seize every
opportunity of purchasing a small farm, and the price is so raised by
mcompetition, that land pays little more than two per cent interest for
the purchase money. Large properties gradually disappear, and are
divided into small portions, which sell at a high rate. But the wealth
and industry of the population is continually increasing, being rather
diffused through the masses than accumulated in individuals.”[†]

Edition: current; Page: [271]
With facts like these, known and accessible, it is not a little
surprising to find the case of Flanders referred to not in
recommendation of peasant properties, but as a warning against them; on
no better ground than a presumptive excess of population, inferred from
the distress which existed among the peasantry of Brabant and East
Flanders in the disastrous year 1846-47. The evidence which I have cited
from a writer conversant with the subject, and having no economical
theory to support, shows that the distress, whatever may have been its
severity, arose from no insufficiency in these little properties to
supply abundantly, in any ordinary circumstances, the wants of all whom
they have to maintain. It arose from the essential condition to which
those are subject who employ land of their own in growing their own
food, namely, that the vicissitudes of the seasons must be borne by
themselves, and cannot, as in the case of large farmers, be shifted from
them to the consumer. When we remember the season of 1846, a partial
failure of all kinds of grain, and an almost total one of the potato, it
is no wonder that in so unusual a calamity the produce of six acres,
half of them sown with flax, hemp, or oil seeds, should fall short of a
year’s provision for a family. But we are not to contrast the distressed
Flemish peasant with an English capitalist who farms several hundred
acres of land. If the peasant were an Englishman, he would not be that
capitalist, but a day labourer under a capitalist. And is there no
distress, in times of dearth, among day labourers? Was there none, that
year, in countries where small proprietors and small farmers are
unknown? nI am aware of no reason for believingn that the distress was
greater in Belgium, than corresponds to the proportional extent of the
failure of crops compared with other ocountries.o*

a§ 6. [Evidence respecting peasant properties in the Channel Islands]
The evidence of the beneficial operation of peasant properties in the
Channel Islands is of so decisive a character, that I cannot help adding
to Edition: current; Page: [272] the numerous citations already made,
part of a description of the economical condition of those islands, by a
writer who combines personal observation with an attentive study of the
information afforded by others. Mr. William Thornton, in his “Plea for
Peasant Proprietors,” a book which by the excellence both of its
materials and of its execution, deserves to be regarded as the standard
work on that side of the question, speaks of the island of Guernsey in
the following terms: “Not even in England is nearly so large a quantity
of produce sent to market from a tract of such limited extent. This of
itself might prove that the cultivators must be far removed above
poverty, for being absolute owners of all the produce raised by them,
they of course sell only what they do not themselves require. But the
satisfactoriness of their condition is apparent to every observer. ‘The
happiest community,’ says Mr. Hill, ‘which it has ever been my lot to
fall in with, is to be found in this little island of Guernsey.’ ‘No
matter,’ says Sir George Head, ‘to what point the traveller may choose
to bend his way, comfort everywhere prevails.’ What most surprises the
English visitor in his first walk or drive beyond the bounds of St.
Peter’s Port is the appearance of the habitations with which the
landscape is thickly studded. Many of them are such as in his own
country would belong to persons of middle rank; but he is puzzled to
guess what sort of people live in the botherb, which, though in general
not large enough for farmers, are almost invariably much too good in
every respect for day labourers. . . Literally, in the whole island,
with the exception of a few fishermen’s huts, there is not one so mean
as to be likened to the ordinary habitation of an English farm labourer.
. . . ‘Look,’ says a late Bailiff of Guernsey, Mr. De L’Isle Brock, ‘at
the hovels of the English, and compare them with the cottages of our
peasantry.’ . . . Beggars are utterly unknown. . . . Pauperism,
able-bodied pauperism at least, is nearly as rare as mendicancy. The
Savings Banks accounts also bear witness to the general abundance
enjoyed by the labouring classes of Guernsey. In the year 1841, there
were in England, out of a population of nearly fifteen millions, less
than 700,000 depositors, or one in every twenty persons, and the average
amount of the deposits was 30l. In Guernsey, in the same year, out of a
population of 26,000, the number of depositors was 1920, and the average
amount of the deposits 40l.”* The evidence as to Jersey and Alderney is
of a similar character.

Of the efficiency and productiveness of agriculture on the small
properties of the Channel Islands, Mr. Thornton produces ample evidence,
the result of which he sums up as follows: “Thus it appears that in the
two Edition: current; Page: [273] principal Channel Islands, the
agricultural population is, in the one twice, and in the other, three
times, as dense as in Britain, there being in the latter country, only
one cultivator to twenty-two acres of cultivated land, while in Jersey
there is one to eleven, and in Guernsey one to seven acres. Yet the
agriculture of these islands maintains, besides cultivators,
nonagricultural populations, respectively four and five times as dense
as that of Britain. This difference does not arise from any superiority
of soil or climate possessed by the Channel Islands, for the former is
naturally rather poor, and the latter is not better than in the southern
counties of England. It is owing entirely to the assiduous care of the
farmers, and to the abundant use of manure.”* “In the year 1837,” he
says in another place,† “the average yield of wheat in the large farms
of England was only twenty-one bushels, and the highest average for any
one county was no more than twenty-six bushels. The highest average
since claimed for the whole of England is thirty bushels. In Jersey,
where the average size of farms is only sixteen acres, the average
produce of wheat per acre was stated by Inglis in 1834 to be thirty-six
bushels; but it is proved by official tables to have been forty bushels
in the five years ending with 1833. In Guernsey, where farms are still
smaller, four quarters per acre, according to Inglis, is considered a
good, but still a very common crop.” “Thirty shillings ‡an acre would be
thought in England a very fair rent for middling land; but in the
Channel Islands, it is only very inferior land that would not let for at
least 4l.”a

a§ 7.a [Evidence respecting peasant properties in France] It is from
France, bthat impressions unfavourable to peasant properties are
generally drawn; it is in France that the system is so often asserted to
have brought forth its fruit in the most wretched possible agriculture,
and to be rapidly reducing, if not to have already reduced the
peasantry, by subdivision of land, to the verge of starvation. It is
difficult to account for the general prevalence of impressions so much
the reverse of ctruth. The agriculture of France was wretched and the
peasantry in great indigence before the Revolution. At that time they
were not, dso universally as at presentd, landed proprietors. There
were, however, considerable districts of France where the land, even
then, was to a great extent the property of the peasantry, and among
these were many of the most conspicuous exceptions to the general bad
agriculture and to the general poverty. An authority, on this point, not
to be disputed, is Arthur Young, the inveterate enemy of small farms,
the coryphæus of the modern English school of agriculturists; Edition:
current; Page: [274] who yet, travelling over nearly the whole of France
in 1787, 1788, and 1789, when he finds remarkable excellence of
cultivation, never hesitates to ascribe it to peasant property. “Leaving
Sauve,” says he,* “I was much struck with a large tract of land,
seemingly nothing but huge rocks; yet most of it enclosed and planted
with the most industrious attention. Every man has an olive, a mulberry,
an almond, or a peach tree, and vines scattered among them; so that the
whole ground is covered with the oddest mixture of these plants and
bulging rocks, that can be conceived. The inhabitants of this village
deserve encouragement for their industry; and if I were a French
minister they should have it. They would soon turn all the deserts
around them into gardens. Such a knot of active husbandmen, who turn
their rocks into scenes of fertility, because I suppose their own, would
do the same by the wastes, if animated by the same omnipotent
principle.” Again:† “Walk to Rossendal,” (near Dunkirk) “where M. le
Brun has an improvement on the Dunes, which he very obligingly showed
me. Between the town and that place is a great number of neat little
houses, built each with its garden, and one or two fields enclosed, of
most wretched blowing dune sand, naturally as white as snow, but
improved by industry. The magic of property turns sand to gold.” And
again:‡ “Going out of Gange, I was surprised to find by far the greatest
exertion in irrigation which I had yet seen in France; and then passed
by some steep mountains, highly cultivated in terraces. Much watering at
St. Lawrence. The scenery very interesting to a farmer. From Gange, to
the mountain of rough ground which I crossed, the ride has been the most
interesting which I have taken in France; the efforts of industry the
most vigorous; the animation the most lively. An activity has been here,
that has swept away all difficulties before it, and has clothed the very
rocks with verdure. It would be a disgrace to common sense to ask the
cause; the enjoyment of property must have done it. Give a man the
secure possession of a bleak rock, and he will turn it into a garden;
give him a nine years’ lease of a garden, and he will convert it into a
desert.”

In his description of the country at the foot of the Western Pyrenees,
he speaks no longer from surmise, but from knowledge. “Take§ the road to
Moneng, and come presently to a scene which was so new to me in France,
that I could hardly believe my own eyes. A succession of many
well-built, tight, and comfortable farming cottages built of stone and
covered with tiles; each having its little garden, enclosed by clipt
thorn-hedges, with plenty of peach and other fruit-trees, some fine oaks
scattered in the hedges, Edition: current; Page: [275] and young trees
nursed up with so much care, that nothing but the fostering attention of
the owner could effect anything like it. To every house belongs a farm,
perfectly well enclosed, with grass borders mown and neatly kept around
the corn-fields, with gates to pass from one enclosure to another. There
are some parts of England (where small yeomen still remain) that
resemble this country of Béarn; but we have very little that is equal to
what I have seen in this ride of twelve miles from Pau to Moneng. It is
all in the hands of little proprietors, without the farms being so small
as to occasion a vicious and miserable population. An air of neatness,
warmth, and comfort breathes over the whole. It is visible in their new
built houses and stables; in their little gardens; in their hedges; in
the courts before their doors; even in the coops for their poultry, and
the sties for their hogs. A peasant does not think of rendering his pig
comfortable, if his own happiness hang by the thread of a nine years’
lease. We are now in Béarn, within a few miles of the cradle of Henry
IV. Do they inherit these blessings from that good prince? The benignant
genius of that good monarch seems to reign still over the country; each
peasant has the fowl in the pot.” He frequently notices the excellence
of the agriculture of French Flanders, where the farms “are all small,
and much in the hands of little proprietors.”* In the Pays de Caux, also
a country of small properties, the agriculture was miserable; of which
his explanation was that it “is a manufacturing country, and farming is
but a secondary pursuit to the cotton fabric, which spreads over the
whole of it.”† The same district is still a seat of manufactures, and a
country of small proprietors, and is now, whether we judge from the
appearance of the crops or from the official returns, one of the best
cultivated in France. In “Flanders, Alsace, and part of Artois, as well
as on the banks of the Garonne, France possesses a husbandry equal to
our own.”‡ eThosee countries, and a considerable part of Quercy, “are
cultivated more like gardens than farms. Perhaps they are too much like
gardens, from the smallness of properties.”§ In those districts the
admirable rotation of crops, so long practised in Italy, but at that
time generally neglected in France, was already universal. “The rapid
succession of crops, the harvest of one being but the signal of sowing
immediately for a second,” (the same fact which fstrikesf all observers
in the valley of the Rhine) “can scarcely be carried to greater
perfection: and this is a point, perhaps, of all others the most
essential to good husbandry, when such crops are so justly distributed
as we generally find them in these provinces; cleaning and ameliorating
ones being made the preparation for such as foul and exhaust.”

It must not, however, be supposed, that Arthur Young’s testimony on the
Edition: current; Page: [276] subject of peasant properties is uniformly
favourable. In Lorraine, Champagne, and elsewhere, he finds the
agriculture bad, and the small proprietors very miserable, in
consequence, as he says, of the extreme subdivision of the land. His
opinion is thus summed up:*—“Before I travelled, I conceived that small
farms, in property, were very susceptible of good cultivation; and that
the occupier of such, having no rent to pay, might be sufficiently at
his ease to work improvements, and carry on a vigorous husbandry; but
what I have seen in France, has greatly lessened my good opinion of
them. In Flanders, I saw excellent husbandry on properties of 30 to 100
acres; but we seldom find here such small patches of property as are
common in other provinces. In Alsace, and on the Garonne, that is, on
soils of such exuberant fertility as to demand no exertions, some small
properties also are well cultivated. In Béarn, I passed through a region
of little farmers, whose appearance, neatness, ease, and happiness
charmed me; it was what property alone could, on a small scale, effect;
but these were by no means contemptibly small; they are, as I judged by
the distance from house to house, from 40 to 80 acres. Except these, and
a very few other instances, I saw nothing respectable on small
properties, except a most unremitting industry. Indeed, it is necessary
to impress on the reader’s mind, that though the husbandry I met with,
in a great variety of instances on little properties, was as bad as can
gbe wellg conceived, yet the industry of the possessors was so
conspicuous, and so meritorious, that no commendations would be too
great for it. It was sufficient to prove that property in land is, of
all others, the most active instigator to severe and incessant labour.
And this truth is of such force and extent, that I know no way so sure
of carrying tillage to a mountain top, as by permitting the adjoining
villagers to acquire it in property; in fact, we see that in the
mountains of Languedoc, &c., they have conveyed earth in baskets, on
their backs, to form a soil where nature had denied it.”

The experience, therefore, of this celebrated agriculturist, and apostle
of htheh grande culture, may be said to be, that the effect of small
properties, cultivated by peasant proprietors, is admirable when they
are not too small: so small, namely, as not fully to occupy the time and
attention of the family; for he often complains, with great apparent
reason, of the quantity of idle time which the peasantry had on their
hands when the land was in very small portions, notwithstanding the
ardour with which they toiled to improve their little patrimony in every
way which their knowledge or ingenuity could suggest. He recommends,
accordingly, that a limit of subdivision should be fixed by law; and
this is by no means an indefensible Edition: current; Page: [277]
proposition in countries, if such there are, where the morcellement,
having already gone farther than the state of capital and the nature of
the staple articles of cultivation render advisable, still continues
progressive. That each peasant should have a patch of land, even in full
property, if it is not sufficient to support him in comfort, is a system
with all the disadvantages, and scarcely any of the benefits, of small
properties; since he must either live in indigence on the produce of his
land, or depend as habitually as if he had no landed possessions, on the
wages of hired labour: which, besides, if all the iholdingsi surrounding
him are jof similar dimensionsj, he has little prospect of finding. The
benefits of peasant properties are conditional on their not being too
much subdivided; that is, on their not being required to maintain too
many persons, in proportion to the produce that can be raised from them
by those persons. The question resolves itself, like most questions
respecting the condition of the labouring classes, into one of
population. Are small properties a stimulus to undue multiplication, or
a check to it?

Edition: current; Page: [278]


CHAPTER VII: Continuation of the Same Subject

§ 1. [Influence of peasant properties in stimulating industry] Before
examining the influence of peasant properties on the ultimate economical
interests of the labouring class, as determined by the increase of
population, let us note the points respecting the moral and social
influence of that territorial arrangement, which may be looked upon as
established, either by the reason of the case, or by the facts and
authorities cited in the preceding chapter.

The reader new to the subject must have been struck with the powerful
impression made upon all the witnesses to whom I have referred, by what
a Swiss statistical writer calls the “almost superhuman industry” of
peasant proprietors.* On this point at least, authorities are unanimous.
Those who have seen only one country of peasant properties, always think
the inhabitants of that country the most industrious in the world. There
is as little doubt among observers, with what feature in the condition
of the peasantry this pre-eminent industry is connected. It is athe
“magica of property” which, in the words of Arthur Young, “turns sand
into gold.” The idea of property does not, however, necessarily imply
that there should be no rent, any more than that there should be no
taxes. It merely implies that the rent should be a fixed charge, not
liable to be raised against the possessor by his own improvements, or by
the will of a landlord. A tenant at a quit-rent is, to all intents and
purposes, a proprietor; a copyholder is not less so than a freeholder.
What is wanted is bpermanentb possession on fixed terms. “Give a man the
secure possession of a bleak rock, and he will turn it into a garden;
give him a nine years’ lease of a garden, and he will convert it into a
desert.”

The details which have been cited, and those, still more minute, to be
found in the same authorities, concerning the habitually elaborate
system of cultivation, and the thousand devices of the peasant
proprietor for making every superfluous hour and odd moment instrumental
to some increase Edition: current; Page: [279] in the future produce and
value of the land, will explain what has been said in a previous
chapter* respecting the far larger gross produce which, with anything
like parity of agricultural knowledge, is obtained from the same quality
of soil on small farms, at least when they are the property of the
cultivator. The treatise on “Flemish Husbandry” is especially
instructive respecting the means by which untiring industry does more
than outweigh inferiority of resources, imperfection of implements, and
ignorance of scientific theories. The peasant cultivation of Flanders
and Italy is affirmed to produce heavier crops, in equal circumstances
of soil, than the best cultivated districts of Scotland and England. It
produces them, no doubt, with an amount of labour which, if paid for by
an employer, would make the cost to him more than equivalent to the
benefit; but to the peasant it is not cost, it is the devotion of time
which he can spare, to a favourite pursuit, if we should not rather say
a ruling passion.†

cWe have seen, too, that it is not solely by superior exertion that the
Flemish cultivators succeed in obtaining these brilliant results. The
same motive which gives such intensity to their industry, placed them
earlier in possession of an amount of agricultural knowledge, not
attained until much later in countries where agriculture was carried on
solely by hired labour. Edition: current; Page: [280] An equally high
testimony is borne by M. de Lavergne* to the agricultural skill of the
small proprietors in those parts of France to which the petite culture
is really suitable. “In the rich plains of Flanders, on the banks of the
Rhine, the Garonne, the Charente, the Rhone, all the practices which
fertilize the land and increase the productiveness of labour are known
to the very smallest cultivators, and practised by them, however
considerable may be the advances which they require. In their hands,
abundant manures, collected at great cost, repair and incessantly
increase the fertility of the soil, in spite of the activity of
cultivation. The races of cattle are superior, the crops magnificent.
Tobacco, flax, colza, madder, beetroot, in some places; in others, the
vine, the olive, the plum, the mulberry, only yield their abundant
treasures to a population of industrious labourers. Is it not also to
the petite culture that we are indebted for most of the garden produce
obtained by dint of great outlay in the neighbourhood of Paris?”c

§ 2. [Influence of peasant properties in training intelligence] Another
aspect of peasant properties, in which it is essential that they should
be considered, is that of an instrument of popular education. aBooks and
schooling are absolutely necessary to education; but not all-sufficient.
The mental faculties will be most developed where they are most
exercised; and what gives more exercise to them than the having a
multitude of interests, none of which can be neglected, and which can be
provided for only by varied efforts of will and intelligence? Some of
the disparagers of small properties lay great stress on the cares and
anxieties which beset the peasant proprietor of the Rhineland or
Flanders. It is precisely those cares and anxieties which tend to make
him a superior being to an English day-labourer. It is, to be sure,
rather abusing the bprivilegesb of fair argument to represent the
condition of a day-labourer as not an anxious one. I can conceive no
circumstances in which he is free from anxiety, where there is a
possibility of being out of employment; unless he has access to a
profuse dispensation of parish pay, and no shame or reluctance in
demanding itc. Thec day-labourer has, in the existing state of society
and population, many of the anxieties which have dnotd an invigorating
effect on the mind, Edition: current; Page: [281] and none of those
which have. The position of the peasant proprietor of eContinental
Europee is the reverse. From the anxiety which chills and paralyses—the
uncertainty of having food to eat—few persons are more exempt: it
requires as rare a concurrence of circumstances as the potato failure
combined with an universal bad harvest, to bring him within reach of
that danger. His anxieties are the ordinary vicissitudes of fmore and
lessf; his cares are that he takes his fair share of the business of
life; that he is a free human being, and not perpetually a child, which
seems to be the approved condition of the labouring classes according to
the prevailing philanthropy. He is no longer a being of a different
order from the middle classes; he has pursuits and objects like those
which occupy them, and give to their intellects the greatest part of
gsuch cultivation asg they receive. If there is a first principle in
intellectual education, it is this—that the discipline which does good
to the mind is that in which the mind is active, not that in which it is
passive. The secret for developing the faculties is to give them much to
do, and much inducement to do it. hThis detracts nothing from the
importance, and even necessity, of other kinds of mental cultivation.
The possession of property will not prevent the peasant from being
coarse, selfish, and narrow-minded. These things depend on other
influences, and other kinds of instruction. But this great stimulus to
one kind of mental activity, in no way impedes any other means of
intellectual development. On the contrary, by cultivating the habit of
turning to practical use every fragment of knowledge acquired, it helps
to render that schooling and reading fruitful, which without some such
auxiliary influence are in too many cases like seed thrown on a rock.

§ 3. [Influence of peasant properties in promoting forethought and
self-control] It is not aona the intelligence alone, that the situation
of a peasant proprietor bexercises an improving influenceb. It is no
less propitious to the moral virtues of prudence, temperance, and
self-control. cDay-labourers, where the labouring class mainly consists
of them, are usually improvident: Edition: current; Page: [282] they
spend carelessly to the full extent of their means, and let the future
shift for itself. This is so notorious, that many persons dstrongly
interested in the welfare ofd the labouring classes, hold it as a fixed
opinion that an increase of wages would do them little good, unless
accompanied by at least a corresponding improvement in their tastes and
habits. The tendency of peasant proprietors, and of those who hope to
become proprietors, is to the contrary extreme; to take even too much
thought for the morrow. They are oftener accused of penuriousness than
of prodigality. They deny themselves reasonable indulgences, and live
wretchedly in order to economize. In Switzerland almost everybody saves,
who has any means of saving; the case of the Flemish farmers ehas beene
already noticed: among the French, though a pleasure-loving and reputed
to be a self-indulgent people, the spirit of thrift is diffused through
the rural population in a manner most gratifying as a whole, and which
in individual instances errs rather on the side of excess than defect.
fAmong thosef who, from the hovels in which they live, and the herbs and
roots which constitute their diet, are mistaken by travellers for proofs
and specimens of general indigence, gthere areg numbers who have hoards
in hleathernh bags, consisting of sums, in five-franc pieces, which they
keep by them perhaps ifori a whole generation, unless brought out to be
expended in their most cherished gratification—the purchase of land. If
there is a moral inconvenience attached to a state of society in which
the peasantry have land, it is the danger of their being jtooj careful
of their pecuniary concerns; of its making them crafty, and
“calculating” in the objectionable sense. The French peasant is no
simple countryman, no downright “paysan du Danube;” both in fact and in
fiction he is now “le rusé paysan.” That is the stage which he has
reached in the progressive development which the constitution of things
has imposed on human intelligence and human emancipation. But some
excess in this direction is a small and a passing evil compared with
recklessness and improvidence in the labouring classes, and a cheap
price to pay for the inestimable worth of the virtue of self-dependence,
as the general characteristic of a people: a virtue which is one of the
first conditions of excellence in kthek human character—the stock on
which if the other virtues are not grafted, they have seldom any firm
root; a quality indispensable in the case of a labouring class, even to
any tolerable degree of physical comfort; and by which the peasantry of
France, and of most European countries of peasant proprietors, are
distinguished beyond any other labouring population.

Edition: current; Page: [283]
§ 4. [Their effect on population] Is it likely that a state of
economical relations so conducive to frugality and prudence in every
other respect, should be prejudicial to it in the cardinal point of
increase of population? That it is so, is the opinion expressed by most
of those English political economists who have written anything about
the matter. Mr. M‘Culloch’s opinion is well known. Mr. Jones affirms,*
that aa “peasanta population raising their own wages from the soil, and
consuming them in kind, are universally acted upon very feebly by
internal checks, or by motives disposing them to restraint. The
consequence is, that unless some external cause, quite independent of
their will, forces such peasant cultivators to slacken their rate of
increase, they will, in a limited territory, very rapidly approach a
state of want and penury, and will be stopped at last only by the
physical impossibility of procuring subsistence.” He elsewhere† speaks
of such a peasantry as “exactly in the condition in which the animal
disposition to increase their numbers is checked by the fewest of those
balancing motives and desires which regulate the increase of superior
ranks or bmore civilized people.” The “causes of this peculiarity,” Mr.
Jones cpromisedc to point out in a subsequent work, which dneverd made
its appearance. I am totally unable to conjecture from what theory of
human nature, and of the motives which influence human conduct, he
ewould have derivede them. Arthur Young assumes the same “peculiarity”
as a fact; but, though not much in the habit of qualifying his opinions,
he does not push his doctrine to so violent an extreme as Mr. Jones;
having, as we have seen, himself testified to various instances in which
peasant populations such as Mr. Jones speaks of, were not tending to “a
state of want and penury,” and were in no danger whatever of coming
fintof contact with “physical impossibility of procuring subsistence.”

That there should be discrepancy of experience on this matter, is easily
to be accounted for. Whether the labouring people live by land or by
wages, they have always hitherto multiplied up to the limit set by their
habitual standard of comfort. When that standard was low, not exceeding
a scanty subsistence, the size of properties, as well as the rate of
wages, has been kept down to what would barely support life. Extremely
low ideas of what is necessary for subsistence, are perfectly compatible
with peasant properties; and if a people have always been used to
poverty, and habit has reconciled them to it, there will be
over-population, and excessive subdivision of land. But this is not to
the purpose. The true question is, supposing a peasantry to possess land
not insufficient but sufficient for their Edition: current; Page: [284]
comfortable support, are they more, or less, likely to fall from this
state of comfort through improvident multiplication, than if they were
living in an equally comfortable manner as hired labourers? All à priori
considerations are in favour of their being less likely. The dependence
of wages on population is a matter of speculation and discussion. That
wages would fall if population were much increased is often a matter of
real doubt, and always a thing which requires some exercise of the
gthinkingg faculty for its intelligent recognition. But every peasant
can satisfy himself from evidence which he can fully appreciate, whether
his piece of land can be made to support several families in the same
comfort hash it supports one. Few people like to leave to their children
a worse lot in life than their own. The parent who has land to leave, is
perfectly able to judge whether the children can live upon it or not:
but people who are supported by wages, see no reason why their sons
should be unable to support themselves in the same way, and trust
accordingly to chance. “In even the most useful and necessary arts and
manufactures,” says Mr. Laing,* “the demand for labourers is not a seen,
known, steady, and appreciable demand: but it is so in husbandry” under
small properties. “The labour to be done, the subsistence that labour
will produce out of his portion of land, are seen and known elements in
a man’s calculation upon his means of subsistence. Can his square of
land, or can it not, subsist a family? Can he marry or not? are
questions which every man can answer without delay, doubt, or
speculation. It is the depending on chance, where judgment has nothing
clearly set before it, that causes reckless, improvident marriages in
the lower, as in the higher classes, and produces among us the evils of
over-population; and chance necessarily enters into every man’s
calculations, when certainty is removed altogether; as it is, where
certain subsistence is, by our distribution of property, the lot of but
a small portion instead of about two-thirds of the people.”

There never has been a writer more keenly sensible of the evils brought
upon the labouring classes by excess of population, than Sismondi, and
this is one of the grounds of his earnest advocacy of peasant
properties. He had ample opportunity, in more countries than one, for
judging of their effect on population. Let us see his testimony. “In the
countries in which cultivation by small proprietors still continues,
population increases regularly and rapidly until it has attained its
natural limits; that is to say, inheritances continue to be divided and
subdivided among several sons, as long as, by an increase of labour,
each family can extract an equal income from a smaller portion of land.
A father who possessed a vast extent of natural pasture, divides it
among his sons, and they turn it into fields and meadows; Edition:
current; Page: [285] his sons divide it among their sons, who abolish
fallows: each improvement in agricultural knowledge admits of another
step in the subdivision of property. But there is no danger lest the
proprietor should bring up his children to make beggars of them. He
knows exactly what inheritance he has to leave them; he knows that the
law will divide it equally among them; he sees the limit beyond which
this division would make them descend from the rank which he has himself
filled, and a just family pride, common to the peasant and to the
nobleman, makes him abstain from summoning into life, children for whom
he cannot properly provide. If more are born, at least they do not
marry, or they agree among themselves, which of several brothers shall
perpetuate the family. It is not found that in the Swiss Cantons, the
patrimonies of the peasants are ever so divided as to reduce them below
an honourable competence; though the habit of foreign service, by
opening to the children a career indefinite and uncalculable, sometimes
calls forth a super-abundant population.”*

There is similar testimony respecting Norway. Though there is no law or
custom of primogeniture, and no manufactures to take off a surplus
population, the subdivision of property is not carried to an injurious
extent. “The division of the land among children,” says Mr. Laing,†
“appears not, during the thousand years it has been in operation, to
have had the effect of reducing the landed properties to the minimum
size that will barely support human existence. I have counted from
five-and-twenty to forty cows upon farms, and that in a country in which
the farmer must, for at least seven months in the year, have winter
provender and houses provided for all the cattle. It is evident that
some cause or other, operating on aggregation of landed property,
counteracts the dividing effects of partition among children. That cause
can be no other than what I have long conjectured would be effective in
such a social arrangement; viz. that in a country where land is held,
not in tenancy merely, as in Ireland, but in full ownership, its
aggregation by the deaths of co-heirs, and by the marriages of ithei
female heirs among the body of landholders, will balance its subdivision
by the equal succession of children. The whole mass of property will, I
conceive, be found in such a state of society to consist of as many
estates of the class of 1000l., as many of 100l., as many of 10l., a
year, at one period as janother.” That this should happen, supposes
diffused through society a very efficacious prudential check to
population; and it is reasonable to give part of the credit of this
prudential restraint to the peculiar adaptation of the
peasant-proprietary system for fostering it.

Edition: current; Page: [286]
k“In some parts of Switzerland,” says Mr. Kay,* “as in the canton of
Argovie for instance, a peasant never marries before he attains the age
of twenty-five years, and generally much later in life; and in that
canton the women very seldom marry before they have attained the age of
thirty. . . . Nor do the division of land and the cheapness of the mode
of conveying it from one man to another, encourage the providence of the
labourers of the rural districts only. They act in the same manner,
though perhaps in a less degree, upon the labourers of the smaller
towns. In the smaller provincial towns it is customary for a labourer to
own a small plot of ground outside the town. This plot he cultivates in
the leveningl as his kitchen garden. He raises in it vegetables and
fruits for the use of his family during the winter. After his day’s work
is over, he and his family repair to the garden for a short time, which
they spend in planting, sowing, weeding, or preparing for sowing or
harvest, according to the season. The desire to become possessed of one
of these gardens operates very strongly in strengthening prudential
habits and in restraining improvident marriages. Some of the
manufacturers in the canton of Argovie told me that a townsman was
seldom contented until he had bought a garden, or a garden and house,
and that the town labourers generally deferred their marriages for some
years, in order to save enough to purchase either one or both of these
luxuries.”

The same writer shows by statistical evidence† that in Prussia the
average age of marriage is not only much later than in England, but “is
gradually becoming later than it was formerly,” while at the same time
“fewer illegitimate children are born in Prussia than in any other of
the European countries.” “Wherever I travelled,” says Mr. Kay,‡ “in
North Germany and Switzerland, I was assured by all that the desire to
obtain land, which was felt by all the peasants, was acting as the
strongest possible check upon undue increase of population.”§k

Edition: current; Page: [287]
mIn Flanders, according to Mr. Fauche, the British Consul at Ostend,*
“farmers’ sons and those who have the means to become farmers will delay
their marriage until they get possession of a farm.” Once a farmer, the
next object is to become a proprietor. “The first thing a Dane does with
his savings,” says Mr. Browne, the Consul at Copenhagen,† “is to
purchase a clock, then a horse and cow, which he hires out, and which
pays a good interest. Then his ambition is to become a petty proprietor,
and this class of persons is better off than any in Denmark. Indeed, I
know of no people in any country who have more easily within their reach
all that is really necessary for life than this class, which is very
large in comparison with that of labourers.”m

But the experience which most decidedly contradicts the asserted
tendency of peasant proprietorship to produce excess of population, is
the case of France. In that country the experiment is nnot tried in the
most favourablen circumstanceso, a large proportion of the properties
being too smallo. The number of landed proprietors in France is not
exactly ascertained, but on no estimate does it fall much short of five
millions; which, on the lowest calculation of the number of persons pofp
a family (and for France it ought to be a low calculation), shows much
more than half the population as either possessing, or entitled to
inherit, landed property. A majority of the properties are qso small as
notq to afford a subsistence to the proprietors, of whom, according to
some computations, as many as three millions are obliged to eke out
their means of support either by working for hire, or by taking
additional land, generally on metayer tenure. When the property
possessed is not sufficient to relieve the possessor from dependence on
wages, the condition of a proprietor loses much of its characteristic
efficacy as a check to over-population: and if the prediction so often
made in England had been realized, and France had become a “pauper
warren,” the experiment would have proved nothing against the tendencies
of the same system of agricultural economy in other circumstances. But
what is the fact? That the rate of increase of the French population is
the slowest in Europe. During the generation which the Revolution raised
from the extreme of hopeless wretchedness to sudden abundance, a great
increase of population took place. But a generation has grown up, which,
having been born in improved circumstances, has not learnt to be
miserable; and upon them the spirit of thrift operates most
conspicuously, in keeping the increase Edition: current; Page: [288] of
population within the increase of national wealth. In a table, drawn up
by Professor Rau,* r of the rate of annual increase of the populations
Edition: current; Page: [289] of various countries, that of France, from
1817 to 1827, is stated at 63/100 per cent, that of England during a
similar decennial period being 16/10 annually, and that of the United
States nearly 3. According to the official returns as analysed by M.
Legoyt,* the increase of the population, which from 1801 to 1806 was at
the rate of 1.28 per cent annually, averaged only 0.47 per cent from
1806 to 1831; from 1831 to 1836 it averaged 0.60 per cent; from 1836 to
1841, 0.41 per cent, and from 1841 to 1846, 0.68 per scent.†s tAt the
census of 1851 the rate of annual increase shown was only 1.08 per cent
uinu the five years, or 0.21 annually; and at the census of 1856 only
0.71 per cent in five years, or 0.14 annually: so that, in the words of
M. de Lavergne, “la population ne s’accroît presque plus en France.”‡t
Even this slow increase is wholly the effect of a diminution of deaths;
the number of births not increasing at all, while the proportion of the
births to the population is constantly diminishing.§ This Edition:
current; Page: [290] slow growth of the numbers of the people, while
capital increases much more rapidly, has caused a noticeable improvement
in the condition of the labouring class. The circumstances of that
portion of the class who are landed proprietors are not easily
ascertained with precision, being of course extremely variable; but the
mere labourers, who derived no direct benefit from the changes in landed
property which took place at the Revolution, have unquestionably much
improved in condition since that period.* vDr.v Edition: current; Page:
[291] Rau testifies to a similar fact in the case of another country in
which the subdivision of wthew land is xprobablyx excessive, the
Palatinate.*

I am not aware of a single authentic instance which supports the
assertion that rapid multiplication is promoted by peasant properties.
Instances may undoubtedly be cited of its not being prevented by them,
and one of the principal of these is Belgium; the yprospectsy of which,
in respect to population, zare at present a matter of considerable
uncertaintyz. Belgium has the most rapidly increasing population on the
Continent; and when the circumstances of the country require, as they
must soon do, that this Edition: current; Page: [292] rapidity should be
checked, there will be a considerable strength of existing habit to be
broken through. One of the unfavourable circumstances is the great power
possessed over the minds of the people by the Catholic priesthood, whose
influence is aeverywhere strongly exerted against restraininga
population. As yet, however, it must be remembered that the
indefatigable industry and great agricultural skill of the people have
rendered the existing rapidity of increase practically innocuous; the
great number of large estates still undivided affording by their gradual
dismemberment, a resource for the necessary augmentation of the gross
produce; and there are, besides, many blargeb manufacturing towns, and
mining and coal districts, which attract and employ a cconsiderablec
portion of the annual increase of population.

§ 5. [Their effect on the subdivision of land] But even where peasant
properties are accompanied by an excess of numbers, this evil is not
necessarily attended with the additional economical disadvantage of too
great a subdivision of the land. It does not follow because landed
apropertya is minutely divided, that bfarmsb will be so. As large
properties are perfectly compatible with small farms, so are small
properties with farms of an adequate size; and a subdivision of
occupancy is not an inevitable consequence of even undue multiplication
among peasant proprietors. As might be expected from their admirable
intelligence in things relating to their occupation, the Flemish
peasantry have long learnt this lesson. “The habit of not dividing
properties,” says cDr.c Rau,* “and the opinion that this is
advantageous, have been so completely preserved in Flanders, that even
now, when a peasant dies leaving several children, they do not think of
dividing his patrimony, though it be neither entailed nor settled in
trust; they prefer selling it entire, and sharing the proceeds,
considering it as a jewel which loses its value when it is divided.”
That the same feeling must prevail widely even in France, is shown by
the great frequency of sales of land, amounting in ten years to a fourth
part of the whole soil of the country: and M. Passy, in his tract “On
the Changes in the Agricultural Condition of the Department of the Eure
since the year 1800,”† states other Edition: current; Page: [293] facts
tending to the same conclusion. “The example,” says he, “of this
department attests that there does not exist, as some writers have
imagined, between the distribution of property and that of cultivation,
a connexion which tends invincibly to assimilate them. In no portion of
it have changes of ownership had a perceptible influence on the size of
holdings. While, in districts of small farming, lands belonging to the
same owner are ordinarily distributed among many tenants, so neither is
it uncommon, in places where the grande culture prevails, for the same
farmer to rent the lands of several proprietors. In the plains of Vexin,
in particular, many active and rich cultivators do not content
themselves with a single farm; others add to the lands of their
principal holding, all those in the neighbourhood which they are able to
hire, and in this manner make up a total extent which in some cases
reaches or exceeds two hundred hectares” (five hundred English acres).
“The more the estates are dismembered, the more frequent do this sort of
arrangements become: and as they conduce to the interest of all
concerned, it is probable that time will confirm them.”

d“In some places,” says M. de Lavergne,* “in the neighbourhood of Paris,
for example, where the advantages of the grande culture become evident,
the size of farms tends to increase, several farms are thrown together
into one, and farmers enlarge their holdings by renting parcelles from a
number of different proprietors. Elsewhere farms as well as properties
of too great extent, tend to division. Cultivation spontaneously finds
out the organization which suits it best.” It is a striking fact, stated
by the same eminent writer,† that the departments which have the
greatest number of small côtes foncières, are the Nord, the Somme, the
Pas de Calais, the Seine Inférieure, the Aisne, and the Oise; all of
them among the richest and best cultivated, and the first-mentioned of
them the very richest and best cultivated, in France.d

Undue subdivision, and excessive smallness of holdings, are undoubtedly
a prevalent evil in some countries of peasant proprietors, and
particularly in parts of Germany and France. The governments of Bavaria
and Nassau have thought it necessary to impose a legal limit to
subdivision, and the Edition: current; Page: [294] Prussian Government
unsuccessfully proposed the esame measuree to the fEstatesf of its
Rhenish Provinces. But I do not think it will anywhere be found that the
petite culture is the system of the peasants, and the grande culture
that of the great landlords: on the contrary, wherever the small
properties are divided among too many proprietors, I believe it to be
true that the large properties also are parcelled out among too many
farmers, and that the cause is the same in both cases, a backward state
of capital, skill, and agricultural enterprise. There is reason to
believe that the subdivision in France is not more excessive than is
accounted for by this cause; that it is diminishing, not increasing; and
that the terror expressed in some quarters, at the progress of the
morcellement, is one of the most groundless of real or pretended
panics.*

If peasant properties have any effect in promoting subdivision beyond
the Edition: current; Page: [295] degree which corresponds to the
agricultural practices of the country, and which is customary on its
large estates, the cause must lie in one of the salutary influences of
the system; the eminent degree in which it promotes providence on the
part of those who, not being yet peasant proprietors, hope to become so.
In England, where the gagriculturalg labourer has no investment for his
savings but the savings bank, and no position hto which he can riseh by
any exercise of economy, except perhaps that of a petty shopkeeper, with
its chances of bankruptcy, there is nothing at all resembling the
intense spirit of thrift which takes possession of ione who,i from being
a day labourer, can raise himself by saving to the condition of a landed
proprietor. According to almost all authorities, the real cause of the
morcellement is the higher price which can be obtained for land by
selling it to the peasantry, as an investment for their small
accumulations, than by disposing of it entire to some rich purchaser who
has no object but to live on its income, without improving it. The hope
of obtaining such an investment is the most powerful of inducements, to
those who are without land, to practice the industry, frugality, and
self-restraint, on which their success in this object of jambition is
dependent.k

As the result of this enquiry into the direct operation and indirect
influences of peasant properties, I conceive it to be established, that
there is no necessary connexion between this form of landed property and
an imperfect state of the arts of production; that it is favourable in
quite as many respects as it is unfavourable, to the most effective use
of the powers of the soil; that no other existing state of agricultural
economy has so beneficial an effect on the industry, the intelligence,
the frugality, and prudence of the population, nor tends on the whole so
much to discourage an improvident increase of their numbers; and that no
lexisting statel, therefore, is on the whole so favourable mboth to
their moral and ntheir Edition: current; Page: [296] physical welfare.
oCompared with the English system of cultivation by hired labour, it
must be regarded as eminently beneficial to the labouring class.* We are
not on the present occasion called upon to compare it with the joint
ownership of the land by associations of labourers.o

Edition: current; Page: [297]


CHAPTER VIII: Of Metayers

§ 1. [Nature of the metayer system, and its varieties] From the case in
which the produce of land and labour belongs undividedly to the
labourer, we proceed to the cases in which it is divided, but between
two classes only, the labourers and the landowners: the character of
acapitalistsa merging in the one or the other, as the case may be. It is
possible indeed to conceive that there might be only two classes of
persons to share the produce, and that a class of capitalists might be
one of them; the character of labourer and that of landowner being
united to form the other. This might occur in two ways. The labourers,
though owning the land, might let it to a tenant, and work under him as
hired servants. But this arrangement, even in the very rare cases which
could give rise to it, would not require any particular discussion,
since it would not differ in any material respect from the threefold
system of labourers, capitalists, and landlords. The other case is the
not uncommon one, in which a peasant proprietor owns and cultivates the
land, but raises the little capital required, by a mortgage upon it.
Neither does this case present any important peculiarity. There is but
one person, the peasant himself, who has any right or power of
interference in the management. He pays a fixed annuity as interest to a
capitalist, as he pays another fixed sum in taxes to the government.
Without dwelling further on these cases, we pass to those which bpresent
marked features of peculiarity.

When the two parties sharing in the produce are the labourer or
labourers and the landowner, it is not a very material circumstance in
the case, which of the two furnishes the stock, or whether, as sometimes
happens, they furnish it, in a determinate proportion, between them. The
essential difference does not lie in this, but in another circumstance,
namely, whether the division of the produce between the two is regulated
by custom or by competition. We will begin with the former case; of
which the metayer culture is the principal, and in Europe almost the
sole, example.

The principle of the metayer system, is that the labourer, or peasant,
makes his engagement directly with the landowner, and pays, not a fixed
rent, either in money or in kind, but a certain proportion of the
produce, Edition: current; Page: [298] or rather of what remains of the
produce after deducting what is considered necessary to keep up the
stock. The proportion is usually, as the name imports, one-half; but in
several districts in Italy it is two-thirds. Respecting the supply of
stock, the custom varies from place to place; in some places the
landlord furnishes the whole, in others half, in others some particular
part, as for instance the cattle and seed, the labourer providing the
implements.* “This connexion,” says Sismondi, speaking chiefly of
Tuscany,† “is often the subject of a contract, to define certain
services and certain occasional payments to which the metayer binds
himself; nevertheless the differences in the obligations of one such
contract and another are inconsiderable; usage governs alike all these
engagements, and supplies the stipulations which have not been
expressed; and the landlord who attempted to depart from usage, who
exacted more than his neighbour, who took for the basis of the agreement
anything but the equal division of the crops, would render himself so
odious, he would be so sure of not obtaining a metayer who was an honest
man, that the contract of all the metayers may be considered as
identical, at least in each province, and never gives rise to any
competition among peasants in search of cemployment, or any offer to
cultivate the soil on cheaper terms than one another.” To the same
effect Châteauvieux,‡ speaking of the metayers of Piedmont. “They
consider it,” (the farm) “as a patrimony, and never think of renewing
the lease, but go on from generation to generation, on the same terms,
without writings or registries.”§

Edition: current; Page: [299]
§ 2. [Its advantages and inconveniences] When the partition of the
produce is a matter of fixed usage, not of varying convention, political
economy has no laws of distribution to investigate. It has only to
consider, as in the case of peasant proprietors, the effects of the
system first on the condition of the peasantry, morally and physically,
and secondly, on the efficiency of athea labour. In both these
particulars the metayer system has the characteristic advantages of
peasant properties, but has them in a less degree. The metayer has less
motive to exertion than the peasant proprietor, since only half the
fruits of his industry, instead of the whole, are his own. But he has a
much stronger motive than a day labourer, who has no other interest in
the result than not to be dismissed. If the metayer cannot be turned out
except for some violation of his contract, he has a stronger motive to
exertion than any tenant-farmer who has not a lease. The metayer is at
least his landlord’s partner, and a half-sharer in their joint gains.
Where, too, the permanence of his tenure is guaranteed by custom, he
acquires local attachments, and much of the feelings of a proprietor. I
am supposing that bthisb half produce is sufficient to yield him a
comfortable support. Whether it is so, depends (in any given state of
agriculture) on the degree of subdivision of the land; which depends on
the operation of the population principle. A multiplication of people,
beyond the number that can be properly supported on the land or taken
off by manufactures, is incident even to a peasant proprietary, and of
course not less but rather more incident to a metayer population. The
tendency, however, which we noticed in the proprietary system, to
promote prudence on this point, is in no small degree common to it with
the metayer system. There, also, it is a matter of easy and exact
calculation whether a family can be supported or not. If it is easy to
see whether the owner of the whole produce can increase the production
so as to maintain a greater number of persons equally well, it is a not
less simple problem whether the owner of half the produce can do so.*
There is one check which this system seems to Edition: current; Page:
[300] offer, over and above those held out even by the proprietary
system; there is a landlord, who may exert a controlling power, by
refusing his consent to a subdivision. I do not, however, attach great
importance to this check, because the farm may be loaded with
superfluous hands without being subdivided; and because, so long as the
increase of hands increases the gross produce, which is almost always
the case, the landlord, who receives half the produce, is an immediate
gainer, the inconvenience falling only on the labourers. The landlord is
no doubt liable in the end to suffer from their poverty, by being forced
to make advances to them, especially in bad seasons; and a foresight of
this ultimate inconvenience may operate beneficially on such landlords
as prefer future security to present profit.

The characteristic disadvantage of the metayer system is very fairly
stated by Adam Smith. After pointing out that metayers “have a plain
interest that the whole produce should be as great as possible, in order
that their own proportion may be so,” he continues,* “it could never,
however, be the interest of this species of cultivators to lay out, in
the further improvement of the land, any part of the little stock which
they might save from their own share of the produce, because the lord
who laid out nothing, was to get one-half of whatever it produced. The
tithe, which is but a tenth of the produce, is found to be a very great
hindrance to improvement. A tax, therefore, which amounted to one-half,
must have been an effectual bar to it. It might be the interest of a
metayer to make the land produce as much as could be brought out of it
by means of the stock furnished by the proprietor; but it could never be
his interest to mix any part of his own with it. In France, where five
parts out of six of the whole Edition: current; Page: [301] kingdom are
said to be still occupied by this species of cultivators, the
proprietors complain that their metayers take every opportunity of
employing the master’s cattle rather in carriage than in cultivation;
because in the one case they get the whole profits to themselves, in the
other they share them with their landlord.”

It is indeed implied in the very nature of the tenure, that all
improvements which require expenditure of capital must be made with the
capital of the landlord. This, however, is essentially the case even in
England, whenever the farmers are tenants-at-will: or (if Arthur Young
is right) even on a “nine years’ lease.” If the landlord is willing to
provide capital for improvements, the metayer has the strongest interest
in promoting them, since half the benefit of them will accrue to
himself. As however the perpetuity of tenure which, in the case cwe are
discussing, he enjoys by custom, renders his consent a necessary
condition; the spirit of routine, and dislike of innovation,
characteristic of an agricultural people when not corrected by
education, are no doubt, as the advocates of the system seem to admit, a
serious hindrance to dimprovementd.

§ 3. [Evidence concerning its effects in different countries] The
metayer system has met with no mercy from English authorities. “There is
not one word to be said in favour of the practice,” says Arthur Young,*
aand a “thousanda arguments that might be used against it. The hard plea
of necessity can alone be urged in its favour; the poverty of the
farmers being so great, that the landlord must stock the farm, or it
could not be stocked at all: this is a most cruel burden to a
proprietor, who is thus obliged to run much of the hazard of farming in
the most dangerous of all methods, that of trusting his property
absolutely in the hands of people who are generally ignorant, many
careless, and some undoubtedly wicked. . . . In this most miserable of
all the modes of letting land, the defrauded landlord receives a
contemptible rent; the farmer is in the lowest state of poverty; the
land is miserably cultivated; and the nation suffers as severely as the
parties themselves. . . . Wherever† this system prevails, it may be
taken for granted that a useless and miserable population is found. . .
. Wherever the country (that I saw) is poor and unwatered, in the
Milanese, it is in the hands of metayers:” they are almost always in
debt to their landlord for seed or food, and “their condition is more
wretched than that of a day labourer. . . . There ‡are but few
districts” (in Italy) “where lands are let Edition: current; Page: [302]
to the occupying tenant at a money-rent; but wherever it is found, their
crops are greater; a clear proof of the imbecility of the metaying
system.” “Wherever it” (the bmetayerb system) “has been adopted,” says
Mr. M‘Culloch,* “it has put a stop to all improvement, and has reduced
the cultivators to the most abject poverty.” Mr. Jones† shares the
common opinion, and quotes Turgot and Destutt-Tracy in support of it.
The impression, however, of all these writers (notwithstanding Arthur
Young’s occasional references to Italy) seems to be chiefly derived from
France, and France before the Revolution.‡ Now the situation of French
metayers under the old régime by no means represents the typical form of
the contract. It is essential to that form, that the proprietor pays all
the taxes. But in France the exemption of the noblesse from direct
taxation had led the Government to throw the whole burthen of their
ever-increasing fiscal exactions upon the occupiers: and it is to these
exactions that Turgot ascribed the extreme wretchedness of the metayers:
a wretchedness in some cases so excessive, that in Limousin and
Angoumois (the provinces which he administered) they had seldom more,
according to him, after deducting all burthens, than from twenty-five to
thirty livres (20 to 24 shillings) per head for their whole annual
consumption: “je ne dis pas en argent, mais en comptant tout ce qu’ils
consomment en nature sur ce qu’ils ont récolté.”§ Edition: current;
Page: [303] When we add that they had not the virtual fixity of tenure
of the metayers of Italy, (“in Limousin,” says Arthur Young,* “the
metayers are considered as little better than menial servants, removable
at pleasure, and obliged to conform in all things to the will of the
landlords,”) it is evident that their case affords no argument against
the metayer system in its better form. A population who could call
nothing their own, who, like the Irish cottiers, could not in any
contingency be worse off, had nothing to restrain them from multiplying,
and subdividing the land, until stopped by actual starvation.

We shall find a very different picture, by the most accurate
authorities, of the metayer cultivation of Italy. In the first place, as
to subdivision. In Lombardy, according to Châteauvieux,† there are few
farms which exceed cfiftyc acres, and few which have less than ten.
These farms are all occupied by metayers at half profit. They invariably
display “an extent‡ and a richness in buildings drarelyd known in any
other country in Europe.” Their plan “affords the greatest room with the
least extent of building; is best adapted to arrange and secure the
crop; and is, at the same time, the most economical, and the least
exposed to accidents by fire.” The court-yard “exhibits a whole so
regular and commodious, and a system of such care and good order, that
our dirty and ill-arranged farms can convey no adequate idea of.” The
same description applies to Piedmont. The rotation of crops is
excellent. “I should think§ no country can bring so large a portion of
its produce to market as Piedmont.” Though the soil is not naturally
very fertile, “the number of cities is prodigiously great.” The
agriculture must, therefore, be eminently favourable to the net as well
as to the gross produce of the land. “Each plough works thirty-two acres
in the season. . . . Nothing can be more perfect or neater than the
hoeing and moulding up the maize, when in full growth, by a single
plough, with a pair of oxen, without injury to a single plant, while all
the weeds are effectually destroyed.” So much for agricultural skill.
“Nothing can be so excellent as the crop which precedes and that which
follows it.” The wheat “is thrashed by a cylinder, drawn by a horse, and
guided by a boy, while the labourers turn over the straw with forks.
This process lasts nearly a fortnight; it is quick and economical, and
completely gets out the grain. . . . . In no part of the world are the
economy and ethee management of the land Edition: current; Page: [304]
better understood than in Piedmont, and this explains the phenomenon of
its great population, and immense export of provisions.” All this under
metayer cultivation.

Of the valley of the Arno, in its whole extent, both above and below
Florence, the same writer thus speaks:*—“Forests of olive-trees covered
the lower parts of the mountains, and by their foliage concealed an
infinite number of small farms, which peopled these parts of the
mountains; chestnut-trees raised their heads on the higher slopes, their
healthy verdure contrasting with the pale tint of the olive-trees, and
spreading a brightness over this amphitheatre. The road was bordered on
each side with village-houses, not more than a hundred paces from each
other. . . . . They are placed at a little distance from the road, and
separated from it by a wall, and a terrace of some feet in extent. On
the wall are commonly placed many vases of antique forms, in which
flowers, aloes, and young orange-trees are growing. The house itself is
completely covered with vines. . . . . . Before these houses we saw
groups of peasant females dressed in white linen, silk corsets, and
straw-hats, ornamented with flowers. . . . . These houses being so near
each other, it is evident that the land annexed to them must be small,
and that property, in these valleys, must be very much divided; the
extent of these domains being from three to ten acres. The land lies
round the houses, and is divided into fields by small canals, or rows of
trees, some of which are mulberry-trees, but the greatest number
poplars, the leaves of which are eaten by the cattle. Each tree supports
a vine. . . . . These divisions, farrayedf in oblong squares, are large
enough to be cultivated by a plough without wheels, and a pair of oxen.
There is a pair of goxeng between ten or twelve of the farmers; they
employ them successively in the cultivation of all the farms. . . . .
Almost every farm maintains a well-looking horse, which goes in a small
two-wheeled cart, neatly made, and painted red; they serve for all the
purposes of draught for the farm, and also to convey the farmer’s
daughters to mass and to balls. Thus, on holidays, hundreds of these
little carts are seen flying in all directions, carrying the young
women, decorated with flowers and ribbons.”

This is not a picture of poverty; and so far as agriculture is
concerned, it effectually redeems metayer cultivation, as existing in
these countries, from the reproaches of English writers; but with
respect to the condition of the cultivators, Châteauvieux’s testimony
is, in some points, not so favourable. “It is† neither the natural
fertility of the soil, nor the abundance Edition: current; Page: [305]
hwhichh strikes the eye of the traveller, which constitute the
well-being of its inhabitants. It is the number of individuals among
whom the total produce is divided, which fixes the portion that each is
enabled to enjoy. Here it is very small. I have thus far, indeed,
exhibited a delightful country, well watered, fertile, and covered with
a perpetual vegetation; I have shown it divided into countless
enclosures, which, like so many beds in a garden, display a thousand
varying productions; I have shown, that to all these enclosures are
attached well-built houses, clothed with vines, and decorated with
flowers; but, on entering them, we find a total want of all the
conveniences of life, a table more than frugal, and a general appearance
of privation.” Is not Châteauvieux here unconsciously contrasting the
condition of the metayers with that of the farmers of other countries,
when the proper standard with which to compare it is that of the
agricultural day-labourers?

Arthur Young says,* “I was assured that these metayers are (especially
near Florence) much at their ease; that on holidays they are dressed
remarkably well, and not without objects of luxury, as silver, gold, and
silk; and live well, on plenty of bread, wine, and legumes. In some
instances this may possibly be the case, but the general fact is
contrary. It is absurd to think that metayers, upon such a farm as is
cultivated by a pair of oxen, can live at their ease; and a clear proof
of their poverty is this, that the landlord, who provides half the live
stock, is often obliged to lend the peasant money to procure his half. .
. . . The metayers, not in the vicinity of the city, are so poor, that
landlords even lend them corn to eat: their food is black bread, made of
a mixture with vetches; and their drink is very little wine, mixed with
water, and called aquarolle; meat on Sundays only; their dress very
ordinary.” Mr. Jones admits the superior comfort of the metayers near
Florence, and attributes it partly to straw-platting, by which the women
of the peasantry can earn, according to Châteauvieux,† from fifteen to
twenty pence a day. But even this fact tells in favour of the metayer
system: for in those parts of England in which either straw-platting or
lace-making is carried on by the women iand childreni of the labouring
class, as in Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire, the condition of the
class is not better, but rather worse than elsewhere, the wages of
agricultural labour being depressed by a full equivalent.

In spite of Châteauvieux’s statement respecting the poverty of the
metayers, his opinion, in respect to Italy at least, is given in favour
of the system. “It occupies‡ and constantly interests the proprietors,
which is never the case with great proprietors who lease their estates
at fixed rents. It Edition: current; Page: [306] establishes a community
of interests, and relations of kindness between the proprietors and the
metayers; a kindness which I have often witnessed, and from which result
great advantages in the moral condition of society. The proprietor,
under this system, always interested in the success of the crop, never
refuses to make an advance upon it, which the land promises to repay
with interest. It is by these advances and by the hope thus inspired,
that the rich proprietors of land have gradually perfected the whole
rural economy of Italy. It is to them that it owes the numerous systems
of irrigation which water its soil, as also the establishment of the
terrace culture on the hills: gradual but permanent improvements, which
common peasants, for want of means, could never have affected, and which
could never have been accomplished by the farmers, nor by the great
proprietors who let their estates at fixed rents, because they are not
sufficiently interested. Thus the interested system forms of itself that
alliance between the rich proprietor, whose means provide for the
improvement of the culture, and the metayer whose care and flabourf are
directed, by a common interest, to make the most of these advances.”

But the testimony most favourable to the system is that of Sismondi,
which has the advantage of being specific, and from accurate knowledge;
his information being not that of a traveller, but of a resident
proprietor, intimately acquainted with rural life. His statements apply
to Tuscany generally, and more particularly to the Val di Nievole, in
which his own property lay, and which is not within the supposed
privileged circle immediately round Florence. It is one of the districts
in which the size of farms appears to be the smallest. The following is
his description of the dwellings and mode of life of the metayers of
that district.*

“Cette maison, bâtie en bonnes murailles à chaux et à ciment, a toujours
au moins un étage, quelquefois deux, au-dessus du rez-de-chaussée. Le
plus souvent on trouve à ce rez-de-chaussée la cuisine, une étable pour
deux bêtes à corne, et le magasin, qui prend son nom, tinaia, des
grandes cuves (tini) où l’on fait fermenter le vin, sans le soumettre au
pressoir: c’est là encore que le métayer enferme sous clé ses tonneaux,
son huile, et son blé. Presque toujours il possède encore un hangar
appuyé contre la maison, pour qu’il puisse y travailler à couvert à
raccommoder ses outils, ou à hacher le fourrage pour son bétail. Au
premier et au second étage sont deux, trois, et souvent quatre chambres
à lit. . . . La plus spacieuse et la mieux aérée de ces chambres est en
général destinée par le métayer, pendant les mois de Mai et de Juin, à
l’éducation des vers à soie: de grands coffres pour enfermer les habits
et le linge, et quelques chaises de bois, sont les Edition: current;
Page: [307] principaux meubles de ces chambres; mais une nouvelle épouse
y apporte toujours sa commode de bois de noyer. Les lits sont sans
rideaux, sans tour de lit; mais sur chacun, outre un bon garde-paille
rempli de la paille élastique du blé de Turquie, on voit un ou deux
matelas en laine, ou, chez les plus pauvres, en étoupe, une bonne
couverture piquée, des draps de forte toile de chanvre, et sur le
meilleur lit de la famille, un tapis de bourre de soie qu’on étale les
jours de fête. Il n’y a de cheminée qu’à la cuisine; dans la même pièce
on trouve toujours la grande table de bois où dîne la famille, avec ses
bancs; le grand coffre, qui sert en même temps d’armoire pour conserver
le pain et les provisions, et de pétrin; un assortiment assez complet et
fort peu coûteux de pots, de plats et d’assiettes en terre cuite; une ou
deux lampes de laiton, un poids à la romaine, et au moins deux cruches
en cuivre rouge pour puiser et pour conserver l’eau. Tout le linge et
tous les habits de travail de la famille ont été filés par les femmes de
la maison. Ces habits, tant pour les hommes que pour les femmes, sont de
l’étoffe qu’ils nomment mezza lana si elle est épaisse, mola si elle est
légere. La trame est un gros fil ou de chanvre ou kd’étoupek, le
remplissage est de laine ou de coton; elle est teinte par les mêmes
paysannes qui l’ont filée. On se figurerait difficilement combien, par
un travail assidu, les paysannes savent accumuler et de toile et de
mezza lana; combien de draps se trouvent au dépôt commun: combien chaque
membre de la famille a de chemises, de vestes, de pantalons, de jupons,
et de robes. Pour le faire comprendre, nous joignons en note une partie
de l’inventaire de la famille de paysans que nous connaissons le mieux;
elle n’est ni parmi les plus pauvres ni parmi les plus riches, et elle
vit heureuse par son travail sur la moitié des récoltes de moins de dix
arpens de terre.l *Cette épouse Edition: current; Page: [308] avait eu
50 écus de dot, dont 20 payés comptant, et le reste à terme, à 2 écus
par année. L’écu de Toscane vaut 6 francs. La dot la plus commune pour
les paysannes, dans le reste de la Toscane où les métairies sont plus
grandes, est de 100 écus, 600 francs.”

Is this poverty, or consistent with poverty? When a common, M. de
Sismondi even says the common, marriage portion of a metayer’s daughter
is 24l. English money, equivalent to at least 50l. in Italy and in that
rank of life; when one whose dowry is only half that amount, has the
mwardrobem described, which is represented by Sismondi as a fair
average; nthe class mustn be fully comparable, in general condition, to
a large proportion even of capitalist farmers in other ocountries;o and
incomparably above the day-labourers of any country, except a new
colony, or the United States. Very little can be inferred, against such
evidence, from a traveller’s impression of the poor quality of their
food. Its unexpensive character may be rather the effect of economy than
of necessity. Costly feeding is not the favourite luxury of a southern
people; their diet in all classes is principally vegetable, and no
peasantry on the Continent has the superstition of the English labourer
respecting white bread. But the nourishment of the Tuscan peasant,
according to Sismondi, “is wholesome and various: its basis is an
excellent wheaten bread, brown, but pure from bran and from all
mixture.” “Dans la mauvaise saison, il ne fait que deux repas par jour:
à dix heures du matin il mange sa pollenta, à l’entrée de la nuit il
mange la soupe, puis du pain avec quelque assaisonnement (companatico).
En été il fait trois repas, à huit heures, à une heure, et au soir, mais
il n’allume de feu qu’une seule fois par jour, pour son dîner, qui se
compose de soupe, puis d’un plat ou de viande salée ou de poisson sec,
ou de haricots, ou d’herbages, qu’il mange avec du pain. La viande salée
n’entre que pour une quantité bien minime dans cet ordinaire, car il
estime que quarante livres de porc salé par individu suffisent amplement
à sa provision de l’année; il en met deux fois par semaine un petit
morceau dans son potage. Le dimanche il a toujours sur sa table un plat
de viande fraîche, mais un morceau qui ne pèse qu’une livre ou une livre
et demie suffit à toute la famille, quelque nombreuse qu’elle soit. Il
ne faut point oublier que le paysan Toscan récolte en général de l’huile
d’olive pour son usage: il s’en sert, non seulement pour s’éclairer,
mais pour assaisonner tous les végétaux qu’il apprête pour sa table, et
qui deviennent ainsi bien plus savoureux et plus nutritifs. A déjeuner
il mange du pain, et quelquefois du fromage et des fruits; à souper, du
pain et de la salade. Sa boisson se compose du vin inférieur du pays, et
de la vinelle ou piquette fait d’eau fermentée sur le marc du raisin.
Edition: current; Page: [309] Il réserve cependant toujours quelque peu
de son meilleur vin pour le jour où il battra son grain, et pour
quelques fêtes qui se célébrent en famille. Il estime à dix barils de
vinelle par année (environ cinquante bouteilles) et à cinq sacs de
froment (environ mille livres de pain) la portion requise pour un homme
fait.”[*]

The remarks of Sismondi on the moral influences of this state of society
are not less worthy of attention. The rights and obligations of the
metayer being fixed by usage, and all taxes and rates being paid by the
proprietor, “le métayer a les avantages de la propriété sans
l’inconvénient de la défendre. C’est au propriétaire qu’avec la terre
appartient la guerre: pour lui il vit en paix avec tous ses voisins; il
n’a à leur égard aucun motif de rivalité ou de défiance; il conserve la
bonne harmonie avec eux, comme avec son maître, avec le fisc et avec
l’église: il vend peu, il achète peu, il touche peu d’argent, mais
personne ne lui en demande. On a souvent parlé du caractère doux et
bienveillant des Toscans, mais on n’a point assez remarqué la cause qui
a le plus contribué à préserver cette douceur: c’est celle qui a
soustrait tous les agriculteurs, formant plus des trois quarts de la
population, à presque toute occasion de querelle.”[†] The fixity of
tenure which the metayer, so long as he fulfils his known obligations,
possesses by usage, though not by law, gives him the local attachments,
and almost the strong sense of personal interest, characteristic of a
proprietor. “Le métayer vit sur sa métairie comme sur son héritage,
l’aimant d’affection, travaillant à la bonifier sans cesse, se confiant
dans l’avenir, et comptant bien que ses champs seront travaillés après
lui par ses enfans et les enfans de ses enfans. En effet, le plus grand
nombre des métayers vivent de génération en génération sur la même
terre; ils la connaissent en détail avec une précision que le sentiment
seul de la propriété peut donner. . . Les champs élevés en terrasses les
uns au-dessus des autres n’ont souvent pas plus de quatre pieds de
largeur, mais il n’y en a pas un dont le métayer n’ait étudié en quelque
sorte le caractère. Celui-ci est sec, celui-là froid et humide; ici la
terre est profonde, là ce n’est qu’une croûte qui couvre à peine le roc;
le froment prospère mieux sur l’un, le seigle sur l’autre; ici ce serait
peine perdue de semer du blé de Turquie, ailleurs la terre se refuse aux
fèves et aux lupins, plus loin le lin viendra à merveille, et le bord de
ce ruisseau sera propre au chanvre: ainsi l’on apprend du métayer, avec
étonnement, que dans une espace de dix arpens, le sol, les aspects, et
l’inclinaison du terrain, présentent plus de variété qu’un riche fermier
n’en sait en général distinguer dans une ferme de cinq cents acres
d’étendue. C’est que le dernier sent qu’il n’est là que de passage, que
de plus il doit se conduire par des règles générales, et negliger les
détails. Mais Edition: current; Page: [310] le métayer, avec
l’expérience du passé, a senti son intelligence éveillée par l’intérêt
et l’affection pour devenir le meilleur des observateurs, et avec tout
l’avenir devant lui, il ne songe pas à lui seulement, mais à ses enfans
et à ses petits enfans. Aussi lorsqu’il plante l’olivier, arbre
séculaire, et qu’il ménage au fond du creux qu’il fait pour lui un
écoulement aux eaux qui pourraient lui nuire, il étudie toutes les
couches de terrain qu’il est appelé à défoncer.”*

§ 4. [Is its abolition desirable?] I do not offer these quotations as
evidence of the intrinsic excellence of the metayer system; but they
surely suffice to prove that neither “land miserably cultivated” nor a
people in “the most abject poverty” have any necessary connexion with
it, and that the unmeasured vituperation lavished upon the system by
English writers, is grounded on an extremely narrow view of the subject.
I look upon the rural economy of Italy as simply so much additional
evidence in favour of small occupations with apermanenta tenure. It is
an example of what can be accomplished by those two elements, even under
the disadvantage of the peculiar nature of the metayer contract, in
which the motives to exertion on the part of the tenant are only half as
strong as if he farmed the land on the same footing of perpetuity at a
money-rent, either fixed, or varying according to some rule which would
leave to the tenant the whole benefit of his own exertions. The metayer
tenure is not one which we should be anxious to introduce where the
exigencies of society had not naturally given birth to it; but neither
ought we to be eager to abolish it on a mere à priori view of its
disadvantages. If the system in Tuscany works as well in Edition:
current; Page: [311] practice as it is represented to do, with every
appearance of minute knowledge, by so competent an authority as
Sismondi; if the mode of living of the people, and the size of farms,
have for ages maintained and still maintain themselves* such as they are
said to be by him, it were to be regretted that a state of rural
well-being so much beyond what is realized in most European countries,
should be put to hazard by an attempt to introduce, under the guise of
agricultural improvement, a system of money-rents and capitalist
farmers. Even where the metayers are poor, and the subdivision great, it
is not to be assumed as of course, that the change would be for the
better. The enlargement of farms, and the introduction of what are
called agricultural improvements, usually diminish the number of
labourers employed on the land; and unless the growth of capital in
trade and manufactures affords an opening for the displaced population,
or unless there bareb reclaimable wastes on which they can be located,
competition will so reduce wages, that they will probably be worse off
as day-labourers than they were as metayers.

Mr. Jones very properly objects against the French Economists of the
last century, that in pursuing their favourite object of introducing
money-rents, they turned their minds solely to putting farmers in the
place of metayers, instead of transforming the existing metayers into
farmers; which, as he justly remarks, can scarcely be effected, unless,
to enable the metayers to save and become owners of stock, the
proprietors submit for a considerable time to a diminution of income,
instead of expecting an increase of it, which has generally been their
immediate motive cforc making the attempt. If this transformation were
effected, and no other change made in the metayer’s condition; if,
preserving all the other rights which usage insures to him, he merely
got rid of the landlord’s claim to half the produce, paying in lieu of
it a moderate fixed rent; he would be so far in a better position than
at present, dasd the whole, instead of only half the fruits of any
improvement he made, would now belong to himself; but even so, the
benefit would not be without alloy; for a metayer, though not himself a
Edition: current; Page: [312] capitalist, ehas a capitalist for his
partner, and has the use, in Italy at least, of a considerable capital,
as is proved by the excellence of the farm buildings: and it is not
probable that the landowners would any longer consent to peril their
moveable property on the hazards of agricultural enterprise, when
assured of a fixed money income without it. Thus would the question
stand, even if the change left undisturbed the metayer’s virtual fixity
of tenure, and converted him, in fact, into a peasant proprietor at a
quitrent. But if we suppose him converted into a mere tenant,
displaceable at the landlord’s will, and liable to have his rent raised
by competition to any amount which any unfortunate being in search of
subsistence can be found to offer or promise for it; he would lose all
the features in his condition which preserve it from being deteriorated;
he would be cast down from his present position of a kind of half
proprietor of the land, and would sink into a cottier tenant.f

Edition: current; Page: [313]


CHAPTER IX: Of Cottiers

§ 1. [Nature and operation of cottier tenure] By the general appellation
of cottier tenure I shall designate all cases without exception in which
the labourer makes his contract for land without the intervention of a
capitalist farmer, and in which the conditions of the contract,
especially the amount of rent, are determined not by custom but by
competition. The principal European example of this tenure is Ireland,
and it is from that country that the term cottier is derived.* aBy far
the greater part of thea agricultural population of Ireland bmight until
very lately have beenb said to be cottier-tenants; except so far as the
Ulster tenant-right cconstitutedc an exception. There dwasd, indeed, a
numerous class of labourers who (we may presume through the refusal
either of proprietors or of tenants in possession to permit any further
subdivision) ehade been unable to obtain even the smallest patch of land
as permanent tenants. But, from the deficiency of capital, the custom of
paying wages in land fwasf so universal, that even those who gworkedg as
casual labourers for the cottiers or for such larger farmers as hwereh
found in the country, iwerei usually paid not in money, but by
permission to cultivate for the season a piece of ground, which jwasj
generally delivered to them by the farmer ready manured, and kwask known
by the name of conacre. For this they lagreedl to pay a money rent,
Edition: current; Page: [314] often of several pounds an acre, but no
money actually mpassedm, the debt being worked out in labour, at a money
valuation.n

The produce, on the cottier system, being divided into two portions,
rent, and the remuneration of the labourer; the one is evidently
determined by the other. The labourer has whatever the landlord does not
take: the condition of the labourer depends on the amount of rent. But
rent, being regulated by competition, depends upon the relation between
the demand for land, and the supply of it. The demand for land depends
on the number of competitors, and the competitors are the whole rural
population. The effect, therefore, of this tenure, is to bring the
principle of population to act directly on the land, and not, as in
England, on capital. Rent, in this state of things, depends on the
proportion between population and land. As the land is a fixed quantity,
while population has an unlimited power of increase; unless something
checks that increase, the competition for land soon forces up rent to
the highest point consistent with keeping the population alive. The
effects, therefore, of cottier tenure depend on the extent to which the
capacity of population to increase is controlled, either by custom, by
individual prudence, or by starvation and disease.

It would be an exaggeration to affirm, that cottier tenancy is
absolutely incompatible with a prosperous condition of the labouring
class. If we could suppose it to exist among a people to whom a high
standard of comfort was habitual; whose requirements were such, that
they would not offer a higher rent for land than would leave them an
ample subsistence, and whose moderate increase of numbers left no
unemployed population to force up rents by competition, save when the
increasing produce of the land from increase of skill would enable a
higher rent to be paid without inconvenience; the cultivating class
might be as well remunerated, might have as large a share of the
necessaries and comforts of life, on this system of tenure as on any
other. They would not, however, while their rents were arbitrary, enjoy
any of the peculiar advantages which metayers on the Tuscan system
derive from their connexion with the land. They would neither have the
use of a capital belonging to their landlords, nor would Edition:
current; Page: [315] the want of this be made up by the intense motives
to bodily and mental exertion which act upon the peasant who has oa
permanent tenureo. On the contrary, any increased value given to the
land by the exertions of the tenant, would have no effect but to raise
the rent against himself, either the next year, or at farthest when his
lease expired. The landlords might have justice or good sense enough not
to avail themselves of the advantage which competition would give them;
and different landlords would do so in different degrees. But it is
never safe to expect that a class or body of men will act pin
oppositionp to their immediate pecuniary interest; and even a doubt on
the subject would be almost as fatal as a certainty, for when a person
is considering whether qor not toq undergo a present exertion or
sacrifice for a comparatively remote future, the scale is turned by a
very small probability that the fruits of the exertion or of the
sacrifice will be taken away from him. The only safeguard against these
uncertainties would be the growth of a custom, insuring a permanence of
tenure in the same occupant, without liability to any other increase of
rent than might happen to be sanctioned by the general sentiments of the
community. The Ulster tenant-right is such a custom. The very
considerable sums which outgoing tenants obtain from their successors,
for the goodwill of their farms,* in the first place actually limit the
competition for land to persons who have such sums to offer: while the
same fact also proves that full advantage is not taken by the landlord
of even that more limited competition, since the landlord’s rent does
not amount to the whole of what the incoming tenant not only offers but
actually pays. He does so in the full confidence that the rent will not
be raised; and for this he has the guarantee of a custom, not recognised
by law, but deriving its binding force from another sanction, perfectly
well understood in Ireland.† Without one or other of these Edition:
current; Page: [316] supports, a custom limiting the rent of land is not
likely to grow up in any progressive community. If wealth and population
were stationary, rent also would generally be stationary, and after
remaining a long time unaltered, would probably come to be considered
unalterable. But all progress in wealth and population tends to a rise
of rents. Under a metayer system there is an established mode in which
the owner of land is sure of participating in the increased produce
drawn from it. But on the cottier system he can only do so by a
readjustment of the contract, while that readjustment, in a progressive
community, would almost always be to his advantage. His interest,
therefore, risr decidedly opposed to the growth of any custom commuting
rent into a fixed demand.

§ 2. [In an overpeopled country its necessary consequence is nominal
rents] Where the amount of rent is not limited, either by law or custom,
a cottier system has the disadvantages of the worst metayer system, with
scarcely any of the advantages by which, in the best forms of that
tenure, they are compensated. It is scarcely possible that cottier
agriculture should be other than miserable. There is not the same
necessity that the condition of the cultivators should be so. Since by a
sufficient restraint on population competition for land could be kept
down, and extreme poverty prevented; habits of prudence and a high
standard of comfort, once established, would have a fair chance of
maintaining themselves: though even in these favourable circumstances
the motives to prudence would be considerably weaker than in the case of
metayers, protected by custom (like those of Tuscany) from being
deprived of their afarmsa: since a metayer family, thus protected, could
not be impoverished by any other improvident multiplication than their
own, but a cottier family, however prudent and self-restraining, may
have the rent raised against it by the consequences of the
multiplication of other families. Any protection to the bcottiersb
against this evil could only be derived from a salutary sentiment of
duty or dignity, pervading the class. From this source, however, ctheyc
might derive considerable protection. If the habitual standard of
requirement among the class were high, a young man might not choose to
offer a rent which would leave him in a worse dconditiond than the
preceding tenant; or it might be the general custom, as it actually is
in some countries, not to marry until a farm eise vacant.

Edition: current; Page: [317]
But it is not where a high standard of comfort has rooted itself in the
habits of the labouring class, that we are ever called upon to consider
the effects of a cottier system. That system is found only where the
habitual requirements of the rural labourers are the lowest possible;
where as long as they are not actually starving, they will multiply: and
population is only checked by the diseases, and the shortness of life,
consequent on insufficiency of fmerelyf physical necessaries. This gwasg
the state of the largest portion of the Irish peasantry. When a people
have sunk into this state, and still more when they have been in it from
time immemorial, the cottier system is an almost insuperable obstacle to
their emerging from it. When the habits of the people are such that
their increase is never checked but by the impossibility of obtaining a
bare support, and when this support can only be obtained from land, all
stipulations and agreements respecting amount of rent are merely
nominal; the competition for land makes the tenants undertake to pay
more than it is possible they should pay, and when they have paid all
they can, more almost always remains due.

“As it may fairly be said of the Irish peasantry,” hsaidh Mr. Revans,
the Secretary to the Irish Poor Law Enquiry Commission,* “that every
family which has not sufficient land to yield its food has one or more
of its members supported by begging, it will easily be conceived that
every endeavour is made by the peasantry to obtain small holdings, and
that they are not influenced in their biddings by the fertility of the
land, or by their ability to pay the rent, but solely by the offer which
is most likely to gain them possession. The rents which they promise,
they are almost invariably incapable of paying; iandi consequently they
become indebted to those under whom they hold, almost as soon as they
take possession. They give up, in the shape of rent, the whole produce
of the land with the exception of a sufficiency of potatoes for a
subsistence; but as this is rarely equal to the promised rent, they
constantly have against them an increasing balance. In some cases, the
largest quantity of produce which their holdings ever yielded, or which,
under their system of tillage, they could in the most favourable seasons
be made to yield, would not be equal to the rent bid; consequently, if
the peasant fulfilled his engagement with his landlord, which he is
rarely able to accomplish, he would till the ground for nothing, and
give his landlord a premium for being allowed to till it. On the
seacoast, Edition: current; Page: [318] fishermen, and in the northern
counties those who have looms, frequently pay more in rent than the
market value of the whole produce of the land they hold. It might be
supposed that they would be better without land under such
circumstances. But fishing might fail during a week or two, and so might
the demand for the produce of the loom, when, did they not possess the
land upon which their food is grown, they might starve. The full amount
of the rent bid, however, is rarely paid. The peasant remains constantly
in debt to his landlord; his miserable possessions—the wretched clothing
of himself and of his family, the two or three stools, and the few
pieces of crockery, which his wretched hovel contains, would not, if
sold, liquidate the standing and generally accumulating debt. The
peasantry are mostly a year in arrear, and their excuse for not paying
more is destitution. Should the produce of the holding, in any year, be
more than usually abundant, or should the peasant by any accident become
possessed of any property, his comforts cannot be increased; he cannot
indulge in better food, nor in a greater quantity of it. His furniture
cannot be increased, neither can his wife or children be better clothed.
The acquisition must go to the person under whom he holds. The
accidental addition will enable him to reduce his arrear of rent, and
thus to defer ejectment. But this must be the bound of his expectation.”

As an extreme instance of the intensity of competition for land, and of
the monstrous height to which it occasionally fforcedf up the nominal
rent; we may cite from the evidence taken by Lord Devon’s Commission,*
ka fact attested by Mr. Hurly, Clerk of the Crown for Kerry: “I have
known a tenant bid for a farm that I was perfectly well acquainted with,
worth 50l. a year: I saw the competition get up to such an extent, that
he was declared the tenant at 450l.”

§ 3. [Nominal rents are inconsistent with industry, frugality, or
restraint on population] In such a condition, what can a tenant gain by
any amount of industry or prudence, and what lose by any recklessness?
If the landlord at any time exerted his full legal rights, the cottier
would not be able even to live. If by extra exertion he doubled the
produce of his bit of land, or if he prudently abstained from producing
mouths to eat it up, his only gain would be to have more left to pay ato
his landlorda; while, if he had twenty children, they would still be fed
first, and the landlord could only take what was left. Almost alone
bamongstb mankind the ccottier is in this condition, Edition: current;
Page: [319] that he can scarcely be either better or worse off by any
act of his own. If he dwered industrious or prudent, nobody but his
landlord would gain; if he is lazy eore intemperate, it is at his
landlord’s expense. A situation more devoid of motives to either labour
or self-command, imagination itself cannot conceive. The inducements of
free human beings are taken away, and those of a slave not substituted.
He has nothing to hope, and nothing to fear, except being dispossessed
of his holding, and against this he protects himself by the ultima ratio
of a defensive civil war. Rockism and Whiteboyism fweref the
determination of a people who ghadg nothing that hcouldh be called
theirs but a daily meal of the lowest description of food, not to submit
to being deprived of that for other people’s convenience.

Is it not, then, a bitter satire on the mode in which opinions are
formed on the most important problems of human nature and life, to find
ipublic instructors jof the greatest pretension,j imputing the
backwardness of Irish industry, and the want of energy of the Irish
people in improving their condition, to a peculiar indolence and
insouciance in the Celtic race? Of all vulgar modes of escaping from the
consideration of the effect of social and moral influences on the human
mind, the most vulgar is that of attributing the diversities of conduct
and character to inherent natural differences. What race would not be
indolent and insouciant when things are so arranged, that they derive no
advantage from forethought or exertion? If such are the arrangements in
the midst of which they live and work, what wonder if the listlessness
and indifference so engendered are not shaken off the first moment an
opportunity offers when exertion would really be of use? It is very
natural that a pleasure-loving and sensitively organized people like the
Irish, should be less addicted to steady routine labour than the
English, because life has more excitements for them independent of it;
but they are not less fitted for it than their Celtic brethren the
French, knork less so than the Tuscans, or the ancient Greeks. An
excitable organization is precisely that in which, by adequate
inducements, it is easiest to kindle a spirit of animated exertion. It
speaks nothing against the capacities of industry in human beings, that
they will not exert themselves lwithoutl motive. No labourers work
harder, in England or America, than the Irish; but not under a cottier
system.

§ 4. [Ryot tenancy of India] The multitudes who till the soil of India,
are in a condition sufficiently analogous to the cottier system, and at
the same time sufficiently different from it, to render the comparison
of the two Edition: current; Page: [320] a source of some instruction.
In most parts of India there are, and aperhaps havea always been, only
two contracting parties, the landlord and the peasant: the landlord
being generally the sovereign, except where he has, by a special
instrument, conceded his rights to an individual, who becomes his
representative. The payments, however, of the peasants, or ryots as they
are termed, have seldom if ever been regulated, as in Ireland, by
competition. Though the customs locally obtaining were infinitely
various, and though practically no custom bcould be maintainedb against
the sovereign’s will, there was always a rule of some sort common to a
neighbourhood; the collector did not make his separate bargain with
cthec peasant, but assessed each according to the rule adopted for the
rest. The idea was thus kept up of a right of property in the tenant, or
at all events, of a right to permanent possession; and the anomaly arose
of a fixity of tenure in the peasant-farmer, co-existing with an
arbitrary power of increasing the rent.

When the Mogul government substituted itself throughout the greater part
of India for the Hindoo rulers, it proceeded on a different principle. A
minute survey was made of the land, and upon that survey an assessment
was founded, fixing the specific payment due to the government from each
field. If this assessment had never been exceeded, the ryots would have
been in the comparatively advantageous position of peasant-proprietors,
subject to a heavy, but a fixed quit-rent. The absence, however, of any
real protection against illegal extortions, rendered this improvement in
their condition rather nominal than real; and, except during the
occasional accident of a humane and vigorous local administrator, the
exactions had no practical limit but the inability of the ryot to pay
more.

It was to this state of things that the English rulers of India
succeeded; and they were, at an early period, struck with the importance
of putting an end to this arbitrary character of the land-revenue, and
imposing a fixed limit to the government demand. They did not attempt to
go back to the Mogul valuation. It has been in general the very rational
practice of the English Government in India, to pay little regard to
what was laid down as the theory of the native institutions, but to
inquire into the rights which existed and were respected in practice,
and to protect and enlarge those. For a long time, however, it blundered
grievously about matters of fact, and grossly misunderstood the usages
and rights which it found existing. Its mistakes arose from the
inability of ordinary minds to imagine a state of social relations
fundamentally different from those with which they are practically
familiar. England being accustomed to great estates and great landlords,
the English rulers took it for granted that India must possess the like;
and looking round for some set of people who might be dtakend for the
objects of their search, they pitched upon a sort of tax-gatherers
called Edition: current; Page: [321] zemindars. “The zemindar,” says the
philosophical historian of India,* “had some of the attributes which
belong to a landowner; he collected the rents of a particular district,
he governed the cultivators of that district, lived in comparative
splendour, and his son succeeded him when he died. The zemindars,
therefore, it was inferred without delay, were the proprietors of the
soil, the landed nobility and gentry of India. It was not considered
that the zemindars, though they collected the rents, did not keep them;
but paid them all away with a small deduction to the government. It was
not considered that if they governed the ryots, and in many respects
exercised over them despotic power, they did not govern them as tenants
of theirs, holding their lands either at will or by contract under them.
The possession of the ryot was an hereditary possession; from which it
was unlawful for the zemindar to displace him; for every farthing which
the zemindar drew from the ryot, he was bound to account; and it was
only by fraud, if, out of all that he collected, he retained an ana more
than the small proportion which, as pay for collection, he was permitted
to receive.”

“There was an opportunity in India,” continues the historian, “to which
the history of the world presents not a parallel. Next after the
sovereign, the immediate cultivators had, by far, the greatest portion
of interest in the soil. For the rights (such as they were) of the
zemindars, a complete compensation might have easily been made. The
generous resolution was adopted, of sacrificing to the improvement of
the country, the proprietary rights of the sovereign. The motives to
improvement which property gives, and of which the power was so justly
appreciated, might have been bestowed upon those upon whom they would
have operated with a force incomparably greater than that with which
they could operate upon any other class of men: they might have been
bestowed upon those from whom alone, in every country, the principal
improvements in agriculture must be derived, the immediate cultivators
of the soil. And a measure worthy to be ranked among the noblest that
ever were taken for the improvement of any country, might have helped to
compensate the people of India for the miseries of that misgovernment
which they had so long endured. But the legislators were English
aristocrats; and aristocratical prejudices prevailed.”

The measure proved a total failure, as to the main effects which its
well-meaning promoters expected from it. Unaccustomed to estimate the
mode in which the operation of any given einstitutione is modified even
by such variety of circumstances as exists within a single kingdom, they
flattered themselves that they had created, throughout the Bengal
provinces, English landlords, and it proved that they had only created
Irish ones. The new Edition: current; Page: [322] landed aristocracy
disappointed every expectation built upon them. They did nothing for the
improvement of their estates, but everything for their own ruin. The
same pains not being taken, as fhadf been taken in Ireland, to enable
landlords to defy the consequences of their improvidence, gnearlyg the
whole land of Bengal had to be sequestrated and sold, for debts or
arrears of revenue, and in one generation hmost ofh the ancient
zemindars had ceased to exist. Other families, mostly the descendants of
Calcutta money dealers, ior of native officials who had enriched
themselves under the British government,i now occupy their place; and
live as useless drones on the soil which has been given up to them.
Whatever the government has sacrificed of its pecuniary claims, for the
creation of such a class, has at the best been wasted.j

In the parts of India into which the British rule has been more recently
introduced, the blunder has been avoided of endowing a useless body of
great landlords with gifts from the public revenuek. In most parts of
the Madras and in part of the Bombay Presidency, the rent is paid
directly to the government by the immediate cultivatorl. In the
North-Western Provinces, the government makes its engagement with the
village community collectively, determining the share to be paid by each
individual, but holding them jointly responsible for each other’s
defaultl. But ink the greater part of India, the immediate cultivators
have mnotm obtained a perpetuity of tenure at a fixed rent. The
government manages the land on the principle on which a good Irish
landlord manages his estate: not putting it up to competition, not
asking the cultivators what they will promise to pay, but determining
for itself what they can afford to pay, and defining its demand
accordingly. In nmany districts a portion of the cultivators are
considered as tenants of the rest, the government making its demand from
those only (often a numerous body) who are looked upon as the successors
of the original settlers or conquerors of the villagen. Sometimes the
rent is fixed Edition: current; Page: [323] only for one year, sometimes
for three or five; but the ouniformo tendency of ppresentp policy is
towards long leases, extending, in the northern provinces of India, to a
term of thirty yearsq. This arrangement has not existed for a sufficient
time to have shown by experience, how far the motives rto improvementr
which the long lease creates in the minds of the cultivators, fall short
of the sinfluence of a perpetual settlement.* But the two plans, of
annual settlements and of short leases, are irrevocably condemned. They
can only be said to have succeeded, in comparison with the unlimited
oppression which texistedt before. They are approved by nobody, and were
never looked upon in any other light than as temporary arrangements, to
be abandoned when a more complete knowledge of the capabilities of the
country should afford data for something more permanent.

Edition: current; Page: [324]


CHAPTER X: Means of Abolishing Cottier Tenancy

a§ 1. [Irish cottiers should be converted into peasant proprietors] When
the first edition of this work was written and published, the question,
what is to be done with a cottier population, was to the English
Government the most urgent of practical questions. The majority of a
population of eight millions, having long grovelled in helpless
inertness and abject poverty under the cottier system, reduced by its
operation to mere food of the cheapest description, and to an incapacity
of either doing or willing anything for the improvement of their lot,
had at last, by the failure of that lowest quality of food, been plunged
into a state in which the alternative seemed to be either death, or to
be permanently supported by other people, or a radical change in the
economical arrangements under which it had hitherto been their
misfortune to live. Such an emergency had compelled attention to the
subject from the legislature and from the nation, but it could hardly be
said with much result; for, the evil having originated in a system of
land tenancy which withdrew from the people every motive to industry or
thrift except the fear of starvation, the remedy provided by Parliament
was to take away even that, by conferring on them a legal claim to
eleemosynary support: while, towards correcting the cause of the
mischief, nothing was done, beyond vain complaints, though at the price
to the national treasury of ten millions sterling for the delay.

“It is needless,” (I observed) “to expend any argument in proving that
the very foundation of the economical evils of Ireland is the cottier
system; that while peasant rents fixed by competition are the practice
of the country, to expect industry, useful activity, any restraint on
population but death, or any the smallest diminution of poverty, is to
look for figs on thistles and grapes on thorns. If our practical
statesmen are not ripe for the recognition of this fact; or if while
they acknowledge it in theory, they have not a sufficient feeling of its
reality, to be capable of founding upon it any course of conduct; there
is still another, and a purely physical consideration, from which they
will find it impossible to escape. If the one crop on which the people
have hitherto supported themselves continues to be precarious, either
some new and great impulse must be given to Edition: current; Page:
[325] agricultural skill and industry, or the soil of Ireland can no
longer feed anything like its present population. The whole produce of
the western half of the island, leaving nothing for rent, will not now
keep permanently in existence the whole of its people: and they will
necessarily remain an annual charge on the taxation of the empire, until
they are reduced either by emigration or by starvation to a number
corresponding with the low state of their industry, or unless the means
are found of making that industry much more productive.”

Since these words were written, events unforeseen by any one have saved
the English rulers of Ireland from the embarrassments which would have
been the just bpenaltyb of their indifference and want of foresight.
Ireland, under cottier agriculture, could no longer supply food to its
population: Parliament, by way of remedy, applied a stimulus to
population, but none at all to production; the help, however, which had
not been provided for the people of Ireland by political wisdom, came
from an unexpected source. Self-supporting emigration—the Wakefield
system, brought into effect on the voluntary principle and on a gigantic
scale (the expenses of those who followed being paid from the earnings
of those who went before) hasc, for the present, reducedc the population
down to the number for which the existing agricultural system can find
employment and support. The census of 1851, compared with that of 1841,
showed in round numbers a diminution of population of a million and a
half. dThe subsequent census (of 1861) shows a further diminution of
about half a million.d The Irish having thus found the way to that
flourishing continent which for generations will be capable of
supporting in undiminished comfort the increase of the population of the
whole world; the peasantry of Ireland having learnt to fix their eyes on
a terrestrial paradise beyond the ocean, as a sure refuge both from the
oppression of the Saxon and from the tyranny of nature; there can be
little doubt that however much the employment for agricultural labour
may hereafter be diminished by the general introduction throughout
Ireland of English farming—or even if, like the county of Sutherland,
all Ireland should be turned into a grazing farm—the superseded people
would migrate to America with the same rapidity, and as free of cost to
the nation, as the million of Irish who ewente thither during the fthree
years previous to 1851f. Those who think that the land of a country
exists for the sake of a few thousand landowners, and that as long as
rents are paid, society and government have fulfilled their function,
may see in this consummation a happy end to Irish difficulties.

Edition: current; Page: [326]
But this is not a time, nor is the human mind now in a condition, in
which such insolent pretensions can be maintained. The land of Ireland,
the land of every country, belongs to the people of that country. The
individuals called landowners have no right, in morality and justice, to
anything but the rent, or compensation for its saleable value. With
regard to the land itself, the paramount consideration is, by what mode
of appropriation and of cultivation it can be made most useful to the
collective body of its inhabitants. To the owners of the rent it may be
very convenient that the bulk of the inhabitants, despairing of justice
in the country where they and their ancestors have lived and suffered,
should seek on another continent that property in land which is denied
to them at home. But the legislature of the empire ought to regard with
other eyes the forced expatriation of millions of people. When the
inhabitants of a country quit the country en masse because its
Government will not make it a place fit for them to live in, the
Government is judged and condemned. gThere is no necessity for depriving
the landlords of one farthing of the pecuniary value of their legal
rights; but justice requires that the actual cultivators should be
enabled to become in Ireland what they will become in
America—proprietors of the soil which they cultivate.

Good policy requires it no less. Those who, knowing neither Ireland nor
any foreign country, take as their sole standard of social and
economical excellence English practice, propose as the single remedy for
Irish wretchedness, the transformation of the cottiers into hired
labourers. But this is rather a scheme for the improvement of Irish
agriculture, than of the condition of the Irish people. The status of a
day-labourer has no charm for infusing forethought, frugality, or
self-restraint, into a people devoid of them. If the Irish peasantry
could be huniversallyh changed into receivers of wages, the ioldi habits
and mental characteristics of the people remaining, we should merely see
four or five millions of people living as day-labourers in the same
wretched manner in which as cottiers they lived before; equally passive
in the absence of every comfort, equally reckless in multiplication, and
even, perhaps, equally listless at their work; since they could not be
dismissed jin a bodyj, and if they could, dismissal would now be simply
remanding them to the poor-rate. Far other would be the effect of making
them peasant proprietors. A people who in industry and providence have
everything to learn—who are confessedly among the most backward of
European populations in the industrial virtues—require for their
regeneration the most powerful incitements by which those virtues can be
stimulated: and there is no stimulus as yet comparable to property
Edition: current; Page: [327] in land. A permanent interest in the soil
to those who till it, is almost a guarantee for the most unwearied
laboriousness: against over-population, thought not infallible, it is
the best preservative yet known, and where it failed, any other plan
would probably fail much more egregiously; the evil would be beyond the
reach of merely economic remedies.

The case of Ireland is similar in its requirements to that of India. In
India, though great errors have from time to time been committed, no one
ever proposed, under the name of agricultural improvement, to eject the
ryots or peasant farmers from their possession; kthe improvement that
has been looked for, has been through making their tenure more secure to
them, and the sole difference of opinion is between those who contend
for perpetuity, and those who think that long leases will suffice. The
same question exists as to Ireland: and it would be idle to deny that
long leases, under such landlords as are sometimes to be found do effect
wonders, even in Ireland. But then they must be leases at a low rent.
Long leases are in no way to be relied on for getting rid of cottierism.
During the existence of cottier tenancy, leases have always been long;
twenty-one years and three lives concurrent, was a usual term. But the
rent being fixed by competition, at a higher amount than could be paid,
so that the tenant neither had, nor could by any exertion acquire, a
beneficial interest in the land, the advantage of a lease was lnearlyl
nominal. In India, the government, where it has not imprudently made
over its proprietary rights to the zemindars, is able to prevent this
evil, because, being itself the landlord, it can fix the rent according
to its own judgment; but under individual landlords, while rents are
fixed by competition, and the competitors are a peasantry struggling for
subsistence, nominal rents are inevitable, unless the population is so
thin, that the competition itself is only nominal. The majority of
landlords will grasp at immediate money and immediate power; and so long
as they find cottiers eager to offer them everything, it is useless to
rely on them for tempering the vicious practice by a considerate
self-denial.

A perpetuity is a stronger stimulus to improvement than a long lease:
not only because the longest lease, before coming to an end, passes
through all the varieties of short leases down to no lease at all; but
for more fundamental reasons. It is very shallow, even in pure
economics, to take no account of the influence of imagination: there is
a virtue in “for ever” beyond the longest term of years; even if the
term is long enough to include children, and all whom a person
individually cares for, yet until he has reached that high degree of
mental cultivation at which the public good (which also includes
perpetuity) acquires a mparamountm ascendancy Edition: current; Page:
[328] over his feelings and desires, he will not exert himself with the
same ardour to increase the value of an estate, his interest in which
diminishes in value every year. Besides, while perpetual tenure is the
general rule of landed property, as it nis in all the countries of
Europe, a tenure for a limited period, however long, is sure to be
regarded as oao something of inferior consideration and dignity, and
inspires less of ardour to obtain it, and of attachment to it when
obtained. But where a country is under cottier tenure, the question of
perpetuity is quite secondary to the more important point, a limitation
of the rent. Rent paid by a capitalist who farms for profit, and not for
bread, may safely be abandoned to competition; rent paid by labourers
cannot, unless the labourers were in a state of civilization and
improvement which labourers have nowhere yet reached, and cannot easily
reach under such a tenure. Peasant rents ought never to be arbitrary,
never at the discretion of the landlord: either by custom or law, it is
imperatively necessary that they should be fixed; and where no mutually
advantageous custom, such as the metayer system of Tuscany, has
established itself, reason and experience recommend that they should be
fixed by authority: thus changing the rent into a quit-rent, and the
farmer into a peasant proprietor.

pFor carrying this change into effect on a sufficiently large scale to
accomplish the complete abolition of cottier tenancy, the mode which
most obviously suggests itself is the direct one of doing the thing
outright by Act of Parliament; making the whole land of Ireland the
property of the tenants, subject to the rents now really paid (not the
nominal qrentq), as a fixed rent charge. This, under the name of “fixity
of tenure,” was one of the demands of the Repeal Association during the
most successful period of their agitation; and was better expressed by
Mr. Conner, its earliest, most enthusiastic, and most indefatigable
apostle,* by the words, “a valuation and a perpetuity.” rIn such a
measure there would not shave beens any injustice, provided the
landlords were compensated for the present value of the chances of
increase which they tweret prospectively required to Edition: current;
Page: [329] forego. The rupture of existing social relations would
hardly uhave beenu more violent than that effected by the ministers
Stein and Hardenberg when, by a series of edicts, in the early part of
the present century, they revolutionized the state of landed property in
the Prussian monarchy, and left their names to posterity among the
greatest benefactors of their country. To enlightened foreigners writing
on Ireland, Von Raumer and Gustave de Beaumont, a remedy of this sort
vseemedv so exactly and obviously what the disease wrequiredw, that they
xhadx some difficulty in comprehending how it ywasy that the thing zwasz
not yet done.

aThis, however, would have been, in the first place,a a complete
expropriation of the higher classes of Ireland: which, if there is any
truth in the principles we have laid down, would be perfectly
warrantable, but only if it were the sole means of effecting a great
public good. In the second place, that there should be none but peasant
proprietors, is in itself far from desirable. Large farms, cultivated by
large bcapitalb, and owned by persons of the best education which the
country can give, persons qualified by instruction to appreciate
scientific discoveries, and able to bear the delay and risk of costly
experiments, are an important part of a good agricultural system. Many
such landlords there are even in Ireland; and it would be a public
misfortune to drive them from their cpostsc. A large proportion also of
the present holdings are dprobably stilld too small to try the
proprietary system under the greatest advantages; nor are the tenants
always the persons one would desire to select as the first occupants of
peasant-properties. There are numbers of them on whom it would have a
more beneficial effect to give them the hope of acquiring a landed
property by industry and frugality, than the property itself in
immediate possession.

eThere are, however, much milder measures, not open to similar
objections, ande which, if pushed to the utmost extent of which they are
susceptible, Edition: current; Page: [330] would realize in no
inconsiderable degree the object sought. One of them would be, to enact
that whoever reclaims waste land becomes the owner of it, at a fixed
quit-rent equal to a moderate interest on its mere value as waste. It
would of course be a necessary part of this measure, to make compulsory
on landlords the surrender of waste lands (not of an ornamental
character) whenever required for reclamation. fAnother expedient, and
one in which individuals could co-operate, would be to buy as much as
possible of the land offered for saleg, and sell it again in small
portions as peasant-properties. A Society for this purpose was hat one
timeh projected i(though the attempt to establish it proved
unsuccessful)i on the principles, so far as applicable, of the Freehold
Land Societies which have been so successfully established in England,
not primarily for agricultural, but for electoral purposes.

This is a mode in which private capital may be employed in renovating
the social and agricultural economy of Ireland, not only without
sacrifice but with considerable profit to its owners. The remarkable
success of the Waste Land Improvement Society, which proceeded on a plan
far less advantageous to the tenant, is an instance of what an Irish
peasantry can be stimulated to do, by a sufficient assurance that what
they do will be for their own advantage. It is not even indispensable to
adopt perpetuity as the rule; long leases at moderate rents, like those
of the Waste Land Society, would suffice, if a prospect were held out to
the farmers of being allowed to purchase their farms with the capital
which they might acquire, as the Society’s tenants were so rapidly
acquiring under the influence of its beneficent system.* When the lands
were sold, the funds of the association would be liberated, and it might
recommence operations in some other quarter.

Edition: current; Page: [331]
a§ 2. [bPresent state of this questionb] Thus far I had written in 1856.
cSince that time the great crisis of Irish industry has made further
progress, and it is necessary to consider how its present state affects
the opinions, on prospects or on practical measures, expressed in the
previous part of this chapter.

Edition: current; Page: [332]
The principal change in the situation consists in the great diminution,
holding out a hope of the entire extinction, of cottier tenure. The
enormous decrease in the number of small holdings, and increase in those
of a medium size, attested by the statistical returns, sufficiently
proves the general fact, and all testimonies show that the tendency
still continues.* It is Edition: current; Page: [333] probable that the
repeal of the corn laws, necessitating a change in the exports of
Ireland from the products of tillage to those of pasturage, would of
itself have sufficed to bring about this revolution in tenure. A grazing
farm can only be managed by a capitalist farmer, or by the landlord. But
a change involving so great a displacement of the population, has been
immensely facilitated and made more rapid by the vast emigration, as
well as by that greatest boon ever conferred on Ireland by any
Government, the Encumbered Estates Act; the best provisions of which
have since, through the Landed Estates Court, been permanently
incorporated into the social system of the country. The greatest part of
the soil of Ireland, there is reason to believe, is now farmed either by
the landlords, or by small capitalist farmers. That these farmers are
improving in circumstances, and accumulating capital, there is
considerable evidence, in particular the great increase of deposits in
the banks of which they are the principal customers. So far as that
class is concerned, the chief thing still wanted is security of tenure,
or assurance of compensation for improvements. The means of supplying
these wants are now engaging the attention of the most competent minds;
Judge Longfield’s address, in the autumn of 1864, and the sensation
created by it, are an era in the subject, and a point has now been
reached when we may confidently expect that within a very few years
something effectual will be done.

But what, meanwhile, is the condition of the displaced cottiers, so far
as they have not emigrated; and of the whole class who subsist by
agricultural labour, without the occupation of any land? As yet, their
state is one of great poverty, with but slight prospect of improvement.
Many wages, indeed, have risen much above the wretched level of a
generation ago: but the cost of subsistence has also risen so much above
the old potato standard, that the real improvement is not equal to the
nominal; and according to the best information to which I have access,
there is little appearance of an improved standard of living among the
class. The population, in fact, reduced though it be, is still far
beyond what the country Edition: current; Page: [334] can support as a
mere grazing district of England. It may not, perhaps, be strictly true
that, if the present number of inhabitants are to be maintained at home,
it can only be either on the old vicious system of cottierism, or as
small proprietors growing their own food. The lands which will remain
under tillage would, no doubt, if sufficient security for outlay were
given, admit of a more extensive employment of labourers by the small
capitalist farmers; and this, in the opinion of some competent judges,
might enable the country to support the present number of its population
in actual existence. But no one will pretend that this resource is
sufficient to maintain them in any condition in which it is fit that the
great body of the peasantry of a country should exist. Accordingly the
emigration, which for a time had fallen off, has, under the additional
stimulus of bad seasons, revived in all its strength. It is calculated
that within the year 1864 not less than 100,000 emigrants left the Irish
shores. As far as regards the emigrants themselves and their posterity,
or the general interests of the human race, it would be folly to regret
this result. The children of the immigrant Irish receive the education
of Americans, and enter, more rapidly and completely than would have
been possible in the country of their descent, into the benefits of a
higher state of civilization. In twenty or thirty years they are not
mentally distinguishable from other Americans. The loss, and the
disgrace, are England’s: and it is the English people and government
whom it chiefly concerns to ask themselves, how far it will be to their
honour and advantage to retain the mere soil of Ireland, but to lose its
inhabitants. With the present feelings of the Irish people, and the
direction which their hope of improving their condition seems to be
permanently taking, England, it is probable, has only the choice between
the depopulation of Ireland, and the conversion of a part of the
labouring population into peasant proprietors. The truly insular
ignorance of her public men respecting a form of agricultural economy
which predominates in nearly every other civilized country, makes it
only too probable that she will choose the worse side of the
alternative. Yet there are germs of a tendency to the formation of
peasant proprietors on Irish soil, which require only the aid of a
friendly legislator to foster them; as is shown in the following extract
from a private communication by my eminent and valued friend, Professor
Cairnes:—

“On the sale, some eight or ten years ago, of the Thomond,
Portarlington, and Kingston estates, in the Encumbered Estates Court, it
was observed that a considerable number of occupying tenants purchased
the fee of their farms. I have not been able to obtain any information
as to what followed that proceeding—whether the purchasers continued to
farm their small properties, or under the mania of landlordism tried to
escape from their former mode of life. But there are other facts which
have a bearing on this Edition: current; Page: [335] question. In those
parts of the country where tenant-right prevails, the prices given for
the goodwill of a farm are enormous. The following figures, taken from
the schedule of an estate in the neighbourhood of Newry, now passing
through the Landed Estates Court, will give an idea, but a very
inadequate one, of the prices which this mere customary right generally
fetches.

“Statement showing the prices at which the tenant-right of certain farms
near Newry was sold:—

  ----- ------- ------ --------------------------------
  Lot   Acres   Rent   Purchase-money of tenant-right
  1     23      £74    £ 33
  2     24      77     240
  3     13      39     110
  4     14      34     85
  5     10      33     172
  6     5       13     75
  7     8       26     130
  8     11      33     130
  9     2       5      5
        110     £334   £980
  ----- ------- ------ --------------------------------

“The prices here represent on the whole about three years’ purchase of
the rental: but this, as I have said, gives but an inadequate idea of
that which is frequently, indeed of that which is ordinarily, paid. The
right, being purely customary, will vary in value with the confidence
generally reposed in the good faith of the landlord. In the present
instance, circumstances have come to light in the course of the
proceedings connected with the sale of the estate, which give reason to
believe that the confidence in this case was not high; consequently, the
rates above given may be taken as considerably under those which
ordinarily prevail. Cases, as I am informed on the highest authority,
have in other parts of the country come to light, also in the Landed
Estates Court, in which the price given for the tenant-right was equal
to that of the whole fee of the land. It is a remarkable fact that
people should be found to give, say twenty or twenty-five years’
purchase, for land which is still subject to a good round rent. Why, it
will be asked, do they not purchase land out and out for the same, or a
slightly larger, sum? The answer to this question, I believe is to be
found in the state of our land laws. The cost of transferring land in
small portions is, relatively to the purchase money, very considerable,
even in the Landed Estates Court; while the goodwill of a farm may be
transferred without any cost at all. The cheapest conveyance that could
be drawn in that Court, Edition: current; Page: [336] where the utmost
economy, consistent with the present mode of remunerating legal
services, is strictly enforced, would, irrespective of stamp duties,
cost 10l.—a very sensible addition to the purchase of a small peasant
estate: a conveyance to transfer a thousand acres might not cost more,
and would probably not cost much more. But in truth, the mere cost of
conveyance represents but the least part of the obstacles which exist to
obtaining land in small portions. A far more serious impediment is the
complicated state of the ownership of land, which renders it frequently
impracticable to subdivide a property into such portions as would bring
the land within the reach of small bidders. The remedy for this state of
things, however, lies in measures of a more radical sort than I fear it
is at all probable that any House of Commons we are soon likely to see
would even with patience consider. A registry of titles may succeed in
reducing this complex condition of ownership to its simplest expression;
but where real complication exists, the difficulty is not to be got rid
of by mere simplicity of form; and a registry of titles—while the powers
of disposition at present enjoyed by landowners remain undiminished,
while every settlor and testator has an almost unbounded licence to
multiply interests in land, as pride, the passion for dictation, or mere
whim may suggest—will, in my opinion, fail to reach the root of the
evil. The effect of these circumstances is to place an immense premium
upon large dealings in land—indeed in most cases practically to preclude
all other than large dealings; and while this is the state of the law,
the experiment of peasant proprietorship, it is plain, cannot be fairly
tried. The facts, however, which I have stated, show, I think,
conclusively, that there is no obstacle in the disposition of the people
to the introduction of this system.”c[*]

I have concluded a discussion, which has occupied a space almost
disproportioned to the dimensions of this work; and I here close the
examination of those simpler forms of social economy in which the
produce of the land either belongs undividedly to one class, or is
shared only between two classes. We now proceed to the hypothesis of a
threefold division of the produce, among labourers, landlords, and
capitalists; and in order to connect the coming discussions as closely
as possible with those which have now for some time occupied us, I shall
commence with the subject of Wages.

Edition: current; Page: [337]


CHAPTER XI: Of Wages

§ 1. [Wages depend on the demand and supply of labour—in other words, on
population and capital] Under the head of Wages are to be considered,
first, the causes which determine or influence the wages of labour
generally, and secondly, the differences that exist between the wages of
different employments. It is convenient to keep these two classes of
considerations separate; and in discussing the law of wages, to proceed
in the first instance as if there were no other kind of labour than
common unskilled labour, of the average degree of hardness and
disagreeableness.

Wages, like other things, may be regulated either by competition or by
customa. In this country there are few kinds of labour of which the
remuneration would not be lower than it is, if the employer took the
full advantage of competition. Competition, however, must be regarded,
in the present state of society, as the principal regulator of wages,
and custom or individual character only as a modifying circumstance, and
that in a comparatively slight degree.a

Wages, then, depend bmainlyb upon the demand and supply of labour; or as
it is often expressed, on the proportion between population and capital.
By population is here meant the number only of the labouring class, or
rather of those who work for hire; and by capital only circulating
capital, and not even the whole of that, but the part which is expended
in the direct purchase of labour. To this, however, must be added all
funds which, without forming a part of capital, are paid in exchange for
labour, such as the wages of soldiers, domestic servants, and all other
unproductive labourers. There is unfortunately no mode of expressing by
one familiar term, the aggregate of what chas beenc called the
wages-fund of a country: Edition: current; Page: [338] and as the wages
of productive labour form nearly the whole of that fund, it is usual to
overlook the smaller and less important part, and to say that wages
depend on population and capital. It will be convenient to employ this
expression, remembering, however, to consider it as elliptical, and not
as a literal statement of the entire truth.

With these limitations of the terms, wages not only depend upon the
relative amount of capital and population, but cannotd, under the rule
of competition,d be affected by anything else. Wages (meaning, of
course, the general rate) cannot rise, but by an increase of the
aggregate funds employed in hiring labourers, or a diminution in the
number of the competitors for hire; nor fall, except either by a
diminution of the funds devoted to paying labour, or by an increase in
the number of labourers to be paid.

§ 2. [Examination of some popular opinions respecting wages] There are,
however, some facts in apparent contradiction to this doctrine, which it
is incumbent on us to consider and explain.

For instance, it is a common saying that wages are high when trade is
good. The demand for labour in any particular employment is more
pressing, and higher wages are paid, when there is a brisk demand for
the commodity produced; and the contrary when there is what is called a
stagnation: then workpeople are dismissed, and those who are retained
must submit to a reduction of wages: though in these cases there is
neither more nor less capital than before. This is true; and is one of
those complications in the concrete phenomena, which obscure and
disguise the operation of general causes: but it is not really
inconsistent with the principles laid down. Capital which the owner does
not employ in purchasing labour, but keeps idle in his hands, is the
same thing to the labourers, for the time being, as if it did not exist.
All capital is, from the variations of trade, occasionally in this
state. A manufacturer, finding a slack demand for his commodity,
forbears to employ labourers in increasing a stock which he finds it
difficult to dispose of; or if he goes on until all his capital is
locked up in unsold goods, then at least he must of necessity pause
until he can get paid for some of them. But no one expects either of
these states to be permanent; if he did, he would at the first
opportunity remove his capital to some other occupation, in which it
would still continue to employ labour. The capital remains unemployed
for a time, during which the labour market is overstocked, and wages
fall. Afterwards the demand revives, and perhaps becomes unusually
brisk, enabling the manufacturer to sell his commodity even faster than
he can produce it: his whole capital is then brought into complete
efficiency, and if he is able, he borrows acapital in addition, which
would otherwise have gone into some Edition: current; Page: [339] other
employment. At such times wages, in his particular occupation, rise. If
we suppose, what in strictness is not absolutely impossible, that one of
these fits of briskness or of stagnation should affect all occupations
at the same time, wages altogether might undergo a rise or a fall.
These, however, are but temporary fluctuations: the capital now lying
idle will next year be in active employment, that which is this year
unable to keep up with the demand will in its turn be locked up in
crowded warehouses; and wages in these several departments will ebb and
flow accordingly: but nothing can permanently alter general wages,
except ban increase or a diminution of capital itself (always meaning by
the term, the funds of all sorts, cdevoted toc the payment of labour)
compared with the quantity of labour offering itself to be hired.

Again, it is another common dnotiond that high prices make high wages;
because the producers and dealers, being better off, can afford to pay
more to their labourers. I ehave already saide that a brisk demand,
which causes temporary high prices, causes also ftemporary high wages.
But high prices, in themselves, can only raise wages if the dealers,
receiving more, are induced to save more, and make an addition to their
capital, or at least to their purchases of labour. This is indeed likely
enough to be the case; and if the high prices came direct from heaven,
or even from abroad, the labouring class might be benefited, not by the
high prices themselves, but by the increase of capital occasioned by
them. The same effect, however, is often attributed to a high price
which is the result of restrictive laws, or which is in some way or
other to be paid by the remaining members of the community; they having
no greater means than before to pay it with. High prices of this sort,
if they benefit one class of labourers, can only do so at the expense of
others; since if the dealers by receiving high prices are enabled to
make greater savings, or otherwise increase their purchases of labour,
all other people by paying those high prices have their means of saving,
or of purchasing labour, reduced in an equal degree; and it is a matter
of accident whether the one alteration or the other will have the
greatest effect on the labour market. Wages will probably be temporarily
higher in the employment in which prices have risen, and somewhat lower
in other employments: in which case, gwhileg the first half of the
phenomenon excites notice, the other is generally overlooked, or if
observed, is not ascribed to the cause which really produced it. Nor
will the partial rise of wages last long: for though the dealers in that
one employment gain Edition: current; Page: [340] more, it does not
follow that there is room to employ a greater amount of savings in their
own business: their increasing capital will probably flow over into
other employments, and hthere counterbalanceh the diminution previously
made in the demand for labour by the diminished savings of other
classes.

Another opinion often maintained is, that wages i(meaning of course
money wages)i vary with the price of food; rising when it rises, and
falling when it falls. This opinion is, I conceive, only partially true;
and in so far as true, in no way affects the dependence of wages on the
proportion between capital and labour: since the price of food, when it
affects wages at all, affects them through that law. Dear or cheap food,
caused by variety of seasons, does not affect wages (unless they are
artificially adjusted to it by law or charity): or rather, it has some
tendency to affect them in the contrary way to that supposed; since in
times of scarcity people generally jcompete more violently for
employmentj, and lower the labour market against themselves. But
dearness or cheapness of food, when of a permanent character, and
capable of being calculated on beforehand, may affect wages. In the
first place, if the labourers have, as is often the case, no more than
enough to keep them in working condition, and enable them barely to
support the ordinary number of children, it kfollowsk that if food grows
permanently dearer without a rise of wages, a greater number of the
children will prematurely die; and thus wages will ultimately be higher,
but only because the number of people will be smaller, than if food had
remained cheap. But, secondly, even though wages were high enough to
admit of food’s becoming more costly without depriving the labourers and
their families of necessaries; though they could bear, physically
speaking, to be worse off, perhaps they would not consent to be so. They
lmightl have habits of comfort which mwerem to them as necessaries, and
sooner than forego which, they would put an additional restraint on
their power of multiplication; so that wages would rise, not by increase
of deaths but by diminution of births. In these cases, nthenn, wages do
adapt themselves to the price of food, though after an interval of
almost a generation. Mr. Ricardo considers these two cases to comprehend
all cases. He assumes, that there is everywhere a minimum rate of wages:
either the lowest with which it is physically possible to keep up the
population, or the lowest with which the people will choose to do so. To
this minimum he assumes that the general rate of wages always tends;
that they can never be lower, beyond the length of time required for a
diminished rate of increase to make itself Edition: current; Page: [341]
felt, and can never long continue higher. This assumption contains
sufficient truth to render it admissible for the purposes of abstract
science; and the conclusion which Mr. Ricardo draws from it, namely,
that wages in the long run rise and fall with the permanent price of
food, is, like almost all his conclusions, true hypothetically, that is,
granting the suppositions from which he sets out. But in the application
to practice, it is necessary to consider that the minimum of which he
speaks, especially when it is not a physical, but what may be termed a
moral minimum, is itself liable to vary. If wages were previously so
high that they could bear reduction, to which the obstacle was a high
standard of comfort habitual among the labourers, a rise oino the price
of food, or any other disadvantageous change in their circumstances, may
operate in two ways: it may correct itself by a rise of wages brought
about through a gradual effect on the prudential check to population; or
it may permanently lower the standard of living of the class, in case
their previous habits in respect of population prove stronger than their
previous habits in respect of comfort. In that case the injury done to
them will be permanent, and their deteriorated condition will become a
new minimum, tending to perpetuate itself as the more ample minimum did
before. It is to be feared that of the two modes in which the cause may
operate, the last is the most frequent, or at all events sufficiently
so, to render all propositions ascribing a self-repairing quality to the
calamities which befal the labouring classes, practically of no
validity. There is considerable evidence that the circumstances of the
agricultural labourers in England have more than once in our history
sustained great permanent deterioration, from causes which operated by
diminishing the demand for labour, and which, if population had
exercised its power of self-adjustment in obedience to the previous
standard of comfort, could only have had a temporary effect: but
unhappily the poverty in which the class was plunged during a long
series of years brought that previous standard into disuse; and the next
generation, growing up without having possessed those pristine comforts,
multiplied in turn without any attempt to retrieve them.*

The converse case occurs when, by improvements in agriculture, the
repeal of corn laws, or other such causes, the necessaries of the
plabourersp are cheapened, and qthey areq enabled, with the same wages,
to command Edition: current; Page: [342] greater comforts than before.
Wages will not fall immediately; it is even possible that they may rise;
but they will fall at last, so as to leave the labourers no better off
than before, unless during this interval of prosperity the standard of
comfort regarded as indispensable by the class, is permanently raised.
Unfortunately this salutary effect is by no means to be counted upon; it
is a much more difficult thing to raise, than to lower, the scale of
living which the rlabourerr will consider as more indispensable than
marrying and having a family. If they content themselves with enjoying
the greater comfort while it lasts, but do not learn to require it, they
will people down to their old scale of living. If from poverty their
children had previously been insufficiently fed or improperly nursed, a
greater number will now be reared, and the competition of these, when
they grow up, will depress wages, probably in full proportion to the
greater cheapness of food. If the effect is not produced in this mode,
it will be produced by earlier and more numerous marriages, or by an
increased number of births to a marriage. According to all experience, a
great increase invariably takes place in the number of marriages, in
seasons of cheap food and full employment. I cannot, therefore, agree in
the importance so often attached to the repeal of the corn laws,
considered merely as a slabourers’s question, or to any of the schemes,
of which some one or other is at all times in vogue, for making the
labourers a very little better off. Things which only affect them a very
little, make no permanent impression upon their habits and requirements,
and they tsoon slide back into their former state. To produce permanent
advantage, the temporary cause operating upon them must be sufficient to
make a great change in their condition—a change such as will be felt for
many years, notwithstanding any stimulus which it may give during one
generation to the increase of people. When, indeed, the improvement is
of this signal character, and a generation grows up which has always
been used to an improved scale of comfort, the habits of this new
generation in respect to population become formed upon a higher minimum,
and the improvement in their condition becomes permanent. Of cases in
point, the most remarkable is France after the Revolution. The majority
of the population being suddenly raised from misery, to independence and
comparative comfort; the immediate effect was that population,
notwithstanding the destructive wars of the period, started forward with
unexampled rapidity, partly because improved circumstances enabled many
children to be reared who would otherwise have died, and partly from
increase of births. The succeeding generation however grew up with
habits uconsiderablyu altered; and though the country was never before
in Edition: current; Page: [343] so prosperous a state, the annual
number of births is now nearly stationary,* and the increase of
population extremely slow.†

§ 3. [Certain rare circumstances excepted, high wages imply restraints
on population] Wages depend, then, on the proportion between the number
of the labouring population, and the capital or other funds devoted to
the purchase of labour; we will say, for shortness, the capital. If
wages are higher at one time or place than at another, if the
subsistence and comfort of the class of hired labourers are more ample,
it is afor no other reason than because capital bears a greater
proportion to population. It is not the absolute amount of accumulation
or of production, that is of importance to the labouring class; it is
not the amount even of the funds destined for distribution among the
labourers: it is the proportion between those funds and the numbers
among whom they are shared. The condition of the class can be bettered
in no other way than by altering that proportion to their advantage; and
every scheme for their benefit, which does not proceed on this as its
foundation, is, for all permanent purposes, a delusion.

In countries like North America and the Australian colonies, where the
knowledge and arts of civilized life, and a high effective desire of
accumulation, Edition: current; Page: [344] co-exist with a boundless
extent of unoccupied land, the growth of capital easily keeps pace with
the utmost possible increase of population, and is chiefly retarded by
the impracticability of obtaining labourers enough. All, therefore, who
can possibly be born, can find employment without overstocking the
market: every labouring family enjoys in abundance the necessaries, many
of the comforts, and some of the luxuries of life; and, unless in case
of individual misconduct, or actual inability to work, poverty does not,
and dependence bneedb not, exist. A similar advantage, though in a less
degree, is occasionally enjoyed by some special class of labourers in
old countries, from an cextraordinarilyc rapid growth, not of capital
generally, but of the capital employed in a particular occupation. So
gigantic has been the progress of the cotton manufacture since the
inventions of Watt and Arkwright, that the capital engaged in it has
probably quadrupled in the time which population requires for doubling.
While, therefore, it has attracted from other employments nearly all the
hands which geographical circumstances and the habits or inclinations of
the people rendered available; and while the demand it created for
infant labour has enlisted the immediate pecuniary interest of the
operatives in favour of promoting, instead of restraining, the increase
of population; nevertheless wages in the great seats of the manufacture
are dgenerallyd so high, that the collective earnings of a family
amounte, on an average of years,e to a very satisfactory sum; and there
is, as yet, no sign of fpermanentf decrease, while the effect has also
been felt in raising the general standard of agricultural wages in the
gcounties adjoiningg.

But those circumstances of a country, or of an occupation, in which
population can with impunity increase at its utmost rate, are rare, and
transitory. Very few are the countries presenting the needful union of
conditions. Either the industrial arts are backward and stationary, and
capital therefore increases slowly; or the effective desire of
accumulation being low, the increase soon reaches its limit; or, even
though both these elements are at their highest known degree, the
increase of capital is checked, because there is not fresh land to be
resorted to, of as good hquality as that already occupied. Though
capital should for a time double itself simultaneously with population,
if all this capital and population are to find employment on the same
land, they cannot without an unexampled succession of agricultural
inventions continue doubling the produce; therefore, if wages idoi not
fall, profits must; and when profits fall, increase of capital is
slackened. Besides, even if wages did not fall, the Edition: current;
Page: [345] price of food (as will be shown more fully hereafter) would
in these circumstances necessarily rise; which is equivalent to a fall
of wages.

Except, therefore, in the very peculiar cases which I have just noticed,
of which the only one of any practical importance is that of a new
colony, or a country in circumstances equivalent to it; it is impossible
that population should increase at its utmost rate without lowering
wages. Nor will the fall be stopped at any point, short of that which
either by its physical or its moral operation, checks the increase of
population. In no old country, therefore, does population increase at
anything like its utmost rate; in most, at a very moderate rate: in some
countries, not at all. These facts are only to be accounted for in two
ways. Either the whole number of births which nature admits of, and
which jhappenj in some circumstances, do not take place; or if they do,
a large proportion of those who are born, die. The retardation of
increase results either from mortality or prudence; from Mr. Malthus’s
positive, or from his preventive check: and one or the other of these
must and does exist, and very powerfully too, in all old societies.
Wherever population is not kept down by the prudence either of
individuals or of the state, it is kept down by starvation or disease.

Mr. Malthus has taken great pains to ascertain, for almost every country
in the world, which of these checks it is that operates; and the
evidence which he collected on the subject, in his Essay on Population,
may even now be read with advantage. Throughout Asia, and formerly in
most European countries in which the labouring classes were not in
personal bondage, there is, or was, no restrainer of population but
death. The mortality was not always the result of poverty: much of it
proceeded from unskilful and careless management of children, from
uncleanly and otherwise unhealthy habits of life among the adult
population, and from the almost periodical occurrence of destructive
kepidemicsk. Throughout Europe these causes of shortened life have lmuch
diminished,l but they have mnotm ceased to exist. Until a period not
very remote, hardly any of our large towns kept up nitsn population,
independently of the stream always flowing into them from the rural
districts: this was still true of Liverpool until very recently; and
even in London, the mortality is larger, and the average duration of
life shorter, than in rural districts where there is much greater
poverty. In Ireland, epidemic fevers, and deaths from the exhaustion of
the constitution by insufficient nutriment, ohave always accompaniedo
even the most moderate deficiency of the potato crop. Nevertheless, it
cannot now be said that in any ppartp of Europe, population Edition:
current; Page: [346] is principally kept down by disease, still less by
starvation, either in a direct or qinq an indirect form. The agency by
which it is limited is rchieflyr preventive, not (in the language of Mr.
Malthus) positive. But the spreventive remedys seldom, I believe,
consists in the unaided operation of prudential motives on a class
wholly or mainly composed of labourers for hire, and looking forward to
no other lot. In England, for example, I much doubt if the generality of
agricultural labourers practise any prudential restraint whatever. They
generally marry as early, and have as many children to a marriage, as
they would or could do if they were settlers in the United States.
During the generation which preceded the enactment of the present Poor
Law, they received the most direct encouragement to this sort of
improvidence: being not only assured of support, on easy terms, whenever
out of employment, but, even when in employment, very commonly receiving
from the parish a weekly allowance proportioned to their number of
children; and the married with large families being always, from a
short-sighted economy, employed in preference to the unmarried; which
last premium on population still exists. Under such prompting, the rural
labourers acquired habits of recklessness, which are so congenial to the
uncultivated mind that in whatever manner produced, they in general long
survive their immediate causes. There are so many new elements at work
in society, even in those deeper strata which are inaccessible to the
mere movements on the surface, that it is hazardous to affirm anything
positive on the mental state or practical impulses of classes and bodies
of men, when the same assertion may be true to-day, and may require
great modification in ta fewt years time. It does, however, seem, that
if the rate of increase of population depended solely on the
agricultural labourers, it would, as far as dependent on births, and
unless repressed by deaths, be as rapid in the southern counties of
England as in America. The restraining principle lies in the very great
proportion of the population composed of the middle classes and the
skilled artizans, who in this country almost equal in number the common
labourers, and on whom prudential motives do, in a considerable degree,
operate.

§ 4. [Restraints on population are in some cases legal] Where a
labouring class who have no property but their daily wages, and no hope
of acquiring it, refrain from over-rapid multiplication, the cause, I
believe, has always hitherto been, either actual legal restraint, or a
custom of some sort, which, without intention on their part, insensibly
moulds their conduct, Edition: current; Page: [347] or affords immediate
inducements not to marry. It is not generally known in how many
countries of Europe direct legal obstacles are opposed to improvident
marriages. The communications made to the original Poor Law Commission
by our foreign ministers and consuls in different parts of Europe,
contain a considerable amount of information on this subject. Mr.
Senior, in his preface to those communications,* says that in the
countries which recognise a legal right to relief, “marriage on the part
of persons in the actual receipt of relief appears to be everywhere
prohibited, and the marriage of those who are not likely to possess the
means of independent support is allowed by very few. Thus we are told
that in Norway no one can marry without ‘showing to the satisfaction of
the clergyman, that he is permanently settled in such a manner as to
offer a fair prospect that he can maintain a family.’

“In Mecklenburg, that ‘marriages are delayed by conscription in the
twenty-second year, and military service for six years; besides, the
parties must have a dwelling, without which a clergyman is not permitted
to marry them. The men marry at from twenty-five to thirty, the women
not much earlier, as both must first gain by service enough to establish
themselves.’

“In Saxony, that ‘a man may not marry before he is twenty-one years old,
if liable to serve in the army. In Dresden, professionists (by which
awordsa artizans are probably meant) may not marry until they become
masters in their trade.’

“In Wurtemburg, that ‘no man is allowed to marry till his twenty-fifth
year, on account of his military duties, unless permission be especially
obtained or purchased: at that age he must also obtain permission, which
is granted on proving that he and his wife would have together
sufficient to maintain a family or to establish themselves; in large
towns, say from 800 to 1000 florins (from 66l. 13s. 4d. to 84l. 3s.
4d.); in smaller, from 400 to 500 florins; in villages, 200 florins
(16l. 13s. 4d.)b’ ”†

The minister at Munich says, “The great cause why the number of the poor
is kept so low in this country arises from the prevention by law of
marriages in cases in which it cannot be proved that the parties have
reasonable means of subsistence; and this regulation is in all places
and at all times strictly adhered to. The effect of a constant and firm
observance of this rule has, it is true, a considerable influence in
keeping down the Edition: current; Page: [348] population of Bavaria,
which is at present low for the extent of country, but it has a most
salutary effect in averting extreme poverty and consequent misery.”*

At Lubeck, “marriages among the poor are delayed by the necessity a man
is under, first, of previously proving that he is in a regular employ,
work, or profession, that will enable him to maintain a wife: and
secondly, of becoming a burgher, and equipping himself in the uniform of
the burgher guard, which together may cost him nearly 4l.”† At
Frankfort, “the government prescribes no age for marrying, but the
permission to marry is only granted on proving a livelihood.”‡

The allusion, in some of these statements, to military duties, points
out an indirect obstacle to marriage, interposed by the laws of some
countries in which there is no direct legal restraint. In Prussia, for
instance, the institutions which compel every able-bodied man to serve
for several years in the army, at the time of life at which imprudent
marriages are most likely to take place, are probably a full equivalent,
in effect on population, for the legal restrictions of the smaller
German states.

c“So strongly,” says Mr. Kay, “do the people of Switzerland understand
from experience the expediency of their sons and daughters postponing
the time of their marriages, that the councils of state of four or five
of the most democratic of the cantons, elected, be it remembered, by
universal suffrage, have passed laws by which all young persons who
marry before they have proved to the magistrate of their district that
they are able to support a family, are rendered liable to a heavy fine.
In Lucerne, Argovie, Unterwalden, and I believe, St. Gall, Schweitz, and
Uri, laws of this character have been in force for many years.”§c

§ 5. [Restraints on population are in other cases the effect of
particular customs] Where there is no general law restrictive of
marriage, there are often customs equivalent to it. When the guilds or
trade corporations of the Middle Ages were in vigour, their bye-laws or
regulations were conceived with a very vigilant eye to the advantage
which the trade derived from limiting competition: and they made it very
effectually the interest of artizans not to marry until after passing
through the two stages of apprentice and journeyman, and attaining the
rank of master.∥ In Norway, where Edition: current; Page: [349] the
labour is chiefly agricultural, it is forbidden by law to engage a
farm-servant for less than a year; which was the general English
practice until the poor-laws destroyed it, by enabling the farmer to
cast his labourers on parish pay whenever he did not immediately require
their labour. In consequence of this custom, and of its enforcement by
law, the whole of the rather limited class of agricultural labourers in
Norway have an engagement for a year at least, which, if the parties are
content with one another, naturally becomes a permanent engagement:
hence it is known in every neighbourhood whether there is, or is likely
to be, a vacancy, and unless Edition: current; Page: [350] there is, a
young man does not marry, knowing that he could not obtain employment.
The acustom still exists in Cumberland and Westmoreland, except that the
term is half a year instead of a year; and seems to be still attended
with the same consequences. The farm-servants “are lodged and boarded in
their bmasters’b houses, which they seldom leave until, through the
death of some relation or neighbour, they succeed to the ownership or
lease of a cottage farm. What is called surplus labour does not here
exist.”* I have mentioned in another chapter the check to population in
England during the last century, from the difficulty of obtaining a
separate dwelling place.† Other customs restrictive of population might
be specified: in some parts of Italy, it is the practice, according to
Sismondi, among the poor, as it is well known to be in the higher ranks,
that all but one of the sons remain unmarried. But such family
arrangements are not likely to exist among day-labourers. They are the
resource of small proprietors and metayers, for preventing too minute a
subdivision of the land.

In England generally there is now scarcely a relic of these indirect
checks to population; except that in parishes owned by one or a very
small number of landowners, the increase of resident labourers is still
occasionally obstructed, by preventing cottages from being built, or by
pulling down those which exist; thus restraining the population liable
to become locally chargeable, without any material effect on population
generally, the work required in those parishes being performed by
labourers settled elsewhere. The surrounding districts always feel
themselves much aggrieved by this practice, against which they cannot
defend themselves by similar means, since a single acre of land owned by
any one who does not enter into the combination, enables him to defeat
the attempt, very profitably to himself, by covering that acre with
cottages. To meet these complaints can Act has within the last few years
been passed by Parliament, by which the poor-rate is made a charge not
on the parish, but on the whole union. This enactment, in other respects
very beneficial, removesc the small remnant of what was Edition:
current; Page: [351] once a check to population: the value of which,
however, from the dnarrow limits of its operation, ehad become very
triflinge.

§ 6. [Due restriction of population the only safeguard of a labouring
class] In the case, therefore, of the common agricultural labourer, the
checks to population may almost be considered as non-existent. If the
growth of the towns, and of the capital there employed, by which the
factory operatives are maintained at their present average aratea of
wages notwithstanding their rapid increase, did not also absorb a great
part of the annual addition to the rural population, there seems no
reason in the present habits of the people why they should not fall into
as miserable a condition as the Irish bprevious to 1846b, and if the
market for our manufactures should, I do not say fall off, but even
cease to expand at the rapid rate of the last fifty years, there is no
certainty that this fate may not be creservedc for usd. Without carrying
our anticipations forward to such a calamity, which the great and
growing intelligence of the factory population would, it may be hoped,
avert, by an adaptation of their habits to their circumstances; the
existing condition of the labourers of some of the most exclusively
agricultural counties, Wiltshire, Somersetshire, Dorsetshire,
Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, is sufficiently painful to contemplate.
The labourers of ethesee counties, with large families, and feight or
perhaps ninef shillings for their weekly wages when in full employment,
have gfor some time beeng one of the stock objects of popular
compassion: it is time that they had the benefit also of some
application of common sense.

Unhappily, sentimentality rather than common sense husually presides
over the discussion of these subjects; and while there is a growing
sensitiveness to the hardships of the poor, and a ready disposition to
admit claims in them upon the good offices of other people, there is an
all but universal unwillingness to face the real difficulty of their
position, or advert at all to the conditions which nature has made
indispensable to the improvement of their physical lot. Discussions on
the condition of the Edition: current; Page: [352] labourers,
lamentations over its wretchedness, idenunciations of all who are
supposed to bei indifferent to it, projects of one kind or another for
improving it, were in no country and in no time of the world so rife as
jin the present generation;j but there is a tacit agreement to ignore
totally the law of wages, or to dismiss it in a parenthesis, with such
terms as “hard-hearted Malthusianism;” as if it were not a thousand
times more hard-hearted to tell human beings that they may, than that
they may not, call into existence swarms of creatures who are sure to be
miserable, and most likely to be depraved; and forgetting that the
conduct, which it is reckoned so cruel to disapprove, is a degrading
slavery to a brute instinct in one of the persons concerned, and most
commonly, in the other, helpless submission to a revolting abuse of
power.k

So long as mankind remained in a semi-barbarous state, with the
indolence and the few wants of lal savage, it probably was not desirable
that population should be restrained; the pressure of physical want may
have been a necessary stimulus, in that stage of the human mind, to the
exertion of labour and ingenuity required for accomplishing that
greatest of all past changes in human modes of existence, by which
industrial life attained predominance over the hunting, the pastoral,
and the military or Edition: current; Page: [353] predatory state. Want,
in that age of the world, had its uses, as even slavery had; and there
may be corners of the earth where those uses are not yet superseded,
though they might easily be so were a helping hand held out by more
civilized communities. But in Europe the time, if it ever existed, is
mlong past, when a life of privation had the smallest tendency to make
men either better workmen or more civilized beings. It is, on the
contrary, evident, that if the agricultural labourers were better off,
they would both work more efficiently, and be better citizens. I ask,
then, is it true, or not, that if their numbers were fewer they would
obtain higher wages? This is the question, and no other: and it is idle
to divert attention from it, by attacking any incidental position of
Malthus or some other writer, and pretending that to refute that, is to
disprove the principle of population. Some, for instance, have achieved
an easy victory over a passing remark of Mr. Malthus, hazarded chiefly
by way of illustration, that the increase of food may perhaps be assumed
to take place in an arithmetical ratio, while population increases in a
geometrical: when every candid reader knows that Mr. Malthus laid no
stress on this unlucky attempt to give numerical precision to things
which do not admit of it, and every person capable of reasoning must see
that it is wholly superfluous to his argument. Others have nattached
immense importance ton a correction which more recent political
economists have made in the mere language of the earlier followers of
Mr. Malthus. Several writers ohado said that it is the tendency of
population to increase faster than the means of subsistence. The
assertion was true in the sense in which they meant it, namely, that
population would in most circumstances increase faster than the means of
subsistence, if it were not checked either by mortality or by prudence.
But inasmuch as these checks act with unequal force at different times
and places, it was possible to interpret the language of these writers
as if they had meant that population is usually gaining ground upon
subsistence, and the poverty of the people becoming greater. Under this
interpretation of their meaning, it was urged that the reverse is the
truth: that as civilization advances, the prudential check tends to
become stronger, and population to slacken its rate of increase,
relatively to subsistence; and that it is an error to maintain that
population, in any improving community, tends to increase faster than,
or even so fast as, subsistence. The word tendency is here used in a
totally different sense from that of the writers who affirmed the
proposition: but waving the verbal question, is it not allowed on both
sides, that in old countries, population presses too closely upon the
means of subsistence? And though its pressure diminishes, the more the
ideas and Edition: current; Page: [354] habits of the poorest class of
labourers can be improved, to which it is to be hoped that there is
always some tendency in a progressive country, yet since that tendency
has hitherto been, and still is, extremely faint, and (to descend to
particulars) has not yet extended to giving to the Wiltshire labourers
higher wages than eight shillings a week, the only thing which it is
necessary to consider is, whether that is a sufficient and suitable
provision for a labourer? for if not, population does, as an existing
fact, bear too great a proportion to the pwages-fundp; and whether it
pressed still harder or not quite so hard at some former period, is
practically of no moment, except that, if the ratio is an improving one,
there is the better hope that by proper aids and encouragements it may
be made to improve more and faster.

It is not, however, against reason, that the argument on this subject
has to struggle; but against a feeling of dislike, which will only
reconcile itself to the unwelcome truth, when every device is exhausted
by which the recognition of that truth can be evaded. It is necessary,
therefore, to enter into a detailed examination of these devices, and to
force every position which is taken up by the enemies of the population
principle in their determination to find some refuge for the
qlabourersq, some plausible means of improving rtheirr condition,
without requiring the exercise, either enforced or voluntary, of any
self-restraint, or any greater control than at present over the animal
power of multiplication. This will be the object of the next chapter.

Edition: current; Page: [355]


CHAPTER XII: Of Popular Remedies for Low Wages

§ 1. [A legal or customary minimum of wages, with a guarantee of
employment] The simplest expedient which can be imagined for keeping the
wages of labour up to the desirable point, would be to fix them by law:
and this is virtually the object aimed at in a variety of plans which
have at different times been, or still are, current, for remodelling the
relation between labourers and employers. No one probably ever suggested
that wages should be absolutely fixed; since the interests of all
concerned, often require that they should be variable: but some have
proposed to fix a minimum of wages, leaving the variations above that
point to be adjusted by competition. Another plan which has found many
advocates among the leaders of the operatives, is that councils should
be formed, which in England have been called local boards of trade, in
France “conseils de prud’hommes,” and other names; consisting of
delegates from the work-people and from the employers, who meeting in
aconference, should agree upon a rate of wages, and promulgate it from
authority, to be binding generally on employers and workmen; the ground
of decision being, not the state of the labour-market, but natural
equity; bto provide that the workmen shall have reasonable wages, and
the capitalist reasonable profits.

Others again (but these are rather philanthropists interesting
themselves for the labouring classes, than the labouring people
themselves) are shy of admitting the interference of authority in
contracts for labour: they fear that if law intervened, it would
intervene rashly and ignorantly; they are convinced that two parties,
with opposite interests, attempting to adjust those interests by
negotiation through their representatives on principles of equity, when
no rule could be laid down to determine what was equitable, would merely
exasperate their differences instead of healing them; but what it is
useless to attempt by the legal sanction, these persons desire to
compass by the moral. Every employer, they think, ought to give
sufficient wages; and if he does it not willingly, should be compelled
to it by general Edition: current; Page: [356] opinion; the test of
sufficient wages being their own feelings, or what they suppose to be
those of the public. This is, I think, a fair representation of a
considerable body of existing opinion on the subject.

I desire to confine my remarks to the principle involved in all these
suggestions, without taking into account practical difficulties, serious
as these must at once be seen to be. I shall suppose that by one or
other of these contrivances, wages could be kept above the point to
which they would be brought by competition. This is as much as to say,
above the highest rate which can be afforded by the existing capital
consistently with employing all the labourers. For it is a mistake to
suppose that competition merely keeps down wages. It is equally the
means by which they are kept up. When there are any labourers
unemployed, cthese, unless maintained by charity,c become competitors
for hire, and wages fall; but when all who were out of work have found
employment, wages will not, under the freest system of competition, fall
lower. There are strange notions afloat concerning the nature of
competition. Some people seem to imagine that its effect is something
indefinite; that the competition of sellers may lower prices, and the
competition of labourers may lower wages, down to zero, or some
unassignable minimum. Nothing can be more unfounded. Goods can only be
lowered in price by competition, to the point which calls forth buyers
sufficient to take them off; and wages can only be lowered by
competition until room is made to admit all the labourers to a share in
the distribution of the wages-fund. If they fell below this point, a
portion of capital would remain unemployed for want of labourers; a
counter-competition would commence on the side of capitalists, and wages
would rise.

Since, therefore, the rate of wages which results from competition
ddistributes the whole eexistinge wages-fund among the whole labouring
population; if law or opinion succeeds in fixing wages above this rate,
some labourers are kept out of employment; and as it is not the
intention of the philanthropists that these should starve, they must be
provided for by a forced increase of the wages-fund; by a compulsory
saving. It is nothing to fix a minimum of wages, unless there be a
provision that work, or wages at least, be found for all who apply for
it. This, accordingly, is always part of the scheme; and is consistent
with the ideas of more people than would approve of either a legal or a
moral minimum of wages. Popular sentiment looks upon it as the duty of
the rich, or of the state, to find employment for all the poor. If the
moral influence of opinion does not induce the rich to spare from their
consumption enough to set all the poor to work at “reasonable wages,” it
is supposed to be incumbent on the state to lay on taxes for the
purpose, either by local rates or votes of public money. The proportion
Edition: current; Page: [357] between labour and the wages-fund would
thus be modified to the advantage of the labourers, not by restriction
of population, but by an increase of capital.

§ 2. [Such a minimum and guarantee would require as a condition legal
measures for repression of population] If this claim on society could be
limited to the existing generation; if nothing more awere necessarya
than a compulsory accumulation, sufficient to provide permanent
employment at ample wages for the existing numbers of the people; such a
proposition would have no more strenuous supporter than myself. Society
mainly consists of those who live by bodily labour; and if society, that
is, if the labourers, lend their physical force to protect individuals
in the enjoyment of superfluities, they are entitled to do so, and have
always done so, with the reservation of a power to tax those
superfluities for purposes of public utility; among which purposes the
subsistence of the people is the foremost. Since no one is responsible
for having been born, no pecuniary sacrifice is too great to be made by
those who have more than enough, for the purpose of securing enough to
all persons already in existence.

But it is another thing altogether, when those who have produced and
accumulated are called upon to abstain from consuming until they have
given food and clothing, not only to all who now exist, but to all whom
these or their descendants may think fit to call into existence. Such an
obligation acknowledged and acted upon, would suspend all checks, both
positive and preventive; there would be nothing to hinder population
from starting forward at its rapidest rate; and as the natural increase
of capital would, at the bbestb, not be more rapid than before,
taxation, to make up the growing deficiency, must advance with the same
gigantic strides. The attempt would of course be made to exact labour in
exchange for support. But experience has shown the sort of work to be
expected from recipients of public charity. When the pay is not given
for the sake of the work, but the work found for the sake of the pay,
inefficiency is a matter of certainty: to extract real work from
day-labourers without the power of dismissal, is only practicable by the
power of the lash. cIt is conceivable, doubtless, that this objection
might be got over. The fund raised by taxation might be spread over the
labour market generally, as seems to be intended by the supporters of
the droit au travail in France; without giving to any unemployed
labourer a right to demand support in a particular place or from a
particular functionary. The power of dismissal as regards individual
labourers, would then remain; the government only undertaking to create
additional employment when there was a deficiency, and reserving, like
Edition: current; Page: [358] other employers, the choice of its own
workpeople.c But let them work ever so efficiently, the increasing
population could not, as we have so often shown, increase the produce
proportionally: the surplus, after all were fed, would bear a less and
less proportion to the whole produce, and to the population: and the
increase of people going on in a constant ratio, while the increase of
produce went on in a diminishing ratio, the surplus would in time be
wholly absorbed; taxation for the support of the poor would engross the
whole income of the country; the payers and the receivers would be
melted down into one mass. The check to population either by death or
prudence, could not then be staved off any longer, but must dcomed into
operation esuddenly ande at once; everything which places mankind above
a nest of ants or a colony of beavers, having perished in the interval.

These consequences have been so often and so clearly pointed out by
fauthors of reputationf, in writings known and accessible, that
ignorance of them on the part of educated persons is no longer
pardonable. It is doubly discreditable in any person setting up for a
public teacher, to ignore these considerations; to dismiss them
silently, and discuss or declaim on wages and poor-laws, not as if these
arguments could be refuted, but as if they did not exist.g

Every one has a right to live. We will suppose this granted. But no one
has a right to bring creatures into lifeh, to be supported by other
people. Whoever means to stand upon the first of these rights must
renounce all pretension to the last. If a man cannot support even
himself unless others help him, those others are entitled to say that
they do not also undertake the support of ianyi offspring which it is
physically possible for him to summon into the world. Yet there are
abundance of writers and public speakers, including many of most
ostentatious jpretensionsj to high feeling, whose views of life are so
truly brutish, that they see hardship in preventing paupers from
breeding hereditary paupers in the kworkhouse itself. Posterity will one
day ask with astonishment, what sort of people it could be among whom
such preachers could find proselytes.

lIt would be possible for the state tol guarantee employment at ample
wages to all who are born. But if it does this, it is bound in
self-protection, Edition: current; Page: [359] and mfor the sakem of
every purpose for which government exists, to provide that no person
shall be born without its consent. If the ordinary and nspontaneousn
motives to self-restraint are removed, others must be substituted.
Restrictions on marriage, at least equivalent to those existing in some
of the German states, or severe penalties on those who have children
when unable to support them, would then be indispensable. Society ocano
feed the necessitous, if it takes their multiplication under its
control; or p(if destitute of all moral feeling for the wretched
offspring)p it qcanq leave the last to their discretion, rabandoningr
the first to their own care.s But it cannot twith impunityt take the
feeding upon itself, and leave the multiplying free.

To ugive profuselyu to the people, whether under the name of charity or
of employment, without placing them under such influences that
prudential motives shall act powerfully upon them, is to lavish the
means of benefiting mankind, without attaining the object. Leave the
people in a situation in which their condition manifestly depends upon
their numbers, and the greatest permanent benefit may be derived from
any sacrifice made to improve the physical well-being of the present
generation, and raise, by that means, the habits of their children. But
remove the regulation of their wages from their own control; guarantee
vtov them a certain payment, either by law, or by the feeling of the
community; and no amount of comfort that you can give them will make
either them or their descendants look to their own self-restraint as the
proper means wofw preserving them in that state. You will only make them
indignantly claim the continuance of your guarantee, to themselves and
their full complement of possible posterity.

On these grounds some writers have altogether condemned the English
poor-law, and any system of relief to the able-bodied, at least when
uncombined with systematic legal precautions against over-population.
The famous Act xof the 43d ofx Elizabeth yundertooky, on the part of the
public, to provide work and wages for all the destitute able-bodied: and
there is little doubt that if the intent of that Act had been fully
carried out, and no means had been adopted by the administrators of
relief to neutralize its natural tendencies, the poor-rate would by this
time have absorbed the whole net produce of the land and labour of the
country. It is not at all surprising, therefore, that Mr. Malthus and
others should at first have Edition: current; Page: [360] concluded
against all poor-laws whatever. It required much experience, and careful
examination of different modes of poor-law management, to give assurance
that the admission of an absolute right to zbe supportedz at the cost of
other people, could exist in law and in fact, without fatally relaxing
the springs of industry and the restraints of prudence. This, however,
was fully substantiated, by the investigations of the original Poor Law
Commissioners. Hostile as they are unjustly accused of being to the
principle of legal relief, they are the first who fully proved the
compatibility of any Poor Law, in which a right to relief was
recognised, with the permanent interests of the labouring class and of
posterity. By a acollectiona of facts, experimentally ascertained in
parishes scattered throughout England, it was shown that the guarantee
of support could be freed from its injurious effects upon the minds and
habits of the people, if the relief, though ample in respect to
necessaries, was accompanied with conditions which they disliked,
consisting of some restraints on their freedom, and the privation of
bsomeb indulgences. Under this proviso, it may be regarded as
irrevocably established, that the fate of no member of the community
needs be abandoned to chance; that society can and therefore ought to
insure every individual belonging to it against the extreme of want;
that the condition even of those cwho are unable to find their own
supportc, needs not be one of physical suffering, or the dread of it,
but only of restricted indulgence, and enforced rigidity of discipline.
This is surely something gained for humanity, important in itself, and
still more so as a step to something beyond; and humanity has no worse
enemies than those who lend themselves, either knowingly or
unintentionally, to bring odium on this law, or on the principles in
which it originated.

§ 3. [Allowances in aid of wages] Next to the attempts to regulate
wages, and provide artificially that all who are willing to work shall
receive an adequate price for their labour, we have to consider another
class of popular remedies, which do not profess to interfere with
freedom of contract; which aleave wages to be fixed by the competition
of the marketa, but, when they are considered insufficient, endeavour by
some subsidiary resource to make up to the labourers for the
insufficiency. Of this nature bwasb the expedient resorted to by parish
authorities during thirty or forty years previous to 1834, generally
known as the Allowance System. This was first introduced, when, through
a succession of bad seasons, and consequent high prices of food, the
wages of labour had become inadequate Edition: current; Page: [361] to
afford to the families of the agricultural labourers the camountc of
support to which they had been accustomed. Sentiments of humanity,
joined with the idea then inculcated in high quarters, that people ought
not to be allowed to suffer for having enriched their country with a
multitude of inhabitants, induced the magistrates of the rural districts
to commence giving parish relief to persons already in private
employment: and when the practice had once been sanctioned, the
immediate interest of the farmers, whom it enabled to throw part of the
support of their labourers upon the other inhabitants of the parish, led
to a great and rapid extension of it. The principle of this scheme being
avowedly that of adapting the means of every family to its necessities,
it was a natural dconsequenced that more should be given to the married
than to the single, and to those who had large families than to those
who had not: in fact, an allowance was usually granted for every child.
So direct and positive an encouragement to population is not, however,
inseparable from the scheme: the allowance in aid of wages might be a
fixed thing, given to all labourers alike, and as this is the least
objectionable form which the system can assume, we will give it the
benefit of the supposition.

It is obvious that this is merely another mode of fixing a minimum of
wages; no otherwise differing from the direct mode, than in allowing the
employer to buy the labour at its market price, the difference being
made up to the labourer from a public fund. The one kind of guarantee is
open to all the objections which have been urged against the othere. Ite
promises to the labourers that they shall all have a certain amount of
wages, however numerous they may be: and removes, therefore, alike the
positive and the prudential obstacles to an unlimited increase. But
besides the objections common to all attempts to regulate wages without
regulating population, the allowance system has a peculiar absurdity of
its own. This is, that it inevitably takes from wages with one hand what
it adds to them with the other. There is a rate of wages, either the
lowest on which the people can, or the lowest on which they will
consent, to live. We will suppose this to be seven shillings a week.
Shocked at the wretchedness of this pittance, the parish authorities
humanely make it up to ten. But the labourers are accustomed to seven,
and though they would gladly have more, will live on that (as the fact
proves) rather than restrain the instinct of multiplication. Their
habits will not be altered for the better by giving them parish pay.
Receiving three shillings from the parish, they will be as well off as
before though they should increase sufficiently to bring down wages to
four shillings. They will accordingly people down to that point;
Edition: current; Page: [362] or perhaps, without waiting for an
increase of numbers, there are unemployed labourers enough in the
workhouse to produce the effect at once. It is well known that the
allowance system did practically operate in the mode described, and that
under its influence wages sank to a lower rate than fhad beenf known in
England before. During the last century, under a rather rigid
administration of the poor-laws, population increased slowly, and
agricultural wages were considerably above the starvation point. Under
the allowance system the people increased so fast, and wages gsankg so
low, that with wages and allowance together, families were worse off
than they had been before with wages alone. When the labourer depends
solely on wages, there hish ia virtuali minimum. jIf wages fall below
the lowest rate which will enable the population to be kept up,
depopulation at least restores them to that lowest rate.j But if the
deficiency is to be made up by a forced contribution from all who have
anything to give, wages may fall below starvation point; they may fall
almost to zero. This deplorable system, worse than any other form of
poor-law abuse yet invented, inasmuch as it pauperizes not merely the
unemployed part of the population but the whole, kreceived a severe
check from the Poor Law of 1834: I wish it could be said that there are
no signs ofk its revival.l

§ 4. [The Allotment System] But while this is agenerally condemneda,
there is another mode of relief in aid of wages, which is bstill highly
popularb; a mode greatly preferable, morally and socially, to parish
allowance, but tending, it is to be feared, to a very similar economical
result: I mean the much-boasted Allotment System. This, too, is a
contrivance to compensate the labourer for the insufficiency of his
wages, by giving him something else as a supplement to them: but instead
of having them made up from the poor-rate, he is enabled to make them up
for himself, by renting a small piece of ground, which he cultivates
like a garden by spade labour, raising potatoes and other vegetables for
home consumption, with perhaps some additional quantity for sale. If he
hires the ground ready manured, he sometimes pays for it at as high a
rate as eight pounds an Edition: current; Page: [363] acre: but getting
his own labour and that of his family for nothing, he is able to gain
several pounds by it even at so high a rent.* The patrons of the system
make it a great point that the allotment shall be in aid of wages, and
not a substitute for them; that it shall not be such as a labourer can
live on, but only sufficient to occupy the spare hours and days of a man
in tolerably regular agricultural employment, with assistance from his
wife and children. They usually limit the extent of a single allotment
to a quarter, or something between a quarter and half an acre. If it
exceeds this, without being enough to occupy him entirely, it will make
him, they say, a bad and uncertain workman for hire: if it is sufficient
to take him entirely out of the class of hired labourers, and to become
his sole means of subsistence, it will make him an Irish cottier: cfor
which assertionc, at the enormous rents usually demanded, there is some
foundation. But in their precautions against cottierism, these
well-meaning persons do not perceive, that if the system they patronize
is not a cottier system, it is, in essentials, neither more nor less
than a system of conacre.

There is no doubt a material difference between eking out insufficient
wages by a fund raised by taxation, and doing the same thing by means
which make a clear addition to the gross produce of the country. There
is also a difference between helping a labourer by means of his own
industry, and subsidizing him in a mode which tends to make him careless
and idle. On both these points, allotments have an unquestionable
advantage over parish allowances. But in their effect on wages and
population, I see no reason why the two plans should substantially
differ. All subsidies in aid of wages enable the labourer to do with
less remuneration, and therefore ultimately bring down the price of
labour by the full amount, unless a change be wrought in the ideas and
requirements of the dlabouring classd; an alteration in the relative
value which ethey sete upon the gratification of ftheirf instincts, and
upon the increase of gtheirg comforts and the comforts of those
connected with hthemh. That any such change in itheiri character should
be produced by the allotment system, appears to me a thing not to be
expected. The possession of land, we are sometimes told, renders the
labourer provident. Property in land does so; or what is equivalent to
property, occupation on fixed terms and on a permanent tenure. But mere
hiring from year to year was never found to have any such effect. jDidj
Edition: current; Page: [364] possession of land render the Irishman
provident? kTestimonies, it is true, abound, and I do not seek to
discredit them, of the beneficial change produced in the conduct and
condition of labourers, by receiving allotments. Such an effect is to be
expected while those who hold them are a small number; a privileged
class, having a status above the common level, which they are unwilling
to lose. They are also, no doubt, almost always, originally a select
class, composed of the most favourable specimens of the labouring
people: which, however, is attended with the inconvenience that the
persons to whom the system facilitates marrying and having lchildrenl,
are precisely those who would otherwise be the most likely to practise
prudential restraint. As affecting the general condition of the
labouring class, the scheme, as it seems to me, must be either nugatory
or mischievous. If only a few labourers have allotments, they are
naturally those who could do best without them, and no good is done to
the class: while, if the system were general, and every or almost every
labourer had an allotment, I believe the effect would be much the same
as when every or almost every labourer had an allowance in aid of wages.
I think there can be no doubt that if, at the end of the last century,
the Allotment instead of the Allowance system had been generally adopted
in England, it would equally have broken down the practical restraints
on population which at that time did really exist; population would have
started forward exactly as in fact it did; and in twenty years, wages
mplusm the allotment would have been, as wages plus the allowance
actually were, no more than equal to the former wages without any
allotmentn. Then only difference in favour of allotments would have
been, that they make the people grow their own poor-rates.

I am at the same time quite ready to allow, that in some circumstances,
the possession of land at a fair rent, even without ownership, by the
generality of labourers for hire, operates as a cause not of low, but of
high wages. This, however, is when their land renders them, to the
extent of actual necessaries, independent of the market for labour.
There is the greatest difference between the position of people who live
by wages, with land as an extra resource, and of people who can, in case
of necessity, subsist entirely on their land, and only work for hire to
add to their comforts. Wages are likely to be high where none are
compelled by necessity to sell their labour. “People who have at home
some kind of property to apply their labour to, will not sell their
labour for wages that do not afford them a better diet than potatoes and
maize, although in saving for themselves, they may live very much on
potatoes and maize. We are often surprised Edition: current; Page: [365]
in travelling on the Continent, to hear of a rate of day’s wages very
high, considering the abundance and cheapness of food. It is want of the
necessity or otheo inclination to take work, that makes day-labour
scarce, and, considering the price of provisions, dear, in many parts of
the Continent, where property in land is widely diffused among the
ppeople.”*p There are parts of the Continent, where, even of the
inhabitants of the towns, scarcely one seems to be exclusively dependent
on his ostensible employment; and nothing else can explain the high
price they put on their services, and the carelessness they evince as to
whether they are employed at all. But the effect would be far different
if their land or other resources gave them only a fraction of a
subsistence, leaving them under an undiminished necessity of selling
their labour for wages in an overstocked market. Their land would then
merely enable them to exist on smaller wages, and to carry their
multiplication so much the further before reaching the point below which
they either could not, or would not descend.

To the view I have taken of the effect of allotments, I see no argument
which can be opposed, but that employed by Mr. Thornton,† with whom on
this subject I am at issue. His defence of allotments is grounded on the
general qdoctrineq, that it is only the very poor who multiply without
regard to consequences, and that if the condition of the existing
generation could be greatly improved, which he thinks might be done by
the allotment system, their successors would grow up with an increased
standard of requirements, and would not have families until they could
keep them in as much comfort as rthat in whichr they had been brought up
themselves. I agree in as much of this argument as goes to prove that a
sudden and very great improvement in the condition of the poor, shas
alwayss, through its effect on their habits of life, ta chance of
becomingt permanent. What happened at the time of the French Revolution
is an example. But I cannot think that the addition of a quarter or even
half an acre to every labourer’s cottage, and that too at a rack rent,
would (after the fall of wages which would be necessary to absorb the
already existing mass of pauper labour) make so great a difference in
the comforts of the family for a generation to come, as to raise up from
childhood a labouring population with a really higher permanent standard
of requirements and habits. So small a portion of land could only be
made a permanent benefit, by holding out uencouragementu to acquire by
industry and saving, the means Edition: current; Page: [366] of buying
it outright: a permission which, if extensively made use of, would be a
kind of education in forethought and frugality to the entire class, the
effects of which might not cease with the occasion. The benefit would
however arise, not from what was given vthemv, but from what they were
stimulated to acquire.

No remedies for low wages have the smallest chance of being efficacious,
which do not operate on and through the minds and habits of the people.
While these are unaffected, any contrivance, even if successful, for
temporarily improving the condition of the very poor, would but let slip
the reins by which population was previously curbed; and could only,
therefore, continue to produce its effect, if, by the whip and spur of
taxation, capital were compelled to follow at an equally accelerated
pace. But this process could not possibly continue for long together,
and whenever it stopped, it would leave the country with an increased
number of the poorest class, and a diminished proportion of all except
the poorest, or, if it continued long enough, with none at all. For “to
this complexion must come at last” all social arrangements, which remove
the natural checks to population without substituting any others.

Edition: current; Page: [367]


CHAPTER XIII: The Remedies for Low Wages Further Considered

§ 1. [Pernicious direction of public opinion on the subject of
population] By what means, then, is poverty to be contended against? How
is the evil of low wages to be remedied? If the expedients usually
recommended for the purpose are not adapted to it, can no others be
thought of? Is the problem incapable of solution? Can political economy
do nothing, but only object to everything, and demonstrate that nothing
can be done?

If this were so, political economy might have a needful, but would have
a melancholy, and a thankless task. If the bulk of the human race are
always to remain as at present, slaves to toil in which they have no
interest, and therefore feel no interest—drudging from early morning
till late at night for bare necessaries, and with all the intellectual
and moral deficiencies which that implies—without resources either in
mind or feelings—untaught, for they cannot be better taught than fed;
selfish, for all their thoughts are required for themselves; without
interests or sentiments as citizens and members of society, and with a
sense of injustice rankling in their minds, equally for what they have
not, and for what others have; I know not what there is which should
make a person with any capacity of reason, concern himself about the
destinies of the human racea. Therea would be no wisdom for any one but
in extracting from life, with Epicurean indifference, as much personal
satisfaction btob himself and those with whom he sympathizes, as it can
yield without injury to any one, and letting the unmeaning bustle of
so-called civilized existence roll by unheeded. But there is no ground
for such a view of human affairs. Poverty, like most social evils,
exists because men follow their brute instincts without due
consideration. But society is possible, precisely because man is not
necessarily a brute. Civilization in every one of its aspects is a
struggle against the animal instincts. Over some even of the strongest
of them, it has shown itself capable of acquiring abundant control. It
has artificialized large portions of mankind to such an extent, that of
many of their most natural inclinations they have scarcely a vestige or
a remembrance left. If it has Edition: current; Page: [368] not brought
the instinct of population under as much restraint as is needful, we
must remember that it has never seriously tried. What efforts it has
made, have mostly been in the contrary direction. Religion, morality,
and statesmanship have vied with one another in incitements to marriage,
and to the multiplication of the species, so it be but in wedlock.
Religion has not even yet discontinued its encouragements. The Roman
Catholic clergy (of any other clergy it is unnecessary to speak, since
no other have any considerable influence over the poorer classes)
everywhere think it their duty to promote marriage, in order to prevent
fornication. There is still in many minds a strong religious prejudice
against the true doctrine. The rich, provided the consequences do not
touch themselves, think it impugns the wisdom of Providence to suppose
that misery can result from the operation of a natural propensity: the
poor think that “God never sends mouths but he sends meat.” No one would
guess from the language of either, that man had any voice or choice in
the matter. So complete is the confusion of ideas on the whole subject;
owing in a great degree to the mystery in which it is shrouded by a
spurious delicacy, which prefers that right and wrong should be
mismeasured and confounded on one of the subjects most momentous to
human welfare, rather than that the subject be freely spoken of and
discussed. People are little aware of the cost to mankind of this
scrupulosity of speech. The diseases of society can, no more than
corporal maladies, be prevented or cured without being spoken about in
plain language. All experience shows that the mass of mankind never
judge of moral questions for themselves, never see anything to be right
or wrong until they have been frequently told it; and who tells them
that they have any duties in the matter in question, while they keep
within matrimonial limits? Who meets with the smallest condemnation, or
rather, who does not meet with sympathy and benevolence, for any amount
of evil which he may have brought upon himself and those dependent on
him, by this species of incontinence? While a man who is intemperate in
drink, is discountenanced and despised by all who profess to be moral
people, cit is one of the chief grounds made use of in appeals to the
benevolent, that the applicant has a large family and is unable to
maintain them.*c

Edition: current; Page: [369]
One cannot wonder that silence on this great department of human duty
should produce unconsciousness of moral obligations, when it produces
oblivion of physical facts. That it is possible to delay marriage, and
to live in abstinence while unmarried, most people are willing to allow;
but when persons are once marriedd, the idea, in this country, never
seems to enter any one’s mind that ehaving or not having a family, or
the number of which it shall consiste, is famenable to their own
control. One would imagine that children were rained down upon married
people, direct from heaven, without their being art or part in the
matter; that it was really, as the common phrases have it, God’s will,
and not their own, which decided the numbers of their offspring. Let us
see what is a Continental philosopher’s opinion on this point; a gmang
among the most benevolent hof his time, and the happiness of whose
married life has been celebratedh.

“Lorsque des préjugés dangereux,” says Sismondi,* “ne sont point
accrédités, lorsqu’une morale contraire à nos vrais devoirs envers les
autres et surtout envers les créatures qui nous doivent la vie, n’est
point enseignée au nom de l’autorité la plus sacrée, aucun homme sage ne
se marie avant de se trouver dans une condition qui lui donne un moyen
assuré de vivre; aucun père de famille n’a plus d’enfans qu’il n’en peut
convenablement élever. Ce dernier compte à bon droit que ses enfans
devront se contenter du sort dans lequel il a vécu; aussi doit-il
désirer que la génération naissante représente exactement celle qui s’en
va; qu’un fils et une fille arrivés à l’âge nubile remplacent son père
et sa mère; que les enfans de ses enfans le remplacent à son tour avec
sa femme; que sa fille trouve dans une autre maison précisément le sort
qu’il donnera à la fille d’une autre maison dans la sienne, et que le
revenu qui suffisait aux pères suffise aux enfans.” In a country
increasing in wealth, isome increase of numbersi would be jadmissiblej,
but that is a question of detail, not of principle. “Une fois que cette
famille est formée, la justice et l’humanité exigent qu’il s’impose la
même contrainte à laquelle se soumettent les célibataires. Lorsqu’on
voit combien est petit, en tout pays, le nombre des enfans naturels, on
doit reconnaître que cette contrainte est suffisamment efficace. Dans un
pays où la population ne peut pas s’accroître, ou du moins dans lequel
son progrès doit être si lent qu’il soit à peine perceptible, quand il
n’y a point de places nouvelles pour de nouveaux établissemens, un
Edition: current; Page: [370] père qui a huit enfans doit compter, ou
que six de ses enfans mourront en bas âge, ou que trois de ses
contemporains et trois de ses contemporaines, et dans la génération
suivante, trois de ses fils et trois de ses filles, ne se marieront pas
à cause de lui.”

§ 2. [Grounds for expecting improvement] Those who think it hopless that
the labouring classes should be induced to practise a sufficient degree
of prudence in regard to the increase of their families, because they
have hitherto stopt short of that point, show an inability to estimate
the ordinary principles of human action. Nothing more would probably be
necessary to secure that result, than an opinion generally diffused that
it was desirable. As a moral principle, such an opinion has never yet
existed in any country: it is curious that it does not so exist in
countries in which, from the spontaneous operation of individual
forethought, population is, comparatively speaking, efficiently
repressed. What is practised as prudence is still not recognised as
duty; the talkers and writers are mostly on the other side, even in
France, where a sentimental horror of Malthus is almost as rife as in
this country. Many causes may be assigned, besides the modern date of
the doctrine, for its not having yet gained possession of the general
mind. Its truth has, in some respects, been its detriment. One may be
permitted to doubt whether, except among the poor themselves (for whose
prejudices on this subject there is no difficulty in accounting) there
has ever yet been, in any class of society, a sincere and earnest desire
that wages should be high. There has been plenty of desire to keep down
the poor-rate; but, that done, people have been very willing that the
working classes should be ill off. Nearly all who are not labourers
themselves, are employers of labour, and are not sorry to get the
commodity cheap. It is a fact, that even Boards of Guardians, who are
supposed to be official apostles of anti-population doctrines, will
seldom hear patiently of anything which they are pleased to designate as
Malthusianism. Boards of Guardians ain rural districts,a principally
consist of farmers, and farmers, it is well known, in general dislike
even allotments, as making the labourers “too independent.” From the
gentry, who are in less immediate contact and collision of interest with
the labourers, better things might be expected, and the gentry of
England are usually charitable. But charitable people have human
infirmities, and would, very often, be secretly not a little
dissatisfied if no one needed their charity: it is from them one
oftenest hears the base doctrine, that God has decreed there shall
always be poor. When one adds to this, that nearly every person who has
had in him any active spring of exertion for a social object, has had
some favourite reform to effect which he thought the admission of this
great principle would throw into the shade; Edition: current; Page:
[371] has had corn laws to repeal, or taxation to reduce, or small notes
to issue, or the charter to carry, or the church bto revive or abolish,
orb the aristocracy to pull down, and looked upon every one as an enemy
who thought anything important except his object; it is scarcely
wonderful that since the population doctrine was first promulgated,
nine-tenths of the talk has always been against it, and the remaining
tenth only audible at intervals; and that it has not yet penetrated far
among those who might be expected to be the least willing recipients of
it, the labourers themselves.

But let us try to imagine what would happen if the idea became general
among the labouring class, that the competition of too great numbers was
the cspecialc cause of their poverty; so that every labourer looked
(with Sismondi) upon every other who had more than the number of
children which the circumstances of society allowed to each, as doing
him a wrong—as filling up the place which he was entitled to shared. Any
one who supposes that this state of opinion would not have a great
effect on conduct, must be profoundly ignorant of human nature; can
never have considered how large a portion of the motives which induce
the generality of men to take care even of their own interest, is
derived from regard for opinion—from the expectation of being disliked
or despised for not doing it. eIn the particular case in question, it is
not too much to say that over-indulgence is as much caused by the
stimulus of opinion as by the mere animal propensity; since opinion
universally, and especially among the most uneducated classes, has
connected ideas of spirit and power with the strength of the instinct,
and of inferiority with its moderation or absence; a perversion of
sentiment caused by its being the means, and the stamp, of a dominion
exercised over other human beings. The effect would be great of merely
removing this factitious stimulus; and when once opinion shall have
turned itself into an adverse direction, a resolution will soon take
place in this department of human conduct.e We are often told that the
most thorough perception of the dependence of wages on population will
not influence the conduct of a labouring man, because it is not the
fchildren he himself can have that will produce any effect in generally
depressing the labour market. True: and it is also true, that one
soldier’s running away will not lose the battle; accordingly it is not
that consideration which keeps each soldier in his rank: it is the
disgrace which naturally and inevitably attends on conduct by any one
individual, which if pursued by a majority, everybody can see would be
fatal. Men are seldom found to brave Edition: current; Page: [372] the
general opinion of their class, unless supported either by some
principle higher than regard for opinion, or by some gstrongg body of
opinion elsewhere.

It must be borne in mind also, that the opinion here in question, as
soon as it attained any prevalence, would have powerful auxiliaries in
the great majority of women. It is hseldomh by the choice of the wife
that families are too numerous; on her devolves (along with all the
physical suffering and at least a full share of the privations) the
whole of the intolerable domestic drudgery resulting from the excess. To
be relieved from it would be hailed as a blessing by multitudes of women
who now never venture to urge such a claim, but who would urge it, if
supported by the moral feelings of the community. Among the barbarisms
which law and morals have not yet ceased to sanction, the most
disgusting surely is, that any human being should be permitted to
consider himself as having a right to the person of another.

If the opinion were once generally established among the labouring class
that their welfare required a due regulation of the numbers of families,
the respectable and well-conducted of the body would conform to the
prescription, and only those would exempt themselves from it, who were
in the habit of making light of isocial obligations generallyi; and
jthere would be then an evident justificationj for converting the moral
obligation against bringing children into the world who are a burthen to
the community, into a legal konek; just as in many other cases of the
progress of opinion, the law ends by enforcing against recalcitrant
minorities, obligations which to be useful must be general, and which,
from a sense of their utility, a large majority have voluntarily
consented to take upon themselves. lThere would be no need, however, of
legal sanctions, if women were admitted, as on all other grounds they
have the clearest mtitlem to be, to the same rights of Edition: current;
Page: [373] citizenship with men. Let them cease to be confined by
custom to one physical function as their means of living and their
source of influence, and they would have for the first time an equal
voice with men in what concerns that function: and of all the
improvements in reserve for mankind which it is now possible to foresee,
none nmight be expected ton be so fertile as this in almost every kind
of moral and social benefit.

It remains to consider what chance there isl that opinions and feelings,
grounded on the law of the dependence of wages on population, will arise
among the labouring oclasses;o and by what means psuch opinions and
feelings can be called forth.p Before considering the grounds of hope on
this subject, a hope which many persons, no doubt, will be ready,
without consideration, to pronounce chimerical, I will remark, that
qunless a satisfactory answer can be made to these two questions,q the
industrial system prevailing in this country, and regarded by many
writers as the ne plus ultra of civilization—the rdependence of the
whole labouring class of the community on the wages of hired labours, is
irrevocably condemneds. The question we are considering is, whether, of
this state of things, overpopulation and a degraded condition of the
labouring class are the inevitable consequence. tIf a uprudent
regulation of population beu not reconcilable with the system of hired
labour, vthe system is a nuisance, and wthe grand object of economical
statesmanship should xbe (by whatever arrangements of property, and
alterations in the modes of applying industry), to bring the labouring
people under the influence of stronger and more obvious inducements to
this kind of prudence, than the relation of workmen and employers ycany
affordx.

zBut there existsz no such incompatibility. The causes of poverty are
not so obvious at first sight to a population of hired labourers, as
athey area to Edition: current; Page: [374] one of proprietors, bor as
they would be to a socialist community. They are, however,b in no way
mysterious. The dependence of wages on the number of the competitors for
employment, is so far from hard of comprehension, or unintelligible to
the labouring classes, that by great bodies of them it is already
recognised and habitually acted on. It is familiar to all Trades Unions:
every successful combination to keep up wages, owes its success to
contrivances for restricting the number of the competitors; all skilled
trades are anxious to keep down their own numbers, and many impose, or
endeavour to impose, as a condition upon employers, that they shall not
take more than a prescribed number of apprentices. There is, of course,
a great difference between limiting their numbers by excluding other
people, and doing the same thing by a restraint imposed on themselves:
but the one as much as the other shows a clear perception of the
relation between their numbers and their remuneration. The principle is
understood in its application to any one employment, but not to the
general mass of employment. For this there are several reasons: first,
the operation of causes is more easily and distinctly seen in the more
circumscribed field; secondly, skilled artizans are a more intelligent
class than ordinary manual labourers: and the habit of concert, and of
passing in review their general condition as a trade, keeps up a better
understanding of their collective interests: thirdly and lastly, they
are the most provident, because they are the best off, and have the most
to preserve. What, however, is clearly perceived and admitted in
particular instances, it cannot be hopeless to see understood and
acknowledged as a general truth. Its recognition, at least in theory,
seems a thing which must necessarily and immediately come to pass, when
the minds of the labouring classes become capable of taking any rational
view of their own aggregate condition. Of this the cgreatc majority of
them have until now been incapable, either from the uncultivated state
of their intelligence, or from poverty, which leaving them neither the
fear of worse, nor the smallest hope of better, makes them careless of
the consequences of their actions, and without thought for the future.

§ 3. [Twofold means of elevating the habits of the labouring people: by
education] For the purpose therefore of altering the habits of the
labouring people, there is need of a twofold action, directed
simultaneously upon their intelligence and their poverty. An effective
national education of the children of the labouring class, is the first
thing needful: and, coincidently with this, a system of measures which
shall (as the Revolution did in France) extinguish extreme poverty for
one whole generation.

This is not the place for discussing, even in the most general manner,
Edition: current; Page: [375] either the principles or the machinery of
national education. aBut bit is to be hoped that opinion on the subject
is advancing, andb that an education of mere words would cnotc now dbe
deemed sufficientd, slow as our progress is towards eprovidinge anything
better even ffor the classes to whom society professes to give the very
best education it can devisef. Without entering into disputable points,
it may be asserted without scruple, that the aim of all intellectual
training for the mass of the people, should be to cultivate common
sense; to qualify them for forming a sound practical judgment of the
circumstances by which they are surrounded. Whatever, in the
intellectual department, can be superadded to this, is chiefly
ornamental; while this is the indispensable groundwork on which
education must rest. Let this object be acknowledged and kept in view as
the thing to be first aimed at, and there will be little difficulty in
deciding either what to teach, or in what manner to teach it.

An education directed to diffuse good sense among the people, with such
knowledge as would qualify them to judge of the tendencies of their
actions, would be certain, even without any direct inculcation, to raise
up a public opinion by which intemperance and improvidence of every kind
would be held discreditable, and the improvidence which overstocks the
labour market would be severely condemned, as an offence against the
common weal. But though the sufficiency of such a state of opinion,
supposing it formed, to keep the increase of population within proper
limits, cannot, I think, be doubted; yet, for the formation of the
opinion, it would not do to trust to education alone. Education is not
compatible with extreme poverty. It is impossible effectually to teach
an indigent population. And it is difficult to make those feel the value
of comfort who have never enjoyed it, or those appreciate the
wretchedness of a precarious subsistence, who have been made reckless by
always living from hand to mouth. Individuals often struggle upwards
into a condition of ease; but the utmost that can be expected from a
whole people is to maintain themselves in it; and gimprovement in the
habits and requirements of the mass of unskilled day-labourersg will be
difficult and tardy, unless means can be contrived of hraising the
entire body to a state of tolerable comfort, and maintaining them in it
until a new generation grows up.

Edition: current; Page: [376]
iTowards effecting this object therei are two resources available,
without wrong to any one, without any of the liabilities of mischief
attendant on voluntary or legal charity, and not only without weakening,
but on the contrary strengthening, every incentive to industry, and
every motive to forethought.

§ 4. [Twofold means of elevating the habits of the labouring people: by
large measures of immediate relief, through foreign and home
colonization] The first is, a great national measure of colonization. I
mean, a grant of public money, sufficient to remove at once, and
establish in the colonies, a considerable fraction of the youthful
agricultural population. By giving the preference, as Mr. Wakefield
proposes, to young couples, or when these cannot be obtained, to
families with children nearly grown up, the expenditure would be made to
go the farthest possible towards accomplishing the end, while the
colonies would be supplied with the greatest amount of what is there in
deficiency and here in superfluity, present and prospective labour. aIt
has been shown by others, and the grounds of the opinion will be
exhibited in a subsequent bpartb of the present worka, that colonization
on an adequate scale might be so conducted as to cost the country
nothing, or nothing that would not be certainly repaid; and that the
funds required, even by way of advance, would not be drawn from the
capital employed in maintaining labour, but from that surplus which
cannot find employment at such profit as constitutes an adequate
remuneration for the abstinence of the possessor, and which is therefore
sent abroad for investment, or wasted at home in reckless speculations.
That portion of the income of the country which is habitually
ineffective for any purpose of benefit to the labouring class, would
bear any draught which it could be necessary to make on it for the
amount of emigration which cis herec in view.

dThed second resource would be, to devote all common land, hereafter
Edition: current; Page: [377] brought into cultivation, to raising ea
class of small proprietors. It has long enough been the practice to take
these lands from public use for the mere purpose of adding to the
domains of the rich. It is time that what is left of them should be
retained as an estate sacred to the benefit of the poor. The machinery
for administering it already exists, having been created by the General
Inclosure Act. What I would propose (though, I confess, with small hope
of its being soon adopted) is, that in all future cases in which common
land is permitted to be enclosed, such portion should first be sold or
assigned as is sufficient to compensate the owners of manorial or common
rights, and that the remainder should be divided into sections of five
acres or thereabouts, to be conferred in absolute property on
findividualsf of the labouring class who would reclaim and bring them
into cultivation by their own labour. The preference should be given to
such glabourersg, and there are many of them, as had saved enough to
maintain them until their first crop was got in, or whose character
hwash such as to induce some responsible person to advance itoi them the
requisite amount on their personal security. The tools, the manure, and
in some cases the subsistence also might be supplied by the parish, or
by the state; interest for the advance, at the rate yielded by the
public funds, being laid on as a perpetual quit-rent, with power to the
peasant to redeem it at any time for a moderate number of years’
purchase. These little landed estates might, if it were thought
necessary, be made indivisible by law; though, if the plan worked in the
manner designed, I should not apprehend any objectionable degree of
subdivision. jInj case of intestacy, and in default of amicable
arrangement among the heirs, they kmightk be bought by government at
their value, and regranted to some other llabourer whol mwouldm give
security for the price. The desire to possess one of these small
properties would nprobablyn become, as oon the Continent, an inducement
to prudence and economy pervading the whole labouring population; and
that great desideratum among a people of hired labourers would be
provided, an intermediate class Edition: current; Page: [378] between
them and their employers; affording them the double advantage, of an
object for their hopes, and, as there would be good reason to
anticipate, an example for their imitation.

It would, however, be of little avail that either or both of these
measures of relief should be adopted, unless on such a scale, as would
enable the whole body of hired labourers remaining on the soil to obtain
not merely employment, but a large addition to the present wages—such an
addition as would enable them to live and bring up their children in a
degree of comfort and independence to which they have hitherto been
strangers. When the object is to raise the permanent condition of a
people, small means do not merely produce small effects, they produce no
effect at all. Unless comfort can be made as habitual to a whole
generation as indigence is now, nothing is accomplished; and pfeeble
half-measures do but fritter away resourcesp, far better reserved until
the improvement of public opinion and of education shall raise up
qpoliticians who will not think that merely because a scheme promises
much, the part of statesmanship is to have nothing to do with itq.

rI have left the preceding paragraphs as they were written, since they
remain true in principle, though it is no longer urgent to apply these
specific recommendations to the present state of this country. The
extraordinary cheapening of the means of transport, which is one of the
great scientific achievements of the age, and the knowledge which nearly
all classes of the people have now acquired, or are in the way of
acquiring, of the condition of the labour market in remote parts of the
world, have opened up a spontaneous emigration from these islands to the
new countries beyond the ocean, which does not tend to diminish, but to
increase; and which, without any national measure of systematic
colonization, may prove sufficient to effect a material rise of wages in
Great Britain, as it has already done in Ireland, and to maintain that
rise unimpaired for one or more generations. Emigration, instead of an
occasional vent, is becoming a steady outlet for superfluous numbers;
and this new fact in modern history, together with the flush of
prosperity occasioned by free trade, have granted to this overcrowded
country a temporary breathing-time, capable of being employed in
accomplishing those moral and intellectual improvements in all classes
of the people, the very poorest included, which would render improbable
any relapse into the over-peopled state. Whether this golden opportunity
will be properly used, depends on the wisdom of our councils; Edition:
current; Page: [379] and whatever depends on that, is always in a high
degree precarious. The grounds of hope are, that there has been no time
in our history when mental progress has depended so little on
governments, and so much on the general disposition of the people; none
in which the spirit of improvement has extended to so many branches of
human affairs at once, nor in which all kinds of suggestions tending to
the public good in every department, from the humblest physical to the
highest moral or intellectual, were heard with so little prejudice, and
had so good a chance of becoming known and being fairly considered.r

Edition: current; Page: [380]


CHAPTER XIV: Of the Differences of Wages in Different Employments

§ 1. [Differences of wages arising from different degrees of
attractiveness in different employments] In treating of wages, we have
hitherto confined ourselves to the causes which operate on them
generally, and en masse; the laws which govern the remuneration of
ordinary or average labour: without reference to the existence of
different kinds of work which are habitually paid at different rates,
depending in some degree on different laws. We will now take into
consideration these differences, and examine in what manner they affect
or are affected by the conclusions already established.

A well-known and very popular chapter of Adam Smith* contains the best
exposition yet given of this portion of the subject. I cannot indeed
think his treatment so complete and exhaustive as it has sometimes been
considered; but as far as it goes, his analysis is atolerablya
successful.

The differences, he says, arise partly from the policy of Europe, which
nowhere leaves things at perfect liberty, and partly “from certain
circumstances in the employments themselves, which either really, or at
least in the imaginations of men, make up for a small pecuniary gain in
some, and counterbalance a great one in others.” These circumstances he
considers to be: “First, the agreeableness or disagreeableness of the
employments themselves; secondly, the easiness and cheapness, or the
difficulty and expense of learning them; thirdly, the constancy or
inconstancy of employment in them; fourthly, the small or great trust
which must be reposed in those who exercise them; and fifthly, the
probability or improbability of success in them.”

Several of these points he has very copiously illustrated: though his
examples are sometimes drawn from a state of facts now no longer
existing. “The wages of labour vary with the ease or hardship, the
cleanliness or dirtiness, the honourableness or dishonourableness of the
employment. Thus, in most places, take the year round, a journeyman
tailor earns Edition: current; Page: [381] less than a journeyman
weaver. His work is much easier.” Things have much altered, as to a
weaver’s remuneration, since Adam Smith’s time; and the artizan whose
work was more difficult than that of a tailor, can never, I think, have
been the common weaver. “A journeyman weaver earns less than a
journeyman smith. His work is not always easier, but it is much
cleanlier.” A more probable explanation is, that it requires less bodily
strength. “A journeyman blacksmith, though an artificer, seldom earns so
much in twelve hours as a collier, who is only a labourer, does in
eight. His work is not quite so dirty, is less dangerous, and is carried
on in daylight, and above ground. Honour makes a great part of the
reward of all honourable professions. In point of pecuniary gain, all
things considered,b” their recompense is, in his opinion, below the
averageb. “Disgrace has the contrary effect. The trade of a butcher is a
brutal and an odious business; but it is in most places more profitable
than the greater part of common trades. The most detestable of all
employments, that of public executioner, is, in proportion to the
quantity of work done, better paid than any common trade whatever.”

One of the causes which make hand-loom weavers cling to their occupation
in spite of the scanty remuneration which it now yields, is said to be a
peculiar attractiveness arising from the freedom of action which it
allows to the workman. “He can play or idle,” says a recent authority,*
“as feeling or inclination lead him; rise early or late, apply himself
assiduously or carelessly, as he pleases, and work up at any time by
increased exertion, hours previously sacrificed to indulgence or
recreation. There is scarcely another condition of any portion of our
working population thus free from external control. The factory
operative is not only mulcted cofc his wages for absence, but, if of
frequent occurrence, discharged altogether from his employment. The
bricklayer, the carpenter, the painter, the joiner, the stonemason, the
outdoor labourer, have each their appointed daily hours of labour, a
disregard of which would lead to the same result.” Accordingly, “the
weaver will stand by his loom while it will enable him to exist, however
miserably; and many, induced temporarily to quit it, have returned to it
again, when work was to be had.”d

Edition: current; Page: [382]
“Employment is much more constant,” continues Adam Smith, “in some
trades than in others. In the greater part of manufactures, a journeyman
may be pretty sure of employment almost every day in the year that he is
able to work” (the interruptions of business arising from overstocked
markets, or from a suspension of demand, or from a commercial crisis,
must be excepted). “A mason or bricklayer, on the contrary, can work
neither in hard frost nor in foul weather, and his employment at all
other times depends upon the occasional calls of his customers. He is
liable, in consequence, to be frequently without any. What he earns,
therefore, while he is employed, must not only maintain him while he is
idle, but make him some compensation for those anxious and desponding
moments which the thought of so precarious a situation must sometimes
occasion. When the computed earnings of the greater part of
manufacturers, accordingly, are nearly upon a level with the day wages
of common labourers, those of masons and bricklayers are generally from
one-half more to double those wages. No species of skilled labour,
however, seems more easy to learn than that of masons and bricklayers.
The high wages of those workmen, therefore, are not so much the
recompense of their skill, as the compensation for the inconstancy of
their employment.

“When the inconstancy of the employment is combined with the hardship,
disagreeableness, and dirtiness of the work, it sometimes raises the
wages of the most common labour above those of the most eskillede
artificers. A collier working by the piece, is supposed, at Newcastle,
to earn commonly about double, and in many parts of Scotland about three
times, the wages of common labour. His high wages arise altogether from
the hardship, disagreeableness, and dirtiness of his work. His
employment may, upon most occasions, be as constant as he pleases. The
coal-heavers in London exercise a trade which in hardship, dirtiness,
and disagreeableness, almost equals that of colliers; and from the
unavoidable irregularity in the farrivalf of coal-ships, the employment
of the greater part of them is necessarily very inconstant. If colliers,
therefore, commonly earn double and triple the wages of common labour,
it ought not to seem unreasonable that coal-heavers should sometimes
earn four or five times those wages. In the inquiry made into their
condition a few years ago, it was found that at the rate at which they
were then paid, they could earn about four times the wages of common
labour in London. How extravagant soever gtheseg Edition: current; Page:
[383] earnings may appear, if they were more than sufficient to
compensate all the disagreeable circumstances of the business, there
would soon be so great a number of competitors as, in a trade which has
no exclusive privilege, would quickly reduce them to a lower rate.”[*]

hThese inequalities of remuneration, which are supposed to compensate
for the disagreeable circumstances of particular employments, would,
under certain conditions, be natural consequences of perfectly free
competition: and as between employments of about the same grade, and
filled by nearly the same description of people, they are, no doubt, for
the most part, realized in practice. But it is altogether a false view
of the state of facts, to present this as the relation which generally
exists between agreeable and disagreeable employments. The really
exhausting and the really repulsive labours, instead of being better
paid than others, are almost invariably paid the worst of all, because
performed by those who have no choice. It would be otherwise in a
favourable state of the general labour market. If the labourers in the
aggregrate, instead of exceeding, fell short of the amount of
employment, work which was generally disliked would not be undertaken,
except for more than ordinary wages. But when the supply of labour so
far exceeds the demand that to find employment at all is an uncertainty,
and to be offered it on any terms a favour, the case is totally the
reverse. Desirable labourers, those whom every one is anxious to have,
can still exercise a choice. The undesirable must take what they can
get. The more revolting the occupation, the more certain it is to
receive the minimum of remuneration, because it devolves on the most
helpless and degraded, on those who from squalid poverty, or from want
of skill and education, are rejected from all other employments. Partly
from this cause, and partly from the natural and artificial monopolies
which will be spoken of presently, the inequalities of wages are
generally in an opposite direction to the equitable principle of
compensation erroneously represented by Adam Smith as the general law of
the remuneration of labour. The hardships and the earnings, instead of
being directly proportional, as in any just arrangements of society they
would be, are generally in iani inverse ratio to one another.h

One of the points best illustrated by Adam Smith, is the influence
exercised on the remuneration of an employment by the uncertainty of
success in it. If the chances are great of total failure, the reward in
case of success must be sufficient to make up, in the general
estimation, for those adverse chances. But, owing to another principle
of human nature, if the reward comes in the shape of a few great prizes,
it usually attracts Edition: current; Page: [384] competitors in such
numbers, that the average remuneration may be reduced not only to zero,
but even to a negative quantity. The success of lotteries proves that
this is possible: since the aggregate body of adventurers in lotteries
necessarily lose, otherwise the undertakers could not gain. The case of
certain professions is considered by Adam Smith to be similar. “The
probability that any particular person shall ever be qualified for the
employment to which he is educated, is very different in different
occupations. In the greater part of mechanic trades, success is almost
certain, but very uncertain in the liberal professions. Put your son
apprentice to a shoemaker, there is little doubt of his learning to make
a pair of shoes; but send him to study the law, it is at least twenty to
one if ever he makes such proficiency as will enable him to live by the
business. In a perfectly fair lottery, those who draw the prizes ought
to gain all that is lost by those who draw the blanks. In a profession
where twenty fail for one that succeeds, that one ought to gain all that
should have been gained by the unsuccessful twenty. The
counsellor-at-law, who, perhaps, at near forty years of age, begins to
make something by his profession, ought to receive the retribution, not
only of his own so tedious and expensive education, but of that of more
than twenty others who are never likely to make anything by it. How
extravagant soever the fees of counsellors-at-law may sometimes appear,
their real retribution is never equal to this. Compute in any particular
place, what is likely to be annually gained, and what is likely to be
annually spent, by all the different workmen in any common trade, such
as that of shoemakers or weavers, and you will find that the former sum
will generally exceed the latter. But make the same computation with
regard to all the counsellors and students of law, in all the different
inns of court, and you will find that their annual gains bear but a
small proportion to their annual expense, even though you rate the
former as high, and the latter as low, as can well be done.j”[*]

Whether this is true in our own day, when the gains of the few are
incomparably greater than in the time of Adam Smith, but also the
unsuccessful aspirants much more numerous, those who have the
appropriate information must decide. It does not, however, seem to be
sufficiently considered by Adam Smith, that the prizes which he speaks
of comprise not the fees of counsel only, but the places of emolument
and honour to which their profession gives access, together with the
coveted distinction of a conspicuous position in the public eye.

Even where there are no great prizes, the mere love of excitement is
Edition: current; Page: [385] sometimes enough to cause an adventurous
employment to be overstocked. This is apparent “in the readiness of the
common people to enlist as soldiers, or to go to sea. . . . . The
dangers and hair-breadth escapes of a life of adventures, instead of
disheartening young people, seem frequently to recommend a trade to
them. A tender mother, among the inferior ranks of people, is often
afraid to send her son to school at a sea-port town, lest the sight of
the ships and the conversation and adventures of the sailors should
entice him to go to sea. The distant prospect of hazards from which we
can hope to extricate ourselves by courage and address, is not
disagreeable to us, and does not raise the wages of labour in any
employment. It is otherwise with those in which courage and address can
be of no avail. In trades which are known to be very unwholesome, the
wages of labour are always remarkably high. Unwholesomeness is a species
of disagreeableness, and its effects upon the wages of labour are to be
ranked under that general head.”[*]

§ 2. [Differences of wages arising from natural monopolies] aThe
precedinga are cases in which inequality of remuneration is necessary to
produce equality of attractiveness, and are examples of the equalizing
effect of free competition. The following are cases of real inequality,
and arise from a different principle. “The wages of labour vary
according to the small or great trust which must be reposed in the
workmen. The wages of goldsmiths and jewellers are everywhere superior
to those of many other workmen, not only of equal, but of much superior
ingenuity; on account of the precious materials with which they are
intrusted. We trust our health to the physician, our fortune and
sometimes our life and reputation to the lawyer and attorney. Such
confidence could not safely be reposed in people of a very mean or low
condition. Their reward must be such, therefore, as may give them that
rank in society which so important a trust requires.”[†]

The superiority of reward is not here the consequence of competition,
but of its absence: not a compensation for disadvantages inherent in the
employment, but an extra advantage; a kind of monopoly price, the effect
not of a legal, but of what has been termed a natural monopoly. If all
labourers were trustworthy, it would not be necessary to give extra pay
to working goldsmiths on account of the trust. The degree of integrity
required being supposed to be uncommon, those who can make it appear
that they possess it are able to take advantage of the peculiarity, and
obtain higher pay in proportion to its rarity. This opens a class of
considerations which Adam Smith, and most other political economists,
have Edition: current; Page: [386] taken into far too little account,
and from inattention to which, he has given a most imperfect exposition
of the wide difference between the remuneration of common labour and
that of skilled employments.

Some employments require a much longer time to learn, and a much more
expensive course of instruction than others; and to this extent there
is, as explained by Adam Smith, an inherent reason for their being more
highly remunerated. If an artizan must work several years at learning
his trade before he can earn anything, and several years more before
becoming sufficiently skilful for its finer operations, he must have a
prospect of at last earning enough to pay the wages of all this past
labour, with compensation for the delay of payment, and an indemnity for
the expenses of his education. His wages, consequently, must yield, over
and above the ordinary amount, an annuity sufficient to repay these
sums, with the common rate of profit, within the number of years he can
expect to live and btob be in working condition. This, which is
necessary to place the skilled employments, all circumstances taken
together, on the same level of advantage with the unskilled, is the
smallest difference which can exist for any length of time between the
two remunerations, since otherwise no one would learn the skilled
employments. And this amount of difference is all which Adam Smith’s
principles account for. When the disparity is greater, he seems to think
that it must be explained by apprentice laws, and the rules of
corporations which restrict admission into many of the skilled
employments. But, independently of these or any other artificial
monopolies, there is a natural monopoly in favour of skilled labourers
against the unskilled, which makes the difference of reward exceed,
sometimes in a manifold proportion, what is sufficient merely to
equalize their advantages. If unskilled labourers had it in their power
to compete with skilled, by merely taking the trouble of learning the
trade, the difference of wages cmightc not exceed what would compensate
them for that trouble, at the ordinary rate at which labour is
remunerated. But the fact that a course of instruction is required, of
even a low degree of costliness, or that the labourer must be maintained
for a considerable time from other sources, suffices everywhere to
exclude the great body of the labouring people from the possibility of
any such competition. Until lately, all employments which required even
the humble education of reading and writing, could be recruited only
from a select class, the majority having dhadd no opportunity of
acquiring those attainments. All such employments, accordingly, were
immensely overpaid, as measured by the ordinary remuneration of labour.
Since reading and writing have been brought within the reach of eae
multitude, the monopoly price of the lower grade of educated employments
has Edition: current; Page: [387] greatly fallen, the competition for
them having increased in an almost incredible degree. There is still,
however, a much greater disparity than can be accounted for on the
principle of competition. A clerk from whom nothing is required but the
mechanical labour of copying, gains more than fan equivalent for his
mere exertion if he receives the wages of a bricklayer’s labourerf. His
work is not a tenth part as hard, it is quite as easy gto learn, and his
condition is less precarious, a clerk’s place being generally a place
for life. The higher rate of his remuneration, therefore, must be partly
ascribed to monopoly, the small degree of education required being not
even yet so generally diffused as to call forth the natural number of
competitors; and partly to the remaining influence of an ancient custom,
which requires that clerks should maintain the dress and appearance of a
more highly paid class. In some manual employments, requiring a nicety
of hand which can only be acquired by long practice, it is difficult to
obtain at any cost workmen in sufficient numbers, who are capable of the
most delicate kind of work; and the wages paid to them are only limited
by the price which purchasers are willing to give for the commodity they
produce. This is the case with some working watchmakers, and with the
makers of hsomeh astronomical and optical instruments. If workmen
competent to such employments were ten times as numerous as they are,
there would be purchasers for all which they could make, not indeed at
the present prices, but at those lower prices which would be the natural
consequence of lower wages. Similar considerations apply in a still
greater degree to employments which it is attempted to confine to
persons of a certain social rank, such as what are called the liberal
professions; into which a person of what is considered too low a class
of society, is not easily admitted, and if admitted, does not easily
succeed.

So complete, indeed, has hitherto been the separation, so strongly
marked the line of demarcation, between the different grades of
labourers, as to be almost equivalent to an hereditary distinction of
caste; each employment being ichieflyi recruited from the children of
those already employed in it, or in employments of the same rank with it
in social estimationj, or from the children of persons who, if
originally of a lower rank, have succeeded in raising themselves by
their exertionsj. The liberal professions are kmostly suppliedk by the
sons of either the professional, or the idle classes: the more highly
skilled manual employments are filled up from the sons of skilled
artizans, or lthe class of tradesmen who rank with them: the lower
classes of skilled employments are in a similar case; and Edition:
current; Page: [388] unskilled labourers, with occasional exceptions,
remain from father to son in their pristine condition. Consequently the
wages of each class have hitherto been regulated by the increase of its
own population, rather than of the general population of the country. If
the professions are overstocked, it is because the class of society from
which they have always mainly been supplied, has greatly increased in
number, and because most of that class have numerous families, and bring
up some at least of their sons to professions. If the wages of artizans
remain so much higher than those of common labourers, it is because
artizans are a more prudent class, and do not marry so early or so
inconsiderately. The changes, however, now so rapidly taking place in
usages and ideas, are undermining all these distinctions; the habits or
disabilities which chained people to their hereditary condition are fast
wearing away, and every class is exposed to increased and increasing
competition from at least the class immediately below it. The general
relaxation of conventional barriers, and the increased facilities of
education which already are, and will be in a much greater degree,
brought within the reach of all, mtendm to produce, among many excellent
effects, one which is the reverse; nthey tendn to bring down the wages
of skilled labour. The inequality of remuneration between the skilled
and the unskilled is, without doubt, overyo much greater than is
justifiable; but it is desirable that this should be pcorrectedp by
raising the unskilled, not by lowering the skilled. If, however, the
other changes taking place in society are not accompanied by a
strengthening of the qchecksq to population on the part of labourers
generally, there will be a tendency to bring the lower grades of skilled
labourers under the influence of a rate of increase regulated by a lower
standard of living than their own, and thus to deteriorate their
condition without raising that of the general mass; rthe stimulus given
to the multiplication of the lowest class beingr sufficient to fill up
without difficulty the additional space gained by them from those
immediately above.

§ 3. [Effect on wages of a class of subsidized competitors] A modifying
circumstance still remains to be noticed, which interferes to some
extent with the operation of the principles thus far brought to view.
While it is true, as a general rule, that the earnings of skilled
labour, and especially of any labour which requires school education,
are at a monopoly rate, from the impossibility, to the mass of the
people, of obtaining that education; Edition: current; Page: [389] it is
also true that the policy of nationsa, or the bounty of individuals,
formerly dida much to counteract the effect of this limitation of
competition, by offering eleemosynary instruction to a much larger class
of persons than could have obtained the same advantages by paying their
price. Adam Smith has pointed out the operation of this cause in keeping
down the remuneration of scholarly or bookish occupations generally, and
in particular of clergymen, literary men, and schoolmasters, or other
teachers of youth. I cannot better set forth this part of the subject
than in his words.

“It has been considered as of so much importance that a proper number of
young people should be educated for certain professions, that sometimes
the public, and sometimes the piety of private founders, have
established many pensions, scholarships, exhibitions, bursaries, &c. for
this purpose, which draw many more people into those trades than could
otherwise pretend to follow them. In all Christian countries, I believe,
the education of the greater part of churchmen is paid for in this
manner. Very few of them are educated altogether at their own expense.
The long, tedious, and expensive education, therefore, of those who are,
will not always procure them a suitable reward, the church being crowded
with people who, in order to get employment, are willing to accept of a
much smaller recompense than what such an education would otherwise have
entitled them to; and in this manner the competition of the poor takes
away the reward of the rich. It would be indecent, no doubt, to compare
either a curate or a chaplain with a journeyman in any common trade. The
pay of a curate or bab chaplain, however, may very properly be
considered as of the same nature with the wages of a journeyman. They
are, all three, paid for their work according to the contract which they
may happen to make with their respective superiors. Till after the
middle of the fourteenth century, five marks, containing as much silver
as ten pounds of our present money, was in England the usual pay of a
curate or a stipendiary parish priest, as we find it regulated by the
decrees of several different national councils. At the same period
fourpence a day, containing the same quantity of silver as a shilling of
our present money, was declared to be the pay of a master-mason, and
threepence a day, equal to ninepence of our present money, that of a
journeyman mason.* The wages of both these labourers, therefore,
supposing them to have been constantly employed, were much superior to
those of the curate. The wages of the master-mason, supposing him to
have been without employment one-third of the year, would have fully
equalled them. By the 12th of Queen Anne, c. 12, it is declared, ‘That
whereas for want of sufficient maintenance and encouragement to curates,
the cures have Edition: current; Page: [390] in several places been
meanly supplied, the bishop is therefore empowered to appoint by writing
under his hand and seal a sufficient certain stipend or allowance, not
exceeding fifty, and not less than twenty pounds a year.’ Forty pounds a
year is reckoned at present very good pay for a curate, and
notwithstanding this act of parliament, there are many curacies under
twenty pounds a year. This last sum does not exceed what is frequently
earned by common labourers in many country parishes. Whenever the law
has attempted to regulate the wages of workmen, it has always been
rather to lower them than to raise them. But the law has upon many
occasions attempted to raise the wages of curates, and for the dignity
of the Church, to oblige the rectors of parishes to give them more than
the wretched maintenance which they themselves might be willing to
accept of. And in both cases the law seems to have been equally
ineffectual, and has never cbeen eitherc able to raise the wages of
curates or to sink those of labourers to the degree that was intended,
because it has never been able to hinder either the one from being
willing to accept of less than the legal allowance, on account of the
indigence of their situation and the multitude of their competitors; or
the other from receiving more, on account of the contrary competition of
those who expected to derive either profit or pleasure from employing
them.”

“In professions in which there are no benefices, such as law (?) and
physic, if an equal proportion of people were educated at the public
expense, the competition would soon be so great as to sink very much
their pecuniary reward. It might then not be worth any man’s while to
educate his son to either of those professions at his own expense. They
would be entirely abandoned to such as had been educated by those public
charities; whose numbers and necessities would oblige them in general to
content themselves with a very miserable recompense.

“That unprosperous race of men, commonly called men of letters, are
pretty much in the situation which lawyers and physicians probably would
be in upon the foregoing supposition. In every part of Europe, the
greater part of them have been educated for the church, but have been
hindered by different reasons from entering into holy orders. They have
generally, therefore, been educated at the public expense, and their
numbers are everywhere so great as to reduce the price of their labour
to a very paltry recompense.

“Before the invention of the art of printing, the only employment by
which a man of letters could make anything by his talents, was that of a
public or private teacher, or by communicating to other people the
curious and useful knowledge which he had acquired himself: and this is
still surely a more honourable, a more useful, and in general even a
more profitable Edition: current; Page: [391] employment than that other
of writing for a bookseller, to which the art of printing has given
occasion. The time and study, the genius, knowledge, and application
requisite to qualify an eminent teacher of the sciences, are at least
equal to what is necessary for the greatest practitioners in law and
physic. But the usual reward of the eminent dteacherd bears no
proportion to that of the lawyer or physician; because the trade of the
one is crowded with indigent people who have been brought up to it at
the public expense, where those of the other two are encumbered with
very few who have not been educated at their own. The usual recompense,
however, of public and private teachers, small as it may appear, would
undoubtedly be less than it is, if the competition of those yet more
indigent men of letters who write for bread was not taken out of the
market. Before the invention of the art of printing, a scholar and a
beggar seem to have been terms very nearly synonymous. The different
governors of the universities before that time appear to have often
granted licences to their scholars to beg.”

§ 4. [Effect on wages of the competition of persons with independent
means of support] The demand for literary labour has so greatly
increased since Adam Smith wrote, while the provisions for eleemosynary
education have nowhere been much added to, and in the countries which
have aundergonea revolutions have been much diminished, that little
effect in keeping down the recompense of literary labour can now be
ascribed to the influence of those institutions. But an effect nearly
equivalent is now produced by a cause somewhat similar—the competition
of persons who, by analogy with other arts, may be called amateurs.
Literary occupation is one of those pursuits in which bsuccess may be
attained by persons the greater part of whose time is taken up by other
employments; and the education necessary for it, is the common education
of all cultivated persons. The inducements to it, independently of
moneyc, in the present state of the world, to all who have either vanity
to gratify, or personal or public objects to promote, are dstrongc.
These motives now attract into this career ea great and increasing
number of persons who do not need its pecuniary fruits, and who would
equally resort to it if it afforded no remuneration at all. In our own
country (to cite known examples), the most influential, and Edition:
current; Page: [392] on the whole most eminent philosophical writer of
recent times (Bentham), the greatest political economist (Ricardo), the
most ephemerally celebrated, and the really greatest poets (Byron and
Shelley), and the most successful writer of prose fiction (Scott), were
none of them authors by profession; and only two of the five, Scott and
Byron, could have supported themselves by the works which they wrote.
Nearly all the higher departments of authorship are, to a great extent,
similarly filled. In consequence, although the highest pecuniary prizes
of successful authorship are incomparably greater than fat any former
period, yet on any rational calculation of gtheg chances, hinh the
existing competition, iscarcely anyi writer can hope to gain a living by
books, and to do so by magazines and reviews becomes daily more
difficult. It is only the more troublesome and disagreeable kinds of
literary labour, and those which confer no personal celebrity, such as
most of those connected with newspapers, or with the smaller
periodicals, on which an educated person can now rely for subsistence.
Of these, the remuneration is, on the whole, decidedly high; because,
though exposed to the competition of what used to be called “poor
scholars” (persons who jhavej received a learned education from some
public or private charity), they are exempt from that of amateurs, those
who have other means of support being seldom candidates for such
employments. Whether these considerations are not connected with
something radically amiss in the idea of authorship as a profession, and
whether any social arrangement under which the teachers of mankind
consist of persons giving out doctrines for bread, is suited to be, or
can possibly be, a permanent thing—would be a subject well worthy of the
attention of thinkers.

The clerical, like the literary profession, is frequently adopted by
persons of independent means, either from religious zeal, or for the
sake of the honour or usefulness which may belong to it, or for a chance
of the high prizes which it holds out: and it is now principally for
this reason that the salaries of curates are so low; those salaries,
though considerably raised by the influence of public opinion, being
still generally insufficient as the sole means of support for one who
has to maintain the externals expected from a clergyman of the
established church.

When an occupation is carried on chiefly by persons who derive the main
portion of their subsistence from other sources, its remuneration may be
lower almost to any extent, than the wages of equally severe labour in
other employments. The principal example of the kind is domestic
manufactures. When spinning and knitting were carried on in every
cottage, by families deriving their principal support from agriculture,
the price at which their Edition: current; Page: [393] produce was sold
(which constituted the remuneration of the labour) was often so low,
that there would have been required great perfection of machinery to
undersell it. The amount of the remuneration in such a case, depends
chiefly upon whether the quantity of the commodity, produced by this
description of labour, suffices to supply the whole of the demand. If it
does not, and there is kconsequentlyk a necessity for some labourers who
devote themselves entirely to the employment, the price of the article
must be sufficient to pay those labourers at the ordinary rate, and to
reward therefore very handsomely the domestic producers. But if the
demand is so limited that the domestic manufacture can do more than
satisfy it, the price is naturally kept down to the lowest rate at which
peasant families think it worth while to continue the production. It is,
no doubt, because the Swiss artizans do not depend for the whole of
their subsistence upon their looms, that Zurich is able to maintain a
competition in the European market lwith English capital, and English
fuel and machinery.* Thus far, as to the remuneration of the subsidiary
employment; but the effect to the labourers of having this additional
resource, is almost certain to be (unless peculiar counteracting causes
intervene) a proportional diminution of the wages of their main
occupation. The habits of the people (as has already been so often
remarked) everywhere require some particular scale of living, and no
more, as the condition mwithout which they will notm bring up a family.
Whether the income which maintains them in this condition comes from one
source or from two, makes no difference: if there is a second source of
income, they nrequire less from the first; and omultiply (at least this
has always hitherto been the case) to a point which leaves them no more
from both employments, than they would probably have had from either if
it had been their sole occupation.

For the same reason it is found that, cæteris paribus, those trades are
pgenerallyp the worst paid, in which the wife and children of the
artizan aid in the work. The income which the habits of the class
demand, and down to which they are almost sure to multiply, is made up,
in those trades, by the earnings of the whole family, while in others
the same income must be obtained by the labour of the man alone. It is
even probable that their qcollectiveq earnings will amount to a smaller
sum than those of the man Edition: current; Page: [394] alone in other
trades; because the prudential restraint on marriage is unusually weak
when the only consequence immediately felt is an improvement of
circumstances, the joint earnings of the two going further in their
domestic economy after marriage than before. Such accordingly is the
fact, in the case of hand-loom weavers. In most kinds of weaving, women
can and do earn as much as men, and children rare employed at a very
early age; but the aggregate earnings of a family are lower than in
almost any other kind of industry, and the marriages earlier. It is
noticeable also that there are certain branches of hand-loom weaving in
which wages are much above the rate common in the trade, and that these
are the branches in which sneither women nor young persons are employed.
These facts were authenticated by the inquiries of the Hand-loom Weavers
Commission, which made its report in 1841. tNo argument ucan be hence
derived for the exclusion of women from the liberty of competing in the
labour marketv: since, evenv when no more is earned by the labour of a
man and a woman than would have been earned by the man alone, the
advantage to the woman of not depending on a master for subsistence wmay
bew more than an equivalent. xIt cannot, however, be considered
desirable as a permanent element in the condition of a labouring class,
that the mother of the family (the case of ya single womany is totally
different) should be under the necessity of working for subsistence, at
least elsewhere than in their place of abode. Inx the case of children,
who are necessarily dependent, the influence of their competition in
depressing the labour market is an important element in the question of
limiting their labour, in order to provide better for their education.t

§ 5. [Wages of women, why lower than those of men] It deserves
consideration, why the wages of women are generally lower, and very much
lower, than those of men. They are not universally so. Where men and
women work at the same employment, if it be one for which they are
equally fitted in point of physical power, athey are not alwaysa
unequally Edition: current; Page: [395] paid. Women, in factories,
bsometimesb earn as much as men; and so they do in hand-loom weaving,
which, being paid by the piece, brings their efficiency to a sure test.
cWhen the efficiency is equal, but the pay unequalc, the only
explanation that can be given is custom; grounded either in a prejudice,
or in the present constitution of society, which, making almost every
woman, socially speaking, an appendage of some man, enables men to take
systematically the lion’s share of whatever belongs to both. dBut the
principal question relates to the peculiar employments of women. The
remuneration of these is always, I believe, greatly below that of
employments of equal skill and equal disagreeableness, carried on by
men. eIn some of these cases the explanation is evidently that already
given: as in the case of domestic servants, whose wages, speaking
generally, are not determined by competition, but are greatly in excess
of the market value of the labour, and in this excess, as in almost all
things which are regulated by custom, the male sex obtains by far the
largest share. In the occupations in which employers take full advantage
of competition, the low wages of women as compared with the ordinary
earnings of men, are a proof that the employmentse are overstocked: that
although so much smaller a number of women, than of men, support
themselves by wages, the occupations which law and fusagef make
accessible to them are comparatively so few, that the field of their
employment is still more overcrowded. It must be observed, that as
matters now stand, a sufficient degree of overcrowding may depress the
wages of women to a much lower minimum than those of men. gThe wages, at
least of single women, mustg be equal to their support, but need not be
more than equal to it; the minimum, in their case, is the pittance
absolutely requisite for the sustenance of one human being. Now the
lowest point to which the most superabundant competition can permanently
Edition: current; Page: [396] depress the wages of a man, is always
somewhat more than this. Where the wife of a labouring man does not by
general custom contribute to his earnings, the man’s wages must be at
least sufficient to support himself, a wife, and a number of children
adequate to keep up the population, since if it were less the population
would not be kept up. And even if the wife earns something, their joint
wages must be sufficient to support not only themselves, but (at least
for some years) their children alsoh. The ne plus ultra of low wages,
therefore (except during some transitory crisis, or in some decaying
employment), can ihardlyi occur in any occupation which the person
employed has to live by, except the occupations of women.

§ 6. [Differences of wages arising from restrictive laws, and from
combinations] Thus far, we have, throughout this discussion, proceeded
on the supposition that competition is free, so far as regards human
interference; being limited only by natural causes, or by unintended
effect of general social circumstances. But law or custom may interfere
to limit competition. If apprentice laws, or the regulations of
corporate bodies, make the access to a particular employment slow,
costly, or difficult, the wages of that employment may be kept much
above their natural proportion to the wages of common laboura. They
might be so kept withouta any assignable limit, were it not that wages
which exceed the usual rate require corresponding prices, and that there
is a limit to the price at which even a restricted number of producers
can dispose of all they produce. In most civilized countries, the
restrictions of this kind which once existed have been either abolished
or very much relaxed, and will, no doubt, soon disappear entirely. In
some trades, however, and to some extent, the combinations of workmen
produce a similar effect. Those combinations always fail to uphold wages
at an artificial rate, unless they also limit the number of competitors.
But they do occasionally succeed in accomplishing this. In several
trades the workmen have been able to make it almost impracticable for
strangers to obtain admission either as journeymen or as apprentices,
except in limited numbers, and under such restrictions as they choose to
impose. It was given in evidence to the Hand-loom Weavers Commission,
that this is one of the hardships which aggravate the grievous condition
of that depressed class. Their own employment is overstocked and almost
ruined; but there are many other trades which it would not be difficult
for them to learn: to this, however, the combinations of workmen
Edition: current; Page: [397] in those other trades are said to
interpose an obstacle hitherto insurmountable.

Notwithstanding, however, the cruel manner in which the exclusive
principle of these combinations operates in a case of this peculiar
nature, bcthe question, whether they are on the whole more useful or
mischievous, requires to be decided on an enlarged consideration of
consequences, among which such a fact as this is not one of the most
important itemsb. Putting aside the atrocities sometimes committed by
dworkmendc in the way of personal outrage or intimidation, ewhich cannot
be too rigidly repressedf; if the present state of the general habits of
the people were to remain for ever unimproved, these partial
combinations, in so far as they do succeed in keeping up the wages of
any trade by limiting its numbers, might be looked uponf as simply
intrenching garoundg a particular spot against the inroads of
over-population, and making hthe wages of the classh depend upon their
own rate of increase, instead of depending on that of a more reckless
and improvident class than themselves. ijWhat at first sight seems the
injustice of excluding the more numerous kbodyk from sharing the gains
of a comparatively few, disappears when we consider that by being
Edition: current; Page: [398] admitted they would not be made better
off, for more than a short time; the only permanent effect which their
admission would produce, would be to lower the others to their own
level. lTo what extent the force of this consideration is annulled when
a tendency commences towards diminished over-crowding in the labouring
classes generally, and what grounds of a different nature there may be
for regarding the existence of trade combinations as rather to be
desired than deprecated, will be considered in a subsequent chapter of
this work, with the subject of Combination Laws.jl

§ 7. [Cases in which wages are fixed by custom] To conclude this
subject, I must repeat an observation already made, that there are kinds
of labour of which the wages are fixed by custom, and not by
competition. Such are the fees or charges of professional persons: of
physicians, surgeons, barristers, and even attorneys. These, as a
general rule, do not vary, and though competition operates upon those
classes as much as upon any others, it is by dividing the business,
nota, in general,a by diminishing the rate at which it is paid. The
cause of this, bperhaps, has beenb cthe prevalence ofc an opinion dthat
such persons are more trustworthy if paid highly in proportion to the
work they perform; insomuch that if a lawyer or a physician offered his
services at less than the ordinary rate, instead of gaining more
practice, he would probably lose that which he already had. For
analogous reasons it is usual to pay greatly beyond the market price of
their labour, all persons in whom the employer wishes to place peculiar
trust, or from whom he requires something besides their mere services.
For example, most persons who can afford it, pay to their domestic
servants higher wages than would purchase in the market the labour of
persons fully Edition: current; Page: [399] as competent to the work
required. They do this, not emerely frome ostentation, but falsof from
gmoreg reasonable motives; heitherh because they desire that those they
employ should serve them cheerfully, and be anxious to remain in their
service; iori because they do not like to drive a hard bargain with
people whom they are in constant intercourse with; jorj because they
dislike to have near their persons, and continually in their sight,
people with the appearance and habits which are the usual accompaniments
of a mean remuneration. Similar feelings operate in the minds of persons
in business, with respect to their clerks, and other employés.
Liberality, generosity, and the credit of the employer, are motives
which, to whatever extent they operate, preclude taking the utmost
advantage of competition: and doubtless such motives might, and even now
do, operate on employers of labour in all the great departments of
industry; and most desirable is it that they should. But they can never
raise the average wages of labour beyond the ratio of population to
capitalk. Byk giving more to each person employed, they limit the power
of giving employment to numbers; and however excellent their moral
effect, they do little good economically, unless the pauperism of those
who are shut out, leads indirectly to a readjustment by means of an
increased restraint on population.

Edition: current; Page: [400]


CHAPTER XV: Of Profits

§ 1. [Profits resolvable into three parts; interest, insurance, and
wages of superintendence] Having treated of the labourer’s share of the
produce, we next proceed to the share of the capitalist; the profits of
capital or stock; the gains of the person who advances the expenses of
production—who, from funds in his possession, pays the wages of the
labourers, or supports them during the work; who supplies the requisite
buildings, materials, and tools or machinery; and to whom, by the usual
terms of the contract, the produce belongs, to be disposed of at his
pleasure. After indemnifying him for his outlay, there commonly remains
a surplus, which is his profit; the net income from his capital: the
amount which he can afford to aspenda in necessaries or pleasures, or
from which by further saving he can add to his wealth.

As the wages of the labourer are the remuneration of labour, so the
profits of the capitalist are properly, according to Mr. Senior’s
well-chosen expression, the remuneration of abstinence. They are what he
gains by forbearing to consume his capital for his own uses, and
allowing it to be consumed by productive labourers for their uses. For
this forbearance he requires a recompense. Very often in personal
enjoyment he would be a gainer by squandering his capital, the capital
amounting to more than the sum of the profits which it will yield during
the years he can expect to live. But while he retains it undiminished,
he has always the power of consuming it if he wishes or needs; he can
bestow it upon others at his death; and in the meantime he derives from
it an income, which he can without impoverishment apply to the
satisfaction of his own wants or inclinations.

Of the gains, however, which the possession of a capital enables a
person to make, a part only is properly an equivalent for the use of the
capital itself; namely, as much as ba solventb person would be willing
to pay for the loan of it. This, which as everybody knows is called
interest, is all that a person is enabled to get by merely abstaining
from the immediate consumption of his capital, and allowing it to be
used for productive purposes by others. The remuneration which is
obtained in any country for mere abstinence, is measured by the current
rate of interest on the best Edition: current; Page: [401] security;
such security as precludes any appreciable chance of losing the
principal. What a person expects to gain, who superintends the
employment of his own capital, is always more, and generally much more,
than this. The rate of profit greatly exceeds the rate of interest. The
surplus is partly compensation for risk. By lending his capital, on
unexceptionable security, he runs little or no risk. But if he embarks
in business on his own account, he always exposes his capital to some,
and in many cases to very great, danger of cpartial or totalc loss. For
this danger he must be compensated, otherwise he will not incur it. He
must likewise be remunerated for the devotion of his time and labour.
The control of the operations of industry usually belongs to the person
who supplies the whole or the greatest part of the funds by which they
are carried on, and who, according to the ordinary arrangement, is
either alone interested, or is the person most interested (at least
directly), in the result. To exercise this control with efficiency, if
the concern is large and complicated, requires great assiduity, and
often, no ordinary skill. This assiduity and skill must be remunerated.

The gross profits from capital, the gains returned to those who supply
the funds for production, must suffice for these three purposes. They
must afford a sufficient dequivalentd for abstinence, indemnity for
risk, and remuneration for the labour and skill required for
superintendence. These different compensations may be either paid to the
same, or to different persons. The capital, or some part of it, may be
borrowed: may belong to some one who does not undertake the risks or the
trouble of business. In that case, the lender, or owner, is the person
who practises the abstinence; and is remunerated for it by the interest
paid to him, while the difference between the interest and the gross
eprofitse remunerates the exertions and risks of the undertaker.*
Sometimes, again, the capital, or a part of it, is supplied by what is
called a sleeping partner; who shares the risks of the employment, but
not the trouble, and who, in consideration of those risks, receives not
a mere interest, but a stipulated share of the gross profits. Sometimes
the capital is supplied and the risk incurred by one person, and the
business carried on exclusively in his name, while the trouble of
management is made over to another, who is engaged for that purpose at a
fixed salary. Management, however, by hired servants, who have no
interest in the result but that of preserving their salaries, is
proverbially inefficient, unless they act under the inspecting eye, if
not the controlling Edition: current; Page: [402] hand, of the person
chiefly interested: and prudence almost always recommends giving to a
manager not thus controlled, a remuneration partly dependent on the
profits; which virtually reduces the case to that of a sleeping partner.
Or finally, the same person may own the capital, and conduct the
business; adding, if he will and can, to the management of his own
capital, that of as much more as the owners may be willing to trust him
with. But under any or all of these arrangements, the same three things
require their remuneration, and must obtain it from the gross profit:
abstinence, risk, exertion. And the three parts into which profit may be
considered as resolving itself, may be described respectively as
interest, insurance, and wages of superintendence.

§ 2. [The minimum of profits; and the variations to which it is liable]
The lowest rate of profit which can permanently exist, is that which is
barely adequate, at the given place and time, to afford an equivalent
for the abstinence, risk, and exertion implied in the employment of
capital. From the gross profit, has first to be deducted as much as will
form a fund sufficient on the average to cover all losses incident to
the employment. Next, it must afford such an equivalent to the owner of
the capital for forbearing to consume it, as is then and there a
sufficient motive to him to persist in his abstinence. How much will be
required to form this equivalent, depends on the comparative value
placed, in the given society, upon the present and the future: a(in the
words formerly used) on the strength of the effective desire of
accumulation. Further, after covering all losses, and remunerating the
owner for bforbearing to consumeb, there must be something left to
recompense the labour and skill of the person who devotes his time to
the business. This recompense too must be sufficient to enable at least
the owners of the larger capitals to receive for their trouble, or to
pay to some manager for his, what to them or him will be a sufficient
inducement for undergoing it. If the surplus is no more than this, none
but large masses of capital will be employed productively; and if it
cdid not even amount toc this, capital would be withdrawn from
production, and unproductively consumed, until, by an indirect
consequence of its diminished amount, to be explained hereafter, the
rate of profit was raised.

Such, then, is the minimum of profits: but that minimum is exceedingly
variable, and at some times and places extremely low; on account of the
great variableness of two out of its three elements. That the rate of
necessary remuneration for abstinence, or in other words the effective
desire of accumulation, differs widely in different states of society
and civilization, has been seen in a former chapter. There is a still
wider difference in the Edition: current; Page: [403] element which
consists in compensation for risk. I am not now speaking of the
differences in point of risk between different employments of capital in
the same society, but of the very different degrees of security of
property in different states of society. Where, as in dmanyd of the
governments of Asia, property is in perpetual danger of spoliation from
a tyrannical government, or from its rapacious and ill-controlled
officers; where to possess or to be suspected of possessing wealth, is
to be a mark not only for plunder, but perhaps for personal
ill-treatment to extort the disclosure and surrender of hidden
valuables; or where, as in the European Middle Ages, the weakness of the
government, even when not itself inclined to oppress, eleavese its
subjects exposed without protection or redress to active spoliation, or
audacious withholding of just rights, by any powerful individual; the
rate of profit which persons of average dispositions will require, to
make them forego the immediate enjoyment of what they happen to possess,
for the purpose of exposing it and themselves to these perils, must be
something very considerable. And these contingencies affect those who
live on the mere interest of their capital, in common with those who
personally engage in production. In a generally secure state of society,
the risks which may be attendant on the nature of particular employments
seldom fall on the person who lends his capital, if he lends on good
security; but in a state of society like that of fmany parts off Asia,
no security (except perhaps the actual pledge of gold or jewels) is
good: and the mere possession of a hoard, when known or suspected,
exposes it and the possessor to risks, for which scarcely any profit he
could expect to obtain would be an equivalent; so that there would be
still less accumulation than there is, if a state of insecurity did not
also multiply the occasions on which the possession of a treasure may be
the means of saving life or averting serious calamities. Those who lend,
under these wretched governments, do it at the utmost peril of never
being paid. In most of the native states of India, the lowest terms on
which any one will lend money, even to the government, are such, that if
the interest is paid only for a few years, and the principal not at all,
the lender is tolerably well indemnified. If the accumulation of
principal and compound interest is ultimately compromised at a few
shillings in the pound, he has generally made an advantageous bargain.

§ 3. [Differences of profits arising from the nature of the particular
employment] The remuneration of capital in different employments, amuch
more thana the remuneration of labour, varies according to the
circumstances which render one employment more attractive, or more
repulsive, than another. The profits, for example, of retail trade, in
proportion to the Edition: current; Page: [404] capital employed, exceed
those of wholesale dealers or manufacturers, for this reason among
others, that there is less consideration attached to the employment. The
greatestb, however, of these differences,b is that caused by difference
of risk. The profits of a gunpowder manufacturer must be considerably
greater than the average, to make up for the peculiar risks to which he
and his property are constantly exposed. When, however, as in the case
of marine adventure, the peculiar risks are capable of being, and
commonly are, commuted for a fixed payment, the premium of insurance
takes its regular place among the charges of production, and the
compensation which the owner of the ship or cargo receives for that
payment, does not appear in the estimate of his profits, but is included
in the replacement of his capital.

The portion, too, of the gross profit, which forms the remuneration for
the labour and skill of the dealer or producer, is very different in
different employments. This is the explanation always given of the
extraordinary rate of apothecaries’ profit; the greatest part, as Adam
Smith observes, being frequently no more than the reasonable wages of
professional attendance; for which, until a late alteration of the law,
the apothecary could not demand any remuneration, except in the prices
of his drugs. Some occupations require a considerable amount of
scientific or technical education, and can only be carried on by persons
who combine with that education a considerable capital. Such is the
business of an engineer, both in the original sense of the term, a
machine-maker, and in its popular or derivative sense, an undertaker of
public works. These are always the most profitable employments. There
are cases, again, in which a considerable amount of labour and skill
cisc required to conduct a business necessarily of limited extent. In
such cases, a higher than common rate of profit is necessary to yield
only the common rate of remuneration. “In a small seaport-town,” says
Adam Smith, “a little grocer will make forty or fifty per cent upon a
stock of a single hundred pounds, while a considerable wholesale
merchant in the same place will scarce make eight or ten per cent upon a
stock of ten thousand. The trade of the grocer may be necessary for the
conveniency of the inhabitants, and the narrowness of the market may not
admit the employment of a larger capital in the business. The man,
however, must not only live by his trade, but live by it suitably to the
qualifications which it requires. Besides possessing a little capital,
he must be able to read, write, and account, and must be a tolerable
judge, too, of perhaps fifty or sixty different sorts of goods, their
prices, qualities, and the markets where they are to be had cheapest.
Thirty or forty pounds a year cannot be considered as too great a
recompense for the labour of a person so accomplished. Deduct this from
the seemingly great profits of Edition: current; Page: [405] his
capital, and little more will remain, perhaps, than the ordinary profits
of stock. The greater part of the apparent profit is, in this case, too,
real wages.”[*]

All the natural monopolies (meaning thereby those which are created by
circumstances, and not by law) which produce or aggravate the disparties
in the remuneration of different kinds of labour, operate similarly
between different employments of capital. If a business can only be
advantageously carried on by a large capital, this in most countries
limits so narrowly the class of persons who can enter into the
employment, that they are enabled to keep their rate of profit above the
general level. A trade may also, from the nature of the case, be
confined to so few hands, that profits may admit of being kept up by a
combination among the dealers. It is well known that even among so
numerous a body as the London booksellers, this sort of combination
dlong continued to existd. I have already mentioned the case of the gas
and water companies.

§ 4. [General tendency of profits to an equality] After due allowance is
made for these various causes of inequality, namely, differences in the
risk or agreeableness of different employments, and natural or
artificial monopolies; the rate of profit on capital in all employments
tends to an equality. Such is the proposition usually laid down by
political economists, and under proper explanations it is true.

That portion of profit which is properly interest, and which forms the
real remuneration for abstinence, is strictly the same, at the same time
and place, whatever be the employment. The rate of interest on equally
good security, does not vary according to the destination of the
aprincipala, though it does vary from time to time very much, according
to the circumstances of the market. There is no employment in which, in
the present state of industry, competition is so active and incessant as
binb the lending and borrowing of money. All persons in business are
occasionally, and most of them constantly, borrowers: while all persons
not in business, who possess monied property, are lenders. Between these
two great bodies there is a numerous, keen, and intelligent class of
middlemen, composed of bankers, stockbrokers, discount brokers, and
others, alive to the slightest breath of probable gain. The smallest
circumstance, or the most transient impression on the public mind, which
tends to an increase or diminution of the demand for loans either at the
time or prospectively, operates immediately on the rate of interest: and
circumstances in the general state of Edition: current; Page: [406]
trade, really tending to cause this difference of demand, are
continually occurring, sometimes to such an extent, that the rate of
interest on the best mercantile bills has been known to vary cin little
more thanc a year (even without the occurrence of the great derangement
called a commercial crisis) from dfour, or less, to eight or nined per
cent. But, at the same time and place, the rate of interest is the same,
to all who can give equally good security. The market rate of interest
is at all times a known and definite thing.

It is far otherwise with gross profit; which, though (as will presently
be seen) it does not vary much from employment to employment, varies
very greatly from individual to individual, and can scarcely be in any
two cases the same. It depends on the knowledge, talents, economy, and
energy of the capitalist himself, or of the agents whom he employs; on
the accidents of personal connexion; and even on chance. Hardly any two
dealers in the same trade, even if their commodities are equally good
and equally cheap, ecarry on their business at the same expense, or turn
over their capital in the same time. That equal capitals give equal
profits, as a general maxim of trade, would be as false as that equal
age or size gives equal bodily strength, or that equal reading or
experience gives equal knowledge. The effect depends as much upon twenty
other things, as upon the single cause specified.

But though profits thus vary, the parity on the whole, of different
modes of employing capital (in the absence of any natural or artificial
monopoly) is, in a certain, and a very important sense, maintained. On
an average (whatever may be the occasional fluctuations) the various
employments of capital are on such a footing as to hold out, not equal
profits, but equal fexpectationsf of profit, to persons of average
abilities and advantages. By equal, I mean after making compensation for
any inferiority in the agreeableness or safety of an employment. If the
case were not so; if there were, evidently, and to common experience,
more favourable chances of pecuniary success in one business than in
others, more persons would engage their capital in the business, or
would bring up their sons to it; which in fact always happens when a
business, like that of an engineer at present, or like any newly
established and prosperous manufacture, is seen to be a growing and
gthriving one. If, on the contrary, a business is not considered
thriving; if the chances of profit in it are thought to be inferior to
those in other employments; capital gradually leaves it, or at least new
capital is not attracted to it; and by this change in the distribution
of capital Edition: current; Page: [407] between the less profitable and
the more profitable employments, a sort of balance is restored. The
expectations of profit, therefore, in different employments, cannot long
continue very different: they tend to a common average, though they are
generally oscillating from one side to the other side of the medium.

This equalizing process, commonly described as the transfer of capital
from one employment to another, is not necessarily the onerous, slow,
and almost impracticable operation which it is very often represented to
be. In the first place, it does not always imply the actual removal of
capital already embarked in an employment. In a rapidly progressive
state of capital, the adjustment often takes place by means of the new
accumulations of each year, which direct themselves in preference
towards the more thriving trades. Even when a real transfer of capital
is necessary, it is by no means implied that any of those who are
engaged in the unprofitable employment, relinquish business and break up
their establishments. The numerous and multifarious channels of credit,
through which, in commercial nations, unemployed capital diffuses itself
over the field of employment, flowing over in greater abundance to the
lower levels, are the means by which the equalization is accomplished.
The process consists in a limitation by one class of dealers or
producers, and an extension by the other, of that portion of their
business which is carried on with borrowed capital. There is scarcely
any dealer or producer on a considerable scale, who confines his
business to what can be carried on by his own funds. When trade is good,
he not only uses to the utmost his own capital, but employs, in
addition, much of the credit which that capital hobtains forh him. When,
either from over-supply or from some slackening in the demand for his
commodity, he finds that it sells more slowly or iobtainsi a lower
price, he contracts his operations, and does not apply to bankers or
other money dealers for a renewal of their advances to the same extent
as before. A business which is increasing holds out, on the contrary, a
prospect of profitable employment for a larger amount of this floating
capital than previously, and those engaged in it become applicants to
the money dealers for jlargerj advances, which, from their improving
circumstances, they have no difficulty in obtaining. A different
distribution of floating capital between two employments has as much
effect in restoring their profits to an equilibrium, as if the owners of
an equal amount of capital were to abandon the one trade and carry their
capital into the other. This easy, and as it were spontaneous, method of
accommodating production to demand, is quite sufficient to correct any
inequalities arising from the fluctuations of trade, or kother causes of
ordinary occurrence. In the case of an altogether Edition: current;
Page: [408] declining trade, in which it is necessary that the
production should be, not occasionally varied, but greatly and
permanently diminished, or perhaps stopped altogether, the process of
extricating the capital is, no doubt, tardy and difficult, and almost
always attended with considerable loss; much of the capital fixed in
machinery, buildings, permanent works, &c. being either not applicable
to any other purpose, or only applicable after expensive alterations;
and time being seldom given for effecting the change in the mode in
which it would be effected with least loss, lnamely,l by not replacing
the fixed capital as it wears out. There is besides, in totally changing
the destination of a capital, so great a sacrifice of established
connexion, and of acquired skill and experience, that people are always
very slow in resolving upon it, and hardly ever do so muntil long after
a change of fortune has becomem hopeless. These, however, are distinctly
exceptional cases, and even in these the equalization is at last
effected. It may also happen that the return to equilibrium is
considerably protracted, when, before one inequality has been corrected,
another cause of inequality arises; which is said to have been
continually the case during a long series of years, with the production
of cotton in the Southern States of North America; the commodity having
been upheld at what was virtually a monopoly price, because the increase
of demand, from successive improvements in the manufacture, went on with
a rapidity so much beyond expectation that for many years the supply
never completely overtook it. But it is not often that a succession of
disturbing causes, all acting in the same direction, are known to follow
one another with hardly any interval. Where there is no monopoly, the
profits of a trade are likely to range sometimes above and sometimes
below the general level, but tending always to return to it; like the
oscillations of the pendulum.

In general, then, although profits are very different to different
individuals, and to the same individual in different years, there cannot
be much diversity at the same time and place in the average profits of
different employments, (other than the standing differences necessary to
compensate for ndifference of oattractivenesso,) except for short
periods, or when some great permanent revulsion has overtaken a
particular trade. If any popular impression exists that some trades are
more profitable than others, independently of monopoly, or of such rare
accidents as have been noticed in regard to the cotton trade, the
impression pis in all probabilityp fallacious, since if it were shared
by those who have greatest means of knowledge and motives to accurate
examination, there would take place such an influx of Edition: current;
Page: [409] capital as would soon lower the profits to the common level.
It is true that, to persons with the same amount of original means,
there is more chance of making a large fortune in some employments than
in others. But it would be found that in those same employments,
bankruptcies also are more frequent, and that the chance of greater
success is balanced by a greater probability of complete failure. Very
often it is more than balanced: for, as was remarked in another case,
the chance of great prizes operates with a greater degree of strength
than arithmetic will warrant, in attracting competitors; and I doubt not
that the average gains, in a trade in which large fortunes may be made,
are lower than in those in which gains are slow, though comparatively
sure, and in which nothing is to be ultimately hoped for beyond a
competency. The timber trade of Canada is one example of an employment
of capital partaking qsoq much of the nature of a lottery, as to make it
an accredited opinion that, taking the adventurers in the aggregate,
there is more money lost by the trade than gained by it; in other words,
that the average rate of profit is less than nothing. In such points as
this, much depends on the characters of nations, according as they
partake more or less of the adventurous, or, as it is called when the
intention is to blame it, the gambling spirit. This spirit is much
stronger in the United States than in Great Britain; and in Great
Britain than in any country of the Continent. In some Continental
countries the tendency is so much the reverse, that rsafe and quiet
employments probably yield ar less average profit to the capital engaged
in them, than those which soffer greater gains at the price of greater
hazardss.

It must not however be forgotten, that even in the countries of most
active competition, custom also has a considerable share in determining
the profits of trade. There is sometimes an idea afloat as to what the
profit of an employment should be, which though not adhered to by all
the dealers, nor perhaps rigidly by any, still exercises a certain
influence over their operations. There thas beent in England a kind of
notion, how widely prevailing I know not, that fifty per cent is a
proper and suitable rate of profit in retail transactions: understand,
not fifty per cent on the whole capital, but an advance of fifty per
cent on the wholesale prices; from which have to be defrayed bad debts,
shop rent, the pay of clerks, shopmen, and agents of all descriptions,
in short all the expenses of the retail business. If this custom were
universal, and strictly adhered to, competition indeed would still
operate, but the consumer would not derive any benefit from uit, at
least as to price;u the way in which it would diminish the advantages
Edition: current; Page: [410] of those engaged in vthev retail trade,
would be by a greater subdivision of the business. wIn some parts of the
Continent the standard is as high as a hundred per cent.w The xincrease
of competition howeverx, in England at least, is yrapidlyy tending to
break down zcustoms of this description. In athe majority ofa trades
(bat leastb in the great emporia of trade), there are now numerous
dealers whose motto is, “small gains and frequent”—a great business at
low prices, rather than high prices and few transactions; and by turning
over their capital more rapidly, and adding to it by borrowed capital
when needed, cthec dealers often obtain individually higher profits;
though they necessarily lower the profits of those among their
competitors, who do not adopt the same principle. dNevertheless,
competition, as remarked* in a previous chapter, has, as yet, but a
limited dominion over retail prices; and consequently the share of the
whole produce of land and labour which is absorbed in the remuneration
of mere distributors, continues exorbitant; and there is no function in
the economy of society which supports a number of persons so
disproportioned to the amount of work to be performed.d

§ 5. a[Profits do not depend on prices, nor on purchase and sale]a The
preceding remarks have, I hope, sufficiently elucidated what is meant by
the common phrase, “the ordinary rate of profit;” and the sense in
which, and the limitations under which, this ordinary rate has a real
existence. It now remains to consider, what causes determine its amount.

bTo popular apprehension it seems as if the profits of business depended
upon prices. A producer or dealer seems to obtain his profits by selling
his commodity for more than it cost him. Profit altogether, people are
apt to think, is a consequence of purchase and sale. It is only (they
suppose) because there are purchasers for a commodity, that the producer
of it is able to make any profit. Demand—customers—a market for the
commodity, are the cause of the gains of capitalists. It is by the sale
of their goods, that they replace their capital, and add to its amount.

This, however, is looking only at the outside surface of the economical
machinery of society. In no case, we find, is the mere money which
passes from one person to another, the fundamental matter in any
economical phenomenon. If we look more narrowly into the operations of
the producer, Edition: current; Page: [411] we shall perceive that the
money he obtains for his commodity is not the cause of his having a
profit, but only the mode in which his profit is paid to him.

The cause of profit is, that labour produces more than is required for
its support. The reason why agricultural capital yields a profit, is
because human beings can grow more food, than is necessary to feed them
while it is being grown, including the time occupied in constructing the
tools, and making all other needful preparations: from which it is a
consequence, that if a capitalist undertakes to feed the labourers on
condition of receiving the produce, he has some of it remaining for
himself after replacing his advances. To vary the form of the theorem:
the reason why capital yields a profit, is because food, clothing,
materials, and tools, last longer than the time which was required to
produce them; so that if a capitalist supplies a party of labourers with
these things, on condition of receiving all they produce, they will, in
addition to reproducing their own necessaries and instruments, have a
portion of their time remaining, to work for the capitalist. We thus see
that profit arises, not from the incident of exchange, but from the
productive power of labour; and the general profit of the country is
always what the productive power of labour makes it, whether any
exchange takes place or not. If there were no division of employments,
there would be no buying or selling, but there would still be profit. If
the labourers of the country collectively produce twenty per cent more
than their wages, profits will be twenty per cent, whatever prices may
or may not be. The accidents of price may for a time make one set of
producers get more than the twenty per cent, and another less, the one
commodity being rated above its natural value in relation to other
commodities, and the other below, until prices have again adjusted
themselves; but there will always be just twenty per cent divided among
them all.

I proceed, in expansion of the considerations thus briefly indicated, to
exhibit more minutely the mode in which the rate of profit is
determined.b

a§ 6. [The advances of the capitalist consist ultimately in wages of
labour]a I assume, throughout, the state of things, which, where the
labourers and capitalists are separate classes, prevails, with few
exceptions, universally; namely, that the capitalist advances the whole
expenses, including the entire remuneration of the labourer. That he
should do so, is not a matter of inherent necessity; the labourer might
wait until the production is complete, for all that part of his wages
which exceeds mere necessaries; and even for the whole, if he has funds
in hand, sufficient for his temporary support. But in the latter case,
the labourer is to that extent really a capitalist, investing capital in
the concern, by supplying a portion of the Edition: current; Page: [412]
funds necessary for carrying it on; and even in the former case he may
be looked upon in the same light, since, contributing his labour at less
than the market price, he may be regarded as lending the difference to
his employer, and receiving it back with interest (on whatever principle
computed) from the proceeds of the enterprise.

The capitalist, then, may be assumed to make all the advances, and
receive all the produce. His profit consists of the excess of the
produce above the advances; his rate of profit is the ratio which that
excess bears to the amount advanced. But what do the advances consist
of?

It is, for the present, necessary to suppose, that the capitalist does
not pay any rent; has not to purchase the use of any appropriated
natural agent. This indeed is scarcely ever the exact truth. The
agricultural capitalist, except when he is the owner of the soil he
cultivates, always, or almost always, pays rent: and even in
manufactures, (not to mention ground-rent,) the materials of the
manufacture have generally paid rent, in some stage of their production.
The nature of rent, however, we have not yet taken into consideration;
and it will hereafter appear, that no practical error, on the question
we are now examining, is produced by disregarding it.

If, then, leaving rent out of the question, we inquire in what it is
that the advances of the capitalist, for purposes of production,
consist, we shall find that they consist of wages of labour.

A large portion of the expenditure of every capitalist consists in the
direct payment of wages. What does not consist of this, is composed of
materials and implements, including buildings. But materials and
implements are produced by labour; and as our bsupposedb capitalist is
not meant to represent a single employment, but to be a type of the
productive industry of the whole country, we may suppose that he makes
his own tools, and raises his own materials. He does this by means of
previous advances, which, again, consist wholly of wages. If we suppose
him to buy the materials and tools instead of producing them, the case
is not altered: he then repays to a previous producer the wages which
that previous producer has paid. It is true, he repays it to him with a
profit; and if he had produced the things himself, he himself must have
had that profit, on this part of his outlay, as well as on every other
part. The fact, however, remains, that in the whole process of
production, beginning with the materials and tools, and ending with the
finished product, all the advances have consisted of nothing but wages;
except that certain of the capitalists concerned have, for the sake of
general convenience, had their share of profit paid to them before the
operation was completed. Whatever, of the ultimate product, is not
profit, is repayment of wages.

Edition: current; Page: [413]
a§ 7.a [The rate of profit depends on the Cost of Labour] It thus
appears that the two elements on which, and which alone, the gains of
the capitalists depend, are, first, the magnitude of the produce, in
other words, the productive power of labour; and secondly, the
proportion of that produce obtained by the labourers themselves; the
ratio, which the remuneration of the labourers bears to the amount they
produce. These two things form the data for determining the gross amount
divided as profit among all the capitalists of the country; but the rate
of profit, the percentage on the capital, depends only on the second of
the two elements, the blabourer’sb proportional share, and not on the
amount to be shared. If the produce of labour were doubled, and the
labourers obtained the same proportional share as before, that is, if
their remuneration was also doubled, the capitalists, it is true, would
gain twice as much; but as they would also have had to advance twice as
much, the rate of their profit would be only the same as before.

We thus arrive at the conclusion of Ricardo and others, that the rate of
profits depends on wages; rising as wages fall, and falling as wages
rise. In adopting, however, this doctrine, I must insist upon making a
most necessary alteration in its wording. Instead of saying that profits
depend on wages, let us say (what Ricardo really meant) that they depend
on the cost of labour.

Wages, and the cost of labour; what labour brings in to the labourer,
and what it costs to the capitalist; are ideas quite distinct, and which
it is of the utmost importance to keep so. For this purpose it is
essential not to designate them, as is almost always done, by the same
name. cWages, in public discussions, both oral and printed, being looked
upon from the point of view of the payers, much oftener than from that
of the receivers, nothingc is more common than to say that wages are
high or low, meaning only that the cost of labour is high or low. The
reverse of this would be oftener the truth: the cost of labour is
frequently at its highest where wages are lowest. This may arise from
two causes. In the first place, the labour, though cheap, may be
inefficient. In no European country are wages so low as dthey are (or at
least were)d in Ireland: the remuneration of an agricultural labourer in
the west of Ireland enot beinge more than half the wages of even the
lowest-paid Englishman, the Dorsetshire labourer. But if, from inferior
skill and industry, two days’ labour of an Irishman faccomplishedf no
more work than an English labourer gperformedg in one, the Irishman’s
labour hcosth as much as the Englishman’s, though it ibroughti in so
much Edition: current; Page: [414] less to himself. The capitalist’s
profit is determined by the former of these two things, not jbyj the
latter. That a difference to this extent really kexistedk in the
efficiency of the labour, is proved not only by abundant testimony, but
by the fact, that notwithstanding the lowness of wages, profits of
capital lare not understood to have beenl higher in Ireland than in
England.

The other cause which renders wages, and the cost of labour, no real
criteria of one another, is the varying costliness of the articles which
the mlabourerm consumes. If these are cheap, wages, in the sense which
is of importance to the labourer, may be high, and yet the cost of
labour may be low; if dear, the labourer may be wretchedly off, though
his labour may cost much to the capitalist. This last is the condition
of a country over-peopled in relation to its land; in which, food being
dear, the poorness of the labourer’s real reward does not prevent labour
from costing much to the purchaser, and low wages and low profits
co-exist. The opposite case is exemplified in the United States of
America. The labourer there enjoys a greater abundance of comforts than
in any other country nofn the world, except some of otheo newest
colonies; but owing to the cheap price at which these comforts can be
obtained (combined with the great efficiency of the labour), the cost of
labour to the capitalist is pat least not higher, nor the rate of profit
lower,p than in Europe.q

The cost of labour, then, is, in the language of mathematics, a function
of three variables: the efficiency of labour; the wages of labour
(meaning thereby the real reward of the labourer); and the greater or
less cost at which the articles composing that real reward can be
produced or rprocuredr. It is plain that the cost of labour to the
capitalist must be influenced by each of these three circumstances, and
sby nos others. These, therefore, are also the circumstances which
determine the rate of profit; and it cannot be in any way affected
except through one or other of them. If labour generally became more
efficient, without being more highly rewarded; if, without its becoming
less efficient, its remuneration fell, no increase taking place in the
cost of the articles composing that remuneration; Edition: current;
Page: [415] or if those articles became less costly, without the
labourer’s obtaining more of them; in any one of these three cases,
profits would rise. If, on the contrary, labour became less efficient
(as it might do from diminished bodily vigour in the people,
tdestruction of fixed capital, ort deteriorated education); or if the
labourer obtained a higher remuneration, without any increased cheapness
in the things composing it; or if, without his obtaining more, that
which he did obtain became more costly; profits, in all these cases,
would suffer a diminution. And there is no other combination of
circumstances, in which the general rate of profit of a country, in all
employments indifferently, can either fall or rise.

The evidence of these propositions can only be stated generally, though,
it is hoped, conclusively, in this stage of our subject. It will come
uoutu in greater fulness and force when, having taken into consideration
the theory of Value and Price, we shall be enabled to exhibit the law of
profits in the concrete—in the complex entanglement of circumstances in
which it actually works. This can only be done in the ensuing Book. One
topic still remains to be discussed in the present one, so far as it
admits of being treated independently of considerations of Value; the
subject of Rent; to which we now proceed.

Edition: current; Page: [416]


CHAPTER XVI: Of Rent

§ 1. [Rent is the effect of a natural monopoly] The requisites of
production being labour, capital, and natural agents; the only person,
besides the labourer and the capitalist, whose consent is necessary to
production, and who can claim a share of the produce as the price of
that consent, is the person who, by the arrangements of society,
possesses exclusive power over some natural agent. The land is the
principal of the natural agents which are capable of being appropriated,
and the consideration paid for its use is called rent. Landed
proprietors are the only class, of any numbers or importance, who have a
claim to a share in the distribution of the produce, through their
ownership of something which neither they nor any one else have
produced. If there be any other cases of a similar nature, they will be
easily understood, when the nature and laws of rent are comprehended.

It is at once evident, that rent is the effect of a monopoly; though the
monopoly is a natural one, which may be regulated, which may even be
held as a trust for the community generally, but which cannot be
prevented from existing. The reason why landowners are able to require
rent for their land, is that it is a commodity which many want, and
which no one can obtain but from them. If all the land of the country
belonged to one person, he could fix the rent at his pleasure. The whole
people would be dependent on his will for the necessaries of life, and
he might make what conditions he chose. This is the actual state of
things in those Oriental kingdoms in which the land is considered the
property of the state. Rent is then confounded with taxation, and the
despot may exact the utmost which the unfortunate cultivators have to
give. Indeed, the exclusive possessor of the land of a country could not
well be other than despot of it. The effect would be much the same if
the land belonged to so few people, that they could, and did, aacta
together as one man, and fix the rent by agreement among themselves.
This case, however, is nowhere known to exist: and the only remaining
supposition is that of free competition; the landowners being supposed
to be, as in fact they are, too numerous to combine.

Edition: current; Page: [417]
§ 2. [No land can pay rent except land of such quality or situation, as
exists in less quantity than the demand] A thing which is limited in
quantity, even though its possessors do not act in concert, is still a
monopolized article. But even when monopolized, a thing which is the
gift of nature, and requires no labour or outlay as the condition of its
existence, will, if there be competition among the holders of it,
command a price, only if it exists in less quantity than the demand. If
the whole land of a country were required for cultivation, all of it
might yield a rent. But in no country of any extent do the wants of the
population require that all the land, which is capable of cultivation,
should be cultivated. The food and other agricultural produce which the
people need, and which they are willing and able to pay for at a price
which remunerates the grower, may always be obtained without cultivating
all the land; sometimes without cultivating more than a small part of
it; the alands most easily cultivated being preferred in a very early
stage of society; the most fertile, or those in the most convenient
situations, in a more advanced statea. There is always, therefore, some
land which cannot, in existing circumstances, pay any rent; and no land
ever pays rent, unless, in point of fertility or situation, it belongs
to those superior kinds which exist in less quantity than the
demand—which cannot be made to yield all the produce required for the
community, unless on terms still less advantageous than the resort to
less favoured soils.

There is land, such as the deserts of Arabia, which will yield nothing
to any amount of labour; and there is land, like some of our hard sandy
heaths, which would produce something, but, in the present state of the
soil, not enough to defray the expenses of production. bSuch lands,
unless by some application of chemistry to agriculture still remaining
to be invented,b cannot be cultivated for profit, unless some one
actually creates a soil, by spreading new ingredients over the surface,
or mixing them with the existing materials. If ingredients fitted for
this purpose exist in the subsoil, or close at hand, the improvement
even of the most unpromising spots may answer as a speculation: but if
those ingredients are costly, and must be brought from a distance, it
will seldom answer to do this for the sake of profit, though the “magic
of property” will sometimes effect it. Land which cannot possibly yield
a profit, is sometimes cultivated at a loss, the cultivators having
their wants partially supplied from other sources; as in the case of
paupers, and some monasteries or charitable institutions, among which
may be reckoned the Poor Colonies Edition: current; Page: [418] of
Belgium. The worst land which can be cultivated as a means of
subsistence, is that which will just replace the seed, and the food of
the labourers employed on it, together with what Dr. Chalmers calls
their secondaries; that is, the labourers crequired for supplyingc them
with tools, and with the remaining necessaries of life. Whether any
given land is capable of doing more than this, is not a question of
political economy, but of physical fact. The supposition leaves nothing
for profits, nor anything for the labourers except necessaries: the
land, therefore, can only be cultivated by the labourers themselves, or
else at a pecuniary loss: and à fortiori, cannot in any contingency
afford a rent. The worst land which can be cultivated as an investment
for capital, is that which, after replacing the seed, not only feeds the
agricultural labourers and their secondaries, but affords them the
current rate of wages, which may extend to much more than mere
necessaries; and leaves for those who have advanced the wages of these
two classes of labourers, a surplus equal to the profit they could have
expected from any other employment of their capital. Whether any given
land can do more than this, is not merely a physical question, but
depends partly on the market value of agricultural produce. What the
land can do for the labourers and for the capitalist, beyond feeding all
whom it directly or indirectly employs, of course depends upon what the
remainder of the produce can be sold for. The higher the market value of
produce, the lower are the soils to which cultivation can descend,
consistently with affording to the capital employed, the ordinary rate
of profit.

As, however, differences of fertility slide into one another by
insensible gradations; and differences of accessibility, that is, of
distance from markets, ddo the same; and since there is land so barren
that it could not pay for its cultivation at any price; it is evident
that, whatever the price may be, there must in any extensive region be
some land which at that price will just pay the wages of the
cultivators, and yield to the capital employed the ordinary profit, and
no more. Until, therefore, the price rises higher, or until some
improvement raises that particular land to a higher place in the scale
of fertility, it cannot pay any rent. It is evident, however, that the
community eneedse the produce of this quality of land; since if the
lands more fertile or better situated than it, could have sufficed to
supply the wants of society, the price would not have risen so high as
to render its cultivation profitable. This land, therefore, will be
cultivated; and we may lay it down as a principle, that so long as any
of the land of a country which is fit for cultivationf, and not withheld
from it by legal or Edition: current; Page: [419] other factitious
obstacles,f is not cultivated, the worst land in actual cultivation (in
point of fertility and situation together) pays no rent.g

§ 3. [The rent of land consists of the excess of its return above the
return to the worst land in cultivation] If, then, of the land in
cultivation, the part which yields least return to the labour and
capital employed on it gives only the ordinary profit of capital,
without leaving anything for rent; a standard is afforded for estimating
the amount of rent which will be yielded by all other land. Any land
yields just as much more than the ordinary profits of stock, as it
yields more than what is returned by the worst land in cultivation. The
surplus is what the farmer can afford to pay as rent to the landlord;
and since, if he did not so pay it, he would receive more than the
ordinary rate of profit, the competition of other capitalists, that
competition which equalizes the profits of different capitals, will
enable the landlord to appropriate it. The rent, therefore, which any
land will yield, is the excess of its produce, beyond what would be
returned to the same capital if employed on the worst land in
cultivation. This is not, and never was pretended to be, the limit of
metayer rents, or of cottier rents; but it is the limit of afarmers’a
rents. No land rented to a capitalist farmer will permanently yield more
than this; and bwhen itb yields less, it cisc because the landlord
foregoes a part of what, if he chose, he could obtain.

This is the theory of rent, first propounded at the end of the last
century by Dr. Anderson, and which, neglected at the time, was almost
simultaneously rediscovered, twenty years dlaterd, by Sir Edward West,
Mr. Malthus, and Mr. Ricardo. It is one of the cardinal doctrines of
political economy; and until it was understood, no consistent
explanation could be given of many of the more complicated industrial
phenomena. The evidence of its truth will be manifested with a great
increase of clearness, when we come to trace the laws of the phenomena
of Value and Price. Until that is done, it is not possible to free the
doctrine from every difficulty which may present itself, nor perhaps to
convey, to those previously unacquainted with the subject, more than a
general apprehension of the reasoning by which the theorem is arrived
at. Some, however, of Edition: current; Page: [420] the objections
commonly made to it, admit of a complete answer even in the present
estagee of our inquiries.

It has been denied that there can be any land in cultivation which pays
no rent; because landlords (it is contended) would not allow their land
to be occupied without payment. Those who lay any stress on this as an
objection, must think that land of the quality which can but just pay
for its cultivation, lies together in large masses, detached from any
land of better quality. If an estate consisted wholly of this land, or
of this and still worse, it is likely enough that the owner would not
give the use of it for nothing; he would probably (if a rich man) prefer
keeping it for other purposes, as for exercise, or ornament, or perhaps
as a game preserve. No farmer could afford to offer him anything for it,
for purposes of culture; though something would probably be obtained for
the use of its natural pasture, or other spontaneous produce. Even such
land, however, would not necessarily remain uncultivated. It might be
farmed by the proprietor; no unfrequent case even in England. Portions
of it might be granted as temporary allotments to labouring families,
either from philanthropic motives, or to save the poor-rate; or
occupation might be allowed to squatters, free of rent, in the hope that
their labour might give it value at some future period. Both these cases
are of quite ordinary occurrence. So that even if an estate were wholly
composed of the worst land capable of profitable cultivation, it would
not necessarily lie uncultivated because it could pay no rent. Inferior
land, however, does not usually occupy, without interruption, many
square miles of ground; it is dispersed here and there, with patches of
better land intermixed, and the same person who rents the better land,
obtains along with it inferior soils which alternate with it. He pays a
rent, nominally for the whole farm, but calculated on the produce of
these parts alone (however small a portion of the whole) which are
capable of returning more than the common rate of profit. It is thus
scientifically true, that the remaining parts pay no rent.

§ 4. [The rent of land consists of the excess of its return above the
return to the worst land in cultivation or to the capital employed in
the least advantageous circumstances] Let us, however, suppose that
there awerea a validity in this objection, which can by no means be
conceded to it; that when the demand of the community had forced up food
to such a price as would remunerate the expense of producing it from a
certain bquantityb of soil, it happened nevertheless that all the soil
of that quality was withheld from cultivation, by the obstinacy of the
owners in demanding a rent for it, cnot nominal, nor trifling, but
sufficiently onerous Edition: current; Page: [421] to dbe a material
item in the calculations of a farmerd. What would then happen? Merely
that the increase of produce, which the wants of society required, would
for the time be obtained wholly (as it always is partially), not by an
extension of cultivation, but by an increased application of labour and
capital to land already cultivated.

Now we have already seen that this increased application of capital,
other things being unaltered, is always attended with a smaller
proportional return. We are not to suppose some new agricultural
invention made precisely at this juncture; nor a sudden extension of
agricultural skill and knowledge, bringing into more general practice,
just then, inventions already in partial use. We are to suppose no
change, except a demand for more corn, and a consequent rise of its
price. The rise of price enables measures to be taken for increasing the
produce, which could not have been taken with profit at the previous
price. The farmer uses more expensive manures; or manures land which he
formerly left to nature; or procures lime or marl from a distance, as a
dressing for the soil; or pulverizes or weeds it more thoroughly; or
drains, irrigates, or subsoils portions of it, which at former prices
would not have paid the cost of the operation; and so forth. These
things, or some of them, are done, when, more food ebeing wanted,e
cultivation has no means of expanding itself upon new landsf. Andf when
the impulse is given to extract an increased amount of produce from the
soil, the farmer or improver will only consider whether the outlay he
makes for the purpose will be returned to him with the ordinary profit,
and not whether any surplus will remain for rent. Even, therefore, if it
were the fact, that there is never any land taken into cultivation, for
which rent, and that too of an amount worth taking into consideration,
was not paid; it would be true, nevertheless, that there is always some
agricultural capital which pays no rent, because it returns nothing
beyond the ordinary rate of profit: this capital being the portion of
capital last applied—that to which the last addition to the produce was
due: or (to express the essentials of the case in one phrase), that
which is applied in the least favourable circumstances. But the same
amount of demand, and the same price, which enable this least productive
portion of capital barely to replace itself with the ordinary profit,
enable every other portion to yield a surplus proportioned to the
advantage it possesses. And this surplus git is, whichg competition
enables the landlord to appropriate. The rent of all land is measured by
the excess of the return to the whole capital employed on it, above what
is necessary to replace the capital with the ordinary rate of profit, or
in other words, above what the same capital would yield if it were all
employed in as disadvantageous Edition: current; Page: [422]
circumstances as the least productive portion of it; whether that least
productive portion of capital is rendered so by being employed on the
worst soil, or by being expended in extorting more produce from land
which already yielded as much as it could be made to part with on
heasierh terms.

It is not pretended that the facts of any concrete case conform with
absolute precision to this or any other scientific principle. We must
never forget that the truths of political economy are truths only in the
roughi: they have the certainty, but not the precision, of exact
sciencei. It is not, for example, strictly true that a farmer will
cultivate no land, and apply no capital, which returns less than the
ordinary jprofitj. He will expect the ordinary kprofitk on the bulk of
his capital. But when he has cast in his lot with his farm, and bartered
his skill and exertions, once for all, against what the farm will yield
to him, he will probably be willing to expend capital on it (for an
immediate return) in any manner which will afford him a surplus profit,
however small, beyond the value of the risk, and the interest which he
must pay for the capital if borrowed, or can get for it elsewhere if it
is his own. But a new farmer, entering on the land, would make his
calculations differently, and would not commence unless he could expect
the full rate of ordinary profit on all the capital which he intended
embarking in the enterprise. Again, prices may range higher or lower
during the currency of a lease, than was expected when the contract was
made, and the land, therefore, may be over or under-rented: and even
when the lease expires, the landlord may be unwilling to grant a
necessary diminution of rent, and the farmer, rather than relinquish his
occupation, or seek a farm elsewhere when all are occupied, may consent
to go on paying too high a rent. Irregularities like these we must
always expect; it is impossible in political economy to obtain general
theorems embracing the complications of circumstances which may affect
the result in an individual case. lWhen, too, the farmer class, having
but little capital, cultivate for subsistence rather than for profit,
and do not think of quitting their farm while they are able to live by
it, their rents approximate to the character of cottier rents, and may
be forced up by competition (if the number of competitors exceeds the
number of farms) beyond the amount which will leave to the farmer the
ordinary rate of profit.l The laws which we are enabled to lay down
respecting rents, profits, wages, prices, are only true in so far as the
persons concerned are free from the influence of any other motives than
those arising from the general circumstances of the case, and are
guided, as to those, by the ordinary mercantile estimate of profit and
loss. Applying this twofold supposition to the case Edition: current;
Page: [423] of farmers and landlords, it will be true that the farmer
requires the ordinary rate of profit on the whole of his capital; that
whatever it returns to him beyond this he is obliged to pay to the
landlord, but will not consent to pay more; that there is a portion of
capital applied to agriculture in such circumstances of productiveness
as to yield only the ordinary profits; and that the difference between
the produce of this, and any other capital of similar amount, is the
measure of the tribute which that other capital can and will pay, under
the name of rent, to the landlord. This constitutes a law of rent, as
near the truth as such a law can possibly be: though of course modified
or disturbed in individual cases, by pending contracts, individual
miscalculations, the influence of habit, and even the particular
feelings and dispositions of the persons concerned.

§ 5. [Is payment for capital sunk in the soil, rent, or profit?] A
remark is often made, which must not here be omitted, though, I think,
more importance has been attached to it than it merits. Under the name
of rent, many payments are commonly included, which are not a
remuneration for the original powers of the land itself, but for capital
expended on it. The additional rent which land yields in consequence of
this outlay of capital, should, in the opinion of some writers, be
regarded as profit, not rent. But before this can be admitted, a
distinction must be made. The annual payment by a tenant almost always
includes a consideration for the use of the buildings on the farm; not
only barns, stables, and other outhouses, but a house to live in, not to
speak of fences and the like. The landlord will ask, and the tenant
give, for these, whatever is considered sufficient to yield the ordinary
profit, or rather (risk and trouble being here out of the question) the
ordinary interest, on the value of the buildings: that is, anota on what
it has cost to erect them, bbutb on what it would now cost to erect
others as good: the tenant being bound, in addition, to leave them in as
good repair as he found them, for otherwise a much larger payment than
simple interest would of course be required from him. These buildings
are as distinct a thing from the farm as the stock or the timber on it;
and what is paid for them can no more be called rent of land, than a
payment for cattle would be, if it were the custom that the landlord
should stock the farm for the tenant. The buildings, like the cattle,
are not land, but capital, regularly consumed and reproduced; and all
payments made in consideration for them are properly interest.

But with regard to capital actually sunk in improvements, and not
requiring periodical renewal, but spent once for all in giving the land
a permanent increase of productiveness, it appears to me that the return
made to such capital loses altogether the character of profits, and is
Edition: current; Page: [424] governed by the principles of rent. It is
true that a landlord will not expend capital in improving his estate,
unless he expects from the improvement an increase of income surpassing
the interest of his outlay. Prospectively, this increase of income may
be regarded as profit; but when the expense has been incurred, and the
improvement made, the rent of the improved land is governed by the same
rules as that of the unimproved. Equally fertile land commands an equal
rent, whether its fertility is natural or acquired; and I cannot think
that the incomes of those who own the Bedford Level or the Lincolnshire
Wolds ought to be called profit and not rent because those lands would
have been worth next to nothing unless capital had been expended on
them. The owners are not capitalists, but landlords; they have parted
with their capital; it is consumed, destroyed; and neither is, nor is to
be, returned to them, like the capital of a farmer or manufacturer, from
what it produces. In lieu of it they now have land of a certain
richness, which yields the same rent, and by the operation of the same
causes, as if it had possessed from the beginning the degree of
fertility which has been artificially given to it.

cSome writers, in particular Mr. H. C. Carey, take awayc, still more
completely than I have attempted to do, the distinction between these
two sources of rent, by rejecting one of them altogetherd, and
consideringd all rent as the effect of capital expended. In proof of
this, eMr. Careye contends that the whole pecuniary value of all the
land in any country, in England for instance, or in the United States,
does not amount to anything approaching to the sum which has been laid
out, or which it would even now be necessary to lay out, in order to
bring the country to its present condition from a state of primæval
forest. fThis startling statement has been seized on by M. Bastiat and
others, as a means of making out a stronger case than could otherwise be
made in defence of property in land. Mr. Carey’s proposition, in its
most obvious meaning, is equivalent to saying, Edition: current; Page:
[425] that if there were suddenly added to the lands of England an
unreclaimed territory of equal natural fertility, it would not be worth
the while of the inhabitants of England to reclaim it: because the
profits of the operation would not be equal to the ordinary interest on
the capital expended. To which assertion if any answer could be supposed
to be required, it would suffice to remark, that land not of equal but
of greatly inferior quality to that previously cultivated, is
continually reclaimed in England, at an expense which the subsequently
accruing rent is sufficient to replace completely in a small number of
years. gThe doctrine, moreover, is totally opposed to Mr. Carey’s own
economical opinions. No one maintains more strenuously than Mr. Carey
the undoubted truth, that as society advances in population, wealth, and
combination of labour, land constantly rises in value and price. This,
however, could not possibly be true, if the present value of land were
less than the expense of clearing it and making it fit for cultivation;
for it must have been worth this immediately after it was cleared; and
according to Mr. Carey it has been rising in value ever since.

When, however, Mr. Carey asserts that the whole land of any country is
not now worth the capital which has been expended on it, he does not
mean that each particular estate is worth less than what has been laid
out in improving itg, and that, to the proprietors, the improvement of
htheh land has beeni, in the final result,i a miscalculation. jHe means,
not that the land of Great Britain would not now sell for what has been
laid out upon it, but that it would not sell for that amount plus the
expense of making all the roads, canals, and railways. This is probably
true, but is no more to the purpose, and no more important in political
economy, than if the statement had been, that it would not sell for the
sums laid out on it plus the national debt, or plus the cost of the
French Revolutionary war, or any other expense incurred for a real or
imaginary public advantage. The roads, railways, and canals were not
constructed to give value to land: on the contrary, their natural effect
was to lower its value, by rendering other and rival lands accessible:
and the landholders of the southern counties actually petitioned
Parliament against the turnpike roads on this very account.j

Edition: current; Page: [426]
The tendency of improved communications is to lower existing rents, by
ktrenchingk on the monopoly of the llandl nearest to the places where
large numbers of consumers are assembled.f Roads and canals are not
mintendedm to raise the value of the land which already supplies the
markets, but (among other purposes) to cheapen the supply, by letting in
the produce of other and more distant lands; and the more effectually
this purpose is attained, the lower rent will be. If we could imagine
that the railways and canals of the United States, instead of only
cheapening communication, did their business so effectually as to
annihilate cost of carriage altogether, and enable the produce of
Michigan to reach the market of New York as quickly and nasn cheaply as
the produce of Long Island—the whole value of all the land of the United
States (except such as lies convenient for building) would be
annihilated; or rather, the best would only sell for the expense of
clearing, and the government tax of a dollar and a quarter per acre;
since land in Michigan, equal to the best in the United States, may be
had in unlimited abundance by that amount of outlay. But it is strange
that Mr. Carey should think this fact inconsistent with the Ricardo
theory of rent. Admitting all that he asserts, it is still true that as
long as there is land which yields no rent, the land which does yield
rent, does so in consequence of some advantage which it enjoys, in
fertility or vicinity to markets, over the other; and the measure of its
advantage is also the measure of its rent. And the cause of its yielding
rent, is that it possesses a natural monopoly; the quantity of land, as
favourably circumstanced as itself, not being sufficient to supply the
market. These propositions constitute the theory of rent, laid down by
Ricardo; and if they are true, I cannot see that it signifies much
whether the rent which the land yields at the present time, is greater
or less than the interest of the capital which has been laid out to
raise its value, together with the interest of the capital which has
been laid out to lower its ovalue.o

Edition: current; Page: [427]
Mr. Carey’s objection, however, has psomewhat more of ingenuity thanp
the arguments commonly met with against the theory of rent; a theorem
which may be called the pons asinorum of political economy, for there
are, I am inclined to think, few persons who have refused their assent
to it except from not having thoroughly understood it. The loose and
inaccurate way in which it is often apprehended by those who affect to
refute it, is very remarkable. Many, for instance, have imputed
absurdity to Mr. Ricardo’s Edition: current; Page: [428] theory, because
it is absurd to say that the cultivation of inferior land is the cause
of rent on the superior. Mr. Ricardo does not say that it is the
cultivation of inferior land, but the necessity of cultivating it, from
the insufficiency of the superior land to feed a growing population:
between which and the proposition imputed to him there is no less a
difference than that between demand and supply. Others again allege as
an objection against Ricardo, that if all land were of equal fertility,
it might still yield a rent. But Ricardo says precisely the same. He
says that if all lands were equally fertile, those which are nearer to
their market than others, and are therefore less burthened with cost of
carriage, would yield a rent equivalent to qtheq advantage; and that the
land yielding no rent would then be, not the least fertile, but the
least advantageously situated, which the wants of the community required
to be brought into cultivation. It is also distinctly a portion of
Ricardo’s doctrine, that even apart from differences of situation, the
land of a country supposed to be of uniform fertility would, all of it,
on a certain supposition, pay rent: namely, if the demand of the
community required that it should all be cultivated, and cultivated
beyond the point at which a further application of capital begins to be
attended with a smaller proportional return. It would be rimpossibler to
show thats, except by forcible exaction,s the whole land of a country
can yield a rent on any other supposition.

§ 6. [Rent does not enter into the cost of production of agricultural
produce] After this view of the nature and causes of rent, let us turn
back to the subject of profits, and bring up for reconsideration one of
the propositions laid down in the last chapter. We there stated, that
the advances of the capitalist, or in other words, the expenses of
production, consist solely in wages of labour; that whatever portion of
the outlay is not wages, is apreviousa profit, and whatever is not
bpreviousb profit, is wages. Rent, however, being an element which it is
impossible to resolve into either profits or wages, we were obliged, for
the moment, to assume that the capitalist is not required to pay rent—to
give an equivalent for the use of an appropriated natural agent: and I
undertook to show in the proper place, that this is an allowable
supposition, and that rent does not really form any part of the expenses
of production, or of the advances of the capitalist. The grounds on
which this assertion was made are now apparent. It is true that all
tenant farmers, and many other classes of producers, pay rent. But we
have now seen, that whoever cultivates land, paying a rent for it, gets
in return for his rent an instrument of superior power to Edition:
current; Page: [429] other instruments of the same kind for which no
rent is paid. The superiority of the instrument is in exact proportion
to the rent paid for it. If a few persons had steam-engines of superior
power to all others in existence, but limited by physical laws to a
number short of the demand, the rent which a manufacturer would be
willing to pay for one of these steam-engines could not be looked upon
as an addition to his outlay, because by the use of it he would save in
his other expenses the equivalent of what it cost him: without it he
could not do the same quantity of work, unless at an additional expense
equal to the rent. The same thing is true of land. The real expenses of
production are those incurred on the worst land, or by the capital
employed in the least favourable circumstances. This land or capital
pays, as we have seen, no rentc; but the expenses to which it is
subject, cause all other land or agricultural capital to be subjected to
an equivalent expense in the form of rentc. Whoever does pay rent gets
back its full value in extra advantages, and the rent which he pays does
not place him in a worse position than, but only in the same position
as, his fellow-producer who pays no rent, but whose instrument is one of
inferior efficiency.

We have now completed the exposition of the laws which regulate the
distribution of the produce of land, labour, and capital, as far as it
is possible to discuss those laws independently of the instrumentality
by which in a civilized society the distribution is effected; the
machinery of Exchange and Price. The more complete elucidation and final
confirmation of the laws which we have laid down, and the deduction of
their most important consequences, must be preceded by an explanation of
the nature and working of that machinery—a subject so extensive and
complicated as to require a separate Book.

Edition: current; Page: [430] Edition: current; Page: [431]


APPENDIX
 [TO BOOK II]

Edition: current; Page: [432] Edition: current; Page: [433]


Appendix[*]

in 1846 there appeared an elaborate treatise,* by two authors, MM.
Mounier and Rubichon, the latter of whom was by his own statement a
public functionary for ten years preceding the French Revolution, and
both appear to take their ideas of a wholesome state of society from the
institutions and practices of the Middle Ages. In this book it is
maintained, that while French writers and administrators are in a
conspiracy to represent their country as making rapid strides in
prosperity, the progress of the morcellement is in fact reducing it to
beggary. An imposing array of official details, adduced in apparent
support of this assertion, gave a degree of weight to it which it could
not claim from any correctness of information or capacity of judgment
shown by its authors. Their work was cried up as a book of authority by
the Quarterly Review,† in an article which excited some notice by
proclaiming, on the evidence produced by these writers, that “in a few
years the Code Napoleon will be employed in dividing fractions of square
inches of land, and deciding by logarithms infinitesimal inheritances.”
As such representations ought not to be without a permanent answer, I
think it worth while to subjoin the substance of three articles in the
Morning Chronicle, containing as complete a refutation of these writers
and of their reviewer, partly from their own materials, as appears to be
either merited or required.

Edition: current; Page: [434]
Substance (with omissions and corrections) of three articles in the
Morning Chronicle of 11th, 13th, and 16th January, 1847, in reply to MM.
Mounier and Rubichon and to the Quarterly Review, on the Subdivision of
Landed Property in France


I

The reviewer makes an extraordinary slip at the threshold of his
subject, in estimating the extent to which the morcellement has actually
proceeded. He finds it stated, that among nearly five millions and a
half of landed proprietors, there are 2,600,000 the revenue of whose
land, as rated to the land-tax, does not exceed forty shillings, which
sum he very candidly says, should rather be sixty, as the rated value is
very much lower than the real value. On this he exclaims, “There already
exist in France millions of examples that a propriétaire may be poorer
than a peasant. . . . 2,600,000 families, comprising 13,000,000 persons,
of each of which families the rated income does not exceed forty
shillings, but say sixty shillings sterling, for the maintenance of five
persons—and these are proprietors! The poorest day labourer would earn
four times as much.” He seems actually to suppose that these small
proprietors, like great landlords, live only upon the rent of their
land, forgetting that they have its whole produce. He might have known
from the very documents he has quoted, and might have guessed if he had
not known, that the forty shillings at which the land is rated in the
collectors’ books are not the gross produce of the little estate, but
its net produce; the surplus beyond the expenses of cultivation: which
expenses include the subsistence of the cultivators, together with
interest on the capital. The reviewer himself shows that the rated
revenue of all the landed property of France is about 4 per cent of its
rated value, and does not therefore much exceed a reasonable rent. A
writer who can mistake this for the whole income of a peasant
cultivating his own land, gives the measure of his competency for the
subject, and of the degree of attention he has paid to it.

We will now attempt to discover, from the reviewer’s data and those of
his authors, what may really be the condition of these 2,600,000
proprietors. As the French Government estimates the land-tax at
one-tenth of the revenue of the land, aproprietorsa rated at £2 (or 50
francs) pay, it is to be presumed, five francs. The average of the
contribution foncière for all France is 2½ francs per hectare, and in
the southern half of the kingdom, Edition: current; Page: [435] which is
the most divided, two francs. A hectare being about 2½ English acres,
this gives from five to between six and seven acres as the portion of
land which falls to the lot of each of the reviewer’s forty-shilling or
sixty-shilling freeholders. But, it may be said, this is not the average
but the maximum of their possessions. We will therefore take another
estimate grounded on official documents, from the reviewer’s
authorities, MM. Mounier and Rubichon. “It is hardly credible,” they
say, “that there are in France more than four millions of proprietors so
poor, that they pay no more than 5f. 95c.” (say 6f.) “to the
contribution foncière.” In this case the 5f. 95c. are certainly the
average. Six francs of land-tax corresponds to six acres per family on
the average of all France, and to seven and a half on that of the
southern division, which contains the greatest proportion of small
proprietors. A still more favourable result is given by the calculations
of M. Lullin de Châteauvieux, a much better authority than these
authors, who estimates the average holdings of the 3,900,000 poorest
proprietors at eight acres and a half. Now, take any one of these
computations in a fertile country like France, suppose as bad an
agriculture as exists anywhere in Western Europe, and then judge whether
a single family, industrious and economical as the French of the poorer
classes are, and enjoying the entire produce of from five to eight and a
half acres, subject to a payment of only tenpence an acre to the
Government, can be otherwise than in a very desirable condition? We do
not forget that the land is sometimes mortgaged for part of the purchase
money, and the reviewer makes a great cry about the tremendous
encumbrances by which the land of France is weighed down; not amounting,
however, on his own showing, to forty per cent on the rental, which we
should think bas favourable a return as could be made by any landed
aristocracy in Europe. The interest on the mortgages of all France is
estimated at twenty-four millions sterling for one hundred and fourteen
millions of acres—less than five shillings per acrec. Thec owner of from
five to eight acres could afford to pay double this amount, and be very
well off.

We are aware that this is an average, and that four millions of
properties, averaging, according to M. de Châteauvieux, eight acres and
a half, imply a great number of proprietors who have less. But there
must be a proportional (though not an equal) number who have more; and
it must not be supposed that this statement includes the large
properties, one of which would be enough to keep up the average against
a hundred extremely small ones. No properties are included which pay so
much as twenty francs land-tax, corresponding on the average of France
to twenty dacres—on thatd of the south to twenty-five. When it is
considered that of the whole Edition: current; Page: [436] soil of
France eonly a third*e is in the hands of peasant proprietors, and that
this fthirdf is not more subdivided than we now see, it will probably be
thought that hitherto at least, the mischiefs of subdivision have not
reached a very formidable height.

g[Facts of a less conjectural character than the above have been
afforded by the researches of M. de Lavergne. Of five millions of small
rural proprietors, three millions at least, according to that high
authority, pay less than ten francs of taxes, and possess, on an
average, only one hectare (2½ acres). Two millions pay from ten to fifty
francs, and possess, on an average, six hectares, or fifteen acres.
These last, says M. de Lavergne, “enjoy sometimes a real affluence.
Their properties are divided by inheritance; but many of them are
continually making new acquisitions by purchase, and on the whole their
tendency is more to rise than to descend in the scale of wealth.”
Respecting the amount of debts with which the peasant proprietors are
encumbered, the facts are highly and unexpectedly favourable. By the
latest authentic returns, the average indebtedness of the entire landed
property of France, does not, according to M. de Lavergne, exceed
one-tenth of the value; and in the case of rural property, it is only
half that average, or one-twentieth. The burthen of interest he
estimates, not at 40 per cent on the rental, but at 10 per cent only;
and even this, he thinks, would now be an overstatement, “car les
dernières crises ont amené une tendance générale vers une
liquidation.”†]g

But it is not what France now is, so much as what she is becoming, that
is the material point. Is the morcellement increasing, or likely to
increase? The apologists of the French system have never denied that the
land in many parts of France is too minutely divided. What they deny is,
that hthish is a growing evil. They assert that the subdivision has
reached its height, and that the reunions, by purchase, marriage, and
inheritance, now balance the subdivisions. How stands the fact in this
respect? Are the small properties tending to become still smaller, or
not? The reader will be surprised when he finds that, with all their
straining, M. Rubichon and his reviewer have failed of proving that the
morcellement, in this sense of the term, is making any progress at all.

The reviewer has a curious theory on the subject. He thinks that “on the
calculated average of three children to each inheritance,”[*] the piece
of land now held by one proprietor must necessarily be divided among
three in the next generation, and among nine in that which follows.
Under what Edition: current; Page: [437] system of landed property could
a population increase at this rate, and not be reduced to starvation?
But is it a fact that population is anywhere trebled in the space of a
generation? We have here blunder within blunder of a very complicated
description. In the first place, he should not have said three children
to one inheritance, but to two inheritances; for as the French law in
questions of property observes that impartial justice between the two
sexes in which other laws are so often deficient, the mother’s patrimony
is on an average equal to that of the father. In the next place, could
not the reviewer have taken the trouble to ascertain at what rate the
French population is actually increasing? If he had, he would have found
that in the 27 years from 1815 to 1842 it only increased 18 per cent,
and during that period with progressively increasing slowness, namely,
in the first eleven years 9 per cent, in the next nine years less than 6
per cent, and in the seven years from 1835 to 1842, 31/10 per cent
only.* This retardation we must take the liberty of attributing mainly
to the prudence and forethought generated in the poorest class by this
very subdivision of property.

Instead, therefore, of trebling in a generation, the population
iincreasedi in that period about 20 per cent; jand if the growth of
towns, and of employments not agricultural, in the same space of time,
is sufficient to absorb this increase, there needs not be, and will not
be, even if the law does its worst, any increase of subdivision. Now,
the towns of France have increased, and are increasing, at a rate far
exceeding the general increase of the population. We read only the other
day in the Siècle,[*] as the result of the census just concluded, that
Paris, which in 1832 had only 930,000 Edition: current; Page: [438]
inhabitants, khad in 1846k more than 1,350,000, an increase of nearly
fifty per cent in fourteen years.* There is every reason, then, to
infer, from these general data, that the morcellement is making no
progress.

What facts have M. Rubichon and the Quarterly reviewer to oppose to
these? One fact; which at first sight appears a very strong one. Between
1826 and 1835, the number of properties rated to the land-tax exhibited
an increase of more than 600,000; being about six per cent in ten years.
Let us first remark, that 600,000 separate assessments are equivalent
only to about 300,000 proprietors; it being the common estimate of
French writers, that on the average about two côtes foncières, or
separate accounts with the land-tax, correspond only to a single
proprietor. But if the reviewer had consulted his author just ten pages
further on,† he would have found a cause sufficient to account for a
considerable portion of this increase. There were sold between 1826 and
1835 domains of the State, to the value of nearly 134 millions of
francs, or five and a half millions sterling. The very nature of such a
sale implies division. And we are the more inclined to ascribe much of
the apparent increase of division to this circumstance, because in the
ten years preceding those in question, the côtes foncières increased in
number by little more than 200,000; an alarming proof, according to the
reviewer, of the progressive advance of the evil; but, as we suspect,
arising partly from the fact, that during the earlier decennial period a
smaller, though still a considerable, amount of public domains were
alienated.

In addition to the State lands, a great extent of Communal lands were
likewise alienated during the same period: and it is further necessary
to subtract all the additions made to the number of côtes foncières by
the extension of building, and lbyl the natural subdivision of town
property, during ten years. All these items must be accurately estimated
and deducted, before it can be affirmed with certainty that in the rural
districts there was during those years any increased division of landed
property at all. And even if there was, increased division does not
necessarily imply increased subdivision. Large estates may have been,
and we believe were in many instances, divided, but the division may
have stopped there. We know of no reason for supposing that small
properties were divided into others still smaller, or that the average
size of the possessions of peasant families was at all diminished.

It so happens that facts exist, more specific and more expressly to the
Edition: current; Page: [439] point than any of M. Rubichon’s. A new
cadastre, or survey and valuation of lands, has been in progress for
some years past. In thirty-seven cantons, taken indiscriminately through
France, the operation has been completed; in twenty-one it is nearly
complete. In the thirty-seven, the côtes foncières, which were 154,266
at the last cadastre (in 1809 and 1810), have only increased by 9011,
being less than 18 per cent in considerably more than thirty years,
while in many of the cantons they have considerably diminished. From
this increase is to be subtracted all which is due to the progress of
building during the period, as well as to the sale of public and
communal lands. In the other twenty-one cantons the number of côtes
foncières is not yet published, but the number of parcelles, or separate
bits of land, has diminished in the same period; and among mthosem
districts is included the greater part of the banlieue of Paris, one of
the most minutely divided districts in France, in which the morcellement
has actually diminished by no less than 16 per cent. The details may be
found in M. Passy’s little work, “Des Systèmes de Culture.” So much for
the terrible progress of subdivision.

We cannot leave this part of the subject without noticing one of the
most signal instances which the reviewer has exhibited of his
incompetency for the subject he treats of. He laments over the
extraordinary number of sales of landed property which he says the law
of inheritance constantly occasions; and indeed the sales of land are
shown to have amounted in ten years to no less than one-fourth part of
the whole territorial property of France. Now, whatever else this
extraordinary amount of sale and purchase may prove, the whole of it is
one gigantic argument nagainstn the reviewer’s case; for every sale of
land which is caused by the law of inheritance must be a sale for the
express purpose of preventing subdivision. If land, sold in consequence
of an inheritance, is nevertheless subdivided, this cannot be an effect
of the law of inheritance; it would only prove that land sells for a
higher price when sold in small portions: that is, in other words, that
the poor, and even, as the reviewer would have us believe, the very
poor, are able to outbid the rich in the land market. This certainly
does onoto prove that the very poor of France are so very poor as these
writers try to make out, while it pdoesp prove that, if so, they must be
by far the most industrious and economical people on the face of the
earth, for which some credit ought surely to be given to the system of
peasant properties.


II

We have shown that the four millions of landowners in France who can be
reckoned among peasant proprietors, those whose holdings fall short of
Edition: current; Page: [440] twenty acres, are computed by one of the
best qauthorities to possess on the average eight and a half English
acres each, and rfrom no authentic documents can the average be brought
much below that amount; a fact wholly incompatible with their being in
the state approaching to starvation in which M. Rubichon and his
reviewer srepresent them to bes. It is equally certain that if there is
bad agriculture on these small estates, it is from some other cause than
their smallness. Farms of this size are consistent with agriculture
equal to any on the face of the earth.

We shall now, however, touch upon another kind of morcellement, which
does amount to a serious inconvenience, and wherever it exists must have
a strong tendency to keep agriculture in a low state. This is the
subdivision, not of the land of the country among many proprietors, but
of the land of each proprietor into many detached pieces, or parcelles,
as they are technically designated. This inconvenience has been
experienced in other countries besides France, as in the canton of
Zurich, in the Palatinate, and (as respects holdings, though not
properties) in Ireland. In France it is carried to so great an excess,
that the number of parcelles is ten times the number of côtes foncières;
and as there are supposed to be twice as many côtes foncières as
proprietors, the curious fact is disclosed, that on the average of
France the estate of every landowner consists of twenty fragments in
twenty different places. The consequences are a subject of general and
increasing complaint. Great loss of time and labour; waste of cultivable
soil in boundaries and paths; the inaccessibility of many parcelles
without trespassing on other properties; endless disputes and frequent
litigation—are enumerated among the evils: and it is evident what
obstacles the small size and dispersed position of the parcelles, and
their intermixture with those of other proprietors, must oppose to many
kinds of agricultural improvement.

For a considerable portion of this evil the French law of inheritance
may fairly be held responsible. A certain amount of it is inevitable
wherever landed properties are undergoing a double process of division
and recomposition: marriages, for example, must in general bring
together portions of land not adjacent. But if parents had the power of
bequest, the owner of twenty parcelles, even if he adhered to the spirit
of the law of equal division, would give some of the portions entire to
one child, and others to another. The law, on the contrary, must divide
with exact equality; and as it is generally impossible to adjust the
value of patches of unequal fertility, vineyards, meadows, arable, &c.,
so as to satisfy everybody, it continually happens, especially in the
more backward parts of France, that when the settlement is made by
division instead of sale, each co-heir insists on taking a share of
every parcelle instead of the whole of some parcelles; from Edition:
current; Page: [441] whence, no doubt, the amazing multiplication of
these little patches in many parts of France.t

That French agriculture, and the condition of the peasant population,
are injuriously affected by this sort of morcellement, is so far true,
that it must considerably retard the improvement which might otherwise
be expected, and which, in spite of all hindrances, does even now, to a
great extent, take place. More than this we cannot admit. There are
conclusive proofs of great and rapid improvement in some parts of
France, and M. Rubichon and his reviewer have no evidence whatever of
retrogression in any.

They produce tables of the average amount of different kinds of food
consumed by the population; also tables of the number of cattle, the
amount of produce per hectare of the different kinds of cultivation,
&c., calculated from the official documents. These estimates, assuming
their correctness (which, so far as that quality is attainable, we
generally see no reason to discredit) are indicative, doubtless, of a
low and backward state. But statistics are only evidence of the present.
Where are the statistics of the past? That the agriculture of a great
part of France is rude and imperfect is known to all Europe; but that it
ever was better, is an assertion opposed to all evidence, and we shall
not take M. Rubichon’s word for it, no more than for the notion that the
ugeneral condition of the mass of the people has been deteriorating from
the time of Louis XIV.* if not earlier. At this Edition: current; Page:
[442] last proposition we cannot repress our wonder. In the reign of
Louis XIV., Marshal Vauban, a great authority with all who are
themselves authorities, and even with M. Rubichon, estimated that
one-tenth of the population of France were beggars, and five of the
remaining nine-tenths little above beggary. In the same reign, Labruyère
claimed credit for apprising the salons of Paris that a strange
nondescript sort of animals, who might be seen in the fields, and were
much addicted to grubbing in the earth, were, though nobody would
suppose it, a kind of men. Some readers may remember the picture drawn
by the old Marquis Mirabeau of the rural population in the middle of the
eighteenth century; nor was Arthur Young’s, at the opening of the
Revolution, much more favorable. Compare this with any authentic
account, or with the testimony of any observant resident or traveller,
respecting their condition now. M. Rubichon’s statistics comprise no
returns of the rate of wages. We are quite willing that our case should
rest upon the result of an inquiry into that one point.

As for agriculture, when it is recollected that, at the beginning of
this century, in the greater part of France the culture of artificial
grasses might be said to be unknown, and that the course of cultivation
consisted solely of grain crops and fallows, it will be difficult to
make us believe that, even in the most backward parts of the country,
there has not been a considerable improvement from so miserable a level.

v[Look now at the facts collected by M. de Lavergne. Fallows have been
reduced, since 1789, from ten to five millions of hectares. The number
of hectares under wheat has risen from four to six millions, while the
inferior grain, rye, has fallen off; that under artificial grasses, from
one to three millions; under roots, from 100,000 to two millions; under
the more peculiar and expensive crops, from 400,000 to one million.
“Thanks to this better distribution of the soil, which allows six
millions more of hectares to be devoted to the feeding of animals, and
consequently to the production of manure; thanks to marling, to
irrigation, to draining, to more efficient tillage, the yield of all
crops has increased; wheat, which gave at an average only eight
hectolitres per hectare (seed deducted) now gives twelve, and as the
breadth sown has also increased, the total produce has more than
doubled. The same thing has taken place with cattle, which, receiving
twice as much sustenance, have increased, both in numbers and quality,
so as to double their produce. The crops for manufacturing use have
extended themselves; silk and colza have quintupled; home-grown sugar is
an entirely Edition: current; Page: [443] new product; the produce of
the vintage has doubled. Even wood, being better defended from the
ravages of animals, and better managed in consequence of an increased
market, has obtained an increase of annual profits, though too often at
the expense of the capital.” *]v

The blind zeal with which M. Rubichon presses everything into the
service of his theory, in which he is faithfully echoed by his reviewer,
makes them lay great stress upon the increase of roots, and other
inferior kinds of culture, as a proof that the population is sinking to
an inferior kind of nutriment; as if the same thing was not happening in
England; as if it was not a necessary condition of an improved rotation
of crops, that other cultures should increase in a greater proportion
than grain culture, and even at the expense, in some degree, of the
inferior kinds of grain.

We have admitted, and again admit, the unsatisfactory state of
cultivation on a very great portion of the soil of France; but would it
be any better if the estates were large? Is it any better now on the
large estates? When M. Rubichon and his reviewer talk of the small
properties as “creating a new Ireland in France,” his own pages make it
known that the large properties, in the backward parts of France, are
already an Ireland, in the very worst feature of Irish landed
mismanagement, the system of middlemen. It is a general practice,
according to M. de Châteauvieux, with the great proprietors of the
central departments, to let their land en bloc, to a middleman, usually
an attorney or a notary, who sublets it in small portions on the métayer
system, and is not only, as in Ireland, the hardest and most grasping of
landlords, but having only a temporary tenure, and being no
agriculturist, of course expends nothing in improvements. Of fifty-seven
millions of acres cultivated by tenants, twenty-one millions ware held
onlyw by farmers at fixed rents, and thirty-six millions on the métayer
tenure; which in France implies all the defects, with very few of the
advantages, of proprietary cultivation; the only exceptions being La
Vendée and a few of the adjoining departments, where the large
proprietors are resident, a primitive relationship subsists between them
and their tenants, and the métayers have in general, as in Tuscany, a
virtual fixity of tenure. We do not believe it will be found in any part
of France that the small properties are under a bad agriculture, and the
large properties under a good one. They are both bad, or both good.
Where large farms exist and are well cultivated, the small properties
also are well managed and prosperous.

And this brings us to the principal cause, both now and formerly, of the
unimproved agriculture and scanty application of capital to the soil of
France. This is, the exclusive taste of the wealthy and middle classes
for town life and town pursuits, combined with the general want of
enterprise of the French nation with respect to industrial improvements.
It is truly, Edition: current; Page: [444] though epigrammatically, said
xby M. Rubichon, that the Frenchman, generally, knows but one way of
getting rich; namely, thrift. He does not understand sowing money freely
to reap it largely. This is the true cause why, when large properties
are sold, they bring the greatest price by being much subdivided. The
peasants, thanks to the Revolution, to the small properties, and to
their own unparalleled yfrugalityy, are able to purchase land, and their
savingsz, together with the money which they imprudently borrow for the
same purpose,z are the only part of the wealth of the country which
takes that direction. We are often told, that it does not answer to
capitalists to buy land at the extravagant price which the passion of
the peasantry for land induces them to give, amounting often to forty
years’ purchase. It does not answer to pay that price in order to live
idly on the rent in Paris, or the large provincial towns. But if there
was one particle of the spirit of agricultural improvement in the owners
of the monied wealth which is so largely increasing in the manufacturing
and commercial districts, few speculations would be more profitable than
to buy land in many fertile and ill-cultivated parts of France, at even
more than forty years’ purchase of its wretchedly low rental, which
would soon be doubled or trebled by the application of capital, with
ordinary agricultural knowledge and enterprise. If the petite culture is
half as wasteful and unprofitable as is pretended, the profit would be
proportional of substituting athea grande culture for it. bBut with a
people who dislike rural pursuits, and in the pursuit of money-getting
prefer the beaten ways, there can be clittlec other farming than peasant
farming.


III

The cheval de bataille of M. Rubichon and his English followers against
the petite propriété, is the cattle question; not without cause, since
on this subject they have an indisputable basis of fact, however
inadequate to sustain the superstructure they have raised upon it. The
supply of butcher’s meat to some of the principal towns, especially
Paris, is less copious than formerly. It has increased greatly, but in a
less ratio than the population. Of the fact there is no doubt, since on
this point there are trustworthy statistics of the past as well as of
the present. In 1789 the consumption of meat in Paris averaged 68
kilogrammes (150 lbs.) for each person; in Edition: current; Page: [445]
1841 it was but 55 (121 lbs.), and there are also complaints of a
falling off in the quality.

The Quarterly reviewer treats very cavalierly the explanation given of
this fact by M. Cunin-Gridaine, Minister of Commerce and Agriculture.
“This is to be accounted for by the revolution which has taken place in
the working classes; Paris having become the most manufacturing town in
Europe.” Industrielle is not exactly synonymous with manufacturing, but
let that pass. On this the reviewer:—“This seems a strange explanation.
The new population of Paris is to starve on an ounce” (five ounces) “of
meat per diem. How is that? Pooh! says the Liberal Minister, they are
only manufacturers. This solution will not be very agreeable to those
theorists amongst us who confound the extension of manufactures with the
welfare and comfort of the working people. The more candid Minister of
Louis-Philippe assumes that a manufacturing population must of necessity
be worse fed than other classes.” The reviewer is evidently no Œdipus.
But he might have found in another page of M. Rubichon’s treatise, what
the Minister meant. In a town such as Paris before the Revolution, in
which there was, comparatively speaking, no production at all, but only
distribution—the population consisting of the great landlords, the Court
and higher functionaries paid by the State, the bankers, financiers,
government contractors, and other monied classes, with the great and
small dealers and tradesmen needful for supplying these opulent
consumers, and few labourers beyond those who cannot be wanting in so
large a town—all will see that the richer must bear an unusually high
numerical proportion to the poorer consumers in such a city. Suppose now
that a Manchester or a Glasgow grows up in the place. It is pretty
evident that while this would add a little to the richer class, it would
add twenty times as much to the poorer. Considering now that the upper
and middle classes in France are great consumers of animal food, while
the poor consume very little dof it, the portiond of each poor person
might in these circumstances increase very much, while yet the average
consumption per head of the whole city, owing to the diminished
proportional numbers of the richer class, might be considerably
diminished. We have little doubt that this is the fact, and that the
great increase in the inferior kinds of animal food introduced into
Paris would prove to be for the use, not of those who formerly used the
superior kinds, but in a great measure for those who seldom obtained
animal food at all.

This, however, does not explain the whole of the change which has taken
place; for the price of butchers’ meat has also risen in the Paris
markets so materially as to be a source of great privation and
complaint. The rise may be ascribed to various causes. In the first
place, “France has till lately always been a large importer of cattle;
and down to 1814 Edition: current; Page: [446] they were exempted from
all duty. In that year, however, a duty of three francs was laid on each
head of cattle imported;” and in 1822 the duty “was suddenly raised to
55 francs, an increase which has well nigh put a stop to the
importation.”* Secondly, the octroi, or town custom duty, now so
burthensome, did not exist at all in 1789, and has been largely
increased at various periods, both in Paris and most other towns, since
its first establishment. eA third cause is that the trade of butcher in
Paris is a monopoly, the number of butchers being limited, and to so
small a number, that the privilege bears a high pecuniary value.† This
we believe to be the principal cause of the high price and diminished
consumption of meat in Paris. Two circumstances are almost decisive in
proof of his opinion. One is that while the consumption per head of
butcher’s meat has diminished, that of almost every other article of
food has largely increased. The other is, that in the banlieue of Paris,
which differs from Paris itself in no material circumstance but that of
being beyond the octroi, and exempt from the butchers’ monopoly, the
consumption per head of meat, instead of diminishing, has augmented in a
remarkable degree; as it is affirmed to have also done in all the great
towns of France, Paris excepted.‡e

Edition: current; Page: [447]
But if there were not these causes, there is cause almost sufficient in
the very fact of an increased and rapidly increasing population. Paris
has added, in fourteen years, between four and five hundred thousand to
its inhabitants, an increase of nearly one-half. The agriculture of a
country must be rapidly improving indeed, if an increase like this can
take place in a single market without compelling it to draw its supplies
from a larger surface and a greater distance, and therefore at an
increased expense. Where would London have been by this time, for the
supply of its markets, fwere it notf for our great coasting trade, and
the invention of steam gcommunicationg, which conveys not only cattle
but carcases from the extremity of Scotland as cheaply as they hcould
formerlyh be brought from Buckinghamshire? The cattle for the supply of
Paris must travel by land, from distances varying from 50 to 150 leagues
(this rests on the authority of a Committee of the Municipal Council of
Paris in 1841), and after so long a journey have either to be brought to
market out of condition, or to be fattened in the immediate
neighbourhood. Can any one, then, be surprised that a idoublei
population cannot be so jcheaply supplied as one of half the number?

To these kcauses of the diminished supply of butcher’s meat in the
towns, we are not afraid to add lanotherl, which, though resting mainly
on general considerations, we should not be wholly unable to support by
positive evidence. This is, the increased consumption by the country
people. They have less animal food, in proportion, to spare for the
towns, because they retain more of it for their own use.

On what evidence is it asserted that small properties imply deficiency
of cattle, and consequent deficiency of manure? That they are not
favourable to sheep farming seems to be admitted; myet in France, as
well as in the United Kingdom, the number of sheep has doubled in the
course of a Edition: current; Page: [448] century.* It is true that in
quality, instead of the extraordinary improvement which has taken place
in England, they have remained almost stationary. Butm the breeding and
fattening of horned cattle nisn so perfectly compatible with small
capital, that in the opinion of many Continental authorities, small
farms have the advantage in this respect, and so great an advantage as
to be more than a compensation for their inferiority in sheep.† It is
argued that the petite propriété must diminish othe number ofo cattle,
because it leads to the breaking up of natural pasture. But when natural
pasture is fit for the plough, a greater number of cattle than were
supported on the whole, may be supported on a part, by laying it out in
roots and artificial grasses; and it is well known that on the
stall-feeding system there is much greater preservation of manure. The
question of petite culture, in relation to cattle, is, in fact, one and
the same with the question of stall-feeding. The two things must stand
or fall together. Stall-feeding produces, cæteris paribus, a greater
quantity of provisions, but in the opinion of most judges a lower
quality. Experience must decide.

This brings us back to the causes assigned by the committee of the Paris
town-council, for the falling off in the quality of the beef consumed at
Paris. One is, the extraordinary increase in the consumption of diary
produce. Milk is now brought from distances of thirty leagues, and
within six or eight leagues of Paris no calves are now bred up, all
being sold at the earliest moment possible. In consequence, a great part
of the beef sold at Paris is the flesh of cows too old to be fit for
producing milk. A second cause assigned is, the increase of
stall-feeding. But the committee make an instructive distinction. In
Normandy, which affords the greatest portion of the supply, the quality,
they say, has deteriorated; but in La Vendée, and the central provinces,
the Limousin, Nivernais, Bourbonnais, and La Marche, “there is
improvement in weight, in fatness, and from some districts in number,”
though these countries have also adopted stall-feeding; and in this, say
the committee, there is no contradiction, since “what is a deterioration
in the rich pasturages of Calvados, is improvement in the petites herbes
of the Allier and the Nièvre.”

It may now be left to the reader to judge if the case of our adversaries
has not broken down as completely on this, their strongest point, as it
has done on every other point of any importance.‡

Edition: current; Page: [449]
We cannot close this long controversy without producing evidence of the
extraordinary improvement, extraordinary both in amount and in rapidity,
which is taking place in the productiveness of the agriculture of some
parts of France. We quote from another work by an authority already
cited, M. Hippolite Passy, several times a minister of Louis-Philippe,
and well known as one of the pmost influentialp politicians and
publicists of France. This tract, published in 1841, is an examination
of “the changes in the agricultural condition of the Department of the
Eure since 1800.” The Eure is one of the five departments of Normandy,
and belongs to the region of which M. Rubichon admits the agriculture to
be the best in France; but only (as he contends) because the
morcellement has not had time to produce its effects, having commenced
in that region only from the Revolution, and he assigns to it
accordingly no privilege but that of Outis in the Odyssey, to be
devoured the last. Let us now see the facts. This department fortunately
possesses an accurate agricultural statistique for the year 1800, drawn
up by a préfet who took great pains to be correct in his information. M.
Passy’s pamphlet is a comparison of these returns with those collected
by the qFrench Government in 1837.

In this interval of thirty-seven years, scarcely any new land rwasr
taken into cultivation, nearly all fit for culture shaving beens already
occupied. But fallows thadt diminished from 172,000 hectares to a little
more than 80,000. The cultures which supply cattle uhadu increased in a
much greater proportion than any others: instead of 17 per cent of the
cultivated area they voccupiedv 37 per cent. Horses whadw multiplied
from 29,500 to 51,000, horned cattle from 51,000 to 106,000, sheep from
205,000 to 511,000, and as their food xhasx increased in a still greater
ratio, and there ywasy importation besides, all kinds of live stock
zwerez better fed, and ahada gained in size, weight, and value. The
produce per Edition: current; Page: [450] hectare of all kinds of grain,
and of most other kinds of produce, bhadb considerably increased, of
some kinds nearly doubled. These changes chadc chiefly been effected
during the second half of the period, so that the improvement dwasd as
progressive as on M. Rubichon’s theory should have been the
deterioration. There ehade been no perceptible variation in the
proportion between the grande and the petite culture; nor fhadf the
division of properties at all promoted the division of farms. On the
soils where small farms are most profitable, large properties are rented
to small tenants; where the reverse is the case, a single farmer often
rents the lands of several proprietors, and this arrangement extends
itself more gas the subdivision of property advances. The consumption of
food per head of the population hhadh largely increased—in the ratio,
according to M. Passy, of about 37 per cent; and while the agricultural
wealth of the department ihadi increased, according to his estimate, by
54 per cent, the population jhadj only increased 5 per cent.*

Though the Eure belongs to the most productive and thriving region of
France, it is not the most productive or the most thriving department.
The Nord, which comprises the greater part of French Flanders, and is a
country of small farms, maintains, according to M. Passy, proportionally
to its extent, a third more cattle than the Eure; and the average
produce of wheat per hectare, instead of seventeen, is twenty
hectolitres, about twenty-two English bushels per acre.

Results almost as satisfactory may be deduced from a statistical account
of a much less improved district than the Eure, the most eastern
district of Brittany, the arrondissement of Fougères, published in
k1845k, by the souspréfet, M. Bertin. “It is only since the peace,” says
this intelligent functionary, “that the agriculture of the
arrondissement has made much progress; but from 1815 it has improved
with increasing rapidity. If from 1815 to 1825 the improvement was as
one, it was as three between 1825 and 1835; and as six since that
period.”[*] At the beginning of the century little wheat was cultivated,
and that little so ill, that in 1809 the produce Edition: current; Page:
[451] per hectare was estimated only at 9 hectolitresl; rather more than
10 bushels per acrel. mIn 1845,m M. Bertin estimates it at 16n, or
upwards of 18 bushels per acren. The cattle, being better fed, and
crossed with more vigorous breeds, have increased in size and strength;
while in number, horned cattle, between 1813 and 1844, multiplied from
33,000 to 52,000, sheep from 6300 to 11,000, swine from 9300 to 26,100,
and horses from 7400 to 11,600. New and valuable manures have been
introduced, and have come largely into use. The extent of meadow land
has increased and is increasing, and great attention has of late been
paid to its improvement. This testimony comes from an enemy of the
morcellement, who, however, states that it is advancing very slowly, and
is not likely to advance much further, the co-heirs not dividing each
parcelle, but either distributing the parcelles among them, or disposing
of them by private or public sale. Some farmers, he says, who are also
proprietors, have the good sense to sell the few fields which belong to
them, in order to increase their farming capital. M. Bertin is an enemy
to stall-feeding, which, he says, is not practised in his
arrondissement. The increase of live stock is othereforeo the more
remarkable. It may not be useless to mention an assertion of this
writer, that the official publication from which M. Rubichon’s data are
taken greatly understates the number of horned cattle in France, by the
accidental omission of a column in summing up, by which the number is
brought below ten millions, when it ought, according to M. Bertin, to be
thirteen.

Of the food of the inhabitants he says, that not long ago it was
composed almost exclusively of milk, buckwheat cakes, and rye bread, but
has greatly improved in quantity, quality, and variety, especially in
the last ten years and now consists of wheaten bread, or bread of
two-thirds wheat and one-third rye; with butter, vegetables, and pin
“pgood farms” about a kilogramme (or 2¼ lbs.) of pork per week for each
person. There is also some consumption of other flesh-meats among the
labouring people, and the arrondissement contains 63 butchers’ shops,
where fifteen years ago there were not 30; the increase not being in the
towns (or rather town), but in the villages. The clothing of the rural
population is substantial, “and different for every season, which is
always a sign of general comfort,” and “persons in rags are very rare in
the arrondissement.”

We cannot further extend this long discussion; but enough has been said,
to enable our readers adequately to appreciate the terrible predictions
of alarmist writers respecting the consequences of the Division of
Landed Property in France.




