BOOK IV: OF OPERATIONS SUBSIDIARY TO INDUCTION

Edition: current; Page: [640]
“Clear and distinct ideas are terms which, though familiar and frequent
in men’s mouths, I have reason to think every one who uses does not
perfectly understand. And possibly it is but here and there one who
gives himself the trouble to consider them so far as to know what he
himself or others precisely mean by them; I have, therefore, in most
places, chose to put determinate or determined, instead of clear and
distinct, as more likely to direct men’s thoughts to my meaning in this
matter.” Locke’s Essay on the Human Understanding; “Epistle to the
Reader” [pp. liii-liv].

a“Il ne peut y avoir qu’une méthode parfaite, qui est la méthode
naturelle; on nomme ainsi un arrangement dans lequel les êtres du même
genre seraient plus voisins entre eux que de ceux de tous les autres
genres; les genres du même ordre, plus que de ceux de tous les autres
ordres; et ainsi de suite. Cette méthode est l’idéal auquel l’histoire
naturelle doit tendre; car il est évident que si l’on y parvenait, l’on
aurait l’expression exacte et complète de la nature entière.” Cuvier,
Règne Animal, Introduction [pp. 11-12].a

b“Deux grandes notions philosophiques dominent la théorie fondamentale
de la méthode naturelle proprement dite, savoir la formation des groupes
naturels, et ensuite leur succession hiérarchique.” Comte, Cours de
Philosophie Positive, 42me leçon [Vol. III, p. 546].b

Edition: current; Page: [641]


CHAPTER I: Of Observation and Description

§ 1. [Observation, how far a subject of logic] The inquiry which
occupied us in the two preceding books, has conducted us to what appears
a satisfactory solution of the principal problem of Logic, according to
the conception I have formed of the science. We have found, that the
mental process with which Logic is conversant, the operation of
aascertaininga truths by means of evidence, is always, even when
appearances point to a different theory of it, a process of induction.
And we have particularized the various modes of induction, and obtained
a clear view of the principles to which it must conform, in order to
lead to results which can be relied on.

The consideration of Induction, however, does not end with the direct
rules for its performance. Something must be said of those other
operations of the mind, which are either necessarily presupposed in all
induction, or are instrumental to the more difficult and complicated
inductive processes. The present book will be devoted to the
consideration of these subsidiary operations: among which our attention
must first be given to those, which are indispensable preliminaries to
all induction whatsoever.

Induction being merely the extension to a class of cases, of something
which has been observed to be true in certain individual instances of
the class; the first place among the operations subsidiary to induction,
is claimed by Observation. This is not, however, the place to lay down
rules for making good observers; nor is it within the competence of
Logic to do so, but of the art of intellectual Education. Our business
with observation is only in its connexion with the appropriate problem
of logic, the estimation of evidence. We have to consider, not how or
what to observe, but under what conditions observation is to be relied
on; what is needful, in order that the fact, supposed to be observed,
may safely be received as true.

§ 2. [A great part of what seems observation is really inference] The
answer to this question is very simple, at least in its first aspect.
The sole condition is, that what is supposed to have been observed shall
really have been observed; that it be an observation, not an inference.
For in almost every act of our perceiving faculties, observation and
inference are intimately Edition: current; Page: [642] blended. What we
are said to observe is usually a compound result, of which one-tenth may
be observation, and the remaining nine-tenths inference.

I affirm, for example, that I hear a man’s voice. This would pass, in
common language, for a direct perception. All, however, which is really
perception, is that I hear a sound. That the sound is a voice, and that
voice the voice of a man, are not perceptions but inferences. I affirm,
again, that I saw my brother at aa certain houra this morning. If any
proposition concerning a matter of fact would bcommonlyb be said to be
known by the direct testimony of the senses, this surely would be so.
The truth, however, is far otherwise. I only saw a certain coloured
surface; or rather I had the kind of visual sensations which are usually
produced by a coloured surface; and from these as marks, known to be
such by previous experience, I concluded that I saw my brother. I might
have had sensations precisely similar, when my brother was not there. I
might have seen some other person so nearly resembling him in
appearance, as, at the distance, and, with the degree of attention which
I bestowed, to be mistaken for him. I might have been asleep, and have
dreamed that I saw him; or in a state of nervous disorder, which brought
his image before me in a waking hallucination. In all these modes,
cmanyc have been led to believe that they saw persons well known to
them, who were dead or far distant. If any of these suppositions had
been true, the affirmation that I saw my brother would have been
erroneous; but whatever was matter of direct perception, namely the
visual sensations, would have been real. The inference only would have
been ill grounded; I should have ascribed those sensations to a wrong
cause.

Innumerable instances might be given, and analysed in the same manner,
of what are vulgarly called errors of sense. There are none of them
properly errors of sense; they are erroneous inferences from sense. When
I look at a candle through a multiplying glass, I dsee what seemsd a
dozen candles instead of one: and if the real circumstances of the case
were skilfully disguised, I might suppose that there were really that
number; there would be what is called an optical deception. In the
kaleidoscope there really is that deception: when I look through the
instrument, instead of what is actually there, namely a casual
arrangement of coloured fragmentse, the appearance presented is that ofe
the same combination several times repeated in symmetrical arrangement
round a point. The delusion is of course effected by giving me the same
sensations which I should have had if such a symmetrical combination had
really been presented to me. If I cross two of my fingers, and bring any
small object, a marble for instance, into contact with both, at points
not usually touched simultaneously by one object, I can hardly, if my
Edition: current; Page: [643] eyes are shut, help believing that there
are two marbles instead of one. But it is not my touch in this case, nor
my sight in the other, which is deceived; the deception, whether durable
or only momentary, is in my judgment. From my senses I have only the
sensations, and those are genuine. Being accustomed to have those or
similar sensations when, and only when, a certain arrangement of outward
objects is present to my organs, I have the habit of instantly, when I
experience the sensations, inferring the existence of that state of
outward things. This habit has become so powerful, that the inference,
performed with the speed and certainty of an instinct, is confounded
withf intuitive perceptions. When it is correct, I am unconscious that
it ever needed proof; even when I know it to be incorrect, I cannot
without considerable effort abstain from making it. In order to be aware
that it is not made by instinct but by an acquired habit, I am obliged
to reflect on the slow process gthroughg which I learnt to judge by the
eye of many things which I now appear to perceive directly by sight; and
on the reverse operation performed by persons learning to draw, who with
difficulty and labour divest themselves of their acquired perceptions,
and learn afresh to see things as they appear to the eyeh.

It would be easy to prolong these illustrations, were there any need to
expatiate on a topic so copiously exemplified in various popular works.
From the examples already given, it is seen sufficiently, that the
individual facts from which we collect our inductive generalizations are
scarcely ever obtained by observation alone. Observation extends only to
the sensations by which we recognise objects; but the propositions which
we make use of, either in science or in common life, relate mostly to
the objects themselves. In every act of what is called observation,
there is at least one inference—from the sensations to the presence of
the object; from the marks or diagnostics, to the entire phenomenon. And
hence, among other consequences, follows the seeming paradox, that a
general proposition collected from particulars is often more certainly
true than any one of the particular propositions from which, by an act
of induction, it was inferred. For, each of those particular (or rather
singular) propositions involved an inference, from the impression on the
senses to the fact which caused that impression: and this inference may
have been erroneous in any one of the instances, but cannot well have
been erroneous in all of them, provided their number was sufficient to
eliminate chance. The conclusion, therefore, that is, the general
proposition, may deserve more complete reliance than it would be safe to
repose in any one of the inductive premises.

The logic of observation, then, consists solely in a correct
discrimination Edition: current; Page: [644] between that, in a result
of observation, which has really been perceived, and that which is an
inference from the perception. Whatever portion is inference, is
amenable to the rules of induction already treated of, and requires no
further notice here: the question for us in this place is, when all
which is inference is taken away, what remains. There iremainsi, in the
first place, the mind’s own feelings or states of consciousness, namely,
its outward feelings or sensations, and its inward feelings—its
thoughts, emotions, and volitions. Whether anything else remains, or all
else is inference from this; whether the mind is capable of directly
perceiving or apprehending anything except states of its own
consciousness—is ja problem of metaphysics not to be discussed in this
placej. But after excluding all questions on which metaphysicians
differ, it remains true, that for most purposes the discrimination we
are called upon practically to exercise is kthatk between sensations or
other feelings, of our own or of other people, and inferences drawn from
them. And on the theory of Observation this is all which seems necessary
to be said lfor the purposes of the present workl.

§ 3. [The description of an observation affirms more than is contained
in the observation] If, in the simplest observation, or in what passes
for such, there is a large part which is not observation but something
else; so in the simplest description of an observation, there is, and
must always be, much more asserted than is contained in the perception
itself. We cannot describe a fact, without implying more than the fact.
The perception is only of one individual thing; but to describe it is to
affirm a connexion between it and every other thing which is either
denoted or connoted by any of the terms used. To begin with an example,
than which none can be conceived more elementary: I have a sensation of
sight, and I endeavour to describe it by saying that I see something
white. In saying this, I do not solely affirm my sensation; I also class
it. I assert a resemblance between the thing I see, and all things which
I and others are accustomed to call white. I assert that it resembles
them in the circumstance in which they all resemble one another, in that
which is the ground of their being called by the name. This is not
merely one way of describing an observation, but the only way. If I
would either register my observation for my own future use, or make it
known for the benefit of others, I must assert a resemblance between the
fact which I have observed and something else. It is inherent in a
description, to be the statement of a resemblance, or resemblances.

Edition: current; Page: [645]
aWe thus see that it is impossible to express in words any result of
observation, without performing an act possessing what Dr. Whewell
considers to be characteristic of Induction. There is always something
introduced which was not included in the observation itself; some
conception common to the phenomenon with other phenomena to which it is
compared. An observation cannot be spoken of in language at all without
declaring more than that one observation; without assimiliating it to
other phenomena already observed and classified. But this identification
of an object—this recognition of it as possessing certain known
characteristics—has never been confounded with Induction. It is an
operation which precedes all induction, and supplies it with its
materials. It is a perception of resemblances, obtained by comparison.a

These resemblances are not always apprehended directly, by merely
comparing the object observed with some other present object, or with
our recollection of an object which is absent. They are often
ascertained through intermediate marks, that is, deductively. In
describing some new kind of animal, suppose me to say that it measures
ten feet in length, from the forehead to the extremity of the tail. I
did not ascertain this by the unassisted eye. I had a two foot rule
which I applied to the object, and, as we commonly say, measured it; an
operation which was not wholly manual, but partly also mathematical,
involving the two propositions, Five times two is ten, and Things which
are equal to the same thing are equal to one another. Hence, the fact
that the animal is ten feet long bisb not an immediate perception, but a
conclusion from reasoning; the minor premises alone being furnished by
observation of the object. cNevertheless, this is called an observation,
or a description of the animal, not an induction respecting it.c

To pass at once from a very simple to a very complex example: I affirm
that the earth is globular. The assertion is not grounded on direct
perception; for the figure of the earth cannot, by us, be directly
perceived, though the assertion would not be true unless circumstances
could be supposed under which its truth could be so perceived. That the
form of the earth is globular is inferred from certain marks, as for
instance from this, that its shadow thrown upon the moon is circular; or
this, that on the sea, or any extensive plain, our horizon is always a
circle; either of which marks is incompatible with any other than a
globular form. I assert further, that the earth is that particular kind
of globe which is termed an oblate spheroid; because it is found by
measurement in the direction of the meridian, that the length on the
surface of the earth which subtends a given angle at its centre,
diminishes Edition: current; Page: [646] as we recede from the equator
and approach the poles. But these propositions, that the earth is
globular, and that it is an oblate spheroid, assert, each of them, dand
individual fact; in its own nature capable of being perceived by the
senses when the requisite organs and the necessary position are
supposed, and only not actually perceived because ethosee organs and
that position are wanting. fThis identification of the earth, first as a
globe, and next as an oblate spheroid,f which, if the fact could have
been seen, would have been called a description of the figure of the
earth, may without impropriety be so called when, instead of being seen,
it is inferred. But we could not without impropriety call either of
these assertions an induction from facts respecting the earth. They are
not general propositions collected from particular facts, but particular
facts deduced from general propositions. They are conclusions obtained
deductively, from premises originating in induction: but of these
premises some were not obtained by observation of the earth, nor had any
peculiar reference to it.

If, then, the truth respecting the figure of the earth is not an
induction, why should the truth respecting the figure of the earth’s
orbit be so? gTheg two cases only differ in this, that the form of the
orbit was not, like the form of the earth itself, deduced by
ratiocination from facts which were marks of ellipticity, but was got at
by boldly guessing that the path was an ellipse, and finding afterwards,
on examination, that the observations were in harmony with the
hypothesis. hAccording to Dr. Whewell, however, this process of guessing
and verifying our guesses is not only induction, buth the whole of
induction: no other exposition can be given of that logical
operation.[*] That he is wrong in the latter assertion, the whole of the
preceding book has, I hope, sufficiently proved; and that ithe process
by which the ellipticity of the planetary orbits was ascertained, is not
induction at alli, was attempted to be shown in the second chapter of
the same book.* We are now, however, prepared to go more into the heart
of the jmatterj than at that earlier period of our inquiry, and kto
show, not merely what the operation in question is not, but what it isk.

Edition: current; Page: [647]
§ 4. [The description of an observation affirms, beyond what is
contained in the observation, an agreement among phenomena; and athea
comparison of phenomena to ascertain such agreements is a preliminary to
induction] We observed, in the second chapter,[*] that the proposition
“the earth moves in an ellipse,” so far as it only serves for the
colligation or connecting together of actual observations, (that is, as
it only affirms that the observed positions of the earth may be
correctly represented by as many points in the circumference of an
imaginary ellipse,) is not an induction, but a description: it is an
induction, only when it affirms that the intermediate positions, of
which there has been no direct observation, would be found to correspond
to the remaining points of the same elliptic circumference. Now, though
this real induction is one thing, and the description another, we are in
a very different condition for making the induction bbefore we have
obtained the description, and afterb it. For cinasmuch asc the
description, like all other descriptions, contains the assertion of a
resemblance between the phenomenon described and something else; in
pointing out something which the series of observed places of a planet
resembles, it points out something in which the several places
themselves agree. If the series of places dcorrespondd to as many points
of an ellipse, the places themselves agree in being situated in that
ellipse. We have, therefore, by ethe same process which gave use the
description, obtained the requisites for an induction by the Method of
Agreement. The successive observed places of the earth being considered
as effects, and its motion as the cause which produces them, we find
that those effects, that is, those places, agree in the circumstance of
being in an ellipse. We conclude that the remaining effects, the places
which have not been observed, agree in the same circumstance, and that
the law of the motion of the earth is motion in an ellipse.

The Colligation of Facts, therefore, by means of hypotheses, or, as Dr.
Whewell prefers to say, by means of Conceptions,[†] instead of being, as
he supposes, Induction itself, takes its proper place among operations
subsidiary to Induction. All Induction supposes that we have previously
compared the requisite number of individual instances, and ascertained
in what circumstances they agree. The Colligation of Facts is no other
than this preliminary operationf. When Kepler, after vainly endeavouring
to connect the observed Edition: current; Page: [648] places of a planet
by various hypotheses of circular motion, at last tried the hypothesis
of an ellipse and found it answer to the phenomena; what he really
attempted, first unsuccessfully and at last successfully, was to
discover the circumstance in which all the observed positions of the
planet agreed. And when he in like manner connected another set of
observed facts, the periodic times of the different planets, by the
proposition that the squares of the times are proportional to the cubes
of the distances, what he did was simply to ascertain the property in
which the periodic times of all the different planets agreed.

Since, therefore, all that is true and to the purpose in Dr. Whewell’s
doctrine of Conceptions might be fully expressed by the more familiar
term Hypothesis; and since his Colligation of Facts by means of
appropriate Conceptions, is but the ordinary process of finding by a
comparison of phenomena, in what consists their agreement or
resemblance; I would willingly have confined myself to those better
understood expressions, and persevered to the end in the same abstinence
which I have hitherto observed fromg ideological discussions;
considering the mechanism of our thoughts to be a topic distinct from
and irrelevant to the principles and rules by which the trustworthiness
of the results of thinking is to be estimated. Since, however, a work of
such high pretensions, and, it must also be said, of so much real merit,
has rested the whole theory of Induction upon such ideological
considerations, it seems necessary for others who hfollowh, to claim for
themselves and their doctrines whatever position may properly belong to
them on the same metaphysical ground. And this is the object of the
succeeding chapter.

Edition: current; Page: [649]


CHAPTER II: Of Abstraction, or the Formation of Conceptions

§ 1. [The comparison which is a preliminary to induction implies general
conceptions] The metaphysical inquiry into the nature and composition of
what have been called Abstract Ideas, or in other words, of the notions
which answer in the mind to classes and to general names, belongs not to
Logic, but to a different science, and our purpose does not require that
we should enter upon it here. We are only concerned with the universally
acknowledged fact, that sucha notions or conceptions do exist. The mind
can conceive a multitude of individual things as one assemblage or
class; and general names do breallyb suggest to us certain ideas or
mental representations, otherwise we could not use the names with
consciousness of a meaning. Whether the idea called up by a general name
is composed of the various circumstances in which all the individuals
denoted by the name agree, and of no others, (which is the doctrine of
Locke, Brown, and the Conceptualists;) or whether it be the idea of some
one of those individuals, clothed in its individualizing peculiarities,
but with the accompanying knowledge that those peculiarities are not
properties of the class, (which is the doctrine of Berkeley, cMr.
Bailey,*c and the modern Nominalists;) or whether (as held by Mr.
eJamese Mill) the idea of the class is that of a miscellaneous
assemblage of individuals belonging Edition: current; Page: [650] to the
class;[*] or whether, finally,f it be any one or any other of all these,
according to the accidental circumstances of the case; certain it is,
that some idea or mental conception is suggested by a general name,
whenever we either hear it or employ it with consciousness of a meaning.
And this, which we may call if we please a general idea, represents in
our minds the whole class of things to which the name is applied.
Whenever we think or reason concerning the class, we do so by means of
this idea. And the voluntary power which the mind has, of attending to
one part of what is present to it at any moment, and neglecting another
part, enables us to keep our reasonings and conclusions respecting the
class unaffected by anything in the idea or mental image which is not
really, or at least which we do not really believe to be, common to the
whole class.*

gThere are, then,g such things as general conceptions, hor conceptions
by means of which we can think generally:h andi when we form a set of
phenomena into a class, that is, when we compare them with one another
to ascertain in what they agree, some general conception is implied in
this mental operation. And inasmuch as such a comparison is a necessary
preliminary to Induction, it is most true that Induction could not go on
without general conceptions.

§ 2. [But these general conceptions need not be pre-existent] But it
does not therefore follow that these general conceptions must have
existed in the mind previously to the comparison. It is nota a law of
our intellect, that in comparing things with each other and taking note
of their agreement we merely recognise as realized in the outward world
something that we already had in our minds. The conception originally
found its way to us as the result of such a comparison. It was obtained
(in metaphysical phrase) by abstraction from individual things. These
things may be things which we perceived Edition: current; Page: [651] or
thought of on former occasions, but they may also be the things which we
are perceiving or thinking of on the very occasion. When Kepler compared
the observed places of the planet Mars, and found that they agreed in
being points of an elliptic circumference, he applied a general
conception which was already in his mind, bhaving beenb derived from his
former experience. But this is by no means cuniversally thec case. When
we compare several objects and find them to agree in being white, or
when we compare the various species of ruminating animals and find them
dtod agree in being cloven-footed, we have just as much a general
conception in our minds as Kepler had in his: we have the conception of
“a white thing,” or the conception of “ea cloven-footede animal.” But no
one supposes that we necessarily bring these conceptions with us, and
superinduce them (to adopt Dr. Whewell’s expressionf)[*] upon the facts:
because in these simple cases everybody sees that the very act of
comparison which ends in our connecting the facts by means of the
conception, may be the source from which we derive the conception
itself. If we had never seen any white object or had never seen any
cloven-footed animal before, we should at the same time and by the same
mental act acquire the idea, and employ it for the colligation of the
observed phenomena. Kepler, on the contrary, really had to bring the
idea with him, and gsuperinduceg it upon the facts; he could not evolve
it out of them: if he had not already had the idea, he would not have
been able to acquire it by a comparison of the planet’s positions. But
this inability was a mere accident: the idea of an ellipse could have
been acquired from the paths of the planets as effectually as from
anything else, if the paths had not happened to be invisible. If the
planet had left a visible track, and we had been so placed that we could
see it at the proper angle, we might have abstracted our original idea
of an ellipse from the planetary orbit. Indeed, every conception which
can be made the instrument for connecting a set of facts, might have
been originally evolved from those very facts. The conception is a
conception of something; and that which it is a conception of, is really
in the facts, and might, under some supposable circumstances, or by some
supposable extension of the faculties which we actually possess, have
been detected in them. And not only is this always in itself possible,
but it actually happens in almost all cases in which the obtaining of
the right conception is a matter of any considerable difficulty. For if
there be no new conception required; if one of those already familiar to
mankind will serve the purpose, the accident Edition: current; Page:
[652] of being the first to whom the right one occurs, may happen to
almost anybody; at least in the case of a set of phenomena which the
whole scientific world are engaged in attempting to connect. The honour,
in Kepler’s case, was that of the accurate, patient, and toilsome
calculations by which he compared the results that followed from his
different guesses, with the observations of Tycho Brahe; but the merit
was very small of guessing an ellipse; the only wonder is that men had
not guessed it before, nor could they have failed to do so if there had
not existed an obstinate à priori prejudice that the heavenly bodies
must move, if not in a circle, in some combination of circles.

The really difficult cases are those in which the conception hdestinedh
to create light and order out of darkness and confusion, has to be
sought for among the very phenomena which it afterwards serves to
arrange. Why, according to Dr. Whewell himself, did the ancients fail in
discovering the laws of mechanics, that is, of equilibrium and of the
communication of motion? Because they had not, or at least had not
clearly, the ideas or conceptions of pressure and resistance, momentum,
and uniform and accelerating force.[*] And whence could they have
obtained these ideas except from the very facts of equilibrium and
motion? The tardy development of several of the physical sciences, for
example of optics, electricity, magnetism, and the higher
generalizations of chemistry, ihei ascribes to the fact that mankind had
not yet possessed themselves of the Idea of Polarity, that is, the idea
of opposite properties in opposite directions. But what was there to
suggest such an idea, until, by a separate examination of several of
these different branches of knowledge, it was shown that the facts of
each of them did present, in some instances at least, the curious
phenomenon of opposite properties in opposite directions? The thing was
superficially manifest only in two cases, those of the magnet and of
electrified bodies; and there the conception was encumbered with the
circumstance of material poles, or fixed points in the body itself, in
which points this opposition of properties seemed to be inherent. The
first comparison and abstraction had led only to this conception of
poles; and if anything corresponding to that conception had existed in
the phenomena of chemistry or optics, the difficulty jnow justly
consideredj so great, would have been extremely small. The obscurity
karosek from the fact, that the polarities in chemistry and optics were
distinct species, though of the same genus, with the polarities in
electricity and magnetism: and that in order to assimilate the phenomena
to one another, it was necessary to compare a polarity without poles,
such lfor instance as is exemplifiedl in Edition: current; Page: [653]
the polarization of light, and the polarity with m(apparent)m poles,
which we see in the magnet; and to recognise that these polarities,
while different in many other respects, agree in the one character which
is expressed by the phrase, opposite properties in opposite directions.
From the result of such a comparison it was that the minds of scientific
men formed this new general conception: between which, and the first
confused feeling of an analogy between some of the phenomena of light
and those of electricity and magnetism, there is a long interval, filled
up by the labours and more or less sagacious suggestions of many
superior minds.

The conceptions, then, which we employ for the colligation and
methodization of facts, do not develop themselves from within, but are
impressed upon the mind from without; they are never obtained otherwise
than by way of comparison and abstraction, and, in the most important
and the most numerous cases, are evolved by abstraction from the very
phenomena which it is their office to colligate. I am farn, however,n
from wishing to imply that it is not often a very difficult thing to
perform this process of abstraction well, or that the success of oano
inductive operation does not, in many cases, principally depend on the
skill with which we perform it. Bacon pwas quite justified in
designatingp as one of the principal obstacles to good induction,
general conceptions wrongly formed, “notiones temerè à rebus abstractæ:”
to which Dr. Whewell adds, that not only does bad abstraction make bad
induction, but that in order to perform induction well, we must have
abstracted well; our general conceptions must be “clear” and
“appropriate” to the matter in hand.[*]q

§ 3. [A general conception, originally the result of a comparison,
becomes itself the type of comparison] In attempting to show what the
difficulty in this matter really is, and how it is surmounted, I must
beg the reader, once for all, to bear this in mind; that although, in
discussing athe opinions of a different school of philosophy, I am
willing to adopt theira language, and to speak, therefore, of connecting
facts through the instrumentality of a conception, this technical
phraseology means neither more nor less than what is commonly called
comparing the facts with one another and determining in what they agree.
Nor has the technical expression even the advantage of being Edition:
current; Page: [654] metaphysically correct. The facts are not
connectedb, except in a merely metaphorical acceptation of the termb.
The ideas of the facts may become connected, that is, we may be led to
think of them together; but this consequence is no more than what may be
produced by any casual association. What really takes place, is, I
conceive, more philosophically expressed by the common word Comparison,
than by the phrases “to connect” or “to superinduce.” For, as the
general conception is itself obtained by a comparison of particular
phenomena, so, when obtained, the mode in which we apply it to other
phenomena is again by comparison. We compare phenomena with each other
to get the conception, and we then compare those and other phenomena
with the conception. We get the conception of an animal (for instance)
by comparing different animals, and when we afterwards see a creature
resembling an animal, we compare it with our general conception of an
animal; and if it agrees with that general conception, we include it in
the class. The conception becomes the type of comparison.

And we need only consider what comparison is, to see that where the
objects are more than two, and still more when they are an indefinite
number, a type of some sort is an indispensable condition of the
comparison. When we have to arrange and classify a great number of
objects according to their agreements and differences, we do not make a
confused attempt to compare all with all. We know that two things are as
much as the cmind can easilyc attend to at a time, and we therefore fix
upon one of the objects, either at hazard or because it offers in a
peculiarly striking manner some important character, and, taking this as
our standard, dcompare it withd one object after another. If we find a
second object which presents a remarkable agreement with the first,
inducing us to class them together, the question instantly arises, in
what eparticulare circumstances do they agree? and to take notice of
these circumstances is already a first stage of abstraction, giving rise
to a general conception. Having advanced thus far, when we now take in
hand a third object we naturally ask ourselves the question, not merely
whether this third object agrees with the first, but whether it agrees
with it in the same circumstances in which the second did? in other
words, whether it agrees with the general conception fwhich has beenf
obtained by abstraction from the first and second? Thus we see the
tendency of general conceptions, as soon as formed, to substitute
themselves as types, for whatever individual objects previously answered
that purpose in our comparisons. We may, perhaps, find that no
considerable number of other objects gagreeg with this first general
conception; and that we must drop the conception, and beginning again
with Edition: current; Page: [655] a different individual case, proceed
by hfreshh comparisons to a different general conception. Sometimes,
again, we find that the same conception will serve, by merely leaving
out some of its circumstances; and by this higher effort of abstraction,
we obtain a still more general conception; as in the case formerly
referred to, ithe scientific worldi rose from the conception of poles to
the general conception of opposite properties in opposite directions; or
as those South-Sea islanders, whose conception of a quadruped had been
abstracted from hogs (the only animals of that description which they
had seen), when they afterwards compared that conception with other
quadrupeds, dropped some of the circumstances, and arrived at the more
general conception which Europeans associate with the term.

These brief remarks contain, I believe, all that is well-grounded in
jthej doctrine, that the conception by which the mind arranges and gives
unity to phenomena must be furnished by the mind itself, and that we
find the right conception by a tentative process, trying first one and
then another until we hit the mark. kThek conception is not furnished by
the mind until it has been furnished to the mind; andl the facts which
supply it are sometimes extraneous facts, but more often the very facts
which we are attempting to arrange by it. It is quite true, however,
that in endeavouring to arrange the facts, mat whatever point we begin,
we never advance threem steps without forming a general conception, more
or less distinct and precise; and that this general conception becomes
the clue which we instantly endeavour to trace through the rest of the
facts, or rather, nbecomesn the standard with which we thenceforth
compare them. If we are not satisfied with the agreements which we
discover among the pehnomena by comparing them with this type, or with
some still more general conception which by an additional stage of
abstraction we can form from the type; we change our opatho, and look
out for other agreements: we recommence the comparison from a different
starting point, and so generate a different set of general conceptions.
This is the tentative process which Dr. Whewell speaks of; and pwhich
has not unnaturally suggestedp the theory, that the conception is
supplied by the mind itselfq: since theq different conceptions which the
mind successively tries, it either already possessed from its previous
experience, or they were supplied to it in ther Edition: current; Page:
[656] first stage of the corresponding act of comparison; sso thats, in
the subsequent part of the process, the conception manifested itself as
something compared with the phenomena, not evolved from themt.

§ 4. [What is meant by appropriate conceptions] If this be a correct
account of the instrumentality of general conceptions in the comparison
which necessarily precedes Induction, we aare nowa able to translate
into our own language what Dr. Whewell means by saying that conceptions,
to be subservient to Induction, must be “clear” and “appropriate.”

If the conception corresponds to a real agreement among the phenomena;
if the comparison which we have made of a set of objects has led us to
class them according to real resemblances and differences; the
conception which does thisb cannot fail to be appropriate, for some
purpose or other. The question of appropriateness is relative to the
particular object we have in view. As soon as, by our comparison, we
have ascertained some agreement, something which can be predicated in
common of a number of objects; we have obtained a basis on which an
inductive process is capable of being founded. But the agreements, or
the ulterior consequences to which cthose agreementsc lead, may be of
very different degrees of importance. If, for instance, we only compare
animals according to their colour, and class those together which are
coloured alike, we form the general conceptions of a white animal, a
black animal, &c., which are conceptions legitimately formed; and if an
induction were to be attempted concerning the causes of the colours of
animals, this comparison would be the proper and necessary preparation
for such an induction, but would not help us towards a knowledge of the
laws of any other of the properties of animals: while if, with Cuvier,
we compare and class them according to the structure of the skeleton,
or, with Blainville,[*] according to the nature of their outward
integuments, the agreements and differences which are observable in
these respects are not only of much greater importance in themselves,
but are marks of agreements and differences in many otherd important
particulars of the structure and mode of life of the animals. If,
therefore, the study of their structure and habits be our object, the
conceptions generated by these last comparisons are far more
“appropriate” than those generated by the former. Nothing, other than
this, can be meant by the appropriateness of a conception.

Edition: current; Page: [657]
When Dr. Whewell says that the ancients, or the schoolmen, or any modern
einquirerse, missed discovering the real law of a phenomenon because
they applied to it an inappropriate instead of an appropriate
conception; he can only mean that in comparing various instances of the
phenomenon, to ascertain in what those instances agreed, they missed the
important points of agreement; and fastened upon such as were either
imaginary, and fnotf agreements at all, or if real agreements, were
comparatively trifling, and had no connexion with the phenomenon, the
law of which was sought.

Aristotle, philosophizing on the subject of motion,[*] remarked that
certain motions apparently take place spontaneously; bodies fall to the
ground, flame ascends, bubbles of air rise in water, &c.: and these he
called natural motions; while others not only never take place without
external incitement, but even when such incitement is applied, tend
spontaneously to cease; which, to distinguish them from the former, he
called violent motions. Now, in comparing the so-called natural motions
with one another, it appeared to Aristotle that they agreed in one
circumstance, namely, that the body which moved (or seemed to move)
spontaneously, was moving towards its own place; meaning thereby the
place from whence it originally came, or the place where a great
quantity of matter similar to itself was assembled. In the other class
of motions, as when bodies are thrown up in the air, they are, on the
contrary, moving from their own place. Now, this conception of a body
moving towards its own place may justly be considered inappropriate;
because, though it expresses a circumstance really found in some of the
most familiar instances of motion apparently spontaneous, yet, first,
there are many other cases of such motion, in which that circumstance is
absent: the motion, for instance, of the earth and planets. Secondly,
even when it is present, the motion, on closer examination, would often
be seen not to be spontaneous: as, when air rises in water, it does not
rise by its own nature, but is pushed up by the superior weight of the
water which presses upon it. Finally, there are many cases in which the
spontaneous motion takes place in the contrary direction to what the
theory considers as the body’s own place; for instance, when a fog rises
from a lake, or when water dries up. gThe agreement, therefore, which
Aristotle selected as his principle of classification, did not extend to
all cases of the phenomenon he wanted to study, spontaneous motion;
while it did include cases of the absence of the phenomenon, cases of
motion not spontaneous. The conception was henceg “inappropriate.” We
may add that, in the case in question, no conception would be
appropriate; there is no Edition: current; Page: [658] agreement which
runs through all the cases of spontaneous or apparently spontaneous
motion hand no othersh: they cannot be brought under one law: it is a
case of Plurality of Causes.*

§ 5. [And what is meant by clear conceptions] So much for the first of
Dr. Whewell’s conditions, that conceptions must be appropriate. The
second is, that they shall be “clear:” and let us consider what this
implies. Unless the conception corresponds to a real agreement, it has a
worse defect than that of not being clear: it is not applicable to the
case at all. Among the phenomena, therefore, which we are attempting to
connect by means of the conception, we must suppose that there really is
an agreement, and that the conception is a conception of that agreement.
In order, then, that ait maya be clear, the only requisite is, that we
shall know exactly in what the agreement consists; that it shall have
been carefully observed, and accurately remembered. We are said not to
have a clear conception of the resemblance among a set of objects, when
we have only a general feeling that they resemble, without having
analysed their resemblance, or perceived in what points it consists, and
fixed in our memory an exact recollection of those points. This want of
clearness, or, as it may be otherwise called, this vagueness, in the
general conception, may be owing either to our having no accurate
knowledge of the objects themselves, or merely to our not having
carefully compared them. Thus a person may have no clear idea of a ship
because he has never seen one, or because he remembers but little, and
that faintly, of what he has seen. Or he may have a perfect knowledge
and remembrance of many ships of various kinds, frigates among the rest,
but he may have no clear but only Edition: current; Page: [659] a
confused idea of a frigate, because he bhas never been told, andb has
not compared them sufficiently to have remarked and remembered, in what
particular points a frigate differs from some other kind of ship.

It is not, however, necessary, in order to have clear ideas, that we
should know all the common properties of the things which we class
together. That would be to have our cconceptionc of the class complete
as well as clear. It is sufficient if we never class things together
without knowing exactly why we do so,—without having ascertained exactly
what agreements we are about to include in our conception; and if, after
having thus fixed our conception, we never vary from it, never include
in the class anything which has not those common properties, nor exclude
from it anything which has. A clear conception means a determinate
conception; one which does not fluctuate, which is not one thing to-day
and another to-morrow, but remains fixed and invariable, except when,
from the progress of our knowledge, or the correction of some error, we
consciously add to it or alter it. A person of clear ideas, is a person
who always knows in virtue of what properties his classes are
constituted; what attributes are connotated by his general names.

The principal requisites, therefore, of clear conceptions, are habits of
attentive observation, an extensive experience, and a memory which
receives and retains an exact image of what is observed. And in
proportion as any one has the habit of observing minutely and comparing
carefully a particular class of phenomena, and an accurate memory for
the results of the observation and comparison, so will his conceptions
of that class of phenomena be clear; provided he has the indispensable
habit, (naturally, however, resulting from those other endowments,) of
never using general names without a precise connotation.

As the clearness of our conceptions chiefly depends on the carefulness
and accuracy of our observing and comparing faculties, so their
appropriateness, or rather the chance we have of hitting upon the
appropriate conception in any case, mainly depends on the activity of
the same faculties. He who by habit, grounded on sufficient natural
aptitude, has acquired a readiness in accurately observing and comparing
phenomena, will perceive so many more agreements and will perceive them
so much more rapidly than other people, that the chances are much
greater of his perceiving, in any instance, the agreement on which the
important consequences depend.

§ 6. [aFurther illustration of the subjecta] bIt is of so much
importance that the part of the process of investigating truth,
discussed in this chapter, Edition: current; Page: [660] should be
rightly understood, that I think it cisc desirable to restate the
results we have arrived at, in a somewhat different mode of expression.

We cannot ascertain general truths, that is, truths applicable to
classes, unless we have formed the classes in such a manner that general
truths can be daffirmedd of them. In the formation of any class, there
is involved a conception of it as a class, that is, a conception of
certain circumstances as being those which characterize the class, and
distinguish the objects composing it from all other things. When we know
exactly what these circumstances are, we have a clear idea (or
conception) of the class, and of the meaning of the general name which
designates it. The primary condition implied in having this clear idea,
is that the class be really a class; that it correspond to a real
distinction; that the things it includes really do agree with one
another in certain particulars, and differ, in those same particulars,
from all other things. A person without clear ideas, is one who
habitually classes together, under the same general names, things which
have no common properties, or none which are not possessed also by other
things; or who, if the usage of other people prevents him from actually
misclassing things, is unable to state to himself the common properties
in virtue of which he classes them rightly.

But it is not the sole requisite of classification that the classes
should be real classes, framed by a legitimate mental process. Some
modes of classing things are more valuable than others for human uses,
whether of speculation or of practice; and our classifications are not
well made, unless the things which they bring together not only agree
with each other in something which distinguishes them from all other
things, but agree with each other and differ from other things in the
very circumstances which are of primary importance for the purpose
(theoretical or practical) which we have in view, and which constitutes
the problem before us. In other words, our conceptions, though they may
be clear, are not appropriate for our purpose, unless the properties we
comprise in them are those which will help us towards what we wish to
understand—i.e., either those which go deepest into the nature of the
things, if our object to be understand that, or those which are most
closely connected with the particular property which we are endeavouring
to investigate.

We cannot, therefore, frame good general conceptions beforehand. That
the conception we have obtained is the one we want, can only be known
when we have done the work for the sake of which we wanted it; when we
completely understand the general character of the phenomena, or the
conditions of the particular property with which we concern ourselves.
General conceptions formed without this thorough knowledge, are Bacon’s
“notiones temerè à rebus abstractæ.”[*] Yet such premature conceptions
we must be Edition: current; Page: [661] continually making up, in our
progress to something better. They are an impediment to the progress of
knowledge, only when they are permanently acquiesced in. When it has
become our habit to group things in wrong classes—in groups which either
are not really classes, having no distinctive points of agreement
(absence of clear ideas), or which are not classes of which anything
important to our purpose can be predicated (absence of appropriate
ideas); and when, in the belief that these badly made classes are those
sanctioned by Nature, we refuse to exchange them for others, and cannot
or will not make up our general conceptions from any other elements; in
that case all the evils which Bacon ascribes to his “notiones temerè
abstractæ” really occur. This was what the ancients did in physics, and
what the world in general does in morals and politics to the present
day.

It would thus, in my view of the matter, be an inaccurate mode of
expression to say, that obtaining appropriate conceptions is a condition
precedent to generalization. Throughout the whole process of comparing
phenomena with one another for the purpose of generalization, the mind
is trying to make up a conception; but the conception which it is trying
to make up is that of the really important point of agreement in the
phenomena. As we obtain more knowledge of the phenomena themselves, and
of the conditions on which their important properties depend, our views
on this subject naturally alter; and thus we advance from a less to a
more “appropriate” general conception, in the progress of our
investigations.b

We eoughte not, at the same time, to forget that the freally importantf
agreement cannot always be discovered by mere comparison of the very
phenomena in question, without the aid of a conception acquired
elsewhere; as in the case, so often referred to, of the planetary
orbits.

g The search for the agreement of a set of phenomena is in truth very
similar to the search for a lost or hidden object. At first we place
ourselves in a sufficiently commanding position, and cast our eyes round
us, and if we can see the object it is well; if not, we ask ourselves
mentally what are the places in which it may be hid, in order that we
may there search for it: and so on, until we imagine the place where it
really is. And here too we require to have had a previous conception, or
knowledge, of those different places. As in this familiar process, so in
the philosophical operation which it illustrates, we first endeavour to
find the lost object or recognise the common attribute, without
conjecturally invoking the aid of any previously acquired conception, or
in other words, of any hypothesis. Having failed in this, we call upon
our imagination for some hypothesis of a possible place, or a possible
point of resemblance, and then look, to see whether the facts agree with
the conjecture.

Edition: current; Page: [662]
For such cases something more is required than a mind accustomed to
accurate observation and comparison. It must be a mind stored with
general conceptions, previously acquired, of the sorts which bear
affinity to the subject of the particular inquiry. And much will also
depend on the natural strength and acquired culture of what has been
termed the scientific imagination; on the faculty possessed of mentally
arranging known elements into new combinations, such as have not yet
been observed in nature, though not contradictory to any known laws.

But the variety of intellectual habits, the purposes which they serve,
and the modes in which they may be fostered and cultivated, are
considerations belonging to the Art of Education: a subject far wider
than Logic, and which hthish treatise does not profess to discuss. Here,
therefore, the present chapter may properly close.i

Edition: current; Page: [663]


CHAPTER III: Of Naming, as Subsidiary to Induction

§ 1. [The fundamental property of names as an instrument of thought] It
does not belong to the present undertaking to dwell on the importance of
language as a medium of human intercourse, whether for purposes of
sympathy or aofa information. Nor does our design admit of more than a
passing allusion to that great property of names, on which their
functions as an intellectual instrument are, in reality, ultimately
dependent; their potency as a means of forming, and of riveting,
associations among our other ideas: a subject on which an able thinker*
has thus written:

Names are impressions of sense, and as such take the strongest hold on
the mind, and of all other impressions can be most easily recalled and
retained in view. They therefore serve to give a point of attachment to
all the more volatile objects of thought and feeling. Impressions that
when passed might be dissipated for ever, are, by their connexion with
language, always within reach. Thoughts, of themselves, are perpetually
slipping out of the field of immediate mental vision; but the name
abides with us, and the utterance of it restores them in a moment. Words
are the custodiers of every product of mind less impressive than
themselves. All extensions of human knowledge, all new generalizations,
are fixed and spread, even unintentionally, by the use of words. The
child growing up learns, along with the vocables of his mother-tongue,
that things which he would have believed to be different, are, in
important points, the same. Without any formal instruction, the language
in which we grow up teaches us all the common philosophy of the age. It
directs us to observe and know things which we should have overlooked;
it supplies us with classifications ready made, by which things are
arranged (as far as the light of cbygonec generations admits) with the
objects to which they bear the greatest total resemblance. The number of
general names in a language, and the degree of generality of those
names, afford a test of the knowledge of the era, and of the
intellectual insight which is the birthright of any one born into it.

It is not, however, of the functions of Names, considered generally,
that we have here to treat, but only of the manner and degree in which
they are directly instrumental to the investigation of truth; in other
words, to the process of induction.

Edition: current; Page: [664]
§ 2. [Names are not indispensable to induction] Observation and
Abstraction, the operations which formed the subject of the two
foregoing chapters, are conditions indispensable to induction; there can
be no induction where they are not. It has been imagined that Naming is
also a condition equally indispensable. There are athinkersa who have
held that language is not solely, according to a phrase generally
current, an instrument of thought, but btheb instrument: that names, or
something equivalent to them, some species of artificial signs, are
necessary to reasoning; that there could be no inference, and
consequently no induction, without them. But if the nature of reasoning
was correctly explained in the earlier part of the present work, this
opinion must be held to be an exaggeration, though of an important
truth. If reasoning be from particulars to particulars, and if it
cconsistc in recognising one fact as a mark of another, or a mark of a
mark of another, nothing is required to render reasoning possible,
except senses and association: senses to perceive that two facts are
conjoined; association, as the law by which one of those two facts
raises up the idea of the other.* For these mental phenomena, as well as
for the belief or expectation which follows, and by which we recognise
as having taken place, or as about to take place, that of which we have
perceived a mark, there is evidently no need of language. And this
inference of one particular fact from another is a case of induction. It
is of this sort of induction that brutes are capable: it is in this
shape that uncultivated minds make almost all their inductions, and that
we all do so in the cases in which familiar experience forces our
conclusions upon us without any active process of inquiry on our part,
and in which the belief or expectation follows the suggestion of the
evidence with the promptitude and certainty of an instinct.†

Edition: current; Page: [665]
§ 3. [In what manner names are subservient to induction] But though
inference of an inductive character is possible without the use of
signs, it could never, without them, be carried much beyond the very
simple cases which we have just described, and which form, in all
probability, the limit of the reasonings of those animals to whom
conventional language is unknown. Without language, or something
equivalent to it, there could only be as much areasoning from experience
as can take place without the aid of general propositions. Now, though
in strictness we may reason from past experience to a fresh individual
case without the intermediate stage of a general proposition, yet
without general propositions we should seldom remember what past
experience we have had, and scarcely ever what conclusions that
experience will warrant. The division of the inductive process into two
parts, the first ascertaining what is a mark of the given fact, the
second whether in the new case that mark exists, is natural, and
scientifically indispensable. It is, indeed, in a majority of cases,
rendered necessary by mere distance of time. The experience by which we
are to guide our judgments may be other people’s experience, little of
which can be communicated to us otherwise than by language: when it is
our own, it is generally experience long past; unless, therefore, it
wereb recorded by means of artificial signs, little of it (except in
cases involving our intenser sensations or emotions, or the subjects of
our daily and hourly ccontemplationc) would be retained in the memory.
It is hardly necessary to add, that when the inductive inference is of
any but the most direct and obvious nature—when it requires several
observations or experiments, in varying circumstances, and the
comparison of one of these with another—it is impossible to proceed a
step, without the artificial memory which words bestow. Without words,
we should, if we had often seen A and B in immediate and obvious
conjunction, expect B whenever we saw A; but to discover their
conjunction when not obvious, or to determine whether it is really
constant or only casual, and whether there is reason to expect it under
any given change of circumstances, is a process far too complex to be
performed without some contrivance to make our remembrance of our own
mental operations accurate. Now, language is such a contrivance. When
that instrument is called to our aid, the difficulty is reduced to that
of making our remembrance of the meaning of words accurate. This being
secured, whatever passes through our minds may be remembered accurately,
by putting it carefully into words, and committing the words either to
writing or to memory.

Edition: current; Page: [666]
The function of Naming, and particularly of General Names, in Induction,
may be recapitulated as follows. Every inductive inference which is good
at all, is good for a whole class of cases: and, that the inference may
have any better warrant of its correctness than the mere clinging
together of two ideas, a process of experimentation and comparison is
necessary; in which the whole class of cases must be brought to view,
and some uniformity in the course of nature evolved and ascertained,
since the existence of such an uniformity is required as a justification
for drawing the inference in even a single case. This uniformity,
therefore, may be ascertained once for all; and if, being ascertained,
it can be remembered, it will serve as a formula for making, in
particular cases, all such inferences as the previous experience will
warrant. But we can only secure its being remembered, or give ourselves
even a chance of carrying in our memory any considerable number of such
uniformities, by registering them through the medium of permanent signs;
which (being, from the nature of the case, signs not of an individual
fact, but of an uniformity, that is, of an indefinite number of facts
similar to one another) are general signs; universals; general names,
and general propositions.

§ 4. [General names not a mere contrivance to economize the use of
language] And here I cannot omit to notice an oversight committed by
some eminent athinkersa; who have said that the cause of our using
general names is the infinite multitude of individual objects, which,
making it impossible to have a name for each, compels us to make one
name serve for many. This is a very limited view of the function of
general names. Even if there were a name for every individual object, we
should require general names as much as we now do. Without them we could
not express the result of a single comparison, nor record any one of the
uniformities existing in nature; and should be hardly better off in
respect to Induction than if we had no names at all. With none but names
of individuals, (or in other words, proper names,) we might, by
pronouncing the name, suggest the idea of the object, but we could not
assert banyb proposition; except the unmeaning ones formed by
predicating two proper names one of another. It is only by means of
general names that we can convey any information, predicate any
attribute, even of an individual, much more of a class. Rigorously
speaking we could get on without any other general names than the
abstract names of attributes; all our propositions might be of the form
“such an individual object possesses such an attribute,” or “such an
attribute is always (or never) conjoined with such another attribute.”
In fact, however, mankind have always given general names to objects as
well as attributes, and indeed before attributes: but the general names
given to objects imply attributes, derive their whole meaning Edition:
current; Page: [667] from attributes: and are chiefly useful as the
language by means of which we predicate the attributes which they
connote.

It remains to be considered what principles are to be adhered to in
giving general names, cso that thesec names, and the general
propositions in which they fill a place, may conduce most to the
purposes of Induction.d

Edition: current; Page: [668]


CHAPTER IV: Of the Requisites of a Philosophical Language, and the Principles of Definition

§ 1. [First requisite of philosophical language, a steady and
determinate meaning for every general name] In order that we may possess
a language perfectly suitable for the investigation and expression of
general truths, there are two principal, and several minor, requisites.
The first is, that every general name should have a meaning, steadily
fixed, and precisely determined. When, by the fulfilment of this
condition, such names as we possess are fitted for the due performance
of their functions, the next requisite, and the second in order of
importance, is that we should possess a name wherever one is needed;
wherever there is anything to be designated by it, which it is of
importance to express.

The former of these requisites is that to which our attention will be
exclusively directed in the present chapter.

§ 2. [Names in common use have often a loose connotation] Every general
name, then, must have a certain and knowable meaning. Now the meaning
(as has so often been explained) of a general aconnotativea name,
resides in the connotation; in the attribute on account of which, and to
express which, the name is given. Thus, the name animal being given to
all things which possess the attributes of sensation and voluntary
motion, the word connotes those attributes exclusively, and they
constitute the whole of its meaning. If the name be abstract, its
denotation is the same with the connotation of the corresponding
concrete: it designates directly the attribute, which the concrete term
implies. To give a precise meaning to general names is, then, to fix
with steadiness the attribute or attributes connoted by each concrete
general name, and denoted by the corresponding abstract. Since abstract
names, in the order of their creation, do not precede but follow
concrete ones, as is proved by the etymological fact that they are
Edition: current; Page: [669] almost always derived from them; we may
consider their meaning as determined by, and dependent on, the meaning
of their concrete: and thus the problem of giving a distinct meaning to
general language, is all included in that of giving a precise
connotation to all concrete general names.

This is not difficult in the case of new names; of the technical terms
created by bscientificb inquirers for the purposes of science or art.
But when a name is in common use, the difficulty is greater; the problem
in this case not being that of choosing a convenient connotation for the
name, but of ascertaining and fixing the connotation with which it is
already used. That this can ever be a matter of doubt, is a sort of
paradox. But the vulgar (including in that term all who have not
accurate habits of thought) seldom know exactly what assertion they
intend to make, what common property they mean to express, when they
apply the same name to a number of different things. All which the name
expresses with them, when they predicate it of an object, is a confused
feeling of resemblance between cthatc object and some of the other
things which they have been accustomed to denote by the name. They have
applied the name Stone to various objects previously seen; they see a
new object, which appears to them dsomewhatd like the former, and they
call it a stone, without asking themselves in what respect it is like,
or what mode or degree of resemblance the best authorities, or even they
themselves, require as a warrant for using ethee name. This rough
general impression of resemblance is, however, made up of particular
circumstances of resemblance; and into these it is the business of the
logician to analyse it; to ascertain what points of resemblance among
the different things commonly called by the name, have produced finf the
common mind this vague feeling of likeness; have given to the things the
similarity of aspect, which has made them a class, and has caused the
same name to be bestowed upon them.

But though general names are imposed by the vulgar without any more
definite connotation than that of a vague resemblance; general
propositions come in time to be made, in which predicates are applied to
those names, that is, general assertions are made concerning the whole
of the things which are denoted by the name. And since by each of these
propositions some attribute, more or less precisely conceived, is of
course predicated, the gideasg of these various attributes thus become
associated with the name, and in a sort of uncertain way it comes to
connote them; there is a hesitation to apply the name in any new case in
which any of the attributes familiarly predicated of the class hdoh not
exist. And thus, to common minds, the propositions which they are in the
habit of hearing or uttering concerning a class, make up Edition:
current; Page: [670] in a loose way a sort of connotation for the
class-name. Let us take, for instance, the word Civilized. How ifew
could be found, even among the most educated persons, who would
undertake to say exactly what the term Civilized connotes.i Yet there is
a feeling in the minds of all who use it, that they are using it with a
meaning; and this meaning is made up, in a confused manner, of
everything which they have heard or read that civilized men, or
civilized communities, are, or jmay be expected toj be.

It is at this stage, probably, in the progress of a concrete name, that
the corresponding abstract name generally comes into use. Under the
notion that the concrete name must of course convey a meaning, or in
other words, that there is some property common to allk things which it
denotes, lpeoplel give a name to this common property; from the concrete
Civilized, they form the abstract Civilization. But since most people
have never compared the different things which are called by the
concrete name, in such a manner as to ascertain what properties mthesem
things have in common, or whether they have any; each is thrown back
upon the marks by which he himself has been accustomed to be guided in
his application of the term: and these, being merely vague hearsays and
current phrases, are not the same in any two persons, nor in the same
person at different times. Hence the word (as Civilization, for example)
which professes to be the designation of the unknown common property,
conveys scarcely to any two minds the same idea. No two persons agree in
the things they predicate of it; and when it is itself predicated of
anything, no other person knows, nor does the speaker himself know with
precision, what he means to assert. Many other words which could be
named, as the word honour, or the word gentleman, exemplify this
uncertainty still more strikingly.

It needs scarcely be observed, that general propositions of which no one
can tell exactly what they assert, cannot possibly have been brought to
the test of a correct induction. Whether a name is to be used as an
instrument of thinking, or as a means of communicating the result of
thought, it is imperative to determine exactly the attribute or
attributes which it is to express: to give it, in short, a fixed and
ascertained connotation.

§ 3. [The logician should fix the connotation of names in common use,
with as little alteration as possible] It would, however, be a complete
misunderstanding of the proper office of a logician in dealing with
terms already in use, if awea were to think that because a name has not
at present an ascertained connotation, it is competent to any one to
give it such a connotation Edition: current; Page: [671] at his own
choice. The meaning of a term actually in use is not an arbitrary
quantity to be fixed, but an unknown quantity to be sought.

In the first place, it is obviously desirable to avail ourselves, as far
as possible, of the associations already connected with the name; not
enjoining the employment of it in a manner which conflicts with all
previous habits, and especially not so as to require the rupture of
those strongest of all associations between names, which are created by
familiarity with propositions in which they are predicated of one
another. A philosopher would have little chance of having his example
followed, if he were to give such a meaning to his terms as should
require us to call the North American Indians a civilized people, or the
higher classes in bEuropeb savages; or to say that civilized people live
by hunting, and savages by agriculture. Were there no other reason, the
extreme difficulty of effecting so complete a revolution in speech would
be more than a sufficient one. The endeavour should be, that all
generally received propositions into which the term enters, should be at
least as true after its meaning is fixed, as they were before; and that
the concrete name, therefore, should not receive such a connotation as
shall prevent it from denoting things which, in common language, it is
currently affirmed of. The fixed and precise connotation which it
receives, should not be in deviation from, but in agreement (as far as
it goes) with, the vague and fluctuating connotation which the term
already had.

To fix the connotation of a concrete name, or the denotation of the
corresponding abstract, is to define the name. When this can be done
without rendering any received assertions inadmissible, the name can be
defined in accordance with its received use, which is vulgarly called
defining not the name but the thing. What is meant by the improper
expression of defining a thing, c(or rather a class of things—forc
nobody talks of defining an individual), is to define the name, subject
to the condition that it shall denote those things. This, of course,
supposes a comparison of the things, feature by feature and property by
property, to ascertain what attributes they agree in; and not
unfrequently an operationd strictly inductive, for the purpose of
ascertaining some unobvious agreement, which is the cause of the obvious
agreements.

For, in order to give a connotation to a name, consistently with its
denoting certain objects, we have to make our selection from among the
various attributes in which those objects agree. To ascertain in what
they do agree is, therefore, the first logical operation requisite. When
this has been done as far as is necessary or practicable, the question
arises, which of these common attributes shall be selected to be
associated with the name. For if the class Edition: current; Page: [672]
which the name denotes be a Kind, the common properties are innumerable;
and even if not, they are often extremely numerous. Our choice is first
limited by the preference to be given toe properties which are well
known, and familiarly predicated of the class; but even these are often
too numerous to be all included in the definition, and, besides, the
properties most generally known may not be those which serve best to
mark out the class from all others. We should therefore select from
among the common properties, (if among them any such are to be found,)
those on which it has been ascertained by experience, or proved by
deduction, that many others depend; or at least which are sure marks of
them, and from whence, therefore, many others will follow by inference.
We thus see that to frame a good definition of a name already in use, is
not a matter of choice but of discussion, and discussion not merely
respecting the usage of language, but respecting the properties of
things, and even the origin of those properties. And hence every
enlargement of our knowledge of the objects to which the name is
applied, is liable to suggest an improvement in the definition. It is
impossible to frame a perfect set of definitions on any subject, until
the theory of the subject is perfect: and as science makes progress, its
definitions are also progressive.

§ 4. [Why definition is often a question not of words but of things] The
discussion of Definitions, in so far as it does not turn on the use of
words but on the properties of things, Dr. Whewell calls the Explication
of Conceptions. The act of ascertaining, better than before, in what
particulars any phenomena which are classed together agree, ahe calls in
his technical phraseologya, unfolding the general conception in virtue
of which they are so classed.[*] Making allowance for what appears to me
the darkening and misleading tendency of this mode of expression,
several of his remarks are so much to the purpose, that I shall take the
liberty of transcribing them.

He observes,* that many of the controversies which have had an important
share in the formation of the existing body of science, have

assumed the form of a battle of Definitions. For example, the inquiry
concerning the laws of falling bodies, led to the question whether the
proper definition of a uniform force is that it generates a velocity
proportional to the space from rest, or to the time. The controversy of
the vis viva was what was the proper definition of the measure of force.
A principal question in the classification of minerals is, what is the
definition of a mineral species. Physiologists have endeavoured to throw
light on their subject by defining organization, or some similar term.

Edition: current; Page: [673]
Questions of the same nature bwere long open and are not yet completely
closed,b respecting the definitions of Specific Heat, Latent Heat,
Chemical Combination, and Solution.

It is very important for us to observe, that these controversies have
never been questions of insulated and arbitrary definitions, as men seem
often tempted to imagine them to have been. In all cases there is a
tacit assumption of some proposition which is to be expressed by means
of the definition, and which gives it its importance. The dispute
concerning the definition thus acquires a real value, and becomes a
question concerning true and false. Thus in the discussion of the
question, What is a uniform force? it was taken for granted that gravity
is a uniform force. In the debate of the vis visa, it was assumed that
in the mutual action of bodies the whole effect of the force is
unchanged. In the zoological definition of species, (that it consists of
individuals which have, or may have, sprung from the same parents,) it
is presumed that individuals so related resemble each other more than
those which are excluded by such a definition; or, perhaps, that species
so defined have permanent and definite differences. A definition of
organization, or of some other term, which was not employed to express
some principle, would be of no value.

The establishment, therefore, of a right definition of a term, may be a
useful step in the explication of our conceptions; but this will be the
case then only when we have under our consideration some proposition in
which the term is employed. For then the question really is, how the
conception shall be understood and defined in order that the proposition
may be true.[*]

To unfold our conceptions by means of definitions has never been
serviceable to science, except when it has been associated with an
immediate use of the definitions. The endeavour to define a Uniform
Force was combined with the assertion that gravity is a uniform force:
the attempt to define Accelerating Force was immediately followed by the
doctrine that accelerating forces may be compounded: the process of
defining Momentum was connected with the principle that momenta gained
and lost are equal: naturalists would have given in vain the definition
of Species which we have quoted, if they had not also given the
characters of species so separated. . . . Definition may be the best
mode of explaining our conception, but that which alone makes it worth
while to explain it in any mode, is the opportunity of using it in the
expression of truth. When a definition is propounded to us as a useful
step in knowledge, we are always entitled to ask what principle it
serves to enunciate.[†]

In givingc, then,c an exact connotation to the phrase, “an uniform
force,” dthe condition was understoodd, that the phrase should continue
to denote gravity. The discussion, therefore, respecting the definition,
resolved itself into this question, What is there of an uniform nature
in the motions produced Edition: current; Page: [674] by gravity? By
observations and comparisons, it was found, that what was uniform in
those motions was the ratio of the velocity eacquirede to the time
elapsed; equal velocities being added in equal times. An uniform force,
therefore, was defined, a force which adds equal velocities in equal
times. So, again, in defining momentum. It was already a received
doctrine, that when two objects impinge upon one another, the momentum
lost by the one is equal to that gained by the other. This proposition
it was deemed necessary to preserve, notf from the motive (which
operates in many other cases) that it was firmly fixed in popular
belief; for the proposition in question had never been heard of by any
but gthe scientifically instructedg. But it was felt to contain a truth:
even a superficial observation of the phenomena left no doubt that in
the propagation of motion from one body to another, there was something
of which the one body gained precisely what the other lost; and the word
momentum had been invented to express this unknown something. hThe
settlement, therefore, of the definition of momentum, involvedh the
determination of the question, What is that of which a body, when it
sets another body in motion, loses exactly as much as it communicates?
And when experiment had shown that this something was the product of the
velocity of the body by its mass, or quantity of matter, this became the
definition of momentum.

iThe following remarks,* therefore, are perfectly just:i

The business of definition is part of the business of discovery. . . .
To define, so that our definition shall have any scientific value,
requires no small portion of that sagacity by which truth is detected. .
. . When it has been clearly seen what ought to be our definition, it
must be pretty well known what truth we have to state. The definition,
as well as the discovery, supposes a decided step in our knowledge to
have been made. The writers on Logic, in the middle ages, made
Definition the last stage in the progress of knowledge; and in this
arrangement at least, the history of science, and the philosophy derived
from the history, confirm their speculative views.

For in order to judge jfinallyj how the name which denotes a class may
best be defined, we must know all the properties common to the class,
and all the relations of causation or dependence among those properties.

If the properties which are fittest to be selected as marks of other
common properties are also obvious and familiar, and especially if they
bear a great Edition: current; Page: [675] part in producing that
generalk air of resemblance which was the original inducement to the
formation of the class, the definition will then be most felicitous. But
it is often necessary to define the class by some property not
familiarly known, provided that property be the best mark of those which
are known. M. de Blainville, for instance,l founded his definition of
life on the process of decomposition and recomposition which incessantly
mtakes placem in every living body, so that the particles composing it
are never for two instants the same.[*] This is by no means one of the
most obvious properties of living bodies; it might escape altogether the
notice of an unscientific observer. Yet great authorities (independently
of M. de Blainville, who is himself a first-rate authority) have
thoughtn that no other property so well answers the conditions required
for the definition.

§ 5. [How the logician should deal with the transitive applications of
words] Having laid down the principles which ought for the most part to
be observed in attempting to give a precise connotation to a term in
use, I must now add, that it is not always practicable to adhere to
those principles, and that even when practicable, it is occasionally not
desirable.

aCases in which it is impossible to comply with all the conditions of a
precise definition of a name in agreement with usage, occur very
frequently. There is often no one connotation capable of being given to
a word, so that it shall still denote everything it is accustomed to
denote; or that all the propositions into which it is accustomed to
enter, and which have any foundation in truth, shall remain true.
Independently of accidental ambiguities, bin whichb the different
meanings have no connexion with one another; it continually happens that
a word is used in two or more senses derived from each other, but yet
radically distinct. So long as a term is vague, that is, so long as its
connotation is not ascertained and permanently fixed, it is constantly
liable to be applied by extension from one thing to another, until it
reaches things which have little, or even no, resemblance to those which
were first designated by it.

Suppose, says Dugald Stewart, in his Philosophical Essays,*

that the letters A, B, C, D, E, denote a series of objects; that A
possesses some one quality in common with B; B a quality in common with
C; C a quality in common with D; D a quality in common with E; while at
the same time, no quality can be found which belongs in common to any
three objects in the series. Is it not Edition: current; Page: [676]
conceivable, that the affinity between A and B may produce a
transference of the name of the first to the second; and that, in
consequence of the other affinities which connect the remaining objects
together, the same name may pass in succession from B to C; from C to D;
and from D to E? In this manner, a common appellation will arise between
A and E, although the two objects may, in their nature and properties,
be so widely distant from each other, that no stretch of imagination can
conceive how the thoughts were led from the former to the latter. The
transitions, nevertheless, may have been all so easy and gradual, that,
were they successfully detected by the fortunate ingenuity of a
theorist, we should instantly recognise, not only the verisimilitude,
but the truth of the conjecture: in the same way as we admit, with the
confidence of intuitive conviction, the certainty of the well-known
etymological process which connects the Latin preposition e or ex with
the English substantive stranger, the moment that the intermediate links
of the chain are submitted to our examination.*

The applications which a word acquires by this gradual extension eof ite
from one set of objects to another, Stewart,[*] adopting an expression
from Mr. Payne Knight,[†] calls its transitive applications; and after
briefly illustrating such of them as are the result of local or casual
associations, he proceeds as follows:†

Edition: current; Page: [677]
But although by far the greater part of the transitive or derivative
applications of words depend on casual and unaccountable caprices of the
feelings or the fancy, there are certain cases in which they open a very
interesting field of philosophical speculation. Such are those, in which
an analogous transference of the corresponding term may be remarked
universally, or very generally, in other languages; and in which, of
course, the uniformity of the result must be ascribed to the essential
principles of the human frame. Even in such cases, however, it will by
no means be always found, on examination, that the various applications
of the same term have arisen from any common quality or qualities in the
objects to which they relate. In the greater number of instances, they
may be traced to some natural and universal associations of ideas,
founded in the common faculties, common organs, and common condition of
the human race. . . . According to the different degrees of intimacy and
strength in the associations on which the transitions of language are
founded, very different effects may be expected to arise. Where the
association is slight and casual, the several meanings will remain
distinct from each other, and will often, in process of time, assume the
appearance of capricious varieties in the use of the same arbitrary
sign. Where the association is so natural and habitual as to become
virtually indissoluble, the transitive meanings will coalesce finf one
complex conception; and every new transition will become a more
comprehensive generalization of the term in question.

I solicit particular attention to the law of mind expressed in the last
sentence, and which is the source of the perplexity so often experienced
in detecting these transitions of meaning. Ignorance of that law is the
shoal on which some of the gmost powerfulg intellects which have adorned
the human race have been hstrandedh. The inquiries of Plato into the
definitions of some of the most general terms of moral speculation are
characterized by Bacon as a far nearer approach to a true inductive
method than is elsewhere to be found among the ancients,[*] and are,
indeed, almost perfect examples of the preparatory process of comparison
and abstraction: but, from being unaware of the law just mentioned, he
iofteni wasted the powers of this great logical instrument on inquiries
in which it could realize no result, since the phenomena, whose common
properties he so elaborately endeavoured to detect, had not really any
common properties. Bacon himself fell into the same error in his
speculations on the nature of heat, in which jhe evidentlyj confounded
under the name hot, classes of phenomena which khavek no property in
common.lm Stewart certainly overstates the matter when he speaks of “a
Edition: current; Page: [678] prejudice which has descended to modern
times from the scholastic ages, that when a word admits of a variety of
significations, these different significations must all be species of
the same genus, and must consequently include some essential idea common
to every individual to which the generic term can be applied:”* for both
Aristotle and his followers were well aware that there are such things
as ambiguities of language, and delighted in distinguishing them. But
they never suspected ambiguity in the cases where (as Stewart remarks)
the association on which the transition of meaning was founded is so
natural and habitual, that the two meanings blend together in the mind,
and a real transition becomes an apparent generalization. Accordingly
they wasted oinfiniteo pains in endeavouring to find a definition which
would serve for several distinct meanings at once: as in an instance
noticed by Stewart himself, that of “causation; the ambiguity of the
word which, in the Greek language, corresponds to the English word
cause, having suggested to them the vain attempt of tracing the common
idea which, in the case of any effect, belongs to the efficient, to the
matter, to the form, and to the end. The idle generalities” (he adds)
“we meet with in other philosophers, about the ideas of the good, the
fit, and the becoming, have taken their rise from the same undue
influence of popular epithets on the speculations of the learned.”†

Among pthep words which have undergone so many successive transitions of
meaning that every trace of a property common to all the things they are
applied to, or at least common and also peculiar to those things, has
been lost, Stewart considers the word Beautiful to be one. And (without
attempting to decide a question which in no respect belongs to logic) I
cannot but feel, with him, considerable doubt, whether the word
beautiful connotes the same property when we speak of a beautiful
colour, a beautiful face, a beautiful qsceneq, a beautiful character,
and a beautiful rpoemr. The word was doubtless extended from one of
these objects to another on account of sas resemblance between them, or
more probably, between the emotions they excited; tandt, by this
progressive extension, it has at last reached things very remote from
those objects of sight to which there is no doubt that it was first
appropriated; and it is at least questionable whether there is now any
property common to all the things uwhich, consistently with usage, may
be calledu beautiful, except the property of agreeableness, which the
term certainly does connote, but which cannot be all that vpeople
usuallyv intend to express by it, Edition: current; Page: [679] since
there are many agreeable things which ware never calledw beautiful. If
such be the case, it is impossible to give to the word Beautiful any
fixed connotation, such that it shall denote all the objects which in
common use it now denotes, but no others. A fixed connotation, however,
it ought to have: for, xsox long as it has not, it is unfit to be used
as a scientific term, and yisy a perpetual source of false analogies and
erroneous generalizations.

This, then, constitutes a case in exemplification of our remark, that
even when there is a property common to all the things denoted by a
name, to erect that property into the definition and exclusive
connotation of the name is not always desirable. The various things
called beautiful unquestionably resemble one another in being agreeable;
but to make this the definition of beauty, and so extend the word
Beautiful to all agreeable things, would be to drop altogether a portion
of meaning which the word really, though indistinctly, conveys, and to
do what zdepends on usz towards causing those qualities of the objects
which the word previously, though vaguely, pointed at, to be overlooked
and forgotten. It is better, in such a case, to give a fixed connotation
to the term by restricting, than by extending its use; rather excluding
from the epithet Beautiful some things to which it is commonly
considered applicable, than leaving out of its connotation any of the
qualities by which, though occasionally lost sight of, the general mind
may have been habitually guided in the commonest and most interesting
applications of the term. For there is no question that when people call
anything beautiful, they think they are asserting more than that it is
merely agreeable. They think they are ascribing a peculiar sort of
agreeableness, analogous to that which they find in some other of the
things to which they are accustomed to apply the same name. If,
therefore, there be any peculiar sort of agreeableness which is common
though not to all, yet to the principal things which are called
beautiful, it is better to limit the denotation of the term to those
things, than to leave that kind of quality without a term to connote it,
and thereby divert attention from its peculiarities.

§ 6. [Evil consequences of casting off any portion of the customary
connotation of words] The last remark exemplifies a rule of terminology,
which is of great importance, and which has hardly yet been recognised
as a rule, but by a few thinkers of the present acenturya. In attempting
to rectify the use of a vague term by giving it a fixed connotation, we
must take care not to discard (unless advisedly, and on the ground of a
deeper knowledge of the subject) any portion of the connotation which
the word, in however indistinct Edition: current; Page: [680] a manner,
previously carried with it. For otherwise language loses one of its
inherent and most valuable properties, that of being the conservator of
ancient experience; the keeper-alive of those thoughts and observations
of bformerb ages, which may be alien to the tendencies of the passing
time. This function of language is so often overlooked or undervalued,
that a few observations on it appear to be extremely required.

Even when the connotation of a term has been accurately fixed, and still
more if it has been left in the state of a vague unanalysed feeling of
resemblance; there is a constant tendency in the word, through familiar
use, to part with a portion of its connotation. It is a well-known law
of the mind, that a word originally associated with a very complex
cluster of ideas, is far from calling up all those ideas in the mind,
every time the word is used: it calls up only one or two, from which the
mind runs on by fresh associations to another set of ideas, without
waiting for the suggestion of the remainder of the complex cluster. If
this were not the case,c processes of thought could not take place with
anything like the rapidity which we know they possess. Very often,
indeed, when we are employing a word in our mental operations, we are so
far from waiting until the complex idea which corresponds to the meaning
of the word is consciously brought before us in all its parts, that we
run on to new trains of ideas by the other associations which the mere
word excites, without having realized in our imagination any part
whatever of the meaning: thus using the word, and even using it well and
accurately, and carrying on important processes of reasoning by means of
it, in an almost mechanical manner; so much so, that some
dmetaphysiciansd, generalizing from an extreme case, have fancied that
all reasoning is but the mechanical use of a set of terms according to a
certain form. We may discuss and settle the most important interests of
towns or nations, by the application of general theorems or practical
maxims previously laid down, without having had consciously suggested to
us, once in the whole process, the houses and green fields, the thronged
market-places and domestic hearths, of which not only those towns and
nations consist, but which the words town and nation confessedly mean.

Since, then, general names come in this manner to be used (and even to
do a portion of their work well) without suggesting to the mind the
whole of their meaning, and often with the suggestion of a very small,
or no part at all of that meaning; we cannot wonder that words so used
come in time to ebe no longer capablee of suggesting any other of the
ideas appropriated to them, than those with which the association is
most immediate and strongest, or most kept up by the incidents of life:
the remainder being lost altogether; unless the mind, by often
consciously dwelling on them, keeps up the association. Edition:
current; Page: [681] Words naturally retain much more of their meaning
to persons of active imagination, who habitually represent to themselves
things in the concrete, with the detail which belongs to them in the
actual world. To minds of a different description, the only antidote to
this corruption of language is predication. The habit of predicating of
the name, all the various properties which it originally connoted, keeps
up the association between the name and those properties.

But in order that it may do so, it is necessary that the predicates
should themselves retain their association with the properties which
they severally connote. For the propositions cannot keep the meaning of
the words alive, if the meaning of the propositions themselves should
die. And nothing is more common than for propositions to be mechanically
repeated, mechanically retained in the memory, and their truth
fundoubtinglyf assented to and relied on, while yet they carry no
meaning distinctly home to the mind; and while the matter of fact or law
of nature which they originally expressed is as much lost sight of, and
practically disregarded, as if it never had been heard of at all. In
those subjects which are at the same time familiar and complicated, and
especially in those which are gso in as great a degreeg as moral and
social subjects are, it is hah matter of common remark how many
important propositions are believed and repeated from habit, while no
account could be given, and no sense is practically manifested, of the
truths which they convey. Hence it is, that the traditional maxims of
old experience, though seldom questioned, have iofteni so little effect
jonj the conduct of life; because their meaning is never, by most
persons, really felt, until personal experience has brought it home. And
thus also it is that so many kdoctrinesk of religion, ethics, and even
politics, so full of meaning and reality to first converts, have
manifested (after the association of that meaning with the verbal
formulas has ceased to be kept up by the controversies which accompanied
their first introduction) a tendency to degenerate rapidly into lifeless
dogmas; which tendency, all the efforts of an education expressly and
skilfully directed to keeping lthel meaning alive, are barelym
sufficient to counteract.

Considering, then, that the human mind, in different generations,
occupies itself with different things, and in one age is led by the
circumstances which surround it to fix more of its attention upon one of
the properties of a thing, in another age upon another; it is natural
and inevitable that in every age a certain portion of our recorded and
traditional knowledge, not being continually nsuggestedn by the pursuits
and inquiries with which mankind are at Edition: current; Page: [682]
that time engrossed, should fall asleep, as it were, and fade from the
memory. It would be oin danger of being totallyo lost, if the
propositions or formulas, the results of the previous experience, did
not remain,p as forms of words it may be, but of words that once really
conveyed, and are still supposed to convey, a meaning: which meaning,
though suspended, may be historically traced, and when suggested, qmay
beq recognised by minds of the necessary endowments as being still
matter of fact, or truth. While the formulas remain, the meaning may at
any time revive; and as on the one hand the formulas progressively lose
the meaning they were intended to convey, so, on the other, when this
forgetfulness has reached its height and begun to produce robvious
consequencesr, minds arise which from the contemplation of the
sformulass rediscover the ttruth, when truth it was, which was contained
in themt, and announce it again to mankind, not as a discovery, but as
the meaning of that which they haveu been taught, and still profess to
believe.

Thus there is a perpetual oscillation in spiritualv truths, and in
spiritual doctrines of any significance, even when not truths. Their
meaning is almost always in a process either of being lost or of being
recoveredw. Whoever has attended to the history of the more serious
convictions of mankind—of the opinions by which the general conduct of
their lives is, or as they conceive ought to be, more especially
regulated—is aware that xeven when recognising verbally thex same
doctrines, they attach to them at different periods a greater or a less
quantity, and even a different kind, of meaning. The words in their
original acceptation connoted, and the propositions expressed, a
complication of outward facts and inward feelings, to different portions
of which the general mind is more particularly alive in different
generations of mankind. To common minds, only that portion of the
meaning is in each generation suggested, of which that generation
possesses the counterpart in its own habitual experience. But the words
and propositions lie ready to suggest to any mind duly prepared the
remainder of the meaning. Such individual minds are almost always to be
found: and the lost meaning, revived by them, again by degrees works its
way into the general mind.

yThe arrival of this salutary reaction may however be materially
retarded Edition: current; Page: [683] byy the shallow conceptions and
incautious proceedings of mere logicians. It sometimes happens that
towards the close of the downward period, when the words have lost part
of their significance, and have not yet begun to recover it, persons
arise whose leading and favourite idea is the importance of clear
conceptions and precise thought, and the necessity, therefore, of
definite language. These persons, in examining the old formulas, easily
perceive that words are used in them without a meaning; and if they are
not the sort of persons who are capable of rediscovering the lost
signification, they naturally enough dismiss the formula, and define the
name withoutz reference to it. In so doing they fasten down the name to
what it connotes in common use at the time when it conveys the smallest
quantity of meaning; and introduce the practice of employing it,
consistently and uniformly, according to that connotation. The word in
this way acquires an extent of denotation far beyond what it had before;
it abecomesa extended to many things to which it was previously, in
appearance capriciously, refused. Of the propositions in which it was
formerly used, those which were true in virtue of the forgotten part of
its meaning are now, by the clearer light which the definition diffuses,
seen not to be true according to the definition; which, however, is the
recognised and sufficiently correct expression of all that is perceived
to be in the mind of any one by whom the term is used at the present
day. The ancient formulas are consequently treated as prejudices; bandb
people are no longer taught as before, though not to understand them,
yet to believe that there is truth in them. They no longer remain in
cthe general mindc surrounded by respect, and ready at any time to
suggest their original meaning. dWhatever truths they containd are not
only, eine these circumstances, rediscovered far more slowly, but, when
rediscovered, the prejudice with which novelties are regarded is now, in
some degree at least, against them, instead of being on their side.

An example may make these remarks more intelligible. In all ages, except
where moral speculation has been silenced by outward compulsion, or
where the feelings which prompt to it fstill continue to be satisfied by
the traditional doctrines of an established faithf, one of the subjects
which have most occupied the minds of thinking gpersonsg is the inquiry,
What is virtue? or, What is a virtuous character? Among the different
theories on the subject Edition: current; Page: [684] which have, at
different times, grown up and obtained hpartialh currency, every one of
which reflected as in the clearest mirror, the express image of the age
which gave it birth; there was one,i according to which virtue
jconsistsj in a correct calculation of our own personal interests,
either in this world only, or also in kanotherk. lTo make this theory
plausible, it was of course necessaryl that the only beneficial actions
which people in general were maccustomed to see, or were thereforem
accustomed to praise, should be such as were, or at least might without
contradicting obvious facts be supposed to be, the result of na
prudential regard to self-interest; so thatn the words really connoted
no more, in common acceptation, than was set down in the definitiono.

Suppose, now, that the partisans of this theory had contrived to
introducep a consistent and undeviating use of the term according to
this definition. Suppose that they had qseriously endeavoured, and had
succeeded in the endeavour, to banish the word disinterestedness from
the language; had obtainedq the disuse of all expressions attaching
odium to selfishness or commendation to self-sacrifice, or which implied
generosity or kindness to be anything but doing a benefit in order to
receive a greater rpersonalr advantage in return. Need we say that this
abrogation of the old formulas for the sake of preserving clear ideas
and consistency of thought, would have been sa greats evil? while the
very inconsistency incurred by the coexistence of the formulas with
philosophical opinions which tseemed to condemnt them as absurdities,
operated as a stimulus to the re-examination of the subject; and thus
the very doctrines originating in the oblivion into which ua part of the
truth had fallen, were rendered indirectly, but powerfully, instrumental
to its revivalu.

Edition: current; Page: [685]
The doctrinev of wthe Coleridge schoolw, that the language of any people
among whom culture is of old date, is a sacred deposit, the property of
all ages, and which no one age should consider itself empowered to
alter—xyborders indeed, as thus expressed, ony an extravagance; but it
is grounded on a truth, frequently overlooked byx that class of
logicians who think more of having a clear than of having a
zcomprehensivez meaning; and who perceive that every age is adding to
the truths which it has received from its predecessors, but fail to see
that a counter process of losing truths already possessed, is also
constantly going on, and requiring the most sedulous attention to
counteract it. Language is the depository of the accumulated body of
experience to which all former ages have contributed their part, and
which is the inheritance of all yet to come. We have no right to prevent
ourselves from transmitting to posterity a larger portion of this
inheritance than we may ourselves have profited by. abHowever much we
may be able to improve on the conclusions of our forefathers,b we ought
to be careful not inadvertently to let any of their premises slip
through our fingers. It may be good to alter the meaning of a word, but
it is bad to let any part of the meaning drop. Whoever seeks to
introduce a more correct use of a term cwith which important
associations are connectedc, should be required to possessa dan
accurated acquaintance with the history of the particular word, and of
the opinions which in different stages of its progress it served to
express. To be qualified to define the name, we must know all that has
ever been known of the properties of the class of objects which are, or
originally were, denoted by it. For if we give it a meaning according to
which any proposition will be false which ehas ever been generallye held
to be true, it isf incumbent on us to be sure that we know gand have
consideredg all which those, who believed the proposition, understood by
it.

Edition: current; Page: [686]


CHAPTER V: aOna the Natural History of the Variations in the Meaning of Terms

§ 1. [How circumstances originally accidental become incorporated into
the meaning of words] It is not only in the mode which has now been
pointed out, namely by gradual inattention to a portion of the ideas
conveyed, that words in common use are liable to shift their
connotation. The truth is, that the connotation of such words is
perpetually varying; as might be expected from the manner in which words
in common use acquire their connotation. A technical term, invented for
purposes of art or science, has, from the first, the connotation given
to it by its inventor; but a name which is in every one’s mouth before
any one thinks of defining it, derives its connotation only from the
circumstances which are habitually brought to mind when it is
pronounced. Among these circumstances, the properties common to the
things denoted by the name, have naturally a principal place; and would
have the sole place, if language were regulated by convention rather
than by custom and accident. But besides these common properties, which
if they exist are bcertainlyb present whenever the name is cemployedc,
any other circumstance may casually be found along with it, so
frequently as to become associated with it in the same manner, and as
strongly, as the common properties themselves. In proportion as this
association forms itself, people give up using the name in cases in
which those casual circumstances do not exist. They prefer using some
other name, or the same name with some adjunct, rather than employ an
expression which willd call up an idea they do not want to excite. The
circumstance originally casual, thus becomes regularly a part of the
connotation of the word.

It is this continual incorporation of circumstances originally
accidental, into the permanent signification of words, which is the
cause that there are so few exact synonymes. It is this also which
renders the dictionary meaning of a word, by universal remark so
imperfect an exponent of its real meaning. Edition: current; Page: [687]
The dictionary meaning is marked out in a broad, blunt way, and probably
includes all that was originally necessary for the correct employment of
the term; but in process of time so many collateral associations adhere
to words, that whoever should attempt to use them with no other guide
than the dictionary, would confound a thousand nice distinctions and
subtle shades of meaning which dictionaries take no account of; as we
notice in the use of a language in conversation or writing by a
foreigner not thoroughly master of it. The history of a word, by showing
the ecausese which fdeterminef its use, is in these cases a better guide
to its employment than any definition; for definitions can only show its
meaning at the particular time, or at most the series of its successive
meanings, but its history may show the law by which the succession was
produced. The word gentleman, for instance, to the correct employment of
which a dictionary would be no guide, originally meant simply a man
gborn in a certain rankg. From this it came by degrees to connote all
such qualities or adventitious circumstances as were usually found to
belong to persons of hthat rankh. This consideration at once explains
why in one of its vulgar acceptations it means any one who lives without
labour, in another without manual labour, and in its more elevated
signification it has in every age signified the conduct, character,
habits, and outward appearance, in whomsoever found, which, according to
the ideas of that age, belonged or were expected to belong to persons
born and educated in a high social position.

It continually happens that of two words, whose dictionary meanings are
either the same or very slightly different, one will be the proper word
to use in one set of circumstances, another in another, without its
being possible to show how the custom of so employing them originally
grew up. The accident that one of the words was used and not the other
on a particular occasion or in a particular social circle, will be
sufficient to produce so strong an association between the word and some
speciality of circumstances, that mankind abandon the use of it in any
other case, and the speciality becomes part of its signification. The
tide of custom first drifts the word on the shore of a particular
meaning, then retires and leaves it there.

An instance in point is the remarkable change which, in the English
language at least, has taken place in the signification of the word
loyalty. That word originally meant in English, as it still means in the
language from whence it came, fair, open dealing, and fidelity to
engagements; in that sense the quality it expressed was part of the
ideal chivalrous or knightly character. By what process, in England, the
term became restricted to the single case of fidelity to the throne, I
am not sufficiently versed in the history of courtly Edition: current;
Page: [688] language to be able to pronounce. The interval between a
loyal chevalier and a loyal subject is certainly great. I can only
suppose that the word was, at some period, the favourite term at court
to express fidelity to the oath of allegiance; until at length those who
wished to speak of any other, and as it was probably ideemedi, inferior
sort of fidelity, either did not venture to use so dignified a term, or
found it convenient to employ some other in order to avoid being
misunderstood.

§ 2. [Sometimes these originally accidental circumstances become the
whole meaning of words] Cases are not unfrequent in which a
circumstance, at first casually incorporated into athea connotation of a
word which originally had no reference to it, in time wholly supersedes
the original meaning, and becomes not merely a part of the connotation,
but the whole of it. This is exemplified in the word pagan, paganus;
which originally, as its etymology imports, was equivalent to villager;
the inhabitant of a pagus, or village. At a particular era in the
extension of Christianity over the Roman empire, the adherents of the
old religion, and the villagers or country people, were nearly the same
body of individuals, the inhabitants of the towns having been earliest
converted; as in our own day, and at all times, the greater activity of
social intercourse renders them the earliest recipients of new opinions
and modes, while old habits and prejudices linger longest among the
country people: not to mention that the towns were more immediately
under the direct influence of the government, which at that time had
embraced Christianity. From this casual coincidence, the word paganus
carried with it, and began more and more steadily to suggest, the idea
of a worshipper of the ancient divinities; until at length it suggested
that idea so forcibly that people who did not desire to suggest the idea
avoided using the word. But when paganus had come to connote heathenism,
the very unimportant circumstance, with reference to that fact, of the
place of residence, was soon disregarded in the employment of the word.
As there was seldom any occasion for making bseparate assertionsb
respecting heathens who lived in the country, there was no need for a
separate word to denote them; and pagan came not only to mean heathen,
but to mean that exclusively.

A case still more familiar to most readers is that of the word villain
or villein. This term, as everybody knows, had in the middle ages a
connotation as strictly defined as a word could have, being the proper
legal designation for those persons who were the subjects of the cless
onerous forms of feudal bondagec. The scorn of the semibarbarous
military aristocracy for these their Edition: current; Page: [689]
abject dependants, rendered the act of likening any person to this class
of dpeopled a mark of the greatest contumely: the same scorn led them to
ascribe to the same people all manner of hateful qualities, which
doubtless also, in the degrading situation in which they were held, were
often not unjustly imputed to them. These circumstances combined to
attach to the term villain, ideas of crime and guilt, in so forcible a
manner that the application of the epithet even to those to whom it
legally belonged became an affront, and was abstained from whenever no
affront was intended. From that timee guilt was part of the connotation;
and soon became the whole of it, since mankind were not prompted by any
urgent motive to continue making a distinction in their language between
bad men of servile station and bad men of any other rank in life.

These and similar instances in which the original signification of a
term is totally lost—another and an entirely distinct meaning being
first engrafted upon the former, and finally substituted for it—faffordf
examples of the double movement which is always taking place in
language: gtwog counter-movements, one of Generalization, by which words
are perpetually losing portions of their connotation, and becoming of
less meaning and more general acceptation; the other of Specialization,
by which other, or even these same words, are continually taking on
fresh connotation; acquiring additional meaning, by being restricted in
their employment to a part only of the occasions on which they might
properly be used before. This double movement is of sufficient
importance in the natural history of language, (to which natural history
the artificial modifications ought always to have some degree of
reference,) to justify our dwellingh a little longer on the nature of
the twofold phenomenon, and the causes to which it owes its existence.

§ 3. [Tendency of words to become generalized] To begin with the
movement of generalization. It amight seema unnecessary to dwell on the
changes in the meaning of names which take place merely from their being
used ignorantly, by persons who, not having properly mastered the
received connotation of a word, apply it in a looser and wider sense
than belongs to it. This, however, is a real source of alterations in
the language; for when a word, from being often employed in cases where
one of the qualities which it connotes does not exist, ceases to suggest
that quality with certainty, then even those who are under no mistake as
to the proper meaning of the word, prefer expressing that meaning in
some other way, and leave the original word to its fate. The word
’Squire as standing for an owner of a landed estate; Edition: current;
Page: [690] Parson, as denoting not the rector of the parish, but
clergymen in general; Artist, to denote only a painter or sculptor; are
cases in point. bSuch cases give a clear insight into the process of the
degeneration of languages in periods of history when literary culture
was suspended; and we are now in danger of experiencing a similar evil
through the superficial extension of the same culture. So many persons
without anything deserving the name of education have become writers by
profession, that written language may almost be said to be principally
wielded by persons ignorant of the proper use of the instrument, and who
are spoiling it more and more for those who understand it. Vulgarisms,
which creep in nobody knows how, are daily depriving the English
language of valuable modes of expressing thought. To take a present
instance: the verb transpire formerly conveyed very expressively its
correct meaning, viz. to become known through unnoticed channels—to
exhale, as it were, into publicity through invisible pores, like a
vapour or gas disengaging itself. But of late a practice has commenced
of employing this word, for the sake of finery, as a mere synonym of to
happen: “the events which have transpired in the Crimea,” meaning the
incidents of the war. This vile specimen of bad English is already seen
in the despatches of noblemen and viceroys: and the time is apparently
not far distant when nobody will understand the word if used in its
proper sense. cIn other cases it is not the love of finery, but simple
want of education, which makes writers employ words in senses unknown to
genuine English. The use of “aggravating” for “provoking,” in my boyhood
a vulgarism of the nursery, has crept into almost all newspapers, and
into many books; and when the word is used in its proper sense, as when
writers on criminal law speak of aggravating and extenuating
circumstances, their meaning, it is probable, is already misunderstood.c
It is a great error to think that these corruptions of language do no
harm. Those who are struggling with the difficulty (and who know by
experience how great it already is) of expressing oneself clearly with
precision, find their resources continually narrowed by illiterate
writers, who seize and twist from its purpose some form of speech which
once served to convey briefly and compactly an unambiguous meaning. It
would hardly be believed how often a writer is compelled to a
circumlocution by the single vulgarism, introduced during the last few
years, of using the word alone as an adverb, only not being fine enough
for the rhetoric of ambitious ignorance. A man will say “to which I am
not alone bound by honour but also by law,” unaware that what he has
unintentionally said is, that he is not alone bound, some other person
being bound with him. Formerly if any one said, “I am not alone
responsible for this,” he was understood to mean, (what alone his words
mean in correct English,) that he is not the sole person responsible;
but if he now used such an expression, Edition: current; Page: [691] the
reader would be confused between that and two other meanings; that he is
not only responsible but something more; or that he is responsible not
only for this but for something besides. The time is coming when
Tennyson’s Œnone could not say, “I will not die alone,”[*] lest she
should be supposed to mean that she would not only die but do something
else.

The blunder of writing predicate for predict has become so widely
diffused that it bids fair to render one of the most useful terms in the
scientific vocabulary of Logic unintelligible. dThe mathematical and
logical term “to eliminate” is undergoing a similar destruction. All who
are acquainted either with the proper use of the word or with its
etymology, know that to eliminate a thing is to thrust it out: but those
who know nothing about it, except that it is a fine-looking phrase, use
it in a sense precisely the reverse, to denote, not turning anything
out, but bringing it in. They talk of eliminating some truth, or other
useful result, from a mass of details.*dbg hA similar permanent
deterioration in the language is in danger of being produced by the
blunders of translators. The writers of telegrams, and the foreign
correspondents of newspapers, have gone on so long translating demander
by “to demand,” without a suspicion that it means only to ask, that (the
context generally showing that nothing else is meant) English readers
are gradually associating the English word demand with simple asking,
thus leaving the language without a term to express a demand in its
proper sense. In like manner, “transaction,” the French word for a
compromise, is translated into the English word transaction; while,
curiously enough, the inverse change is taking place in France, where
the word “compromis” has lately begun to be used for expressing the same
idea. If this continues, the two countries will have exchanged phrases.h

iIndependently, however, of the generalization of names through their
ignorant misuse, there is a tendency in the same direction consistently
with Edition: current; Page: [692] ja perfectj knowledge of their
meaning; arising from the fact, that the number of things known to us,
and of which we feel a desire to speak, multiply faster than the names
for them. Except on subjects for which there has been constructed a
scientific terminology, with which unscientific persons do not meddle,
great difficulty is generally found in bringing a new name into use; and
independently of that difficulty, it is natural to prefer giving to a
new object a name which at least expresses its resemblance to something
already known, since by predicating of it a name entirely new we at
first convey no information. In this manner the name of a species often
becomes the name of a genus; as salt, for example, or oil; the former of
which words originally denoted only the muriate of soda, the latter, as
its etymology indicates, only olive oil; but which now denote large and
diversified classes of substances resembling these in some of their
qualities, and connote only those common qualities, instead of the whole
of the distinctive properties of olive oil and sea salt. The words glass
and soap are used by modern chemists in a similar manner, to denote
genera of which the substances vulgarly so called are single species.k
And it often happens, as in those instances, that the term keeps its
special signification in addition to its more general one, and becomes
ambiguous, that is, two names instead of one.

These changes, by which words in ordinary use become more and more
generalized, and less and less expressive, take place in a still greater
degree with the words which express the complicated phenomena of mind
and society. Historians, travellers, and in general those who speak or
write concerning moral and social phenomena with which they are not
familiarly acquainted, are the great agents in this modification of
language. The vocabulary of all except unusually instructed las well as
thinkingl persons, is, on such subjects, eminently scanty. They have a
certain small set of words to which they are accustomed, and which they
employ to express phenomena the most heterogeneous, because they have
never sufficiently analysed the facts to which those words correspond in
their own country, to have attached perfectly definite ideas to the
words. The first English conquerors of Bengal, for example, carried with
them the mphrasem landed proprietor into a country where the rights of
individuals over the soil were extremely different in degree, and even
in nature, from those recognised in Englandn. Applyingn Edition:
current; Page: [693] the term with all its English associations in such
a state of things; to one who had only a limited right they gave an
absolute right, from another because he had not an absolute right they
took away all right, drove whole classes of opeopleo to ruin and
despair, filled the country with banditti, created a feeling that
nothing was secure, and produced, with the best intentions, a
disorganization of society pwhich had not beenp produced in that country
by the most ruthless of its barbarian invaders.q Yet the usage of
persons capable of so gross a misapprehension determines the meaning of
language; and the words they thus misuse grow in generality, until the
instructed are obliged to acquiesce; and to employ those words (first
freeing them from vagueness by giving them a definite connotation) as
generic terms, subdividing the genera into species.

§ 4. [Tendency of words to become specialized] While the more rapid
growth of ideas than of names thus creates a perpetual necessity for
making the same names serve, even if imperfectly, on a greater number of
occasions; a counter-operation is going on, by which names become on the
contrary restricted to fewer occasions, by taking on, as it were,
additional connotation, from circumstances not originally included in
the meaning, but which have become connected with it in the mind by some
accidental cause. We have seen above, in the words pagan and villain,
remarkable examples of the specialization of the meaning of words from
casual associations, as well as of the generalization of it in a new
direction,a which often follows.

Similar specializations are of frequent occurrence in the history even
of scientific nomenclature.

It is by no means uncommon, [says Dr. Paris, in his Pharmacologia,*] to
find a word which is used to express general characters subsequently
become the name of a specific substance in which such characters are
predominant; and we shall find that some important anomalies in
nomenclature may be thus explained. The term Αρσενίκον, from which the
word Arsenic is derived, was an ancient epithet applied to those natural
substances which possessed strong and acrimonious properties, and as the
poisonous quality of arsenic was found to be remarkably powerful, the
term was especially applied to Orpiment, the form in which this metal
most usually occurred. So the term Verbena (quasi Herbena) originally
denoted all those herbs that were held sacred on account of their being
employed in the rites of sacrifice, as we learn from the poets; but as
one herb was usually adopted upon these occasions, the word Verbena came
to denote that particular herb only, and it is transmitted to us to this
day under the same title, viz., Verbena or Vervain, Edition: current;
Page: [694] and indeed until lately it enjoyed the medical reputation
which its sacred origin conferred upon it, for it was worn suspended
around the neck as an amulet. Vitriol, in the original application of
the word, denoted any crystalline body with a certain degree of
transparency (vitrum); it is hardly necessary to observe that the term
is now appropriated to a particular species: in the same manner, Bark,
which is a general term, is applied to express one genus, and by way of
eminence it has the article The prefixed, as The bark: the same
observation will apply to the word Opium, which, in its primitive sense,
signifies any juice (ὀπὸς, Succus), while it now only denotes one
species, viz., that of the poppy. So, again, Elaterium was used by
Hippocrates to signify various internal applications, especially
purgatives, of a violent and drastic nature (from the word ἐλαύνω,
agito, moveo, stimulo), but by succeeding authors it was exclusively
applied to denote the active matter which subsides from the juice of the
wild cucumber. The word Fecula, again, originally meant to imply any
substance which was derived by spontaneous subsidence from a liquid
(from fœx, the grounds or settlement of any liquor); afterwards it was
applied to Starch, which is deposited in this manner by agitating the
flour of wheat in water; and lastly, it has been applied to a peculiar
vegetable principle, which, like starch, is insoluble in cold, but
completely soluble in boiling water, with which it forms a gelatinous
solution. This indefinite meaning of the word fecula has created
numerous mistakes in pharmaceutic chemistry; Elaterium, for instance, is
said to be fecula, and, in the original sense of the word, it is
properly so called, inasmuch as it is procured from a vegetable juice by
spontaneous subsidence, but in the limited and modern acceptation of the
term, it conveys an erroneous idea; for instead of the active principle
of the juice residing in fecula, it is a peculiar proximate principle,
sui generis, to which I have ventured to bestow the name of Elatin. For
the same reason, much doubt and obscurity involve the meaning of the
word Extract, because it is applied generally to any substance obtained
by the evaporation of a vegetable solution, and specifically to a
peculiar proximate principle, possessed of certain characters, by which
it is distinguished from every other elementary body.

A generic term is always liable to become thus limited to a single
species, or even individual, if people have occasion to think and speak
of that individual or species much oftener than of anything else which
is contained in the genusb. Thusb by cattle, a stage-coachman will
understand horses; beasts, in the language of agriculturists, stands for
oxen; and birds, with some sportsmen, for partridges only. The law of
language which operates in these trivial instances, is the very same in
conformity to which the terms Θεός, Deus, and God, were adopted from
Polytheism by Christianity, to express the single object of its own
adorationc. Almost all the terminology of the Christian Church is made
up of words originally used in a much more general acceptation:
Ecclesia, Assembly; Bishop, Episcopus, Overseer; Priest, Presbyter,
Elder; Deacon, Diaconus, Administrator; Sacrament, a vow of allegiance;
Evangelium, good tidings; and some words, as Minister, are still used
both in the general and in the limited sense. It would be interesting to
trace the Edition: current; Page: [695] progress by which author dcame,
in its most familiar sense,d to signify a writer, and ποιητής, or maker,
a poet.

Of the incorporation into the meaning of a term, of circumstances
accidentally connected with it at some particular period, as in the case
of Pagan, instances might easily be multiplied. Physician (ϕυσικός, or
naturalist) became, in Englande, synonymous with a healer of diseases,
because until a comparatively late period medical practitioners were the
only naturalists. Clerc, or clericus, a scholar, came to signify an
ecclesiastic, because the clergy were for many centuries the only
scholars.

Of all ideas, however, the most liable to cling by association to
anything with which they have ever been connected by proximity, are
thosef of our pleasures and pains, or of the things which we habitually
contemplate as sources of our pleasures or pains. The additional
connotation, therefore, which a word soonest and most readily takes on,
is that of agreeableness or painfulness, in their various kinds and
degrees: of being a good org bad thing; desirable or to be avoided; an
object of hatred, of dread,h contempt, admiration, hope, or love.
Accordingly there is hardly a isingle name, expressive of anyi moral or
social fact calculated to call forth strong affections either of a
favourable or of a hostile nature, which jdoes not carryj with it
decidedly and irresistibly a connotation of those strong affections, or,
at kthek least, of approbation or censure; insomuch that to employ those
names in conjunction with others by which the contrary sentiments were
expressed, would produce the effect of a paradox, or even a
contradiction in terms. The baneful influence of lal connotation thus
acquired, on mthe prevailing habits of thought, especially in morals and
politicsm, has been well pointed out on many occasions byn Bentham. It
gives rise to the fallacy of “question-begging names.”[*] The very
property which we are inquiring whether a thing possesses or not, has
become so associated with the name of the thing as to be part of its
meaning, insomuch that by merely uttering the name we assume the point
which was to be made out: one of the most frequent sources of apparently
self-evident propositions.o

Edition: current; Page: [696]
Without any further multiplication of examples to illustrate the changes
which usage is continually making in the signification of terms, I shall
add, as a practical rule, that the logician, not being able to prevent
such transformations, should submit to them with a good grace when they
are irrevocably effected, and if a definition is necessary, define the
word according to its new meaning; retaining the former as a second
signification, if it is needed, and if there pisp any chance of being
able to preserve it either in the language Edition: current; Page: [697]
of philosophy or in common use. Logicians cannot make the meaning of any
but scientific terms: that of all other words is made by the collective
human race. But logicians can ascertain clearly what it is which,
working obscurely, has guided the general mind to a particular
employment of a name; and when they have found this, they can clothe it
in such distinct and permanent terms, that mankind qshallq see the
meaning which before they only felt, and rshallr not suffer it to be
afterwards forgotten or misapprehended.s

Edition: current; Page: [698]


CHAPTER VI: The Principles of a Philosophical Language Further Considered

§ 1. [Second requisite of philosophical language, a name for every
important meaning] We have, thus far, considered only one of the
requisites of a language adapted for the investigation of truth; that
its terms shall each of them convey a determinate and unmistakeable
meaning. There are, however, as we have already remarked, other
requisites; some of them important only in the second degree, but one
which is fundamental, and barely yields in point of importance, if it
yields at all, to the quality which we have already discussed at so much
length. That the language may be fitted for its purposes, not only
should every word perfectly express its meaning, but there should be no
important meaning without its word. Whatever we have occasion to think
of often, and for scientific purposes, ought to have a name appropriated
to it.

This requisite of philosophical language may be considered under three
different heads; that number of separate conditions being involved in
it.

§ 2. [Having a name for every important meaning implies, first, an
accurate descriptive terminology] First: there ought to be all such
names, as are needful for making such a record of individual
observations that the words of the record shall exactly show what fact
it is which has been observed. In other words, there ashoulda be an
accurate Descriptive Terminology.

The only things which we can observe directly being our own sensations,
or other feelings, a complete descriptive language would be one in which
there should be a name for every variety of elementary sensation or
feeling. Combinations of sensations or feelings may always be described,
if we have a name for each of the elementary feelings which compose
them; but brevity of description, band clearness (which often depends
very much on brevity,) areb greatly promoted by giving distinctive names
not to the elements alone, but also to all combinations which are of
frequent recurrence. On this occasion Edition: current; Page: [699] I
cannot do better than quote from Dr. Whewell* some of the excellent
remarks which he has made on this important branch of our subject.

The meaningc of [descriptive] technical terms can be fixed in the first
instance only by convention, and can be made intelligible only by
presenting to the senses that which the terms are to signify. The
knowledge of a colour by its name can only be taught through the eye. No
description can convey to a hearer what we mean by apple-green or
French-grey. It might, perhaps, be supposed that, in the first example,
the term apple, referring to so familiar an object, sufficiently
suggests the colour intended. But it may easily be seen that this is not
true; for apples are of many different hues of green, and it is only by
a conventional selection that we can appropriate the term to one special
shade. When this appropriation is once made, the term refers to the
sensation, and not to the parts of the term; for these enter into the
compound merely as a help to the memory, whether the suggestion be a
natural connexion as in ‘apple-green,’ or a casual one as in
‘French-grey.’ In order to derive due advantage from technical terms of
this kind, they must be associated immediately with the perception to
which they belong; and not connected with it through the vague usages of
common language. The memory must retain the sensation; and the technical
word must be understood as directly as the most familiar word, and more
distinctly. When we find such terms as tin-white or pinchbeck-brown, the
metallic colour so denoted ought to start up in our memory without delay
or search.

This, which it is most important to recollect with respect to the
simpler properties of bodies, as colour and form, is no less true with
respect to more compound notions. In all cases the term is fixed to a
peculiar meaning by convention; and the student, in order to use the
word, must be completely familiar with the convention, so that he has no
need to frame conjectures from the word itself. Such conjectures would
always be insecure, and often erroneous. Thus the term papilionaceous
applied to a flower is employed to indicate, not only a resemblance to a
butterfly, but a resemblance arising from five petals of a certain
peculiar shape and arrangement; and even if the resemblance were much
stronger than it is in such cases, yet, if it were produced in a
different way, as for example, by one petal, or two only, instead of a
‘standard,’ two ‘wings,’ and a ‘keel’ consisting of two parts more or
less united into one, we should no longer be justified in speaking of it
as a ‘papilionaceous’ flower.

When, however, the thing named is, as in this dlastd case, a combination
of simple sensations, it is not necessary, in order to learn the meaning
of ethee word, that the student should refer back to the sensations
themselves; it may be communicated to him through the medium of other
words; the terms, in short, may be defined. But the names of elementary
sensations, or elementary Edition: current; Page: [700] feelings of any
sort, cannot be defined; nor is there any fmodef of making their
signification known but by making the learner experience the sensation,
or referring him, through some known mark, to his remembrance of having
experienced it before. Hence it is only the impressions on the outward
senses, or those inward feelings which are connected in a very obvious
and uniform manner with outward objects, that are really susceptible of
an exact descriptive language. The countless variety of sensations which
arise, for instance, from disease, or from peculiar physiological
states, it would be in vain to attempt to name; for as no one can judge
whether the sensation I have is the same with his, the name gcannotg
have, to us two, hrealh community of meaning. The same may be said, to a
considerable extent, of purely mental feelings. But in some of the
sciences which are conversant with external objects, it is scarcely
possible to surpass the perfection to which this quality of a
philosophical language has been carried.

The iformation*i of an exact and extensive descriptive language for
botany has been executed with a degree of skill and felicity, which,
before it was attained, could hardly have been dreamt of as attainable.
Every part of a plant has been named; and the form of every part, even
the most minute, has had a large assemblage of descriptive terms
appropriated to it, by means of which the botanist can convey and
receive knowledge of form and structure, as exactly as if each minute
part were presented to him vastly magnified. This acquisition was part
of the Linnæan reform. . . . ‘Tournefort,’ says Decandolle, ‘appears to
have been the first who really perceived the utility of fixing the sense
of terms in such a way as always to employ the same word in the same
sense, and always to express the same idea by the same word; but it was
Linnæus who really created and fixed this botanical language, and this
is his fairest claim to glory, for by this fixation of language he has
shed clearness and precision over all parts of the science.’

It is not necessary here to give any detailed account of the terms of
botany. The fundamental ones have been gradually introduced, as the
parts of plants were more carefully and minutely examined. Thus the
flower was successively distinguished into the calyx, the corolla, the
stamens, and the pistils; the sections of the corolla were termed petals
by Columna; those of the calyx were called sepals by Necker. Sometimes
terms of greater generality were devised; as perianth, to include the
calyx and corolla, whether one or both of these were present; pericarp,
for the part enclosing the grain, of whatever kind it be, fruit, nut,
pod, &c. And it may easily be imagined, that descriptive terms may, by
definition and combination, become very numerous and distinct. Thus
leaves may be called pinnatifid, pinatipartite, pinnatisect,
pinnatilobate, palmatifid, palmatipartite, &c., and each of these words
designates different combinations of the modes and extent of the
divisions of the leaf with the divisions of its outline. In some cases,
arbitrary numerical relations are introduced into the definition: thus,
a leaf is called bilobate, Edition: current; Page: [701] when it is
divided into two parts by a notch; but if the notch go to the middle of
its length, it is bifid; if it go near the base of the leaf, it is
bipartite; if to the base, it is bisect. Thus, too, a pod of a
cruciferous plant is a jsiliquaj, if it is four times as long as it is
broad, but if it be shorter than this it is a silicula. Such terms being
established, the form of the very complex leaf or frond of a fern
k(Hymenophyllum Wilsoni)k is exactly conveyed by the following
phrase:—‘fronds rigid pinnate, pinnæ recurved subunilateral, pinnatifid,
the segments linear undivided or bifid spinuloso-serrate.’[*]

Other characters, as well as form, are conveyed with the like precision:
Colour by means of a classified scale of colours. . . . This was done
with most precision by Werner, and his scale of colours is still the
most usual standard of naturalists. Werner also introduced a more exact
terminology with regard to other characters which are important in
mineralogy, as lustre, hardness. But Mohs improved upon this step by
giving a numerical scale of hardness, in which talc is 1, gypsum 2, calc
spar 3, and so on. . . . Some properties, as specific gravity, by their
definition give at once a numerical measure; and others, as crystalline
form, require a very considerable array of mathematical calculation and
reasoning, to point out their relations and gradations.

§ 3. [Having a name for every important meaning implies, secondly, a
name for each of the more important results of scientific abstraction]
Thus far of Descriptive Terminology, or of the language requisite for
placing on record our observation of individual instances. But when we
proceed from this to Induction, or rather to that comparison of observed
instances which is the preparatory step towards it, we stand in need of
an additional and a different sort of general names.

Whenever, for purposes of Induction, we find it necessary to introduce
(in Dr. Whewell’s phraseology) some new general conception; that is,
whenever the comparison of a set of phenomena leads to the recognition
in them of some common circumstance, which, our attention not having
been directed to it on any former occasion, is to us a new phenomenon;
it is of importance that this new conception, or this new result of
abstraction, should have a name appropriated to it; especially if the
circumstance it involves be one which leads to many consequences, or
which is likely to be found also in other classes of phenomena. No
doubt, in most cases of the kind, the meaning might be conveyed by
joining together several words already in use. But when a thing has to
be often spoken of, there are more reasons than the saving of time and
space, for speaking of it in the most concise manner possible. What
darkness would be spread over geometrical ademonstrationsa, if wherever
the word circle is used, the definition of a circle were inserted
instead Edition: current; Page: [702] of it. In mathematics and its
applications, where the nature of the processes demands that the
attention should be strongly concentrated, but does not require that it
should be widely diffused, the importance of concentration also in the
expressions has always been duly felt; and a mathematician no sooner
finds that he shall often have occasion to speak of the same two things
together, than he at once creates a term to express them whenever
combined: just as, in his algebraical operations, he substitutes for
(am + bn) [], or for [] &c., the single letter P, Q, or S; not solely to
shorten his symbolical expressions, but to simplify the purely
intellectual part of his operations, by enabling the mind to give its
exclusive attention to the relation between the quantity S and the other
quantities which enter into the equation, without being distracted by
thinking unnecessarily of the parts of which S is itself composed.

But there is another reason, in addition to that of promoting
perspicuity, for giving a brief and compact name to each of the more
considerable results of abstraction which are obtained in the course of
our intellectual phenomena. By naming them, we fix our attention upon
them; we keep them more constantly before the mind. The names are
remembered, and being remembered, suggest their definition; while if
instead of specific and characteristic names, the meaning had been
expressed by putting together a number of other names, that particular
combination of words already in common use for other purposes would have
had nothing to make itself remembered by. If we want to render a
particular combination of ideas permanent in the mind, there is nothing
which clenches it like a name specially devoted to express it. If
mathematicians had been obliged to speak of “that to which a quantity,
in increasing or diminishing, is always approaching nearer, so that the
difference becomes less than any assignable quantity, but to which it
never becomes exactly equal,” instead of expressing all this by the
simple phrase, “the limit of a quantity,” we should probably have long
remained without most of the important truths which have been discovered
by means of the relation between quantities of various kinds and their
limits. If instead of speaking of momentum, it had been necessary to
say, “the product of the number of units of velocity in the velocity by
the number of units of mass in the mass,” many of the dynamical truths
now apprehended by means of this complex idea would probably have
escaped notice, for want of recalling the idea itself with sufficient
readiness and familiarity. And on subjects less remote from the topics
of popular discussion, whoever wishes to draw attention to some new or
unfamiliar distinction among things, will find no way so sure as to
invent or select bsuitable namesb for the express purpose of marking it.

Edition: current; Page: [703]
A volume devoted to explaining what cthe writer means by civilizationc,
does not raise so vivid a conception of it as the single expression,
that Civilization is a different thing from Cultivation; the compactness
of that brief designation for the contrasted quality being an equivalent
for a long discussion. So, if we would impress forcibly upon the
understanding and memory the distinction between dthe two different
conceptions of a representative governmentd, we cannot more effectually
do so than by saying that eDelegation is not Representatione.f Hardly
any original thoughts on mental or social subjects ever make their way
among mankind, or assume their proper importance in the minds even of
their inventors, until aptly-selected words or phrases have, as it were,
nailed them down and held them fast.

§ 4. [Having a name for every important meaning implies, thirdly, a
nomenclature, or system of the names of Kinds] Of the three essential
parts of a philosophical language, we have now mentioned two: a
terminology suited for describing with precision the individual facts
observed; and a name for every common property of any importance or
interest, which we detect by comparing those facts: including (as the
concretes corresponding to those abstract terms) names for the classes
which we artificially construct in virtue of those properties, or as
many of them, at least, as we have frequent occasion to predicate
anything of.

But there is a sort of classes, for the recognition of which no such
elaborate process is necessary; because each of them is marked out from
all others not by some one property, the detection of which may depend
on a difficult act of abstraction, but by its properties generally. I
mean, the Kinds of things, in the sense which, in this treatise, has
been aspeciallya attached to that term. By a Kind, it will be
remembered, we mean one of those classes which are distinguished from
all others not by one or a few definite properties, but by an unknown
multitude of them: the combination of properties on which the class is
grounded, being a mere index to an indefinite number of other
distinctive attributes. The class horse is a Kind, because the things
which agree in possessing the characters by which we recognise a horse,
agree in a Edition: current; Page: [704] great number of other
properties, as we know, and, it cannot be doubted, in many more than we
know. Animal, again, is a Kind, because no definition that could be
given of the name animal could either exhaust the properties common to
all animals, borb supply premises from which the remainder of those
properties could be inferred. But a combination of properties which does
not give evidence of the existence of any other independent
peculiarities, does not constitute a Kind. White horse, therefore, is
not a Kind; because horses which agree in whiteness, do not agree in
anything else, except cthe qualities common to all horses, andc whatever
may be the causes or effects of dthatd particular colour.

On the principle that there should be a name for everything which we
have frequent occasion to make assertions about, there ought evidently
to be a name for every Kind; for as it is the very emeaninge of a Kind
that the individuals composing it have an indefinite multitude of
properties in common, it follows that, if not with our present
knowledge, yet with that which we may hereafter acquire, the Kind is a
subject to which there will have to be applied many predicates. The
third component element of a philosophical language, therefore, is that
there shall be a name for every Kind. In other words, there must not
only be a terminology, but also a nomenclature.

The words Nomenclature and Terminology are employed by most authors
almost indiscriminately; Dr. Whewell being, fasf far as I am aware, the
first writer who has regularly assigned to the two words different
meanings.[*] The distinction however which he has drawn between them
being greal and importantg, his example is likely to be followed; and
(as is apt to be the case when such innovations in language are
felicitously made) a vague sense of the distinction is found to have
influenced the employment of the terms in common hpracticeh, before the
expediency had been pointed out of discriminating them philosophically.
Every one would say that the reform effected by Lavoisier and
Guyton-Morveau in the language of chemistry consisted in the
introduction of a new nomenclature, not of a new terminology. Linear,
lanceolate, oval, or oblong, serrated, dentate, or crenate leaves, are
expressions forming part of the terminology of botany, while the names
“Viola odorata,” and “Ulex Europæus,” belong to its nomenclature.

A nomenclature may be defined, the collection of the names of all the
Kinds with which any branch of knowledge is conversant; or more
properly, Edition: current; Page: [705] of all the lowest Kinds, or
infimæ species—those which may be subdivided indeed, but not into Kinds,
and which generally accord with what in natural history are termed
simply species. Science ipossessesi two splendid examples of a
systematic nomenclature; that of plants and animals, constructed by
Linnæus and his successors, and that of chemistry, which we owe to the
illustrious group of chemists who flourished in France towards the close
of the eighteenth century. In these two departments, not only has every
known species, or lowest Kind, a name assigned to it, but when new
lowest Kinds are discovered, names are at once given to them on an
uniform principle. In other sciences the nomenclature is not at present
constructed on any system, either because the species to be named are
not numerous enough to require one, (as in geometry for example,) or
because no one has yet suggested a suitable principle for such a system,
as in mineralogy; in which the want of a scientifically constructed
nomenclature is now the principal cause which retards the progress of
the science.

§ 5. [Peculiar nature of the connotation of names which belong to a
nomenclature] A word which carries on its face that it belongs to a
nomenclature, seems at first sight to differ from other concrete general
names in this—that its meaning does not reside in its connotation, in
the attributes implied in it, but in its denotation, that is, in the
particular group of things which it is appointed to designate; and
cannot, therefore, be unfolded by means of a definition, but must be
made known in another way. aThis opiniona, however, appears to me
erroneous. Words belonging to a nomenclature differ, I conceive, from
other words mainly in this, that besides the ordinary connotation, they
have a peculiar one of their own: besides connoting certain attributes,
they also connote that those attributes are distinctive of a Kind. The
term “peroxide of iron,” for example, belonging by its form to the
systematic nomenclature of chemistry, bears on its face that it is the
name of a peculiar Kind of substance. It moreover connotes, like the
name of any other class, some portion of the properties common to the
class; in this instance the property of being a compound of iron and the
largest dose of oxygen with which iron will combine. These two things,
the fact of being such a compound, and the fact of being a Kind,
constitute the connotation of the name peroxide of iron. When we say of
the substance before us, that it is the peroxide of iron, we thereby
assert, first, that it is a compound of iron and a maximum of oxygen,
and next, that the substance so composed is a peculiar Kind of
substance.

Now, this second part of the connotation of any word belonging to a
nomenclature is as essential a portion of its meaning as the first part,
while Edition: current; Page: [706] the definition bonly declaresb the
first: and hence the appearance that the signification of such terms
cannot be conveyed by a definition: which appearance, however, is
fallacious. The name Viola odorata denotes a Kind, of which a certain
number of characters, sufficient to distinguish it, are enunciated in
botanical works. This enumeration of characters is surely, as in other
cases, a definition of the name. No, say some, it is not a definition,
for the name Viola odorata does not mean those characters; it means that
particular group of plants, and the characters are selected from among a
much greater number, merely as marks by which to recognise the group.
cBut to this I reply, thatc the name does not mean that group, for it
would be applied to that group no longer than while the group is
believed to be an infima species; if it were to be discovered that
several distinct Kinds have been confounded under this one name, no one
would any longer apply the name Viola odorata to the whole of the group,
but would apply it, if retained at all, to one only of the Kinds
contained therein. What is imperative, therefore, is not that the name
shall denote one particular collection of objects, but that it shall
denote a Kind, and a lowest Kind. The form of the name declares that,
happen what will, it is to denote an infima species; and that,
therefore, the properties which it connotes, and which are expressed in
the definition, are to be connoted by it no longer than while we
continue to believe that those properties, when found together, indicate
a Kind, and that the whole of them are found in no more than one Kind.

With the addition of this peculiar connotation, implied in the form of
every word which belongs to a systematic nomenclature; the set of
characters which is employed to discriminate each Kind from all other
Kinds (and which is a real definition) constitutes as completely as in
any other case the whole meaning of the term. It is no objection to say
that (as is often the case in natural history) the set of characters may
be changed, and another substituted as being better suited for the
purpose of distinction, while the word, still continuing to denote the
same group of things, is not considered to have changed its meaning. For
this is no more than may happen in the case of any other general name:
we may, in reforming its connotation, leave its denotation untouched;
and it is generally desirable to do so. The connotation, however, is not
the less for this the real meaning, for we at once apply the name
wherever the characters set down in the definition are found; and that
which exclusively guides us in applying the term, must constitute its
signification. If we find, contrary to our previous belief, that the
characters are not peculiar to one species, we cease to use the term
coextensively with the characters; but then it is dbecause the other
portion of the connotationd fails; the condition Edition: current; Page:
[707] that the class must be a Kind. The connotation, therefore, is
still the meaning; the set of descriptive characters is a true
definition; and the meaning is unfolded, not indeed (as in other cases)
by the definition alone, but by the definition and the form of the word
taken together.

§ 6. [In what cases language may, and may not, be used mechanically] We
have now analysed what is implied in the two principal requisites of a
philosophical language; first, precision, or definiteness, and secondly,
completeness. Any further remarks on the mode of constructing a
nomenclature must be deferred until we treat of Classification; the mode
of naming the Kinds of things being necessarily subordinate to the mode
of arranging those Kinds into alargera classes. With respect to the
minor requisites of terminology, some of them are well stated andb
illustrated in the “Aphorisms cconcerningc the Language of Science,”
included in Dr. Whewell’s Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences.[*]
These, as being of secondary importance in the peculiar point of view of
Logic, dI shall not further refer to, butd shall confine emye
observations to one more quality, which, next to the two already treated
of, appears to be the most valuable which the language of science can
possess. Of this quality a general notion may be conveyed by the
following aphorism:

Whenever the nature of the subject permits our reasoning fprocessesf to
be, without danger, carried on mechanically, the language should be
constructed on as mechanical principles as possible; while in the
contrary case, it should be so constructed that there shall be the
greatest possible obstacles to a merely mechanical use of it.

I am gawareg that this maxim requires much explanation, which I shall at
once proceed to give. And first, as to what is meant by using a language
mechanically. The complete or extreme case of the mechanical use of
language, is when it is used without any consciousness of a meaning, and
with only the consciousness of using certain visible or audible marks in
conformity to technical rules previously laid down. This extreme case
ish nowhere realized except in the figures of arithmetic, and istill
more,i the symbols of algebra, a language unique in its kind, and
approaching as nearly to perfection, Edition: current; Page: [708] for
the purposes to which it is destined, as can, perhaps, be said of any
creation of the human mind. Its perfection consists in the completeness
of its adaptation to a purely mechanical use. The symbols are mere
counters, without even the semblance of a meaning apart from the
convention which is renewed each time they are employed, and which is
altered at each renewal, the same symbol a or x being used on different
occasions to represent things which (except that, like all things, they
are susceptible of being numbered) have no property in common. There is
nothing, therefore, to distract the mind from the set of mechanical
operations which are to be performed upon the symbols, such as squaring
both sides of the equation, multiplying or dividing jthemj by the same
or by equivalent symbols, and so forth. Each of kthesek operations, it
is true, corresponds to a syllogism; represents one step of a
ratiocination relating not to the symbols, but to the things signified
by them. But as it has been found practicable to frame a technical form,
by conforming to which we can make sure of finding the conclusion of the
ratiocination, our end can be completely attained without our ever
thinking of anything but the symbols. Being thus intended to work merely
as mechanism, they have the qualities which mechanism ought to have.
They are of the least possible bulk, so that they take up scarcely any
room, and waste no time in their manipulation; they are compact, and fit
so closely together that the eye can take in the whole at once of
lalmostl every operation which they are employed to perform.

These admirable properties of the symbolical language of mathematics
have made so strong an impression on the minds of many mthinkersm, as to
have led them to consider the symbolical language in question as the
ideal type of philosophical language generally; to think that names in
general, or (as they are fond of calling them) signs, are fitted for the
purposes of thought in proportion as they can be made to approximate to
the compactness, the entire unmeaningness, and the capability of being
used as counters without a thought of what they represent, which are
characteristic of the a and b, the x and y, of algebra. This notion has
led to sanguine views of the acceleration of the progress of science by
means which,n I conceive, cannot possibly conduce to that end, and forms
part of that exaggerated estimate of the influence of signs, which has
contributed in no small degree to prevent the real laws of our
intellectual operations from beingo rightly understood.

In the first place, a set of signs pby which we reasonp without
consciousness of their meaning, can be serviceable, at most, only in our
deductive operations. In our direct inductions we cannot for a moment
dispense with Edition: current; Page: [709] a distinct mental image of
the phenomena, since the whole operation turns on a perception of the
particulars in which those phenomena agree and differ. But, further,
this reasoning by counters is only suitable to a very limited portion
even of our deductive processes. In our reasonings respecting numbers,
the only general principles which we ever have occasion to introduce,
are these, Things which are equal to the same thing are equal to one
another, and The sums or differences of equal things are equal; with
their various corollaries. Not only can no hesitation ever arise
respecting the applicability of these principles, since they are true of
all magnitudes whatever; but every possible application of which they
are susceptible, may be reduced to a technical rule; qand suchq, in
fact, the rules of the calculus are. But if the symbols represent any
other things than mere numbers, let us say even straight or curve lines,
we have then to apply theorems of geometry not true of all lines without
exception, and to select those which are true of the lines we are
reasoning about. And how can we do this unless we keep completely in
mind what particular lines these are? Since additional geometrical
truths may be introduced into the ratiocination in any stage of its
progress, we cannot suffer ourselves, during even the smallest part of
it, to use the names mechanically (as we use algebraical symbols)
without an image annexed to them. It is only after ascertaining that the
solution of a question concerning lines rcan be made to dependr on a
previous question concerning numbers, or in other words after the
question has been (to speak technically) reduced to an equation, that
the unmeaning signs become available, and that the nature of the facts
themselves to which the investigation relates can be dismissed from the
mind. Up to the establishment of the equation, the language in which
mathematicians carry on their reasoning does not differ in character
from that employed by close reasoners on any other kind of subject.

I do not deny that every correct ratiocination, when thrown into the
syllogistic shape, is conclusive from the mere form of the expression,
provided none of the terms used be ambiguous; and this is one of the
circumstances which have led some swriterss to think that if all names
were so judiciously constructed and so carefully defined as not to admit
of any ambiguity, the improvement thus made in language would not only
give to the conclusions of every deductive science the same certainty
with those of mathematics, but would reduce all reasonings to the
application of a technical form, and enable their conclusiveness to be
rationally assented to after a merely mechanical process, as is
undoubtedly the case in algebra. But, if we except geometry, the
conclusions of which are already as certain and exact Edition: current;
Page: [710] as they can be made, there is no tscience but that of
number, in which the practical validityt of a reasoning can be apparent
to any person who has looked only at the ureasoning itselfu. Whoever has
vassented tov wwhatw was said in the last Book concerning the case of
the Composition of Causes, and the still stronger case of the entire
supersession of one set of laws by another, is aware that geometry and
algebra are the only sciences of which the propositions are
categorically true: the general propositions of all other sciences are
true only hypothetically, supposing that no counteracting cause happens
to interfere. A conclusion, therefore, however correctly deduced, in
point of form, from admitted laws of nature, will have no other than an
hypothetical certainty. At every step we must assure ourselves that no
other law of nature has superseded, or intermingled its operation with,
those which are the premises of the reasoning; and how can this be done
by merely looking at the words? We must not only be constantly thinking
of the phenomena themselves, but we must be constantly xstudyingx them;
making ourselves acquainted with the peculiarities of every case to
which we attempt to apply our general principles.

The algebraic notation, yconsidered asy a philosophical language, is
perfect in its adaptation to the subjects for which it is commonly
employed, namely those of which the investigations have already been
reduced to the ascertainment of a relation between numbers. But,
admirable as it is for its own purpose, the properties by which it is
rendered such are so far from constituting it the ideal model of
philosophical language in general, that the more nearly the language of
any other branch of science approaches to it, the less fit that language
is for its own proper functions. On all other subjects, instead of
contrivances to prevent our attention from being distracted by thinking
of the meaning of our signs, we zought to wish forz contrivances to make
it impossible that we should ever lose sight of that meaning even for an
instant.

With this view, as much meaning as possible should be thrown into the
formation of the word itself; the aids of derivation and analogy being
made available to keep alive a consciousness of all that is signified by
it. In this respect those languages have an immense advantage which form
their compounds and derivatives from native roots, like the German, and
not from those of a foreign ora dead language, as is so much the case
with English, French, and Italian: and the best are those which form
them according to fixed analogies, corresponding to the relations
between the ideas to be expressed. Edition: current; Page: [711] All
languages do this more or less, but bespecially,b among modern European
languages, the German; while even that is inferior to the Greek, in
which the relation between the meaning of a derivative word and that of
its primitive is in general clearly marked by its mode of formation;
except in the case of words compounded with prepositions, whichc are
oftend, in both those languages,d extremely anomalous.

But all that can be done, by the mode of constructing words, to prevent
them from degenerating into sounds passing through the mind without any
distinct apprehension of what they signify, is far too little for the
necessity of the case. Words, however well constructed originally, are
always tending, like coins, to have their inscription worn off by
passing from hand to hand; and the only possible mode of reviving it is
to be ever stamping it afresh, by living in the habitual contemplation
of the phenomena themselves, and not resting in our familiarity with the
words that express them. If any one, having possessed himself of the
laws of phenomena as recorded in words, whether delivered to him
originally by others, or even found out by himself, is content from
thenceforth to live eamonge these formulæ, to think exclusively of them,
and of applying them to cases as they arise, without keeping up his
acquaintance with the realities from which these laws were collected—not
only will he continually fail in his practical efforts, because he will
apply his formulæ without duly considering whether, in this case and in
that, other laws of nature do not modify or supersede them; but the
formulæ themselves will progressively lose their meaning to him, and he
will cease at last even to be capable of recognising with certainty
whether a case falls within the contemplation of his formula or not. It
is, in short, as necessary, on all subjects not mathematical, that the
things on which we reason should be conceived by us in the concrete, and
“clothed in circumstances,” as it is in falgebraf that we should keep
all individualizing peculiarities sedulously out of view.

With this remark weg close ourh observations on the Philosophy of
Language.

Edition: current; Page: [712]


CHAPTER VII: Of Classification, as Subsidiary to Induction

§ 1. [Classification as here treated of, wherein different from the
classification implied in naming] There is, as ahas beena frequently
remarked in this work, a classification of things, which is inseparable
from the fact of giving them general names. Every name which connotes an
attribute, divides, by that very fact, all things whatever into two
classes, those which have the attribute and those which have bitb not;
those of which the name can be predicated, and those of which it cannot.
And the division thus made is not merely a division of such things as
actually exist, or are known to exist, but of all such as may hereafter
be discovered, and even of all cwhichc can be imagined.

On this kind of Classification we have nothing to add to what has
previously been said. The Classification which requires to be discussed
as a separate act of the mind, is altogether different. In the one, the
arrangement of objects in groups, and distribution of them into
compartments, is a mere incidental effect consequent on the use of names
given for another purpose, namely that of simply expressing some of
their qualities. In the other, the arrangement and distribution dared
the main object, and the naming is secondary to, and purposely conforms
itself to, instead of governing, that more important operation.

Classification, thus regarded, is a contrivance for the best possible
ordering of the ideas of objects in our minds; for causing ethee ideas
to accompany or succeed one another in such a way as shall give us the
greatest command over our knowledge already acquired, and lead most
directly to the acquisition of more. The general problem of
Classification, in reference to these purposes, may be stated as
follows: To provide that things shall be thought of in such groups, and
those groups in such an order, as will fbestf conduce to the remembrance
and to the ascertainment of their laws.

Edition: current; Page: [713]
Classification thus considered, differs from classification in the wider
sense, in having reference to real objects exclusively, and not to all
that are imaginable: its object being the due co-ordination in our minds
of those things only, with the properties of which we have actually
occasion to make ourselves acquainted. But, on the other hand, it
embraces all really existing objects. We cannot constitute any one class
properly, except in reference to a general division of the whole of
nature; we cannot determine the group in which any one object can most
conveniently be placed, without taking into consideration all theg
varieties of existing objects, all at least which have any degree of
affinity with it. No one family of plants or animals could have been
rationally constituted, except as part of a systematic arrangement of
all plants or animals; nor could such a general arrangement have been
properly made, without first determining the exact place of plants and
animals in a general division of nature.h

§ 2. [Theory of natural groups] There is no property of objects which
may not be taken, if we please, as the foundation for a classification
or mental grouping of those objects; and in our first attempts we are
likely to select for that purpose properties which are simple, easily
conceived, and perceptible on a first view, without any previous process
of thought. Thus Tournefort’s arrangement of plants was founded on the
shape and divisions of the corolla; and that which is commonly called
the Linnæan (though Linnæus aalso suggested another anda more scientific
arrangement) was grounded chiefly on the number of the stamens and
pistils.

But these classifications, which are at first recommended by the
facility they afford of ascertaining to bwhatb class any individual
belongs, are seldom much adapted to the ends of that Classification
which is the subject of our present remarks. The Linnæan arrangement
answers the purpose of making us think together of all those kinds of
plants which possess the same number of stamens and pistils; but to
think of them in that manner is of little use, since we seldom have
anything to affirm in common of the plants which have a given number of
stamens and pistils. If plants of the class Pentandria, order Edition:
current; Page: [714] Monogynia, agreed in any other properties, the
habit of thinking and speaking of the plants under a common designation
would conduce to our remembering those common properties so far as they
were ascertained, and would dispose us to be on the look-out for such of
them as cwerec not yet known. But since this is not the case, the only
purpose of thought which the Linnæan classification serves is that of
causing us to remember, better than we should otherwise have done, the
exact number of stamens and pistils of every species of plants. Now, as
this property is of little importance or interest, the remembering it
with any particular accuracy is of no moment. And, inasmuch as, by
habitually thinking of plants in those groups, we are prevented from
habitually thinking of them in groups which have a greater number of
properties in common, the effect of such a classification, when
systematically adhered to, upon our habits of thought, must be regarded
as mischievous.

The ends of scientific classification are best answered, when the
objects are formed into groups respecting which a greater number of
general positions can be made, and those propositions more important,
than could be made respecting any other groups into which the same
things could be distributed. The properties, therefore, according to
which objects are classified, should, if possible, be those which are
causes of many other properties: or at any rate, which are sure marks of
them. Causes are preferable, both as being the surest and most direct of
marks, and as being themselves the properties on which it is of most use
that our attention should be strongly fixed. But the property which is
the cause of the chief peculiarities of a class, is dunfortunatelyd
seldom fitted to serve also as the diagnostic of the class. Instead of
the cause, we must generally select some of its more prominent effects,
which may serve as marks of the other effects and of the causee.

A classification thus formed is properly scientific or philosophical,
and is commonly called a Natural, in contradistinction to a Technical or
Artificial, classification or arrangement. The phrase Natural
Classification seems most peculiarly appropriate to such arrangements as
correspond, in the groups which they form, to the spontaneous tendencies
of the mind, by placing together the objects most similar in their
general aspect: in opposition to those technical systems which,
arranging things according to their agreement in some circumstance
arbitrarily selected, often throw into the same group objects which in
the general aggregate of their properties present no resemblance, and
into different and remote groups, others which have the closest
similarity. It is one of the most valid recommendations of any
classification to the character of a scientific one, that it shall be a
natural classification in this sense also; for the test of its
scientific character is the number and importance of the properties
which can be asserted in common of all objects Edition: current; Page:
[715] included in a group; and properties on which the general aspect of
the things depends, aref, if only on that ground, importantf, as well
as, in most cases, numerous. But, though a strong recommendation, this
circumstance is not a sine quâ non; gsince the mostg obvious properties
of things may be of trifling importance compared with others that are
not obvious. I have seen it mentioned as a great absurdity in the
Linnæan classification, that it places (which by the way it does not)
the violet by the side of the oak: it certainly dissevers natural
affinities, and brings together things quite as unlike as the oak and
the violet are. But the difference, apparently so wide, which renders
the juxtaposition of hthoseh two vegetables so suitable an illustration
of a bad arrangement, depends, to the common eye, mainly on mere size
and texture; now if we made it our study to adopt the classification
which would involve the least peril of similar rapprochements, we should
return to the obsolete division into trees, shrubs, and herbs, which
though of primary importance with regard to mere general aspect, yet
(compared even with so petty and unobvious a distinction as that into
dicotyledons and monocotyledons) answers to so few differences in the
other properties of plants, that a classification founded on it
(independently of the indistinctness of the lines of demarcation) would
be as completely artificial and technical as the Linnæan.

Our natural groups, therefore, must often be founded not on the obvious,
but on the unobvious properties of things, when these are of greater
importance. But in such cases it is essential that there should be some
other property or set of properties, more readily recognisable by the
observer, which coexist with, and may be received as marks of, the
properties which are the real groundwork of the classification. A
natural arrangement, for example, of animals, must be founded in the
main on their internal structure, but (as iM. Comte remarksi)[*] it
would be absurd that we should not be able to determine the genus and
species of an animal without first killing it. On this ground, jthe
preference, among zoological classifications, is probably duej to that
of M. de Blainville, founded on the differences in the external
integuments; differences which correspond, much more accurately than
might be supposed, to the really important varieties, both in the other
parts of the structure, and in the habits and history of the animals.

This shows, more strongly than ever, how extensive a knowledge of the
properties of objects is necessary for making a good classification of
them. Edition: current; Page: [716] And as it is one of the uses of such
a classification that by drawing attention to the properties on which it
is founded, and which if the classification be good are marks of many
others, it facilitates the discovery of those others; we see in what
manner our knowledge of things, and our classification of them, tend
mutually and indefinitely to the improvement of keach otherk.

We said just now that the classification of objects should follow those
of their properties which indicate not only the most numerous, but also
the most important peculiarities. What is here meant by importance? It
has reference to the particular end in view; and the same objects,
therefore, may admit with propriety of several different
classifications. Each science or art forms its classification of things
according to the properties which fall within its special cognizance, or
of which it must take account in order to accomplish its peculiar
practical lendl. A farmer does not divide plants, like a botanist, into
dicotyledonous and monocotyledonous, but into useful plants and weeds. A
geologist divides fossils, not like a zoologist, into families
corresponding to those of living species, but into fossils of the
mpalæozoic, mesozoic, andm tertiary periods, above the coal and below
the coal, &c. Whales are or are not fish, according to the purpose for
which we are considering them.

If we are speaking of the internal structure and physiology of the
animal, we must not call them fish; for in these respects they deviate
widely from fishes: they have warm blood, and produce and suckle their
young as land quadrupeds do. But this would not prevent our speaking of
the whale fishery, and calling such animals fish on all occasions
connected with this employment; for the relations thus arising depend
upon the animal’s living in the water, and being caught in a manner
similar to other fishes. A plea that human laws which mention fish do
not apply to whales, would be rejected at once by an intelligent judge.*

These different classifications are all good, for the purposes of their
own particular departments of knowledge or practice. But when we are
studying objects not for any special practical end, but for the sake of
extending our knowledge of the whole of their properties and relations,
we must consider as the most important attributes, those which
contribute most, either by themselves or by their effects, to render the
things like one another, and unlike other things; which give to the
class composed of them the most marked individuality; which fill, as it
were, the largest space in their existence, and would most nimpressn the
attention of a spectator who knew all their properties but was not
specially interested in any. Classes formed on this principle may be
called, in a more emphatic manner than any others, natural groups.

Edition: current; Page: [717]
§ 3. [Are natural groups given by type, or by definition?] On the
subject of these groups Dr. Whewell lays down a theory, grounded on an
important truth, which he has, in some respects, expressed and
illustrated very felicitously, but also, as it appears to me, with some
admixture of error. It will be advantageous, for both these reasons, to
extract the statement of his doctrine in the very words he has used.

“Natural groups,” according to athis theorya,* are “given by Type, not
by Definition.” And this consideration accounts for bthat

indefinitenessb and indecision which we frequently find in the
descriptions of such groups, and which must appear so strange and
inconsistent to any one who does not suppose these descriptions to
assume any deeper ground of connexion than an arbitrary choice of the
botanist. Thus in the family of the rose-tree, we are told that the
ovules are very rarely erect, the stigmata usually simple. Of what use,
it might be asked, can such loose accounts be? To which the answer is,
that they are not inserted in order to distinguish the species, but in
order to describe the family, and the total relations of the ovules and
the stigmata of the family are better known by this general statement. A
similar observation may be made with regard to the Anomalies of each
group, which occur so commonly, that cDr.c Lindley, in his Introduction
to the Natural System of Botany,[*] makes the ‘Anomalies’ an article in
each family. Thus, part of the character of the Rosaceæ is, that they
have alternate stipulate leaves, and that the albumen is obliterated;
but yet in Lowea, one of the genera of this family, the stipulæ are
absent; and the albumen is present in another, Neillia. This implies, as
we have already seen, that the artificial character (or diagnosis, as
Mr. Lindley calls it,) is imperfect. It is, though very nearly, yet not
exactly, commensurate with the natural group: and hence in certain cases
this character is made to yield to the general weight of natural
affinities.

These views,—of classes determined by characters which cannot be
expressed in words,—of propositions which state, not what happens in all
cases, but only usually,—of particulars which are included in a class,
though they transgress the definition of it, mayd probably surprise the
reader. They are so contrary to many of the received opinions respecting
the use of definitions, and the nature of scientific propositions, that
they will probably appear to many persons highly illogical and
unphilosophical. But a disposition to such a judgment arises in a great
measure from this, that the mathematical and mathematico-physical
sciences have, in a great degree, determined men’s views of the general
nature and form of scientific truth; while Natural History has not yet
had time or opportunity to exert its due influence upon the current
habits of philosophizing. The apparent indefiniteness and inconsistency
of the classifications and definitions of Natural History belongs, in a
far higher degree, to all other except mathematical speculations; and
the modes in which approximations to exact distinctions and general
Edition: current; Page: [718] truths have been made in Natural History,
may be worthy our attention, even for the light they throw upon the best
modes of pursuing truth of all kinds.

Though in a Natural group of objects a definition can no longer be of
any use as a regulative principle, classes are not therefore left quite
loose, without any certain standard or guide. The class is steadily
fixed, though not precisely limited; it is given, though not
circumscribed; it is determined, not by a boundary line without, but by
a central point within; not by what it strictly excludes, but by what it
eminently includes; by an example, not by a precept; in short, instead
of a Definition we have a Type for our director.

A Type is an example of any class, for instance a species of a genus,
which is considered as eminently possessing the characters of the class.
All the species which have a greater affinity with this type-species
than with any others, form the genus, and are ranged about it, deviating
from it in various directions and different degrees. Thus a genus may
consist of several species which approach very near the type, and of
which the claim to a place with it is obvious; while there may be other
species which straggle further from this central knot, and which yet are
clearly more connected with it than with any other. And even if there
should be some species of which the place is dubious, and which appear
to be equally bound to two generic types, it is easily seen that this
would not destroy the reality of the generic groups, any more than the
scattered trees of the intervening plain prevent our speaking
intelligibly of the distinct forests of two separate hills.

The type-species of every genus, the type-genus of every family, is,
then, one which possesses all the characters and properties of the genus
in a marked and prominent manner. The type of the Rose family has
alternate stipulate leaves, wants the albumen, has the ovules not erect,
has the stigmata simple, and besides these features, which distinguish
it from the exceptions or varieties of its class, it has the features
which make it prominent in its class. It is one of those which possess
clearly several leading attributes; and thus, though we cannot say of
any one genus that it must be the type of the family, or of any one
species that it must be the type of the genus, we are still not wholly
to seek; the type must be connected by many affinities with most of the
others of its group; it must be near the centre of the crowd, and not
one of the stragglers.

In this passage (the latter part of which especially I cannot help
noticing as an admirable example of philosophic style) Dr. Whewell has
stated very clearly and forcibly, but (I think) without making all
necessary distinctions, one of the principles of a Natural
Classification. What this principle is, what are its limits, and in what
manner ehee seems to me to have overstepped them, will appear when we
have laid down another frule of Natural Arrangement, which appears to me
still more fundamentalf.

§ 4. [Kinds are natural groups] The reader is by this time familiar with
the general truth (which I restate so often on account of the great
confusion in which it is commonly involved), that there are in nature
distinctions of Kind; distinctions not consisting in a given number of
definite properties, Edition: current; Page: [719] plus the effects
which follow from those properties, but running through the whole
nature, through the attributes generally, of the things so
distinguished. Our knowledge of the properties of a Kind is never
complete. We are always discovering, and expecting to discover, new
ones. Where the distinction between atwo classes ofa things is not one
of Kind, we expect to find their properties alike, except where there is
some reason for their being different. On the contrary, bwhenb the
distinction is in Kind, we expect to find the properties different
unless there be some cause for their being the same. All knowledge of a
Kind must be obtained by observation and experiment upon the Kind
itself; no inference respecting its properties from the properties of
things not connected with it by Kind, goes for more than the sort of
presumption usually characterized as an analogy, and generally in one of
its fainter degrees.

Since the common properties of a true Kind, cand consequentlyc the
general assertions which can be made respecting it, or which are certain
to be made hereafter as our knowledge extends, are indefinite and
inexhaustible; dand sinced the very first principle of natural
classification eis that of forming the classes so that the objects
composing each may have the greatest number of properties in common;
this principlee prescribes that every such classification shall
recognise and adopt into itself all distinctions of Kind, which exist
among the objects it professes to classify. To pass over any
distinctions of Kind, and substitute definite distinctions, which,
however considerable they may be, do not point to ulterior unknown
differences, would be to replace classes with more by classes with fewer
attributes in commonf; andf would be subversive of the Natural Method of
Classification.

Accordingly all natural arrangements, whether the reality of the
distinction of Kinds was felt or not by their framers, have been led, by
the mere pursuit of their own proper end, to conform themselves to the
distinctions of Kind, so far as these had been ascertained at the time.
The Species of Plants are not only real Kinds, but are probably,g all of
them, real lowest Kinds,h Infimæ Species; which, if we were to
subdivide, as of course it is open to us Edition: current; Page: [720]
to do, into sub-classes, the subdivision would necessarily be founded on
definite distinctions, not pointing (apart from what may be known of
their causes or effects) to any difference beyond themselves.

In so far as a natural classification is grounded on real Kinds, its
groups are certainly not conventional; iit is perfectly truei that they
do not depend upon an arbitrary choice of the naturalist. But it does
not follow, nor, I conceive, is it true, that these classes are
determined by a type, and not by characters. To determine them by a type
would be as sure a way of missing the Kind, as if we were to select a
set of characters arbitrarily. They are determined by characters, but
jthesej are not arbitrary. The problem is, to find a few definite
characters which point to the multitude of indefinite ones. Kinds are
Classes between which there is an impassable barrier; and what we have
to seek is, marks kwherebyk we may determine on which side of the
barrier an object takes its place. The characters which will best do
thisl should be chosen: if they are also important in themselves, so
much the better. When we have selected the characters, we parcel out the
objects according to those characters, and not, mI conceivem, according
to resemblance to a type. We do not compose the species Ranunculus
acris, of all plants which bear a satisfactory degree of resemblance to
a model-buttercup, but of those which possess certain characters
selected as marks by which we might recognise the possibility of a
common parentage; and the enumeration of nthosen characters is the
definition of the species.

The question next arises, whether, as all Kinds must have a place among
the classes, so all the classes in a natural arrangement must be Kinds?
And to this I answer, certainly not. The distinctions of oKindso are not
numerous enough to pmake up the wholep of a classification. Very few of
the genera of plants, or even of the families, can be pronounced with
certainty to be Kinds. The great distinctions of Vascular and Cellular,
Dicotyledonous or Exogenous and Monocotyledonous or Endogenous qplantsq,
are perhaps differences of Kind; the lines of demarcation which divide
those classes seem (though even on this I would not pronounce
positively) to go through the whole nature of the plants. But the
different species of a genus, or genera of a family, usually have in
common only a limited number of characters. A rRoser does not seem to
differ from a Rubus, or the Umbelliferæ from the Ranunculaceæ, in much
else than the characters botanically assigned to those Edition: current;
Page: [721] genera or those families. Unenumerated differences certainly
do exist in some cases; there are families of plants which have
peculiarities of chemical composition, or yield products having peculiar
effects on the animal economy. The Cruciferæ and Fungi contain an
unusual proportion of snitrogens; the Labiatæ are the chief sources of
essential oils, the Solaneæ are very commonly narcotic, &c. In these and
similar cases there are possibly distinctions of Kind; but it is by no
means indispensable that there should be. Genera and Families may be
eminently natural, though marked out from one another by properties
limited in number; tprovidedt those properties uareu important, and the
objects contained in each genus or family resemble each other more than
they resemble anything which is excluded from the genus or family.

After the recognition and definition, then, of the infimæ species, the
next step is to arrange vthose infimæ species into larger groups: making
thesev groups correspond to Kinds wherever it is possible, but in most
cases without any such guidance. And in doing this it is true that we
are naturally and properly guided, in most cases at least, by
resemblance to a type. We form our groups round certain selected Kinds,
each of which serves as a sort of exemplar of its group. But though the
groups are suggested by types, I cannot wthinkw that a group when formed
is determined by the type; that in deciding whether a species belongs to
the group, a reference is made to the type, and not to the characters;
that the characters “cannot be expressed in words.”[*] This assertion is
inconsistent with Dr. Whewell’s own statement of the fundamental
xprinciplex of classification, namely, that “general assertions shall be
possible.”[†] If the class did not possess any characters in common,
what general assertions would be possible respecting it? Except that
they all resemble each other more than they resemble anything else,
nothing whatever could be predicated of the class.

The truth is, on the contrary, that every genus or family is framed with
distinct reference to certain characters, and is composed, first and
principally, of species which agree in possessing all those characters.
To these are added, as a sort of appendix, such other species, generally
in small number, as possess nearly all the properties selected; wanting
some of them one property, some another, and which, while they agree
with the rest almost as much as these agree with one another, do not
resemble in an equal degree any other group. Our conception of the class
continues to be grounded on the characters; and the class might be
defined, those things which either possess that Edition: current; Page:
[722] set of characters, or resemble the things that do so, more than
they resemble anything else.

And this resemblance itself is not, like resemblance between simple
sensations, an ultimate fact, unsusceptible of analysis. Even the
inferior degree of resemblance is created by the possession of common
characters. Whatever resembles the genus Rose more than it resembles any
other genus, does so because it possesses a greater number of the
characters of that genus, than of the characters of any other genus. Nor
can there be yany realy difficulty in representing, by an enumeration of
characters, the nature and degree of the resemblance which is strictly
sufficient to include any object in the class. There are always some
properties common to all things which are included. Others there often
are, to which some things, which are nevertheless included, are
exceptions. But the objects which are exceptions to one character are
not exceptions to another: the resemblance which fails in some
particulars must be made up for in others. The class, therefore, is
constituted by the possession of all the characters which are universal,
and most of those which admit of exceptions. If a plant had the ovules
erect, the stigmata divided, zpossessed the albumenz, and was without
stipules, it apossiblya would not be classed among the Rosaceæ. But it
may want any one, orb more than one of these characters, and not be
excluded. The ends of a scientific classification are better answered by
including it. Since it agrees so nearly, in its known properties, with
the sum of the characters of the class, it is likely to resemble that
class more than any other in those cof its propertiesc which are still
undiscovered.

Not only, therefore, are natural groups, no less than any artificial
classes, determined by characters; they are constituted in contemplation
of, and by reason of, characters. But it is in contemplation not of
those characters only which are rigorously common to all the objects
included in the group, but of the entire body of characters, all of
which are found in most of those objects, and most of them in all. And
hence our conception of the class, the image in our minds which is
representative of it, is that of a specimen complete in all the
characters; most naturally a specimen which, by possessing them all in
the greatest degree in which they are ever found, is the best fitted to
exhibit clearly, and in a marked manner, what they are. It is by a
mental reference to this standard, not instead of, but in illustration
of, the definition of the class, that we usually and advantageously
determine whether any individual or species belongs to the class or not.
And this, as it seems to me, is the amount of dtruth contained in thed
doctrine of Types.

Edition: current; Page: [723]
We shall see presently that where the classification is made for the
express purpose of a special inductive inquiry, it is not optional, but
necessary for fulfilling the conditions of a correct Inductive Method,
that we should establish a type-species or genus, namely, the one which
exhibits in the most eminent degree the particular phenomenon under
investigation. But of this hereafter. It remains, for completing the
theory of natural groups, that a few words should be said on the
principles of the nomenclature adapted to them.

§ 5. [How the names of Kinds should be constructed] A Nomenclature ain
science, is, as we have said,a a system of the names of Kinds. These
names, like other class-names, are defined by the enumeration of the
characters distinctive of the class. The only merit which a set of names
can have beyond this, is to convey, by the mode of their construction,
as much information as possible: so that a person who knows the thing,
may receive all the assistance which the name can give in remembering
what he knows, while he who knows it not, may receive as much knowledge
respecting it as the case admits of, by merely being told its name.

There are two modes of giving to the name of a Kind this sort of
significance. The best, but which unfortunately is seldom practicable,
is when the word can be made to indicate, by its formation, the very
properties which it is designed to connote. The name of a Kind does not,
of course, connote all the properties of the Kind, since these are
inexhaustible, but such of them as are sufficient to distinguish it;
such as are sure marks of all the rest. Now, it is very brarelyb that
one property, or even any two or three properties, can answer this
purpose. To distinguish the common daisy from all other species of
plants would require the specification of many characters. And a name
cannot, without being too cumbrous for use, give indication, by its
etymology or mode of construction, of more than a very small number of
these. The possibility, therefore, of an ideally perfect Nomenclature,
is probably confined to the one case in which we are happily in
possession of somethingc approaching to it;d the Nomenclature of
eelementarye Chemistry. The substances, whether simple or compound, with
which chemistry is conversant, are Kinds, and, as such, the properties
which distinguish each of them from the rest are innumerable; but in the
case of compound substances (the simple ones are not numerous enough to
require a systematic nomenclature), there is one property, the chemical
composition, which is of itself sufficient to distinguish the Kind; fand
is (with certain reservations not yet thoroughly understood)f a sure
mark of all the other properties gof the compoundg. All Edition:
current; Page: [724] that was needful, therefore, was to make the name
of every compound express, on the first hearing, its chemical
composition; that is, to form the name of the compound, in some uniform
manner, from the names of the simple substances which enter into it as
elements. This was done, most skilfully and successfully, by the French
chemistsh, though their nomenclature has become inadequate to the
convenient expression of the very complicated compounds now known to
chemistsh. The only thing left unexpressed by them was the exact
proportion in which the elements were combined; and even this, since the
establishment of the atomic theory, it has been found possible to
express by a simple adaptation of their phraseology.

But where the characters which must be taken into consideration, in
order sufficiently to designate the Kind, are too numerous to be all
signified in the derivation of the name, and where no one of them is of
such preponderant importance as to justify its being singled out to be
so indicated, we may avail ourselves of a subsidiary resource. Though we
cannot indicate the distinctive properties of the Kind, we may indicate
its nearest natural affinities, by incorporating into its name the name
of the proximate natural group of which it is one of the species. On
this principle is founded the admirable binary nomenclature of botany
and zoology. In this nomenclature the name of every species consists of
the name of the genus, or natural group next above it, with a word added
to distinguish the particular species. iThei last portion of the
compound name is sometimes taken from some one of the peculiarities in
which that species differs from others of the genus; as Clematis
integrifolia, Potentilla alba, Viola palustris, Artemisia vulgaris;
sometimes from a circumstance of an historical nature, as Narcissus
poeticus, Potentilla tormentilla (indicating that the plant jis that
whichj was formerly known by the latter name), Exacum Candollii (from
the fact that De Candolle was its first discoverer); and sometimes the
word is purely conventional, as Thlaspi bursapastoris, Ranunculus thora;
it is of little consequence which; since the second, or as it is usually
called, the specific name, could at most express, independently of
convention, no more than a very small portion of the connotation of the
term. But by adding to this the name of the superior genus, we kmayk
make the best amends we can for the impossibility of so contriving the
name as to express all the distinctive characters of the Kind. We make
it, at all events, express as many of those characters as are common to
the proximate natural group in which the Kind is included. If even those
common characters are so numerous or so little familiar as to require a
further extension of the same resource, we might, instead of a binary,
adopt a ternary nomenclature, employing not only the name of the genus,
but that of the next natural group in order of generality above the
genus, commonly Edition: current; Page: [725] called the Family. This
lwasl done in the mineralogical nomenclature proposed by Professor Mohs.
“The names framed by himm were not composed of two, but of three
elements, designating respectively the Species, the Genus, and the
Order; thus he has such species as Rhombohedral Lime Haloide, Octohedral
Fluor Haloide, Prismatic Hal Baryte.”* The binary construction, however,
has been found sufficient in botany and zoology, the only sciences in
which this general principle has hitherto been successfully adopted in
the construction of a nomenclature.

Besides the advantage which this principle of nomenclature possesses, in
giving to the names of species the greatest quantity of independent
significance which the circumstances of the case admit of, it answers
the further end of immensely economizing the use of names, and
preventing an otherwise intolerable burden on the memory. When the names
of species become extremely numerous, some artifice (as Dr. Whewell†
observes) becomes absolutely necessary to make it possible to recollect
or apply them.

The known species of plants, for example, were ten thousand in the time
of Linnæus, and are now probably sixty thousand. It would be useless to
endeavour to frame and employ separate names for each of these species.
The division of the objects into a subordinated system of classification
enables us to introduce a Nomenclature which does not require this
enormous number of names. Each of the genera has its name, and the
species are marked by the addition of some epithet to the name of the
genus. In this manner about seventeen hundred generic names, with a
moderate number of specific names, were found by Linnæus sufficient to
designate with precision all the species of vegetables known at his
time.

And though the number of generic names has since greatly increased, it
has not increased in anything like the proportion of the multiplication
of known species.

Edition: current; Page: [726]


CHAPTER VIII: Of Classification by Series

§ 1. [Natural groups should be arranged in a natural series] Thus far,
we have considered the principles of scientific classification so far
only as relates to the formation of natural groups; and at this point
most of those who have attempted a theory of natural arrangement,
including, among the rest, Dr. Whewell, have stopped. There remains,
however, another, and a not less important portion of the theory, which
has not yet, aasa far as I am aware, been systematically treated of by
any writer except M. Comte.[*] This is, the arrangement of the natural
groups into a natural series.*

The end of Classification, as an instrument for the investigation of
nature, is (as before stated) to make us think of those objects
together, which have the greatest number of important common properties;
and which, therefore, we have oftenest occasion, in the course of our
inductions, for taking into joint consideration. Our ideas of objects
are thus brought into the order most conducive to the successful
prosecution of inductive inquiries generally. But when the purpose is to
facilitate some particular inductive inquiry, more is required. To be
instrumental to that purpose, the classification must bring those
objects together, the simultaneous contemplation of which is likely to
throw most light upon the particular subject. That subject being the
laws of some phenomenon or some set of connected phenomena; the very
phenomenon Edition: current; Page: [727] or set of phenomena in question
must be chosen as the groundwork of the classification.

The requisites of a classification intended to facilitate the study of a
particular phenomenon, are, first, to bring into one class all Kinds of
things which exhibit that phenomenon, in whatever variety of forms or
degrees; and secondly, to arrange cthosec Kinds in a series according to
the degree in which they exhibit it, beginning with those which exhibit
most of it, and terminating with those which exhibit least. The
principal example, as yet, of such a classification, is afforded by
comparative anatomy and physiology, from which, therefore, our
illustrations shall be taken.

§ 2. [The arrangement of the natural series should follow the degrees of
the main phenomenon] The object being supposed to be, the investigation
of the laws of animal life; the first step, after aforminga bthe most
distinct conception of the phenomenon itself, possible in the existing
state of our knowledge,b is to erect into one great class (that of
animals) all the cknown Kinds of beingsc where that phenomenon presents
itself; in however various combinations with other properties, and in
however different degrees. As some of these Kinds manifest the dgenerald
phenomenon of animal life in a very high degree, and others in an
insignificant degree, barely sufficient for recognition; we must, in the
next place, arrange the various Kinds in a series, following one another
according to the degrees in which they severally exhibit the phenomenon;
beginning therefore with man, and ending with the most imperfect kinds
of zoophytes.

This is merely saying that we should put the instances, from which the
law is to be inductively collected, into the order which is implied in
one of the four Methods of Experimental Inquiry discussed in the
preceding Book; the fourth Method, that of Concomitant Variations. Ase
formerly remarked, this is often the only method to which recourse can
be had, with assurance of a true conclusion, in cases in which we have
but limited means of effecting, by artificial fexperimentsf, a
separation of circumstances usually conjoined. The principle of the
method is, that facts which increase or diminish together, and disappear
together, are either cause and effect, or effects of a common cause.
When it has been ascertained that this relation really subsists between
the variations, a connexion between the facts themselves may be
confidently laid down, either as a law of nature or only as an empirical
law, according to circumstances.

Edition: current; Page: [728]
That the application of this Method must be preceded by the formation of
such a series as we have described, is too obvious to need being pointed
out; and the mere arrangement of a set of objects in a series, according
to the degrees in which they exhibit some fact of which we are seeking
the law, is too naturally suggested by the necessities of our inductive
operations, to require any lengthened illustration here. But there are
cases in which the arrangement required for the special purpose, becomes
the determining principle of the classification of the same objects for
general purposes. This will naturally and properly happen, when those
laws of the objects which are sought in the special inquiry enact so
principal a part in the general character and history of those
objects—exercise so much influence in determining all the phenomena of
which they are either the agents or the theatre—that all other
differences existing among the objects are fittingly regarded as mere
modifications of the one phenomenon sought; effects determined by the
cooperation of some incidental circumstance with the laws of that
phenomenon. Thus in the case of animated beings, the differences between
one class of animals and another may reasonably be considered as mere
modifications of the general phenomenon, animal life; modifications
arising either from the different degrees in which that phenomenon is
manifested in different animals, or from the intermixture of the effects
of incidental causes peculiar to the nature of each, with the effects
produced by the general laws of life; those laws still exercising a
predominant influence over the result. Such being the case, no other
inductive inquiry respecting animals can be successfully carried on,
except in subordination to the great inquiry into the universal laws of
animal life; and the classification of animals best suited to that one
purpose, is the most suitable to all the other purposes of zoological
science.

§ 3. [Following the degrees of the main phenomenon implies the
assumption of a type species] To establish a classification of this
sort, or even to aapprehenda it when established, requires the power of
recognising the essential similarity of a phenomenon, in its minuter
degrees and obscurer forms, with what is called the same phenomenon in
the greatest perfection of its development; that is, bof identifying
with each other all phenomena which differ only in degree, and in
properties whichb we suppose to be caused by difference of degree. In
order to recognise this identity, or in other words, this exact
similarity of quality, the assumption of a type-species is
indispensable. We must consider as the type of the class, that among the
Kinds included in it, which exhibits the properties constitutive of the
class, in the highest degree; conceiving the other varieties as
instances of degeneracy, as it were, from that type; deviations from it
by inferior intensity of the characteristic Edition: current; Page:
[729] property or properties. For every phenomenon is best studied
(cæteris paribus) where it exists in the greatest intensity. It is there
that the effects which either depend on it, or depend on the same causes
with it, will also exist in the greatest degree. It is there,
consequently, and only there, that those effects of it, or joint effects
with it, can become fully known to us, so that we may clearn toc
recognise their smaller degrees, or even their mere rudiments, in cases
in which the direct study would have been difficult or even impossible.
Not to mention that the phenomenon in its higher degrees may be attended
by effects or collateral circumstances which in its smaller degrees do
not occur at all, requiring for their production in any sensible amount
a dgreater degree of intensity of the cause than is there met withd. In
man, for example, (the species in which both the phenomenon of animal
and that of organic life exist in the highest degree,) many subordinate
phenomena develop themselves in the course of his animated existence,
which the inferior evarietiese of animals do not show. The knowledge of
these properties may fneverthelessf be of great avail towards the
discovery of the conditions and glawsg of the general phenomenon of
life, which is common to man with those inferior animals. And they are,
even, rightly considered hash properties of animated nature itself;
because they may evidently be affiliated to the general laws of animated
nature; because we may fairly presume that some rudiments or feeble
degrees of those properties would be recognised in all animals by more
perfect organs, or even by more perfect instruments, than ours; and
because those may be correctly termed properties of a class, which a
thing exhibits exactly in proportion as it belongs to the class, that
is, in proportion as it possesses the main attributes constitutive of
the class.

§ 4. [How the divisions of the series should be determined] It remains
to consider how the internal distribution of the series may most
properly take place: in what manner it should be divided into Orders,
Families, and Genera.

The main principle of division must of course be natural affinity; the
classes formed must be natural groups: and the formation of these has
already been sufficiently treated of. But the principles of natural
grouping must be applied in subordination to the principle of a natural
series. The groups must not be so constituted as to place in the same
group things which ought to occupy different points of the general
scale. The precaution necessary to be observed for this purpose is, that
the primary divisions must be grounded not on all distinctions
indiscriminately, but on those which correspond to Edition: current;
Page: [730] variations in the degree of the main phenomenon. The series
of Animated Nature should be broken into parts at thea points where the
variation in the degree of intensity of the main phenomenon (as marked
by its principal characters, Sensation, Thought, Voluntary Motion, &c.)
begins to be attended by conspicuous changes in the miscellaneous
properties of the animal. Such well-marked changes take place, for
example, where the class Mammalia ends; at the points where Fishes are
separated from Insects, Insects from Mollusca, &c. When so formed, the
primary natural groups will compose the series by mere juxtaposition,
without redistribution; each of them corresponding to a definite
bportionb of the scale. In like manner each family should, if possible,
be so subdivided, that one portion of it shall stand higher and the
other lower, though of course contiguous, in the general scale; and only
when this is impossible is it allowable to ground the remaining
subdivisions on characters having no determinable connexion with the
main phenomenon.

Where the principal phenomenon csoc far transcends in importance all
other properties on which a classification could be grounded, as it does
in the case of animated existence, any considerable deviation from the
rule last laid down is in general sufficiently guarded against by the
first principle of a natural arrangement, that of forming the groups
according to the most important characters. All attempts at a scientific
classification of animals, since dfirst their anatomy and physiology
wered successfully studied, have been framed with a certain degree of
instinctive reference to a natural series, and have accorded in many
more points than they have differed, with the classification which would
most naturally have been grounded on such a series. But the accordance
has not always been complete; and it still is often a matter of
discussion, which of several classifications best accords with the true
scale of intensity of the main phenomenon. eCuvier, for example, has
been justly criticisede for having formed his natural groups with an
undue degree of reference to the mode of alimentation, a circumstance
directly connected only with organic life, and fnot leading to the
arrangement most appropriatef for the purposes of an investigation of
the laws of animal life, since both carnivorous and herbivorous or
frugivorous animals are found at almost every degree in the scale of
animal perfection.g hBlainville’s classification has been considered by
high authorities to be free from this defect;h as Edition: current;
Page: [731] representing correctly, by the mere order of the iprincipali
groups, the successive degeneracy of animal nature from its highest to
its most imperfect exemplification.

§ 5. [Zoology affords the completest type of scientific classification]
A classification of any large portion of the field of nature in
conformity to the foregoing principles, has hitherto been found
practicable only in one great instance, that of animals. In the case
aevena of vegetables, the natural arrangement has not been carried
beyond the formation of natural groups. Naturalists have found, and
probably will continue to find it impossible to form those groups into
bany series, the terms of whichb correspond to real gradations in the
phenomenon of vegetative or organic life. Such a difference of degree
may be traced between the class of Vascular Plants and that of Cellular,
which includes lichens, algæ, and other substances whose organization is
simpler and more rudimentary than that of the higher order of
vegetables, and which therefore approach nearer to mere inorganic
nature. But when we rise much above this point, we do not find any
csufficientc difference in the degree in which different plants possess
the properties of organization and life. The dicotyledons dare of more
complex structure, and somewhat more perfect organization, than the
monocotyledons: and some dicotyledonous families, such as the Compositæ,
are rather more complex in their organization than the rest. But the
differences are not of a marked character, and do not promise to throw
any particular light upon the conditions and laws of vegetable life and
development. If they did, the classification of vegetables would have to
be made, like that of animals, with reference to the scale or series
indicated.d

Although the scientific arrangements of organic nature afford as yet the
only complete example of the true principles of rational classification,
whether as to the formation of groups or of series, those principles are
applicable to all cases in which mankind are called upon to bring the
various parts of any extensive subject into mental co-ordination. They
are as much to the point when objects are to be classed for purposes of
art or business, Edition: current; Page: [732] as for those of science.
The proper arrangement, for example, of a code of laws, depends on the
same scientific conditions as the classifications in natural history;
nor could there be a ebettere preparatory discipline for that important
function, than the study of the principles of a natural arrangement, not
only in the abstract, but in their actual application to the class of
phenomena for which they were first elaborated, and which are still the
best school for learning their use. Of this the great authority on
codification, Bentham, was perfectly aware: and his early Fragment on
Government,[*] the admirable introduction to a series of writings
unequalled in theirf department, contains clear and just views (as far
as they go) on the meaning of a natural arrangement, such as could
scarcely have occurred to any one who lived anterior to the age of
Linnæus gand Bernard deg Jussieu.

Edition: current; Page: [733]


BOOK V: ON FALLACIES

Edition: current; Page: [734]
a“Errare non modo affirmando et negando, sed etiam sentiendo, et in
tacitâ hominum cogitatione contingit.” Hobbes, Computatio sive Logica
[in Opera Philosophica. Ed. W. Molesworth. London: Bohn, 1839-45], Chap.
v [Vol I, p. 49].

“Il leur semble qu’il n’y a qu’à douter par fantaisie, et qu’il n’y a
qu’à dire en général que notre nature est infirme; que notre esprit est
plein d’aveuglement; qu’il faut avoir un grand soin de se défaire de ses
préjugés, et autres choses semblables. Ils pensent que cela suffit pour
ne plus se laisser séduire à ses sens, et pour ne plus se tromper du
tout. Il ne suffit pas de dire que l’esprit est foible, il faut lui
faire sentir ses foiblesses. Ce n’est pas assez de dire qu’il est sujet
à l’erreur, il faut lui découvrir en quoi consistent ses erreurs.”
Malebranche, Recherche de la Vérité [p. 93].b

Edition: current; Page: [735]


CHAPTER I: Of Fallacies in General

§ 1. [Theory of fallacies a necessary part of logic] It is a maxim of
the schoolmen, that “contrariorum eadem est scientia:” we never really
know what a thing is, unless we are also able to give a sufficient
account of its opposite. Conformably to this maxim, one considerable
section, in most treatises on Logic, is devoted to the subject of
Fallacies; and the practice is too well worthy of observance, to allow
of our departing from it. The philosophy of reasoning, to be complete,
ought to comprise the theory of bad as well as of good reasoning.

We have endeavoured to ascertain the principles by which the sufficiency
of any proof can be tested, and by which the nature and amount of
evidence needful to prove any given conclusion can be determined
beforehand. If these principles were adhered to, then although the
number and value of the truths ascertained would abe limited by the
opportunities, or bya the industry, ingenuity, and patience, of the
individual inquirer, at least error would not be embraced instead of
truth. But the general consent of mankind, founded onb their experience,
vouches for their being far indeed from even this negative kind of
perfection in the employment of their reasoning powers.

In the conduct of life—in the cpracticalc business of mankind—wrong
inferences, incorrect interpretations of experience, unless after much
culture of the thinking faculty, are absolutely inevitable: and with
most people, after the highest degree of culture they ever attaind, such
erroneous inferences, producing ecorrespondinge errors in conduct, are
lamentably frequentd. Even in the speculations to which feminent
intellects have systematically devotedf themselves, and in reference to
which the collective mind of the scientific world is always gat handg to
aid the efforts and hcorrecth the aberrations of Edition: current; Page:
[736] individuals, it is only from the more perfect sciences, from those
of which the subject-matter is the least complicated, that opinions not
resting on a correct induction have at length, generally speaking, been
expelled. In the departments of inquiry relating to the more complex
phenomena of inaturei, jandj especially those of which the subject is
man, whether as a moral and intellectual, a social, or even as a
physical being; the diversity of opinions still prevalent among
instructed persons, and the equal confidence with which those of the
most contrary ways of thinking cling to their respective tenets, arek
proof not only that right modes of philosophizing are not yet generally
adopted on those subjects, but that wrong ones are: that linquirersl
have not only in general missed the truth, but have often embraced
error; that even the most cultivated portion of our mspeciesm have not
yet learned to abstain from drawing conclusions nwhich the evidence does
not owarranton.

The only complete safeguard against reasoning ill, is the habit of
reasoning well; familiarity with pthe principlesp of correct reasoning,
and practice in applying those principles. It is, however, not
unimportant to consider what are the most common modes of bad reasoning;
by what appearances the mind is most likely to be seduced from the
observance of true principles of induction; what, in short, are the most
common and most dangerous varieties of Apparent Evidence, whereby
qpersonsq are misled into opinions for which there does not exist
evidence really conclusive.

A catalogue of the varieties of apparent evidence which are not real
evidence, is an enumeration of Fallacies. Without such an enumeration,
therefore, the present work would be wanting in an essential point. And
while writers who included in their theory of reasoning nothing more
than ratiocination, have, in consistency with this limitation, confined
their remarks to the fallacies which have their seat in that portion of
the process of investigation; we, who profess to treat of the whole
process, must add to our directions for performing it rrightlyr,
warnings against performing it swronglys in any of its parts: whether
the ratiocinative or the experimental portion of it be in fault, or the
fault lie in dispensing with ratiocination and induction altogether.

§ 2. [Casual mistakes are not fallacies] In considering the sources of
unfounded inference, it is unnecessary to reckon the errors which arise,
not Edition: current; Page: [737] from a wrong method, anora even from
ignorance of the right one, but from a casual lapse, through hurry or
inattention, in the application of the true principles of induction.
Such errors, like the accidental mistakes in casting up a sum, do not
call for philosophical analysis or classification; theoretical
considerations can throw no light upon the means of avoiding them. In
the present treatise our attention is required, not to mere inexpertness
in performing the operation in the right way, (the only remedies for
which are increased attention and more sedulous practice,) but to the
modes of performing it in a way fundamentally wrong; the conditions
under which the human mind persuades itself that it has sufficient
grounds for a conclusion which it has not arrived at by any of the
legitimate methods of induction—which it has not, even carelessly or
overhastily, endeavoured to test by those legitimate methods.

§ 3. [The moral sources of erroneous opinion, how related to the
intellectual] There is another branch of what may be called the
Philosophy of Error, which must be mentioned here, though only to be
excluded from our subject. The sources of erroneous opinions are
twofold, moral and intellectual. Of these, the moral do not fall within
the compass of this work. They may be classed under two general heads;
Indifference to the attainment of truth, and Bias: of which last the
most common case is that in which we are biassed by our wishes; but the
liability is almost as great to the undue adoption of a conclusion which
is disagreeable to us, as of one which is agreeable, if it be of a
nature to bring into action any of the stronger passions. Persons of
timid character are the more predisposed to believe any statement, the
more it is calculated to alarm them. Indeed it is a psychological law,
deducible from the most general laws of the mental constitution of man,
that any strong passion renders us credulous as to the existence of
objects suitable to excite it.

But the moral causes of aopinions, though with most persons the most
powerful of alla, are but remote causes: they do not act bdirectlyb, but
by means of the intellectual causes; to which they bear the same
relation that the circumstances called, in the theory of medicine,
predisposing causes, bear to exciting causes. Indifference to truth
cannot, in and by itself, produce erroneous belief; it operates by
preventing the mind from collecting the proper evidences, or from
applying to them the test of a legitimate and rigid induction; by which
omission it is exposed unprotected to the influence of Edition: current;
Page: [738] any species of apparent evidence which coffers itselfc
spontaneously, or which is elicited by that smaller quantity of trouble
which the mind may be dwillingd to take. As little is Bias a direct
source of wrong conclusions. We cannot believe a proposition only by
wishing, or only by dreading, to believe it. The most violent
inclination to find a set of propositions true, will not enable the
weakest of mankind to believe them without a vestige of intellectual
grounds—without any, even apparent, evidence. It eactse indirectly, by
placing the intellectual grounds of belief in an incomplete or distorted
shape before his eyes. It makes him shrink from the irksome labour of a
rigorous induction, when he has a misgiving that its result may be
disagreeable; and in such examination as he does institute, it makes him
exert that which is in a certain measure voluntary, his attention,
unfairly, giving a larger share of it to the evidence which seems
favourable to the desired conclusion, a smaller to that which seems
unfavourable. fIt operates, too, by making him look out eagerly for
reasons, or apparent reasons, to support opinions which are conformable,
or resist those which are repugnant, to his interests or feelings; and
when the interests or feelings are common to great numbers of persons,
reasons are accepted and pass current, which would not for a moment be
listened to in that character if the conclusion had nothing more
powerful than its reasons to speak in its behalf. The natural or
acquired partialities of mankind are continually throwing up
philosophical theories, the sole recommendation of which consists in the
premises they afford for proving cherished doctrines, or justifying
favourite feelings: and when any one of these theories has been so
thoroughly discredited as no longer to serve the purpose, another is
always ready to take its place. This propensity, when exercised in
favour of any widely-spread persuasion or sentiment, is often decorated
with complimentary epithets; and the contrary habit of keeping the
judgment in complete subordination to evidence, is stigmatized by
various hard names, as scepticism, immorality, coldness,
hard-heartedness, and similar expressions according to the nature of the
case. But though the opinions of the generality of mankind, when not
dependent on mere habit and inculcation, have their root much more in
the inclinations than in the intellect, it is a necessary condition to
the triumph of the moral bias that it should first pervert the
understanding. Everyf erroneous inference, though originating in moral
causes, involves the intellectual operation of admitting insufficient
evidence Edition: current; Page: [739] as sufficient; and whoever gwasg
on his guard against all kinds of inconclusive evidence which can be
mistaken for conclusive, would be in no danger of being led into error
even by the strongest bias. There hareh minds so strongly fortified on
the intellectual side, that they could not blind themselves to the light
of truth, however really desirous of doing so; they could not, with all
the inclination in the world, pass off upon themselves bad arguments for
good ones. If the sophistry of the intellect could be rendered
impossible, that of the feelings, having no instrument to work with,
would be powerless. A comprehensive classification of all those things
which, not being evidence, are liable to appear such to the
understanding, will, therefore, iof itselfi include all errors of
judgment arising from moral causes, to the exclusion only of errors of
practice committed against better knowledge.

To examine, then, the various kinds of apparent evidence which are not
evidence at all, and of apparently conclusive evidence which do not
really amount to conclusiveness, is the object of that part of our
inquiry into which we are about to enter.

The subject is not beyond the compass of classification and
comprehensive survey. The things, indeed, which are not evidence of any
given conclusion, are manifestly endless, and this negative property,
having no dependence on any positive ones, cannot be made the groundwork
of a real classification. But the things which, not being evidence, are
susceptible of being mistaken for it, are capable of a classification
having reference to the positive property which they possess of
appearing to be evidence. We may arrange them, at our choice, on either
of two principles; according to the cause which makes them appear jto
bej evidence, not being so; or according to the particular kind of
evidence which they simulate. The Classification of Fallacies which will
be attempted in the ensuing chapter, is founded on these considerations
jointly.

Edition: current; Page: [740]


CHAPTER II: Classification of Fallacies

§ 1. [On what criteria a classification of fallacies should be grounded]
In attempting to establish certain general distinctions which shall mark
out from one another the various kinds of Fallacious Evidence, we
propose to ourselves an altogether different aim from that of several
eminent thinkers, who have given, under the name of Political or other
Fallacies, a mere enumeration of a certain number of erroneous opinions;
false general propositions which happen to be often met with; loci
communes of bad arguments on some particular subject. Logic is not
concerned with the false opinions which apeoplea happen to entertain,
but with the manner in which they come to entertain them. The question
bis not, what facts have at any time beenb erroneously supposed to bec
proof of certain other facts, but what property in the facts it was
which led dany oned to this mistaken supposition.

When a fact is supposed, though incorrectly, to be evidentiary of, or a
mark of, some other fact, there must be a cause of the error; the
supposed evidentiary fact must be connected in some particular manner
with the fact of which it is deemed evidentiary,—must stand in some
particular relation to it, without which relation it would not be
regarded in that light. The relation may either be one resulting from
the simple contemplation of the two facts side by side with one another,
or it may depend on some process ofe mind, by which a previous
association has been established between them. Some peculiarity of
relation, however, there must be; the fact which can, even by the
wildest aberration, be supposed to prove another fact, must stand in
some special position with regard to it; and if we could ascertain and
define that special position, we should perceive the origin of the
error.

We cannot regard one fact as evidentiary of another, unless we believe
that the two are always, or in the majority of cases, conjoined. If we
believe A to be evidentiary of B, if fwhenf we see A we are inclined to
infer B from it, the reason is because we believe that wherever A is, B
also either always or for the most part exists, either as an antecedent,
a consequent, or a concomitant. If when we see A we are inclined not to
expect B—if we believe A Edition: current; Page: [741] to be evidentiary
of the absence of B—it is because we believe that where A is, B either
is never, or at least seldom, found. Erroneous conclusions, in short, no
less than correct conclusions, have an invariable relation to a general
formula, either expressed or tacitly implied. When we infer some fact
from some other fact which does not really prove it, we either have
admitted, or, if we maintained consistency, ought to admit, some
groundless general proposition respecting the conjunction of the two
phenomena.

For every property, therefore, in facts, or in our mode of considering
facts, which leads us to believe that they are habitually conjoined when
they are not, or that they are not when in reality they are, there is a
corresponding kind of Fallacy; and an enumeration of fallacies would
consist in a specification of those properties in facts, and those
peculiarities in our gmodeg of considering them, which give rise to this
erroneous opinion.

§ 2. [The five classes of fallacies] To begin, then; the supposed
connexion, or repugnance, between the two facts, may either be a
conclusion from evidence (that is, from some other proposition or
propositions), or may be admitted without any such ground; admitted, as
the phrase is, on its own evidence; embraced as self-evident, as an
axiomatic truth. This gives rise to the first great distinction, that
between Fallacies of Inference, and Fallacies of Simple Inspection. In
the latter division must be included not only all cases in which a
proposition is believed and held for true, literally without any
extrinsic evidence, either of specific experience or general reasoning;
but those more frequent cases in which simple inspection creates a
presumption in favour of a proposition; not sufficient for belief, but
sufficient to cause the strict principles of a regular induction to be
dispensed with, and creating a predisposition to believe it on evidence
which would be seen to be insufficient if no such presumption existed.
This class, comprehending the whole of what may be termed Natural
Prejudices, and which I shall call indiscriminately Fallacies of Simple
Inspection or Fallacies à priori, shall be placed at the head of our
list.

Fallacies of Inference, or erroneous conclusions from supposed evidence,
must be subdivided according to the nature of the apparent evidence from
which the conclusions are drawn; or (what is the same thing) according
to the particular kind of sound argument which the fallacy in question
simulates. But there is a distinction to be first drawn, which does not
answer to any of the divisions of sound arguments, but arises out of the
nature of bad ones. We may know exactly what our evidence is, and yet
draw a false conclusion from it; we may conceivea precisely what our
premises are, what alleged matters of fact, or general principles, are
the foundation of our inference; and yet, because the premises are
false, or because we have inferred from them what they will not support,
our conclusion may be erroneous. But a Edition: current; Page: [742]
case, perhaps even more frequent, is that in which the error arises from
not conceiving our premises with due clearness, that is, (as shown in
the preceeding Book,*) with due fixity: forming one conception of our
evidence when we collect or receive it, and another when we make use of
it; or unadvisedly, and in general unconsciously, substituting, as we
proceed, different premises in the place of those with which we set
outb, or a different conclusion for that which we undertook to proveb.
This gives existence to a class of fallacies which may be justly termed
c(in a phrase borrowed from Bentham)c Fallacies of Confusion;[*]
comprehending, among others, all those which have their source in
language, whether arising from the vagueness or ambiguity of our terms,
or from casual associations with them.

When the fallacy is not one of Confusion, that is, when the proposition
believed, and the evidence on which it is believed, are steadily
apprehended and unambiguously expressed, there remain to be made two
cross divisionsd. The Apparent Evidence may be either particular facts,
or foregone generalizations; that is, the process may simulate either
simple Induction, or Deduction; and again, the evidence, whether
consisting of esupposed facts or ofe general propositions, may be false
in itself, or, being true, may fail to bear out the conclusion attempted
to be founded on it. This gives us first, Fallacies of Induction and
Fallacies of Deduction, and then a subdivision of each of these,
according as the supposed evidence is false, or true but inconclusive.

Fallacies of Induction, where the facts on which the induction proceeds
are erroneous, may be termed Fallacies off Observation. The term is not
strictly accurate, or rather, not accurately coextensive with the class
of fallacies which gIg propose to designate by it. Induction is not
always grounded on facts immediately observed, but sometimes on facts
inferred: and when these last are erroneous, the error hmay not beh, in
the literal sense of the term, an instance of bad observation, but of
bad inference. It will be convenient, however, to make only one class of
all ithe inductions ofi which the error lies in not sufficiently
ascertaining the facts on which the theory is grounded; whether the
cause of failure be mal-observation, or simple non-observation, and
whether the mal-observation be direct, or by means of intermediate marks
which do not prove what they are supposed to prove. And in the absence
of any comprehensive term to denote the ascertainment, by whatever
means, of the facts on which an induction is grounded, I will venture to
retain for this class of fallacies, under the explanation jnowj given,
the title kofk Fallacies ofl Observation.

Edition: current; Page: [743]
The other class of inductive fallacies, in which the facts are correct,
but the conclusion not warranted by them, are properly denominated
Fallacies ofm Generalization: and these, again, fall into various
subordinate classes or natural groups, some of which will be enumerated
in their proper place.

When we now turn to Fallacies of Deduction, namely, those modes of
incorrect argumentation in which the premises, or some of them, are
general propositions, and the argument a ratiocination; we may of course
subdivide these also into two species similar to the two preceding,
namely, those which proceed on false premises, and those of which the
premises, though true, do not support the conclusion. But of these
species, the first must necessarily fall nundern some one of the heads
already enumerated. For the error must be either in those premises which
are general propositions, or in those which assert individual facts. In
the former case it is an Inductive Fallacy, of one or the other class;
in the latter it is a Fallacy ofo Observation: unless, in either case,
the erroneous premise has been assumed on simple inspection, in which
case the fallacy is à priori. Or finally, the premises, of whichever
kind they are, may never have been conceived in so distinct a manner as
to produce any clear consciousness by what means they were arrived at;
as in the case of what is called reasoning in a circle: and then the
fallacy is ponep of Confusion.

There qremainq, therefore, as the only class of fallacies having
properly their seat in deduction, those in which the premises of the
ratiocination do not bear out its conclusion; the various cases, in
short, of vicious argumentation, provided against by the rules of the
syllogism. We shall call these, Fallacies ofr Ratiocination.

We have thus five distinguishable classes of fallacy, which may be
expressed in the following synoptic table:

_u_MS Bad
_t_MS Bad
_s_MS Bad
Fallacies
{ of Simple Inspection
1. Fallacies _à priori._
{ of Inference
{ from evidence distinctly conceived
{ Inductive Fallacies
{ 2. Fallacies of_s_ Observation.
{ 3. Fallacies of_t_ Generalization.
{ Deductive Fallacies }
4. Fallacies of_u_ Ratiocination.
{ from evidence indistinctly conceived }
5. Fallacies of Confusion.

Edition: current; Page: [744]
§ 3. [The reference of a fallacy to one or aanothera class is sometimes
arbitrary] We must not, however, expect to find that men’s actual errors
always, or even commonly, fall so unmistakeably under some one of these
classes, as to be incapable of being referred to any other. Erroneous
arguments do not admit of such a sharply cut division as valid arguments
do. An argument fully stated, with all its steps distinctly set out, in
language not susceptible of misunderstanding, must, if it be erroneous,
be so in some one bof these five modes unequivocallyb: or indeed of the
first four, since the fifth, on such a supposition, would vanish. But it
is not in the nature of bad reasoning to express itself thus
unambiguously. When a sophist, whether he is imposing on himself or
attempting to impose on others, can be constrained to throw his
sophistry into so distinct a form, it needs, in a large proportion of
cases, no further exposure.

In all arguments, everywhere but in the schools, some of the links are
suppressed; à fortiori when the arguer either intends to deceive, or is
a lame and inexpert thinker, little accustomed to bring his reasoning
processes to any test: and it is in those steps of the reasoning which
are made in this tacit and half-conscious, or even wholly unconscious
manner, that the error oftenest lurks. In order to detect the fallacy,
the proposition thus silently assumed must be supplied; but the
reasoner, most likely, has never really asked himself what he was
assuming: his confuter, cunless permittedc to extort it from him by the
Socratic mode of interrogation, must himself judge what the suppressed
premise ought to be in order to support the conclusion. And hence, in
the words of Archbishop Whately,

it must be often a matter of doubt, or rather, of arbitrary choice, not
only to which genus each kind of fallacy should be referred, but even to
which kind to refer any one individual fallacy; for since, in any course
of argument, one premise is usually suppressed, it frequently happens in
the case of a fallacy, that the hearers are left to the alternative of
supplying either a premise which is not true, or else, one which does
not prove the conclusion: e.g. if a man expatiates on the distress of
the country, and thence argues that the government is tyrannical, we
must suppose him to assume either that ‘every distressed country is
under a tyranny,’ which is a manifest falsehood, or merely that ‘every
country under a tyranny is distressed,’ which, however true, proves
nothing, the middle term being undistributed.

The former would be ranked, in our distribution, among fallacies ofd
generalization, the latter among those ofe ratiocination. “Which are we
to suppose the speaker meant us to understand? Surely” (if he understood
himself) Edition: current; Page: [745] “just whichever each of his
hearers might happen to prefer: some might assent to the false premise;
others allow the unsound syllogism.”[*]

Almost all fallacies, therefore, might in strictness be brought under
our fifth class, Fallacies of Confusion. A fallacy can seldom be
absolutely referred to any of the other classes; we can only say, that
if all the links were filled up which should be capable of being
supplied in a valid argument, it would either stand thus (forming a
fallacy of one class), or thus (a fallacy of another); or at furthest we
may say, that the conclusion is most likely to have originated in a
fallacy of such and such a class. Thus in fthe illustration just
quotedf, the error committed may be traced with most probability to a
fallacy ofg generalization; that of mistaking an uncertain mark, or
piece of evidence, for a certain one; concluding from an effect to some
one of its possible causes, when there are others which would have been
equally capable of producing it.

Yet, though the five classes run into each other, and a particular error
often seems to be arbitrarily assigned to one of them rather than to any
of the rest, there is considerable use in so distinguishing them. We
shall find it convenient to set apart, as Fallacies of Confusion, those
of which confusion is the most obvious characteristic; in which no other
cause can be assigned for the mistake committed, than neglect or
inability to state the question properly, and to apprehend the evidence
with definiteness and precision. In the remaining four classes hIh shall
place not only thei cases in which the evidence is clearly seen to be
what it is, and yet a wrong conclusion drawn from it, but also those in
which, although there be confusion, the confusion is not the sole cause
of the error, but there is some shadow of a ground for it in the nature
of the evidence itself. And in distributing these cases of partial
confusion among the four classes, jIj shall, when there can be any
hesitation as to the precise seat of the fallacy, suppose it to kbek in
that part of the process in which, from the nature of the case, and the
ltendenciesl of the human mind, an error would in the particular
circumstances be the most probable.

After these observations we shall proceed, without further preamble, to
consider the five classes in their order.

Edition: current; Page: [746]


CHAPTER III: Fallacies of Simple Inspection; or a priori Fallacies

§ 1. [Character of this class of fallacies] The tribe of errors of which
we are to treat in the first instance, are those in which no actual
inference takes place at all: the proposition (it cannot in such cases
be called a conclusion) being embraced, not as proved, but as requiring
no proof; as a self-evident truth; or else as having such intrinsic
verisimilitude, that external evidence not in itself amounting to proof,
is sufficient in aid of the antecedent presumption.

An attempt to treat this subject comprehensively would be a
transgression of the bounds prescribed to this work, since it would
necessitate the inquiry which, more than any other, is the grand
question of awhat is calleda metaphysics, viz. What are the propositions
which may reasonably be received without proof? That there must be some
such propositions all are agreed, since there cannot be an infinite
series of proof, a chain suspended from nothing. But to determine what
these propositions are, is the opus magnum of the bmore reconditeb
mental philosophy. Two principal divisions of opinion on the subject
have divided the schools of philosophy from its first dawn. The one
recognises no ultimate premises but the facts of our subjective
consciousness; our sensations, emotions, intellectual states of mind,
and volitions. These, and whatever byc strict rules of induction can be
derived from these, it is possible, according to this theory, for us to
know; of all else we must remain in ignorance. The opposite school hold
that there are other existences, suggested indeed to our minds by these
subjective phenomena, but not inferrible from them, by any process
either of deduction or of induction; which, however, we must, by the
constitution of our mental nature, recognise as realities; and
realities, too, of a higher order than the phenomena of our
consciousness, being the efficient causes and necessary substrata of all
Phenomena. Among these entities they reckon Substances, whether matter
or spirit; from the dust under our feet to the soul, and from that tod
Deity. Edition: current; Page: [747] All these, according to them, are
preternatural or supernatural beings, having no likeness in experience,
though experience is eentirely ae manifestation of their agency. Their
existence, together with more or less of the laws to which they conform
in their operations, aref, on this theory,f apprehended and recognised
as real by the mind itself intuitively: experience (whether in the form
of sensation or of mental feeling) having no other part in the matter
than as affordingg facts which are consistent with these necessary
postulates of reason, and which are explained and accounted for by them.

As it is foreign to the purpose of the present treatise to hdecide
between these conflictingh theories, we are precluded from inquiring
into the existence, or defining the extent and limits, of knowledge à
priori, and from characterizing the kind of correct assumptioni which
the fallacy of incorrect assumption, now under consideration, simulates.
Yet since it is allowed on both sides that such assumptions are joftenj
made improperly, we may find it practicable, without entering into the
ultimate metaphysical grounds of the discussion, to state some
speculative propositions, and suggest some practical cautions,k
respecting the forms in which such unwarranted assumptions are most
likely to be made.

§ 2. [Natural prejudice of mistaking subjective laws for objective,
exemplified in popular superstitions] In the cases in which, according
to the athinkersa of the ontological school, the mind apprehends, by
intuition, things, and the laws of things, not cognizable by our
sensitive faculty; those intuitive, or supposed intuitive, perceptions
are undistinguishable from what the opposite school are accustomed to
call ideas of the mind. When they themselves say that they perceive the
things by an immediate act of a faculty given for that purpose bby their
Creatorb, it would be said of them by their opponents that they find an
idea or conception in their own minds, and from the idea or conception,
infer the existence of a corresponding objective reality. Nor would this
be an unfair statementc, but a mere version into other words of the
account given by dmany ofd themselves; and one to which the more
clear-sighted of them might, and generally do, without hesitation,
subscribe. Since, therefore, in the cases which lay the strongest
eclaimse to be Edition: current; Page: [748] examples of knowledge à
priori, the mind proceeds from the idea of a thing to the reality of the
thing itself, we cannot be surprised by finding that illicit assumptions
à priori consist in doing the same thing erroneously: in mistaking
subjective facts for objective, laws of the percipient mind for laws of
the perceived object, properties of the ideas or conceptions for
properties of the things conceived.

Accordingly, a large proportion of the erroneous thinking which exists
in the world proceeds on a tacit assumption, that the same order must
obtain among the objects in nature which obtains among our ideas of
them. That if we always think of two things together, the two things
must always exist together. That if one thing makes us think of another
as preceding or following it, that other must precede it or follow it in
actual fact. And conversely, that when we cannot conceive two things
together they cannot exist together, and that their combination may,
without further evidence, be rejected from the list of possible
occurrences.

Few persons, I am inclined to think, have reflected on the great extent
to which this fallacy has prevailed, and prevails, in the actual beliefs
and actions of mankind. For a first illustration of it, we may refer to
a large class of popular superstitutions. If any one will examine in
what fcircumstancesf most of those things agree, which in different ages
and by different portions of the human race have been considered as
omens or prognostics of some interesting event, whether calamitous or
fortunate; gthey will be foundg very generally characterized by this
peculiarity, that they cause the mind to think of that, of which they
are therefore supposed to forebode the actual occurrence. “Talk of the
devil, and he will appear,” has passed into a proverb. Talk of the
devil, that is, raise the idea, and the reality will follow. In times
when the appearance of that personage in a visible form was thought to
be no hunfrequenth occurrence, it has doubtless often happened to
persons of vivid imagination and susceptible nerves, that talking of the
devil has caused them to fancy they saw him; as, even in our imorei
incredulous days, listening to ghost stories predisposes us to see
jghostsj; and thus, as a prop to the à priori fallacy, there might come
to be added an auxiliary fallacy of malobservation, with one of false
generalization grounded on it. Fallacies of different orders often herd
or cluster together in this fashionk, one smoothing the way for
anotherk. But the origin of the superstition is evidently that which we
have assigned. In like manner it has been universally considered unlucky
to speak of misfortune. The day on which any calamity happened has been
considered an unfortunate day, and there has been a feeling everywhere,
and in some nations a religious obligation, against transacting any
important Edition: current; Page: [749] business on that day. For on
such a day our thoughts are likely to be of misfortune. For a similar
reason, any untoward occurrence in commencing an undertaking has been
considered ominous of failure; and often, doubtless, has really
contributed to it, by putting the persons engaged in the enterprise more
or less out of spirits: but the belief has equally prevailed where the
disagreeable circumstance was, independently of superstition, too
insignificant to depress the spirits by any influence of its own. All
know the story of Cæsar’s accidentally stumbling in the act of landing
on the African coast; and the presence of mind lwithl which he converted
the direful presage into a favourable one by exclaiming, “Africa, I
embrace thee.”[*] Such omens, it is true, were often conceived as
warnings of the future, given by a friendly or a hostile deity; but this
very superstition grew out of a pre-existing tendency; the god was
supposed to send, as an indication of what was to come, something which
mpeople were already disposedm to consider in that light. So in the case
of lucky or unlucky names. Herodotus tells nusn how the Greeks, on otheo
way to Mycale, were encouraged in their enterprise by the arrival of a
deputation from Samos, one of the members of which was named
Hegesistratus, the leader of armies.[†]

Cases may be pointed out in which something which could have no real
effect but to make persons think of misfortune, was regarded not merely
as a prognostic, but as something approaching to an actual cause of it.
The εὐϕήμει of the Greeks, and favete linguis, or bona verba quæso, of
the Romans, evince the care with which they endeavoured to repress the
utterance of any word expressive or suggestive of ill fortune; not from
notions of delicate politeness, to which their general mode of conduct
and feeling had very little reference, but from bonâ fide alarm lest the
event so suggested to the imagination should in fact occur. Some vestige
of a similar superstition has been known to exist among uneducated
persons even in our own day: it is thought an unchristian thing to talk
of, or suppose, the death of any person while he is alive. It is known
how careful the Romans were to avoid, by an indirect mode of speech, the
utterance of any word directly expressive of death or other calamity:
how instead of mortuus est they said vixit; and “be the event fortunate
or otherwise” instead of adverse. The name Maleventum, of which
Salmasius so sagaciously detected the Thessalian origin (Μαλόεις,
Μαλοέντος), they changed into the highly propitious denomination,
Beneventum; pEgesta into Segesta;p and Epidamnus, a name so
qinterestingq in its Edition: current; Page: [750] associations to the
reader of Thucydides,[*] they exchanged for Dyrrhachium, to escape the
perils of a word suggestive of damnum or detriment.

“If an hare cross the highway,” says Sir Thomas Browne,* “there are few
above threescore that are not perplexed thereat; which notwithstanding
is but an augurial terror, according to that received expression,
Inauspicatum dat iter oblatus lepus. And the ground of the conceit was
probably no greater than this, that a fearful animal passing by us
portended unto us something to be feared; as upon the like consideration
the meeting of a fox presaged some future imposture.” Such superstitions
as these last must be the result of study; they are too recondite for
natural or spontaneous growth. But when the attempt rwas once mader to
construct a science of predictions, any association, though severs so
faint or remote, by which an object could be connected in however
far-fetched a manner with ideas either of prosperity or of danger and
misfortune, was enough to determine its being classed among good or evil
omens.

An example of rather a different kind from any of these, but falling
under the same principle, is the famous attempt on which so much labour
and ingenuity were expended by the alchemists, to make gold potable. The
motive to this was a conceit that potable gold could be no other than
the universal medicine: and why gold? Because it was so precious. It
must have all marvellous properties as a physical substance, because the
mind was already accustomed to marvel at it.

From a similar feeling, “every substance,” says Dr. Paris,† “whose
origin is involved in mystery, has at different times been eagerly
applied to the purposes of medicine. Not long since, one of those
showers which are now known to consist of the excrements of insects,
fell in the north of Italy; the inhabitants regarded it as manna, or
some supernatural panacea, and they swallowed it with such avidity, that
it was only by extreme address that a small quantity was obtained for a
chemical examination.” The superstition, in this instance, though
doubtless partly of a religious character, probably in part also arose
from the prejudice that a wonderful thing must of course have wonderful
properties.

§ 3. [Natural prejudices, that things which we think of together must
exist together, and that what is inconceivable must be false] The
instances of à priori fallacy which we have hitherto cited belong to the
class of vulgar Edition: current; Page: [751] errors, and do not now,
nor in any but a rude age ever could, impose upon minds of any
considerable attainments. But those to which we are about to proceed,
have been, and still are, all but universally prevalenta among
bthinkersb. The same disposition to give objectivity to a law of the
mind—to suppose that what is true of our ideas of things must be true of
the things themselves—exhibits itself in many of the most accredited
modes of philosophical investigation, both on physical and on
metaphysical subjects. In one of its most undisguised manifestations, it
embodies itself in two maxims, which lay claim to axiomatic truth:
Things which we cannot think of together, cannot coexist; and Things
which we cannot help thinking of together, must coexist. I am not sure
that the maxims were ever expressed in these precise words, but the
history both of philosophy and of popular opinions abounds with
exemplifications of both forms of the doctrine.

To begin with the latter of them: Things which we cannot think of except
together, must exist together. This is assumed in the cgenerally
received and accredited mode of reasoning which concludesc that A must
accompany B in point of fact, because “it is involved in the idea.”
dSuch thinkersd do not reflect that the idea, being a result of
abstraction, ought to conform to the facts, and cannot make the facts
conform to it. The argument is at most admissible as an appeal to
authority; a surmise, that what is now part of the idea, must, before it
became so, have been found by previous inquirers in the facts.
Nevertheless, the philosopher who more than all others emade
professionse of rejecting authority, Descartes, constructed hisf system
on this very basis. His favourite device for arriving at truth, even in
regard to outward things, was by looking into his own mind for it.
“Credidi me,” says his celebrated maxim, “pro regulâ generali sumere
posse, omne id quod valdè dilucidè et distinctè concipiebam, verum
esse;”[*] whatever can be very clearly conceived must certainly exist;
that is, as he afterwards explains it, if the idea includes existence.
And on this ground he infers that geometrical figures really exist,
because they can be distinctly conceived. Whenever existence is
“involved in an idea,” a thing conformable to the idea must really
exist; which is as much as to say, whatever the idea contains must have
its equivalent in the thing; and what we are not able to leave out of
the idea cannot be absent from the reality.* This assumption pervades
the philosophy not Edition: current; Page: [752] only of Descartes, but
of all the thinkers who received their impulse mainly from him, in
particular the two most remarkable among them, hSpinoza and Leibnitzh,
from whom the modern German metaphysical philosophy is essentially an
emanation.i jI am indeed disposed to think that the fallacy now under
consideration has been the cause of two-thirds of the bad philosophy,
and especially of the bad metaphysics, which the human mind has never
ceased to produce. Our general ideas contain nothing but what has been
put into them, either by our passive experience, or by our active habits
of thought; and the metaphysicians in all ages, who have attempted to
construct the laws of the universe by reasoning from our supposed
necessities of thought, have always proceeded, and only could proceed,
by laboriously finding in their own minds what they themselves had
formerly put there, and evolving from their ideas of things what they
had first involved in those ideas. In this way all deeply-rooted
opinions and feelings are enabled to create apparent demonstrations of
their truth and reasonableness, as it were out of their own substance.j

The other form of the fallacy; Things which we cannot think of together
cannot exist together,—including as one of its branches, that what we
cannot think of as existing cannot exist at all,—may kthus bek briefly
expressed: Whatever is inconceivable must be false.

Against this prevalent doctrine I have lsufficiently arguedl in a former
Book,* and nothing is required in this place but examples. It was long
held that Antipodes were impossible because of the difficulty which
owaso found in conceivingp persons with their heads in the same
direction as our feet. And it was one of the received arguments against
the Copernican system, that we Edition: current; Page: [753] cannot
conceive so great a void space as that system supposes to exist in the
celestial regions. When men’s imaginations had always been used to
conceive the stars as firmly set in solid spheres, they naturally found
much difficulty in imagining them in so different, and, as it doubtless
appeared to them, so qprecariousq a situation. But rtheyr had no right
to mistake the limitation (whether natural, or, as it in fact proved,
only artificial) of their own faculties, for an inherent limitation of
the possible modes of existence in the universe.

It may be said in objection, that the error in these cases was in the
minor spremises, not the major; an error of fact, not of principle; that
it did not consist in supposing that what is inconceivable cannot be
true, but in supposing antipodes to be inconceivable, when present
experiencet proves that they can be conceived. Even if this objection
were allowed, and the proposition that what is inconceivable cannot be
true were suffered to remain unquestioned as a speculative truth, it
would be a truth on which no practical consequence could ever be
founded, since, on this showing, it is impossible to affirm of any
proposition, not being a contradiction in terms, that it is
inconceivable. Antipodes were really, not fictitiously, inconceivable to
our ancestors: they are indeed conceivable to us; and as the limits of
our power of conception have been so largely extended, by the extension
of our experience and the more varied exercise of our imagination, so
may posterity find many combinations perfectly conceivable to them which
are inconceivable to us. But, as beings of limited experience, we must
always and necessarily have limited conceptive powers; while it does not
by any means follow that the same limitation obtains in the
possibilities of nature, nor even in her actual manifestations.

Rather more than a century and a half ago it was a uscientificu maxim,
disputed by no one, and which no one deemed to require any proof, that
“a thing cannot act where it is not.”* With this weapon the Cartesians
waged a formidable war against the theory of gravitation, which,
according to them, involving so obvious an absurdity, must be rejected
in limine: the sun could not possibly act upon the earth, not being
there. It was not surprising that the adherents of the old systems of
astronomy should urge this objection against the new; but the false
assumption imposed equally on Newton himself, who in order to turn the
edge of the objection, imagined a subtle ether which filled up the space
between the sun and the earth, and by its intermediate Edition: current;
Page: [754] agency was the proximate cause of the phenomena of
gravitation. “It is inconceivable,” said Newton, in one of his letters
to Dr. Bentley,*

that inanimate brute matter should, without the mediation of something
else, which is not material, operate upon and affect other matter
without mutual contact. . . . That gravity should be innate, inherent,
and essential to matter, so that one body may act on another, at a
distance, through a vacuum, without the mediation of anything else, by
and through which their action and force may be conveyed from one to
another, is to me so great an absurdity, that I believe no man, who in
philosophical matters has a competent faculty of thinking, can ever fall
into it.

This passage should be hung up in the cabinet of every vcultivatorv of
science who is ever tempted to pronounce a fact impossible because it
appears to him inconceivable. In our own day one would be more
wtemptedw, though with equal injustice, to reverse the concluding
observation, and consider the seeing any absurdity at all in a thing so
simple and natural, to be what really marks the absence of “a competent
faculty of thinking.” No one now feels any difficulty in conceiving
gravity to be, as much as any other property is, “xinherent, and
essential to matter,” nor finds the comprehension of it facilitated in
the smallest degree by the supposition of an ether y(though some recent
inquirers do give this as an explanation of it)y, nor thinks it at all
incredible that the celestial bodies can and do act where they, in
actual bodily presence, are not. To us it is not more wonderful that
bodies should act upon one another “without mutual contact,” than that
they should do so when in contact; we are familiar with both zthese
factsz, and we find them equally inexplicable, but equally easy to
believe. To Newton, the one, because his imagination was familiar with
it, appeared natural and a matter of course, while the other, for the
contrary reason, seemed too absurd to be credited.a

It is strange that any one, after such a warning, should rely implicitly
on the evidence à priori of such propositions as these, that matter
cannot think; that space, or extension, is infinite; that nothing can be
made out of nothing Edition: current; Page: [755] (ex nihilo nihil fit).
Whether these propositions are true or bnotb this is not the place to
determine, nor even whether the questions are soluble by the human
faculties. But such doctrines are no more self-evident truths, than the
ancient maxim that a thing cannot act where it is not, which probably is
not now believed by any educated person in Europe.* Matter cannot think;
why? because we cannot conceive thought to be annexed to any arrangement
of material particles. Space is infinite, because having never known any
part of it which had not other parts beyond it, we cannot conceive an
absolute termination. Ex nihilo nihil fit, because having never known
any physical product without a pre-existing physical material, we
cannot, or think we cannot, imagine a creation out of nothing. But these
things may in themselves be as conceivable as gravitation without can
intervening mediumc, which Newton thought too great an absurdity for any
dpersond of a competent faculty of philosophical thinking to admit: and
even supposing them not conceivable, this, for aught we know, may be
merely one of the limitations of our very limited minds, and not in
nature at all.e

No fwriterf has more directly identified himself with the fallacy now
under consideration, or has embodied it in more distinct terms, than
Leibnitz. In his view, unless a thing was not merely conceivable, but
even explainable, it could not exist in nature. All natural phenomena,
according to him, must be susceptible of being accounted for à priori.
The only facts of which no explanation could be given but the will of
God, were miracles properly so Edition: current; Page: [756] called. “Je
reconnais,” says he,* “qu’il n’est pas permis de nier ce qu’on n’entend
pas; mais j’ajoute qu’on a droit de nier (au moins dans l’ordre naturel)
ce que absolument n’est point intelligible ni explicable. Je soutiens
aussi . . . qu’enfin la conception des créatures n’est pas la mesure du
pouvoir de Dieu, mais que leur conceptivité, ou force de concevoir, est
la mesure du pouvoir de la nature, tout ce qui est conforme à l’ordre
naturel pouvant être conçu ou entendu par quelque créature.”

Not content with assuming that nothing can be true which we are unable
to conceive, gscientific inquirersg have frequently given a still
further extension to the doctrine, and hheldh that, even of things not
altogether inconceivable, that which we can conceive with the greatest
ease is likeliest to be true. It was long an admitted axiom, and is not
yet entirely discredited, that “nature always acts by the simplest
means,” i.e. by those which are most easily conceivable.† A large
proportion of all the errors ever committed in the investigation of the
laws of nature, have arisen from the assumption that the most familiar
explanation or hypothesis must be the truest. One of the most
instructive facts in scientific history is the pertinacity with which
the human mind clung to the belief that the heavenly bodies must move in
circles, or be carried round by the revolution of spheres; merely
because those were in themselves the simplest suppositions: though, to
make them accord with the facts which were ever contradicting them more
and more, it became necessary to add sphere to sphere and circle to
circle, until the original simplicity was converted into almost
inextricable complication.

§ 4. [Natural prejudice, of ascribing objective existence to
abstractions] We pass to another à priori fallacy or natural prejudice,
allied to the former, and originating as that does, in the tendency to
presume an exact correspondence between the laws of the mind and those
of things external to it. The fallacy may be enunciated in this general
form—Whatever can be thought of apart exists apart: and its most
remarkable manifestation consists in the personification of
abstractions. Mankind in all ages have had a strong propensity to
conclude that wherever there is a name, there must be a distinguishable
separate entity corresponding to the name; and every complex idea which
the mind has formed for itself by operating upon its conceptions of
individual things, was considered to have an outward objective reality
Edition: current; Page: [757] answering to it. Fate, Chance, Nature,
Time, Space, were real beings, nay, even gods. If the analysis of
qualities in the earlier part of this work be correct, names of
qualities and names of substances stand for the very same sets of facts
or phenomena; whiteness and a white thing are only different phrases,
required by convenience for speaking aof the same external fact under
different relationsa. Not such, however, was the notion which this
verbal distinction suggested of old, either to the vulgar or to bthe
scientificb. Whiteness was an entity, inhering or sticking in the white
substance: and so of all other qualities. So far was this carried, that
even concrete general terms were supposed to be, not names of indefinite
numbers of individual substances, but names of a peculiar kind of
entities termed Universal Substances. Because we can think and speak of
man in general, that is, of all cpersonsc in so far as possessing the
common attributes of the species, without fastening our thoughts
permanently on some one individual dpersond; therefore man in general
was supposed to be, not an aggregate of individual epersonse, but an
abstract or universal man, distinct from these.

It may be imagined what havoc metaphysicians trained in these habits
made with philosophy, when they came to the largest generalizations of
all. Substantiæ Secundæ of any kind were bad enough, but such Substantiæ
Secundæ as τὸ ὄν, for example, and τὸ ἕν, standing for peculiar entities
supposed to be inherent in all things which exist, or fin allf which are
said to be one, were enough to put an end to all intelligible
discussion; especially since, with a just perception that the truths
which philosophy pursues are general truths, it was soon laid down that
these general substances were the only gsubjectsg of science, being
immutable, while individual substances cognizable by the senses, being
in a perpetual flux, could not be the subject of real knowledge. This
misapprehension of the himporth of general language constitutes
Mysticism, a word so much oftener written and spoken than understood.
Whether in the Vedas, in the Platonists, or in the Hegelians, mysticism
is neither more nor less than ascribing objective existence to the
subjective creations of iour own faculties, to ideas or feelings of the
mindi; and believing that by watching and contemplating these ideas of
its own making, it can read in them what takes place in the world
without.

§ 5. [Fallacy of the Sufficient Reason] Proceeding with the enumeration
of à priori fallacies, and endeavouring to arrange them with as much
reference as possible to their natural affinities, we come to another,
which is also Edition: current; Page: [758] nearly allied to the fallacy
preceding the last, standing in the same relation to one variety of it
as the fallacy last mentioned does to the other. This, too, represents
nature as aunder incapacities corresponding to thosea of our intellect;
but instead of only asserting that nature cannot do a thing because we
cannot conceive it done, goes the still greater length of averring that
nature does a particular thing, on the sole ground that we can see no
reason why she should not. Absurd as this seems when so plainly stated,
it is a received principle among bscientific authoritiesb for
demonstrating à priori the laws of physical phenomena. A phenomenon must
follow a certain law, because we see no reason why it should deviate
from that law in one way rather than in another. This is called the
Principle of the Sufficient Reason;* and by means of it philosophers
often flatter themselves that they are able to establish, without any
appeal to experience, the most general truths of experimental physics.

Take, for example, two of the most elementary of all laws, the law of
inertia and the first law of motion. A body at rest cannot, it is
affirmed, begin to move unless acted upon by some external force:
because, if it did, it must either move up or down, forward or backward,
and so forth; but if no outward force acts upon it, there can be no
reason for its moving up rather than down, or down rather than up, &c.,
ergo, it will not move at all.c

This reasoning I conceive to be entirely fallacious, as indeed Dr.d
Brown, in his treatise on Cause and Effect,[*] has shown with great
acuteness and justness of thought. We have before remarked, that almost
every fallacy may be referred to different genera by different modes of
filling up the suppressed steps; and this particular one may, at our
option, be brought under petitio principii. It supposes that nothing can
be a “sufficient reason” for a body’s moving in one particular
direction, except some external force. But this is the very thing to be
proved. Why not some einternale force? Why not the law of the thing’s
own nature? Since these philosophers think it necessary to prove the law
of inertia, they of course do not suppose it to be self-evident; they
must, therefore, be of opinion that, previously to all proof, the
supposition of a body’s moving by internal impulse is an admissible
hypothesis; but if so, why is not the hypothesis also admissible, that
the internal impulse acts naturally in some one particular direction,
not in another? If spontaneous Edition: current; Page: [759] motion
might have been the law of matter, why not spontaneous motion towards
the sun, towards the earth, or towards the zenith? Why not, as the
ancients supposed, towards a particular place in the universe,
appropriated to each particular kind of substance? Surely it is not
allowable to say that spontaneity of motion is credible in itself, but
not credible if supposed to take place in any determinate direction.

Indeed, if any one chose to assert that all bodies when uncontrolled set
out in a direct line towards the north pole, he might equally prove his
point by the principle of the Sufficient Reason. By what right is it
assumed that a state of rest is the particular state which cannot be
deviated from without special cause? Why not a state of motion, and of
some particular sort of motion? Why may we not say that the natural
state of a horse left to himself is to amble, because otherwise he must
either trot, gallop, or stand still, and because we know no reason why
he should do one of these rather than another? If this is to be called
an unfair use of the “sufficient reason,” and the other a fair one,
there must be a tacit assumption that a state of rest is more natural to
a horse than a state of ambling. If this means that it is the state
which the animal will assume when left to himself, that is the very
point to be proved; and if it does not mean this, it can only mean that
a state of rest is the simplest state, and therefore the most likely to
prevail in nature, which is one of the fallacies or natural prejudices
we have already examined.

So again of the First Law of Motion; that a body once moving will, if
left to itself, continue to move uniformly in a straight line. An
attempt is made to prove this law by saying, that if not, the body must
deviate either to the right or to the left, and that there is no reason
why it should do one more than the other. But who could know,
antecedently to experience, whether there was a reason or not? Might it
not be the nature of bodies, or of some particular bodies, to deviate
towards the right? or if the supposition is preferred, towards the east,
or south? It was long thought that bodies, terrestrial ones at least,
had a natural tendency to deflect downwards; and there is no shadow of
anything objectionable in the supposition, except that it is not true.
The pretended proof of the law of motion is even more manifestly
untenable than that of the law of inertia, for it is flagrantly
inconsistent; it assumes that the continuance of motion in the direction
first taken is more natural than deviation either to the right or to the
left, but denies that one of these can possibly be more natural than the
other. All these fancies of the possibility of knowing what is natural
or not natural by any other means than experience, are, in truth,
entirely futile. The real and only proof of the laws of motion, or of
any other law of the universe, is experience; it is simply that no other
suppositions explain or are consistent with the facts of universal
nature.

Geometers have, in all ages, been open to the imputation of endeavouring
to prove the most general facts of the outward world by sophistical
reasoning, Edition: current; Page: [760] in order to avoid appeals to
the senses. Archimedes, says Professor Playfair,* established some of
the elementary propositions of statics by a process in which he “borrows
no principle from experiment, but establishes his conclusion entirely by
reasoning à priori. He assumes, indeed, that equal bodies, at the ends
of the equal arms of a lever, will balance one another; and also that a
cylinder or parallelopiped of homogeneous matter, will be balanced about
its centre of magnitude. These, however, are not inferences from
experience; they are, properly speaking, conclusions deduced from the
principle of the Sufficient Reason.” And to this day there are few
geometers who would not think it far more scientific to establish these
or any other premises in this way, than to rest their evidence on that
familiar experience which in the case in question might have been so
safely appealed to.

§ 6. [Natural prejudice, that the differences in nature correspond to
the distinctions in language] Another natural prejudice, of most
extensive prevalence, and which ahad a great share in producing the
errors fallen into by the ancientsa in their physical inquiries, was
this: That the differences in nature must correspond to our received
distinctions; that effects which we are accustomed, in popular language,
to call by different names, and arrange in different classes, must be of
different natures, and have different causes. This prejudice, so
evidently of the same origin with those already treated of, marks more
especially the earliest stage of science, when it has not yet broken
loose from the trammels of every-day phraseology. The extraordinary
prevalence of the fallacy among the Greek philosophers may be accounted
for by their generally knowing no other language than their own; from
which it was a consequence that their ideas followed the accidental or
arbitrary combinations of that language, more completely than can happen
among the moderns to any but illiterate persons. They had great
difficulty in distinguishing between things which their language
confounded, or in putting mentally together things which it
distinguished; and could hardly combine the objects in nature, into any
classes but those which were made for them by the popular phrases of
their own country: or at least could not help fancying those classes to
be natural, and all others arbitrary and artificial. Accordingly,b
scientific investigation among the Greek cschools of speculationc and
their followers in the middle ages, was little more than a mere sifting
and analysing of the notions attached to common language. They thought
that by determining the meaning of words, they could become acquainted
with facts. Edition: current; Page: [761] “They took for granted,” says
Dr. Whewell,* “that philosophy must result from the relations of those
notions which are involved in the common use of language, and they
proceeded to seek it by studying such notions.” In his next chapter, Dr.
Whewell has so well illustrated and exemplified this error, that dId
shall take the liberty of quoting him at some length.

The propensitye to seek for principles in the common usages of language
may be discerned at a very early period. Thus we have an example of it
in a saying which is reported of Thales, the founder of Greek
philosophy. When he was asked, ‘What is the greatest thing?’ he replied
‘Place; for all other things are in the world, but the world is in it.’
In Aristotle we have the consummation of this mode of speculation. The
usual point from which he starts in his inquiries is, that we say thus
or thus in common language. Thus, when he has to discuss the question
whether there be, in any part of the universe, a void, or space in which
there is nothing, he inquires first in how many senses we say that one
thing is in another. He enumerates many of these; we say the part is in
the whole, as the finger is in the hand; again we say, the species is in
the genus, as man is included in animal; again, the government of Greece
is in the king; and various other senses are described and exemplified,
but of all these the most proper is when we say a thing is in a vessel,
and generally in place. He next examines what place is, and comes to
this conclusion, that ‘if about a body there be another body including
it, it is in place, and if not, not.’ A body moves when it changes its
place; but he adds, that if water be in a vessel, the vessel being at
rest, the parts of the water may still move, for they are included by
each other; so that while the whole does not change its place, the parts
may change their place in a circular order. Proceeding then to the
question of a void, he as usual examines the different senses in which
the term is used, and adopts as the most proper, place without matter:
with no useful result.

Again, in a question concerning mechanical action, he says, ‘When a man
moves a stone by pushing it with a stick, we say both that the man moves
the stone, and that the stick moves the stone, but the latter more
properly.’

Again, we find the Greek philosophers applying themselves to extract
their dogmas from the most general and abstract notions which they could
detect; for example, from the conception of the Universe as One or as
Many things. They tried to determine how far we may, or must, combine
with these conceptions that of a whole, of parts, of number, of limits,
of place, of beginning or end, of full or void, of rest or motion, of
cause and effect, and the like. The analysis of such conceptions with
such a view, occupies, for instance, almost the whole of Aristotle’s
Treatise on the Heavens.[*]

Edition: current; Page: [762]
The following paragraph merits particular attention:

Another mode of reasoning, very widely applied in these attempts, was
the doctrine of contrarieties, in which it was assumed that adjectives
or substantives which are in common language, or in some abstract mode
of conception, opposed to each other, must point at some fundamental
antithesis in nature, which it is important to study. Thus Aristotle
says that the Pythagoreans, from the contrasts which number suggests,
collected ten principles—Limited and Unlimited, Odd and Even, One and
Many, Right and Left, Male and Female, Rest and Motion, Straight and
Curved, Light and Darkness, Good and Evil, Square and Oblong . . . .
Aristotle himself deduced the doctrine of four elements and other dogmas
by oppositions of the same kind.[*]

Of the manner in which, from premises obtained in this way, the ancients
attempted to deduce laws of nature, fan example is given in the same
workf a few pages further on.

Aristotle decides that there is no void on such arguments as this. In a
void there could be no difference of up and down; for as in nothing
there are no differences, so there are none in a privation or negation;
but a void is merely a privation or negation of matter; therefore, in a
void, bodies could not move up and down, which it is in their nature to
do. It is easily seen [Dr. Whewell very justly adds] that such a mode of
reasoning elevates the familiar forms of language, and the intellectual
connexions of terms, to a supremacy over facts; making truth depend upon
whether terms are or are not privative, and whether we say that bodies
fall naturally.[†]

The propensity to assume that the same relations obtain between objects
themselves, which obtain between our ideas of them, is here seen in the
extreme stage of its development. For the mode of philosophizing,
exemplified in the foregoing instances, assumes no less than that the
proper way of arriving at knowledge of nature, is to study nature
gitselfg subjectively; to apply our observation and analysis not to the
facts, but to the common notions entertained of htheh facts.

Many other equally striking examples may be given of the tendency to
assume that things which for the convenience of common life are placed
in different classes, must differ in every respect. Of this nature was
the universal and deeply-rooted prejudice of antiquity and the middle
ages, that celestial and terrestrial phenomena must be essentially
different, and could in no manner or degree depend on the same laws. Of
the same kind, also, was the Edition: current; Page: [763] prejudice
against which Bacon contended, that nothing produced by nature could be
successfully imitated by man: “Calorem solis et ignis toto genere
differre; ne scilicet homines putent se per opera ignis, aliquid simile
iis quæ in Natura fiunt, educere et formare posse:” and again,
“Compositionem tantum opus Hominis, Mistionem vero opus solius Naturæ
esse: ne scilicet homines sperent aliquam ex arte Corporum naturalium
generationem aut transformationem.”* The grand distinction in the
ancient iscientific speculationsi, between natural and violent motions,
though not without a plausible foundation in the appearances themselves,
was doubtless greatly recommended to adoption by its conformity to this
prejudice.

§ 7. [Prejudice, that a phenomenon cannot have more than one cause] From
the fundamental error of the scientific inquirers of antiquity, we pass,
by a natural association, to a scarcely less fundamental one of their
great rival and successor, Bacon. It has excited the surprise of
philosophers that the detailed system of inductive logic, which this
extraordinary man laboured to construct, has been turned to so little
direct use by subsequent inquirers, having neither continued, except in
a few of its generalities, to be recognised as a theory, nor ahavinga
conducted in practice to any great scientific results. But this, though
not unfrequently remarked, has scarcely received any plausible
explanation; and some, indeed, have preferred to assert that all rules
of induction are useless, rather thanb suppose that Bacon’s rules are
grounded on an insufficient analysis of the inductive process. Such,
however, will be seen to be the fact, as soon as it is considered, that
Bacon entirely overlookedc Plurality of Causes. All his rules tacitly
imply the assumption, so contrary to all we now know of nature, that a
phenomenon cannot have more than one cause.

When dhed is inquiring into what he terms the forma calidi aut frigidi,
gravis aut levis, sicci aut humidi, and the like,[*] he never for an
instant doubts that there is some one thing, some invariable condition
or set of conditions, which is present in all cases of heat, or ecold,
ore whatever other phenomenon he is considering; the only difficulty
being to find what it is; which accordingly he tries to do by a process
of elimination, rejecting or excluding, by negative instances, whatever
is not the forma or cause, in order to arrive at what is. But, that this
forma or cause is one thing, and that it is the same in all hot objects,
he has no more doubt of, than another person has that there is always
some cause or other. In the present state of knowledge it Edition:
current; Page: [764] could not be necessary, even if we had not already
treated so fully of the question, to point out how widely this
supposition is at variance with the truth. It is particularly
unfortunate for Bacon that, falling into this error, he should have
fixed almost exclusively upon a class of inquiries in which it was
fespeciallyf fatal; namely, inquiries into the causes of the sensible
qualities of objects. For his assumption, groundless in every case, is
false in a peculiar degree with respect to those sensible qualities. In
regard to scarcely any of them has it been found possible to trace any
unity of cause, any set of conditions invariably accompanying the
quality. The conjunctions of such qualities with one another constitute
the variety of Kinds, in which, as already remarked, it has not been
found possible to trace any law. gBacong was seeking for what did not
exist. The phenomenon of which he sought for the one cause has oftenest
no cause at all, and when it has, depends (as far as hitherto
ascertained) on an unassignable variety of distinct causes.

And on this rock every one must split, whoh represents to himself as the
first and fundamental problem of science to ascertain what is the cause
of a given effect, rather than what are the effects of a given cause. It
was shown, in an early stage of our inquiry into the nature of
Induction,* how much more ample are the resources which science commands
for the latter than for the former inquiry, since it is upon the latter
only that we can throw any direct light by means of experiment; the
power of artificially producing an effect, implying a previous knowledge
of at least one of its causes. If we discover the causes of effects, it
is generally by having previously discovered the effects of causes: the
greatest skill in devising crucial instances for the former purpose may
only end, as Bacon’s physical inquiries did, in no result at all. Was it
that his eagerness to acquire the power of producing for man’s benefit
effects of practical importance to human life, rendering him impatient
of pursuing that end by a circuitous route, made even him, the champion
of experiment, prefer the direct mode, though one of mere observation,
to the indirecti, in which alone experiment was possible? Or had even
Bacon not entirely cleared his mind from the notion of the ancients,
that “rerum cognoscere causas” was the sole object of philosophy, and
that to inquire into the effects of things belonged to servile and
mechanical arts?

It is worth remarking that, while the only efficient mode of cultivating
speculative science was missed from an undue contempt of manual
operations, the false speculative views thus engendered gave in their
turn a false direction to such practical and mechanical aims as werej
suffered to exist. The assumption universal among the ancients and in
the middle ages, that Edition: current; Page: [765] there were
principles of heat and cold, dryness and moisture, &c., led directly to
a belief in alchemy; in a transmutation of substances, a change from one
Kind into another. Why should it not be possible to make gold? Each of
the characteristic properties of gold khask its forma, its essence, its
set of conditions, which if we could discover, and learn how to
lrealizel, we could superinduce that particular property upon any other
substance, upon wood, or iron, or lime, or clay. If, then, we could
effect this with respect to every one of the essential properties of the
precious metal, we should have converted the other substance into gold.
Nor did this, if once the premises were granted, appear to transcend the
real powers of mmankindm. For daily experience showed that almost every
one of the distinctive sensible properties of any object, its
consistence, its colour, its taste, its smell, its shape, admitted of
being totally changed by fire, or water, or some other chemical agent.
The formæ of all those qualities seeming, therefore, to be within human
power either to produce or to annihilate, not only did the transmutation
of substances appear abstractedly possible, but the employment of the
power, at our choice, for practical ends, seemed by no means hopeless.*

A prejudice, universal in the ancient world, and from whichn Bacon was
so far from being free, that it pervaded and vitiated the whole
practical part of his system of logic, may with good reason be ranked
high in the order of Fallacies of which we are now treating.

§ 8. [Prejudice, that the conditions of a phenomenon must resemble the
phenomenon] There remains one à priori fallacy or natural prejudice, the
most deeply-rooted, perhaps, of all which we have enumerated: one which
not only reigned supreme in the ancient world, but still possesses
almost undisputed dominion over many of the most cultivated minds; and
asome of the most remarkable of the numerous instances by which I shall
think it necessary to exemplify it,a will be taken from brecent
thinkersb. This is, that the conditions of a phenomenon must, or at
least probably will, resemble the phenomenon itself.

Conformably to what we have before remarked to be ofc frequent
occurrence, this fallacy might without much impropriety have been placed
in a different class, among Fallacies ofd Generalization: for experience
does Edition: current; Page: [766] afford a certain degree of
countenance to the assumption. The cause does, in very many cases,
resemble its effect; like produces like. Many phenomena have a direct
tendency to perpetuate their own existence, or to give rise to other
phenomena similar to themselves. Not to mention forms actually moulded
on one another, as impressions on wax and the like, in which the closest
resemblance between the effect and its cause is the very law of the
phenomenon; all motion tends to continue itself, with its own velocity,
and in its own original direction; and the motion of one body tends to
set others in motion, which is indeed the most common of the modes in
which the motions of bodies originate. We need scarcely refer to
contagion, fermentation, and the like; or to the production of effects
by the growth or expansion of a germ or rudiment resembling on a smaller
scale the completed phenomenon, as in the growth of a plant or animal
from an embryo, that embryo itself deriving its origin from another
plant or animal of the same kind. Again, ethee thoughts, or
reminiscences, which are effects of our past sensations, resemble those
sensations; feelings produce similar feelings by way of sympathy; acts
produce similar acts by involuntary or voluntary imitation. With so many
appearances in its favour, no wonder if a presumption naturally grew
upf, that causes must necessarily resemble their effects, and that like
could only be produced by like.

This principle of fallacy has usually presided over the fantastical
attempts to influence the course of nature by conjectural means, the
choice of which was not directed by previous observation and experiment.
The guess almost always fixed upon some means which possessed features
of real or apparent resemblance to the end in view. If a charm was
wanted, as by Ovid’s Medea, to prolong life, all long-lived animals, or
what were esteemed such, were collected and brewed into a broth:

-   

    . . . nec defuit illic
-   

    Squamea Cinyphii tenuis membrana chelydri
-   

    Vivacisque jecur cervi: quibus insuper addit
-   

    Ora caputque novem cornicis sæcula passæ.[*]

A similar notion was embodied in the celebrated medical theory called
the “Doctrine of Signatures,” “which is no less,” says Dr. Paris,* “than
a belief that every natural substance which possesses any medicinal
virtue indicates by an obvious and well-marked external character the
disease for which it is a remedy, or the object for which it should be
employed.” This Edition: current; Page: [767] outward character was
generally some feature of resemblance, real or fantastical, geitherg to
the effect it was supposed to produce, or to the phenomenon over which
its power was thought to be exercised.

Thus the lungs of a fox must be a specific for asthma, because that
animal is remarkable for its strong powers of respiration. Turmeric has
a brilliant yellow colour, which indicates that it has the power of
curing the jaundice; for the same reason, poppies must relieve diseases
of the head; Agaricus those of the bladder; Cassia fistula the
affections of the intestines, and Aristolochia the disorders of the
uterus: the polished surface and stony hardness which so eminently
characterize the seeds of the Lithospermum officinale (common gromwell)
were deemed a certain indication of their efficacy in calculous and
gravelly disorders; for a similar reason, the roots of the Saxifraga
granulata (white saxifrage) gained reputation in the cure of the same
disease; and the Euphrasia (eye-bright) acquired fame, as an application
in complaints of the eye, because it exhibits a black spot in its
corolla resembling the pupil. The blood-stone, the Heliotropium of the
ancients, from the occasional small specks or points of a blood-red
colour exhibited on its green surface, is even at this hveryh day
employed in many parts of England and Scotland, to stop a bleeding from
the nose; and nettle tea continues a popular remedy for the cure of
Urticaria. It is also asserted that some substances bear the signatures
of the humours, as the petals of the red rose that of the blood, and the
roots of rhubarb and the flowers of saffron that of the bile.[*]

The early speculations respecting the ichemicali composition of bodies
were rendered abortive by no circumstance more, than by their invariably
taking for granted that the properties of the elements must resemble
those of the compounds which were formed from them.

To descend to more modern instances; it was long thought, and was
stoutly maintained by the Cartesians and even by Leibnitz[†] against the
Newtonian jsystemj, (nor did Newton himself, as we have seen, contest
the assumption, but eluded it by an arbitrary hypothesis), that nothing
(of a physical nature at least) could account for motion, except
previous motion; the impulse or impact of some other body. It was very
long before the scientific world could prevail upon itself to admit
attraction and repulsion (i.e. spontaneous tendencies of particles to
approach or recede from one another) as ultimate laws, no more requiring
to be accounted for than impulse itself, if indeed the latter were not,
in truth, resolvable into the former. From kthek same source arose the
innumerable hypotheses ldevisedl to explain those classes of mmotionm
which appeared more mysterious than others Edition: current; Page: [768]
because there was no obvious mode of attributing them to impulse, as for
example the voluntary motions of the human body. Such were the
interminable systems of vibrations propagated along the nerves, or
animal spirits rushing up and down between the muscles and the brain;
which, if the facts could have been proved, wouldn have been an
important addition to our knowledge of physiological laws; but the mere
invention, or arbitrary supposition of them, could not unless by the
strongest delusion be supposed to render the phenomena of animal life
more comprehensible, or less mysterious. Nothingo, however, seemed
satisfactoryo, but to make out that motion was caused by motion; by
something like itself. If it was not one kind of motion, it must be
another. In like manner it was supposed that the physical qualities of
objects must arise from some similar quality, or perhaps only psome
qualityp bearing the same name, in the particles or atoms of which the
objects were composed; that a sharp taste, for example, must arise from
sharp particles. And reversing the inference, the effects produced by a
phenomenon must, it was supposed, resemble in their physical attributes
the phenomenon itself. The influences of the planets were supposed to be
analogous to their visible peculiarities: Mars, being of a red colour,
portended fire and slaughter; and the like.

Passing from physics to metaphysics, we may notice among the most
remarkable fruits of this à priori fallacy, two closely analogous
theories, employed in ancient andq modern times to bridge over the chasm
between the world of mind and that of matter: the species sensibiles of
the Epicureans, and the modern doctrine of perception by means of ideas.
These theories are indeed, probably, indebted for their existence not
solely to the fallacy in question, but to that fallacy combined with
another natural prejudice already adverted to, that a thing cannot act
where it is not. In both doctrines it is assumed that the phenomenon
which takes place in us when we see or touch an object, and which we
regard as an effect of that object, or rather of its presence to our
organs, must of necessity resemble very closely the outward object
itself. To fulfil this condition, the Epicureans supposed that objects
were constantly projecting in all directions impalpable images of
themselves, which entered at the eyes and penetrated to the mind; while
modern rmetaphysiciansr, though they rejected this hypothesis, agreed in
deeming it necessary to suppose that not the sthings itself, but a
mental image or representation of it, was the direct object of
perception. Dr. Reid had to employ a world of argument and illustration
to familiarize people with the truth, that the sensations or impressions
on our minds need not necessarily be copies of, or tbeart Edition:
current; Page: [769] any resemblance to, the causes which produce them;
in opposition to the natural prejudice which led upeopleu to assimilate
the action of bodies upon our senses, and through them upon our minds,
to the transfer of a given form from one object to another by actual
moulding.[*] The works of Dr. Reid are even now the most effectual
course of study for detaching the mind from the prejudice of which this
was an example. And the value of the service which he thus rendered to
popular philosophy, is not much diminished although we may hold, with
Brown,[†] that he went too far in imputing the “ideal theory” as an
actual tenet, to the generality of the philosophers who preceded him,
and especially to Locke and Hume: for if they did not themselves
consciously fall into the error, unquestionably they often led their
readers into it.

The prejudice, that the conditions of a phenomenon must resemble the
phenomenon, is occasionally exaggerated, at least verbally, into a still
more palpable absurdity; the conditions of the thing are spoken of as if
they were the very thing itself. In Bacon’s model-inquiry, which
occupies so great a space in the Novum Organum,[‡] the inquisitio in
formam calidi, the conclusion which he favours is that heat is a kind of
motion; meaning of course not the feeling of heat, but the conditions of
the feeling; meaning, therefore, only that wherever there is heat, there
must first be a particular kind of motion; but he makes no distinction
in his language between these two ideas, vexpressingv himself as if
heat, and the conditions of heat, were one and the same thing. So wthe
elderw Darwin, in the beginning of his Zoonomia, says, “The word idea
has various meanings in the writers of metaphysic: it is here used
simply for those notions of external things which our organs of sense
bring us acquainted with originally,” (thus far the proposition, though
vague, is unexceptionable in meaning,) “and is defined a contraction, a
motion, or configuration, of the fibres which constitute the immediate
organ of sense.”[§] Our notions, a configuration of the fibres! What
xkind of logicianx must he be who thinks that a phenomenon is defined to
be the yconditiony on which he supposes it to depend? Accordingly he
says soon after, not that our ideas are caused by, or consequent on,
certain organic phenomena, but “our ideas Edition: current; Page: [770]
are animal motions of the organs of sense.”[*] And this confusion runs
through the four volumes of the Zoonomia; the reader never knows whether
the writer is speaking of the effect, or of its supposed cause; of the
idea, a state of mental consciousness, or of the state of the nerves and
zbrainz which he considers it to presuppose.

I have given a variety of instances in which the natural prejudice, that
causes and their effects must resemble one another, has operated in
practice so as to give rise to aseriousa errors. I shall now go
bfurtherb, and produce from cwritings even of the present or very recent
times, instances in which this prejudicec is laid down as an established
principle. M. Victor Cousin, in the last of his dcelebratedd lectures on
Lockee, enunciates thee maxim in the following unqualified terms. “Tout
ce qui est vrai de l’effet, est vrai de la cause.”[†] A doctrine to
which, unless in some peculiar and technical meaning of the words cause
and effect, it is not to be imagined that any person would literally
adhere: but he who could so write must be far enough from seeing, that
the very reverse might be the feffectf; that there is nothing impossible
in the supposition that no one property which is true of the effect
might be true of the cause. Without going quite so far in point of
expression, Coleridge, in his Biographia Literaria,* affirms as an
“evident truth,” that “the law of causality holds only between
homogeneous things, i.e. things having some common property,” and
therefore “cannot extend from one world into another, its opposite:”
hence, as mind and matter have no common property, mind cannot act upon
matter, nor matter upon mind. What is this but the à priori fallacy of
which we are speaking? The doctrine, like many others of Coleridge, is
taken from Spinoza, in the first book of whose Ethica (De Deo) it stands
as the Third Proposition, “Quæ res nihil commune inter se habent, earum
una alterius causa esse non potest,”[‡] and is there proved from two
so-called axioms, equally gratuitous with itself: but Spinoza, ever
systematically consistent, pursued the doctrine to its inevitable
consequence, the materiality of God.

Edition: current; Page: [771]
gThe same conception of impossibility led the ingenious and subtle mind
of Leibnitz to his celebrated doctrine of a pre-established harmony. He,
too, thought that mind could not act upon matter, norh matter upon mind,
and that the two, therefore, must have been arranged by their Maker like
two clocks, which, though unconnected with one another, strike
simultaneously, and always point to the same hour. Malebranche’s
iequally famousi theory of Occasional Causes was janother form of the
samej conception: instead of supposing the clocks originally arranged to
strike together, he held that when the one strikes, God interposes, and
makes the other strike in correspondence with it.

Descartes, in like manner, whose works are a rich mine of kalmostk every
description of à priori fallacy, says that the Efficient Cause must at
least have all the perfections of the effect, and for this singular
reason: “Si enim ponamus aliquid in ideâ reperiri quod non fuerit in
ejus causâ, hoc igitur habet a nihilo;”[*] of which it is scarcely a
parody to say, that if there be pepper in the soup there must be pepper
in the cook who made it, since otherwise the pepper would be without a
cause. A similar fallacy is committed by Cicero, in his second book De
Finibus, where, speaking in his own person against the Epicureans, he
charges them with inconsistency in saying that the pleasures of the mind
had their origin from those of the body, and yet that the former were
more valuable, as if the effect could surpass the cause. “Animi voluptas
oritur propter voluptatem corporis, et major est animi voluptas quam
corporis? ita fit ut gratulator, lætior sit quam is cui gratulatur.”[†]
Even that, surely, is lnot an impossibility: a person’s good fortune has
often given more pleasure to others than it gave to the personl himself.

Descartes, with no less readiness, applies the same principle the
converse way, and infers the nature of the effects from the assumption
that they must, in this or that property or in all their properties,
resemble their cause. To this class belong his speculations, and those
of so many others after him, tending to infer the order of the universe,
not from observation, but mby à priori reasoning from supposedm
qualities of the Godhead. This sort of inference was probably never
carried to a greater length than it was in one particular instance by
Descartes, when, as a proof of one of his physical Edition: current;
Page: [772] principles, that the quantity of motion in the universe is
invariable, he had recourse to the immutability nof then Divine Nature.
oReasoning of a very similar character is however nearly as common now
as it was in his time, and does duty largely as a means of fencing off
disagreeable conclusions. Writers have not yet ceased to oppose the
theory of divine benevolence to the evidence of physical facts, to the
principle of population for example. And people seem in general to think
that they have used a very powerful argument, when they have said, that
to suppose some proposition true, would be a reflection on the pgoodness
or wisdomp of the Deity. Put into the simplest possible terms, their
argument is, “If it had depended on me, I would not have made the
proposition true, therefore it is not true.” Put into other words it
stands thus: “God is perfect, therefore (what I think) perfection must
obtain in nature.” But since in reality every one feels that nature is
very far from perfect, the doctrine is never applied consistently. It
qfurnishesq an argument which (like many others of a similar character)
people like to appeal to when it makes for their own side. Nobody is
convinced by it, but each appears to think that it puts religion on his
side of the question, and that it is a useful weapon of offence for
wounding an adversary.o

Although several other varieties of à priori fallacy might probably be
added to those here specified, these are all against which it seems
necessary to give any special caution. Our object is to open, without
attempting or affecting to exhaust, the subject. Having illustrated,
therefore, this first class of Fallacies at sufficient length, I shall
proceed to the second.

Edition: current; Page: [773]


CHAPTER IV: Fallacies of aObservation

§ 1. [Non-observation, and mal-observation] From the fallacies which are
properly Prejudices, or presumptions antecedent to, and superseding,
proof, we pass to those which lie in the incorrect performance of the
proving process. And as Proof, in its widest extent, embraces one or
more, or all, of three processes, Observation, Generalization, and
Deduction; we shall consider in their order the errors capable of being
committed in these three operations. And first, of the first mentioned.

A fallacy of misobservation may be either negative or positive; either
Non-observation or Mal-observation. It is non-observation, when all the
error consists in overlooking, or neglecting, facts or particulars which
ought to have been observed. It is mal-observation, when something is
not simply unseen, but seen wrong; when the fact or phenomenon, instead
of being recognised for what it is in reality, is mistaken for something
else.

§ 2. [Non-observation of instances, and non-observation of
circumstances] Non-observation may either take place by overlooking
instances, or by overlooking some of the circumstances of a given
instance. If we were to conclude that a fortune-teller was a true
prophet, from not adverting to the cases in which his predictions had
been falsified by the event, this would be non-observation of instances;
but if we overlooked or remained ignorant of the fact that in cases
where the predictions had abeen fulfilleda, he had been in collusion
with some one who had given him the information on which they were
grounded, this would be non-observation of circumstances.

The former case, in so far as the act of induction from insufficient
evidence is concerned, does not fall under this second class of
Fallacies, but under the third, Fallacies ofb Generalization. In every
such case, however, there are two defects or errors instead of one:
there is the error of treating the insufficient evidence as if it were
sufficient, which is a Fallacy of the third class; and there is the
insufficiency itself; the not having better evidence; which, when such
evidence, or in other words, when other instances, were to be had,
Edition: current; Page: [774] is Non-observation: and the erroneous
inference, so far as it is to be attributed to this cause, is a Fallacy
of the second class.

It belongs not to our purpose to treat of non-observation as arising
from casual inattention, from general slovenliness of mental habits,
want of due practice in the use of the observing faculties, or
insufficient interest in the subject. The question pertinent to logic
is—Granting the want of complete competency in the observer, on what
points is that insufficiency on his part likely to lead him wrong? or
rather, what sorts of instances, or of circumstances in any given
instance, are most likely to escape the notice of observers generally;
of mankind at large.

§ 3. [Examples of non-observation of instances] First, then, it is
evident that when the instances on one side of a question are more
likely to be remembered and recorded than those on the other; especially
if there be any strong motive to preserve the memory of the first, but
not of the latter; these last are likely to be overlooked, and escape
the observation of the mass of mankind. This is the recognised
explanation of the credit given, in spite of reason and evidence, to
many classes of impostors: to quack doctors, and fortune-tellers in all
ages; to the “cunning man” of modern times, and the oracles of old. Few
have considered the extent to which this fallacy operates in practice,
even in the teeth of the most palpable negative evidence. A striking
example of it is the faith which the uneducated portion of the
agricultural classes, in this and other countries, continue to repose in
the prophecies as to weather supplied by almanac makers: though every
season affords to them numerous cases of completely erroneous
prediction; but as every season also furnishes some cases in which the
prediction is afulfilleda, this is enough to keep up the credit of the
prophet, with people who do not reflect on the number of instances
requisite for what we have called, in our inductive terminology, the
Elimination of Chance; since a certain number of casual coincidences not
only may but will happen, between any two unconnected events.

Coleridge, in one of the essays in the Friend,[*] hasb illustrated the
matter we are now considering, in discussing the origin of a proverb,
“which, differently worded, is to be found in all the languages of
Europe,” viz., “Fortune favours fools.” cHe ascribes it partly to the
“tendencyc to exaggerate all Edition: current; Page: [775] effects that
seem disproportionate to their visible cause, and all circumstances that
are in any way strongly contrasted with our notions of the persons under
them.” Omitting somed explanations which would refer the error to
mal-observation, or to the other species of non-observation (that of
circumstances) eIe take up the quotation farther on.

Unforeseen coincidences may have greatly helped a man, yet if they have
done for him only what possibly from his own abilities he might have
effected for himself, his good luck will excite less attention, and the
instances be less remembered. That clever men should attain their
objects seems natural, and we neglect the circumstances that perhaps
produced that success of themselves, without the intervention of skill
or foresight; but we dwell on the fact and remember it, as something
strange, when the same happens to a weak or ignorant man. So too, though
the latter should fail in his undertakings from concurrences that might
have happened to the wisest man, yet his failure being no more than
might have been expected and accounted for from his folly, it lays no
hold on our attention, but fleets away among the other undistinguished
waves in which the stream of ordinary life murmurs by us, and is
forgotten. Had it been as true as it was notoriously false, that those
all-embracing discoveries, which have shed a dawn of science on the art
of chemistry, and give no obscure promise of some one great constitutive
law, in the light of which dwell dominion and the power of prophecy; if
these discoveries, instead of having been, as they really were,
preconcerted by meditation, and evolved out of his own intellect, had
occurred by a set of lucky accidents to the illustrious father and
founder of philosophic alchemy; if they had presented themselves to
Professor Davy exclusively in consequence of his luck in possessing a
particular galvanic battery; if this battery, as far as Davy was
concerned, had itself been an accident, and not (as in point of fact it
was) desired and obtained by him for the purpose of ensuring the
testimony of experience to his principles, and in order to bind down
material nature under the inquisition of reason, and force from her, as
by torture, unequivocal answers to prepared and preconceived
questions,—yet still they would not have been talked of or described as
instances of luck, but as the natural results of his admitted genius and
known skill. But should an accident have disclosed similar discoveries
to a mechanic at Birmingham or Sheffield, and if the man should grow
rich in consequence, and partly by the envy of his neighbours and partly
with good reason, be considered by them as a man below par in the
general powers of his understanding; then, ‘O, what a lucky fellow!
Well, Fortune does favour fools—that’s for certain! It is always so!’
And forthwith the exclaimer relates half a dozen similar instances. Thus
accumulating the one sort of facts and never collecting the other, we
do, as poets in their diction, and quacks of all denominations do in
their reasoning, put a part for the wholef.

Edition: current; Page: [776]
This passage very happily sets forth the manner in which, under the
loose mode of induction which proceeds per enumerationem simplicem, not
seeking for instances of such a kind as to be decisive of the question,
but generalizing from any which occur, or rather which are remembered,
opinions grow up with the apparent sanction of experience, which have no
foundation in the laws of nature at all.

Itaque recte respondit ille, [we gmayg say with Bacon,*] qui cum
suspensa tabula in templo ei monstraretur eorum, qui vota solverant,
quod naufragii periculo elapsi sint, atque interrogando premeretur, anne
tum quidem Deorum numen agnosceret, quæsivit denuo, At ubi sunt illi
depicti qui post vota nuncupata perierunt? Eadem ratio est fere omnis
superstitionis, ut in Astrologicis, in Somniis, Ominibus, Nemesibus, et
hujusmodi; in quibus, homines delectati hujusmodi vanitatibus, advertunt
eventus, ubi implentur; ast ubi fallunt, licet multo frequentius, tamen
negligunt, et prætereunt.

And he proceeds to say, that independently of the love of the
marvellous, or any other bias in the inclinations, there is a natural
tendency in the intellect itself to this kind of fallacy; since the mind
is more moved by affirmative instances, though negative ones are of most
use in philosophy:

Is tamen humano intellectui error est proprius et perpetuus, ut magis
moveatur et excitetur Affirmativis quam Negativis; cum rite et ordine
æquum se utrique præbere debeat; quin contra, in omni Axiomate vero
constituendo, major vis est instantiæ negativæ.

But the greatest of all causes of non-observation is a preconceived
opinion. This it is which, in all ages, has made the whole race of
mankind, and every separate section of it, for the most part
hunobservanth of all facts, however abundant, even when passing under
their own eyes, which are contradictory to any first appearance, or any
received tenet. It is worth while to recal occasionally to the oblivious
memory of mankind some of the striking instances in which opinions that
the simplest experiment would have shown to be erroneous, continued to
be entertained because nobody ever thought of trying that experiment.
One of the most remarkable of these was exhibited in the Copernican
controversy. The opponents of Copernicus argued that the earth did not
move, because if it did, a stone let fall from the top of a high tower
would not reach the ground at the foot of the tower, but at a little
distance from it, in a contrary direction to the earth’s course; in the
same manner (said they) as, if a ball is let drop from the mast-head
while the ship is in full sail, it does not fall exactly at the foot of
the mast, but nearer Edition: current; Page: [777] to the stern of the
vessel. The Copernicans would have silenced these objectors at once if
they had tried dropping a ball from the mast-head, isincei they would
have found that it does fall exactly at the foot, as the theory
requires: but no; they admitted the spurious fact, and struggled vainly
to make out a difference between the two cases. “The ball was no part of
the ship—and the motion forward was not natural, either to the ship or
to the ball. The stone, on the other hand, let fall from the top of the
tower, was a part of the earth; and therefore, the diurnal and jannularj
revolutions which were natural to the earth, were also natural to the
stone: the stone would, therefore, retain the same motion with the
tower, and strike the ground precisely at the bottom of it.”*

Other examples, scarcely less striking, are recorded by Dr. Whewell,†
where imaginary laws of nature have continued to be received as real,
merely because nok person had steadily looked at facts which almost
every one had the opportunity of observing.

A vague and loose mode of looking at facts very easily observable, left
men for a long time under the belief that a body ten times as heavy as
another falls ten times as fast; that objects immersed in water are
always magnified, without regard to the form of the surface; that the
magnet exerts an irresistible force; that crystal is always found
associated with ice; and the like. These and many others are examples
how blind and careless man can be even in observation of the plainest
and commonest appearances; and they show us that the mere faculties of
perception, although constantly exercised upon innumerable objects, may
long fail in leading to any exact knowledge.

lIf even on physical facts, and these of the most obvious character, the
observing faculties of mankind can be to this degree the passive slaves
of their preconceived impressions, we need not be surprised that this
should be so lamentably true as all experience attests it to be, on
things more nearly connected with their stronger feelings—on moral,
social, and religious subjects. The information which an ordinary
traveller brings back from a foreign country, as the result of the
evidence of his senses, is almost always such as exactly confirms the
opinions with which he set out. He has had eyes and ears for such things
only as he expected to see. Men read the sacred books of their religion,
and pass unobserved therein multitudes of things utterly irreconcileable
with even their own notions of moral excellence. With the same
authorities before them, different historians, alike innocent of
intentional misrepresentation, see only what is favourable to
Protestants or Edition: current; Page: [778] Catholics, royalists or
republicans, Charles I or Cromwell; while others, having set out with
the preconception that extremes must be in the wrong, are incapable of
seeing truth and justice when these are wholly on one side.l

The influence of a preconceived theory is well exemplified in the
superstitions of barbarians respecting the virtues of medicaments andm
charms. The negroes, among whom coral, as of old among ourselves, is
worn as an amulet, affirm, according to Dr. Paris,* that its colour “is
always affected by the state of health of the wearer, it becoming paler
in disease.” On a matter open to universal observation, a general
proposition which has not the smallest vestige of truth is received as a
result of experience; the preconceived opinion preventingn, it would
seem, any observation whatever on the subjectn.

§ 4. [Examples of non-observation of circumstances] For illustration of
the first species of non-observation, that of Instances, what has now
been stated may suffice. But there may also be non-observation of some
material circumstances, in instances which have not been altogether
overlooked—nay, which may be the very instances on which the whole
superstructure of a theory has been founded. As, in the cases hitherto
examined, a general proposition was too rashly adopted, on the evidence
of particulars, true indeed, but insufficient to support it; so in the
cases to which we now turn, the particulars themselves have been
imperfectly observed, and the singular propositions on which the
generalization is grounded, or some at least of those singular
propositions, are false.

Such, for instance, was one of the mistakes committed in the celebrated
phlogistic theory; a doctrine which accounted for combustion by the
extrication of a substance acalled phlogiston, supposed to be contained
in all combustible mattera. The hypothesis accorded tolerably well with
superficial appearances: the ascent of flame naturally suggests the
escape of a substance; and the visible residuum of ashes, in bulk and
weight, generally falls extremely short of the combustible material. The
error was, non-observation of an important portion of the actual
residue, namely, the gaseous products of combustion. When these were at
last noticed and brought into account, it appeared to be an universal
law, that all substances gain instead of losing weight by undergoing
combustion; and after the usual attempt to accommodate the old theory to
the new fact by means of an arbitrary hypothesis (that phlogiston had
the quality of positive levity instead of gravity), Edition: current;
Page: [779] chemists were conducted to the true explanation, namely,
that instead of a substance separated, there was on the contrary a
substance absorbed.

Many of the absurd practices which have been deemed to possess medicinal
efficacy, have been indebted for their reputation to bnon-observanceb of
some accompanying circumstance which was the real agent in the cures
ascribed to them. Thus, of the sympathetic powder of Sir Kenelm Digby:

Whenever any wound had been inflicted, this powder was applied to the
weapon that had inflicted it, which was, moreover, covered with
ointment, and dressed two or three times a day. The wound itself, in the
meantime, was directed to be brought together, and carefully bound up
with clean linen rags, but above all, to be let alone for seven days, at
the end of which period the bandages were removed, when the wound was
generally found perfectly united. The triumph of the cure was decreed to
the myterious agency of the sympathetic powder which had been so
assiduously applied to the weapon, whereas it is hardly necessary to
observe that the promptness of the cure depended upon the total
exclusion of air from the wound, and upon the sanative operations of
nature not having received any disturbance from the officious
interference of art. The result, beyond all doubt, furnished the first
hint which led surgeons to the improved practice of healing wounds by
what is technically called the first intention.*

In all records, [adds Dr. Paris,] of extraordinary cures performed by
mysterious agents, there is a great desire to conceal the remedies and
other curative means which were simultaneously administered with them;
thus Oribasius commends in high terms a necklace of Pæony root for the
cure of epilepsy; but we learn that he always took care to accompany its
use with copious evacuations, although he assigns to them no share of
credit in the cure. In later times we have a good specimen of this
species of deception, presented to us in a work on scrofula by Mr.
Morley, written, as we are informed, for the sole purpose of restoring
the much injured character and use of the Vervain; in which the author
directs the root of this plant to be tied with a yard of white satin
riband around the neck, where it is to remain until the patient is
cured; but mark—during this interval he calls to his aid the most active
medicines in the materia medica.†

In other cases the cures really produced by rest, regimen, and
amusement, have been ascribed to the medicinal, or occasionally to the
supernatural, means which were put in requisition.

The celebrated John Wesley, while he commemorates the triumph of sulphur
and supplication over his bodily infirmity, forgets to appreciate the
resuscitating influence of four months’ repose from his apostolic
labours; and such is the disposition of the human mind to place
confidence in the operation of mysterious agents, that we find him more
disposed to attribute his cure to a brown paper Edition: current; Page:
[780] plaister of egg and brimstone, than to Dr. Fothergill’s salutary
prescription of country air, rest, asses’ milk, and horse exercise.*

In the following example, the circumstance overlooked was of a somewhat
different character.

When the yellow fever raged in America, the practitioners trusted
exclusively to the copious use of mercury; at first this plan was deemed
so universally efficacious, that, in the enthusiasm of the moment, it
was triumphantly proclaimed that death never took place after the
mercury had evinced its effect upon the system: all this was very true,
but it furnished no proof of the efficacy of that metal, since the
disease in its aggravated form was so rapid in its career, that it swept
away its victims long before the system could be brought under mercurial
influence, while in its milder shape it passed off equally well without
any assistance from art.†

In these examples the circumstance overlooked was cognizable by the
senses. In other cases, it is one the knowledge of which could only be
arrived at by reasoning; but the fallacy may still be classed under the
head to which, for want of a more appropriate name, we have given the
appellation Fallacies of Non-observation. It is not the nature of the
faculties which ought to have been employed, but the non-employment of
them, which constitutes this Natural Order of Fallacies. Wherever the
error is negative, not positive; wherever it consists cespeciallyc in
overlooking, in being ignorant or unmindful of some fact which, if known
and attended to, would have made a difference in the conclusion arrived
at; the error is properly placed in the Class which we are considering.
In dthisd Class, there is not, as in all other fallacies there is, a
positive mis-estimate of evidence actually had. The conclusion would be
just, if the portion which is seen of the case were the whole of it; but
there is another portion overlooked, which vitiates the result.

For instance, there is a remarkable doctrine which has occasionally
found a vent in the public speeches of unwise legislators, but which
only in one instance that I am aware of has received the sanction of a
ephilosophical writere, namely M.f Cousin, who in his preface to the
Gorgias of Plato, contending that punishment must have some other and
higher justification than the prevention of crime, makes use of this
argument—that if punishment were only for the sake of example, it would
be indifferent whether we punished the innocent or the guilty, since the
punishment, considered as an example, is equally efficacious in either
case.[*] Now we must, in order to go Edition: current; Page: [781] along
with gthis reasoningg, suppose, that the person who feels himself under
temptation, observing somebody punished, concludes himself to be in
danger of being punished likewise, and is terrified accordingly. But it
is forgotten that if the person punished is hsupposed to beh innocent,
or even if there be any doubt of his guilt, the spectator will reflect
that his own danger, whatever it may be, is not contingent on his
guiltiness, but threatens him equally if he remains innocent, and how
therefore is he deterred from guilt by the apprehension of such
punishment? M. Cousin supposes that ipeoplei will be dissuaded from
guilt by whatever renders the condition of the guilty more perilous,
forgetting that the condition of the innocent (also one of the elements
in the calculation) is, in the case supposed, made perilous in precisely
an equal degree. This is a fallacy of overlooking; or of
non-observation, within the intent of our classification.

Fallacies of this description are the great stumbling-block to jcorrect
thinkingj in political economy. The economical workings of society
afford knumerousk cases in which the effects of a cause consist of two
sets of phenomena: the one immediate, concentrated, obvious to lalll
eyes, and passing, in common apprehension, for the whole effect; the
other widely diffused, or lying deeper under the surface, and which is
exactly contrary to the former. Take, for instance, the mcommonm notion
so plausible at the first glance, of the encouragement given to industry
by lavish expenditure. A, who spends his whole income, and even his
capital, in expensive living, is supposed to give great employment to
labour. B, who lives on na small portionn, and invests the remainder in
the funds, is thought to give little or no employment. For everybody
sees the gains which are made by A’s tradesmen, servants, and others,
while his money is spending. B’s savings, on the contrary, pass into the
hands of the person whose stock he purchased, who with it pays a debt he
owed to some banker, who lends it again to some merchant or
manufacturer; and the capital being laid out in hiring spinners and
weavers, or carriers and the crews of merchant ovesselso, not only gives
immediate employment to pat least as much industryp as A employs during
the whole of his career, but coming back with increase by the sale of
the goods which have been manufactured or imported, qformsq a fund for
the employment of the same and perhaps a greater quantity of labour in
perpetuity. But ther observer does not see, and therefore does not
consider, what becomes of B’s money; he does see what is done with A’s:
he observes the amount of industry which A’s profusion feeds; he
observes not the far greater quantity Edition: current; Page: [782]
which it prevents from being fed; and thence the prejudice, universal to
the time of Adam Smith,s that prodigality encourages industry, and
parsimony is a discouragement to it.

The common argument against free trade twast a fallacy of the same
nature. The purchaser of British silk encourages British industry; the
purchaser of Lyons silk encourages only French; the former conduct is
upatrioticu, the latter ought to be vpreventedv by law. The circumstance
is overlooked, that the purchaser of any foreign commodity wnecessarilyw
causes, directly or indirectly, the export of an equivalent value of
some xarticle of home productionx (beyond what would otherwise be
exported), either to the same foreign country or to some other; which
fact, though from the complication of the circumstances it cannot always
be verified by specific observation, no observation can possibly be
brought to contradict, while the evidence of reasoning on which it rests
isy irrefragable. The fallacy is, therefore, the same as in the
preceding case, that of seeing a part only of the phenomena, and
imagining that part to be the whole: and may be ranked among Fallacies
of Non-observation.

§ 5. [Mal-observation characterized and exemplified] To complete the
examination of the second of our five classes, we have now to speak of
Mal-observation; in which the error does not lie in the fact that
something is unseen, but that something seen is seen wrong.

Perception being infallible evidence of whatever is really perceived,
the error now under consideration can be committed no otherwise than by
mistaking for perception what is in fact inference. We have formerly
shown how intimately the two are blended in almost everything which is
called observation, and still more in every Description.* What is
actually on any occasion perceived by our senses being so minute in
amount, and generally so unimportant a portion of the state of facts
which we wish to ascertain or to communicate; it would be absurd to say
that either in our observations, or in conveying their result to others,
we ought not to mingle inference with fact; all that can be said is,
that when we do so we ought to be aware of what we are doing, and to
know what part of the assertion rests on consciousness, and is therefore
indisputable, what part on inference, and is therefore questionable.

One of the most celebrated examples of an universal error produced by
Edition: current; Page: [783] mistaking an inference for the direct
evidence of the senses, was the resistance made, on the ground of common
sense, to the Copernican system. People fancied they saw the sun rise
and set, the stars revolve in circles round the pole. We now know that
they saw no such thing; what they really saw awasa a set of appearances,
equally reconcileable with the theory they held and with a totally
different one. It seems strange that such an instance as this, of the
testimony of the senses pleaded with the most entire conviction in
favour of something which was a mere inference of the judgment, and, as
it turned out, a false inference, should not have opened the eyes of the
bigots of common sense, and inspired them with a more modest distrust of
the competency of mere ignorance to judge the conclusions of bcultivated
thoughtb.

In proportion to any person’s deficiency of knowledge and mental
cultivation, is generally his inability to discriminate between his
inferences and the perceptions on which they were grounded. Many a
marvellous tale, many a scandalous anecdote, owes its origin to this
incapacity. The narrator relates, not what he saw or heard, but the
impression which he derived from what he saw or heard, and of which
perhaps the greater part consisted of inference, though the whole is
related not as inference but as matter-of-fact. The difficulty of
inducing witnesses to restrain within any moderate limits the
intermixture of theirc inferences with the narrative of their
perceptions, is well known to experienced cross-examiners; and still
more is this the case when ignorant persons attempt to describe any
natural phenomenon. “The simplest narrative,” saysd Dugald Stewart,* “of
the most illiterate observer involves more or less of hypothesis; nay,
in general, it will be found that, in proportion to his ignorance, the
greater is the number of conjectural principles involved in his
statements. A village apothecary (and, if possible, in a still greater
degree, an experienced nurse) is seldom able to describe the plainest
case, without employing a phraseology of which every word is a theory:
whereas a simple and genuine specification of the phenomena which mark a
particular disease; a specification unsophisticated by fancy, or by
preconceived opinions, may be regarded as unequivocal evidence of a mind
trained by long and successful study to the most difficult of all arts,
that of the faithful interpretation of nature.”e

Edition: current; Page: [784]
The universality of the confusion between perceptions and the inferences
drawn from them, and the rarity of the power to discriminate the one
from the other, ceases to surprise us when we consider that in the far
greater number of instances the actual perceptions of our senses are of
no importance or interest to us except as marks from which we infer
something beyond them. It is not the colour and superficial extension
perceived by the eye that faref important to us, but the object, of
which those visible appearances testify the presence; and where the
sensation itself is indifferent, as it generally is, we have no motive
to attend particularly to it, but acquire a habit of passing it over
without distinct consciousness, and going on at once to the inference.
So that to know what the sensation actually was, is a study in itself,
to which gpainters, for example, have to train themselvesg by special
and long-continued discipline and application. In things further removed
from the dominion of the outward senses, no one who has not great
experience in psychological analysis is competent to break this intense
association; and hwhenh such analytic habits do not exist in the
requisite degree, it is hardly possible to mention any of the habitual
judgments of mankind on subjects of a high degree of abstraction, from
the being of iai God and the immortality of the soul down to the
multiplication table, which are not, or have not been, considered as
matter of direct intuition. jSo strong isj the tendency to ascribe an
intuitive character to judgments which are mere inferences, and often
false ones. No one can doubt that many a deluded visionary has actually
believed that he was directly inspired from Heaven, and that the
Almighty had conversed with him face to face; which yet was only, on his
part, a conclusion drawn from appearances to his senses, or feelings in
his internal consciousness, which kafforded no warrant for any such
belief. A caution, therefore, against this class of errors, is not only
needful but indispensablek; though to determine whether, on any of the
great questions of metaphysics, such errors are actually committed,
belongs not to this place, but, as lIl have so often said, to a
different science.

Edition: current; Page: [785]


CHAPTER V: Fallacies of aGeneralization

§ 1. [Character of the class] The class of Fallacies of which we are now
to speak, is the most extensive of all; embracing a greater number and
variety of unfounded inferences than any of the other classes, and which
it is even more difficult to reduce to sub-classes or species. If the
attempt made in the preceding books to define the principles of
well-grounded generalization has been successful, all generalizations
not conformable to those principles might, in a certain sense, be
brought under the present class: when however the rules are known and
kept in view, but a casual lapse committed in the application of them,
this is a blunder, not a fallacy. To entitle an error of generalization
to the latter epithet, it must be committed on principle; there must lie
in it some erroneous general conception of the inductive process; the
legitimate mode of drawing conclusions from observation and experiment
must be fundamentally misconceived.

Without attempting anything so chimerical as an exhaustive
classification of all the misconceptions which can exist on the subject,
let us content ourselves with noting, among the cautions which might be
suggested, a few of the most useful and needful.

§ 2. [Certain kinds of generalizationa must always be groundless] In the
first place, there are certain kinds of generalization which, if the
principles already laid down be correct, must be groundless: experience
cannot afford the necessary conditions for establishing them by a
correct induction. Such, for instance, are all inferences from the order
of nature existing on the earth, or in the solar system, to that which
may exist in remote parts of the universe; where the phenomena, for
aught we know, may be entirely different, or may succeed one another
according to different laws, or even according to no fixed law at all.
Such, again, in matters dependent on causation, are all universal
negatives, all propositions that assert impossibility. The non-existence
of any given phenomenon, however uniformly experience may as yet have
testified to the fact, proves at most that no cause, adequate to its
production, has yet manifested itself; but that no such causes exist in
nature Edition: current; Page: [786] can only be inferred if we bare so
foolish as to supposeb that we know all the forces in nature. The
supposition would at least be premature while our acquaintance with some
even of those which we do know is so extremely recent. And however much
our knowledge of nature may hereafter be extended, it is not easy to see
how that knowledge could ever be complete, or how, if it were, we could
ever be assured of its being so.

The only laws of nature which afford sufficient warrant for attributing
impossibility c(even with reference to the existing order of nature, and
to our own region of the universe)c, are first, those of number and
extension, which are paramount to the laws of the succession of
phenomena, and not exposed to the agency of counteracting causes; and
secondly, the universal law of causality itself. That no variation in
any effect or consequent will take place while the whole of the
antecedents remain the same, may be affirmed with full assurance. But,
that the addition of some new antecedent might not entirely alter and
subvert the accustomed consequent, or that antecedents competent to do
this do not exist in nature, we are in no case empowered positively to
conclude.

§ 3. [Attempts to resolve aphenomena radically differenta into the same]
It is next to be remarked that all generalizations which profess, like
the theories of Thales, Democritus, and others of the early Greek
bspeculatorsb, to resolve all things into some one element, or like many
modern theories, to resolve phenomena radically different into the same,
are necessarily false. By radically different phenomena I mean
impressions on our senses which differ in quality, and not merely in
degree. On this subject what appeared necessary was said in the chapter
on the Limits to the Explanation of Laws of Nature; but as the fallacy
is even in our own times a common one, I shall touch on it somewhat
further in this place.

When we say that the force which cretainsc the planets in their orbits
is resolved into gravity, or that the force which makes substances
combine chemically is resolved into electricity, we assert in the one
case what is, and in the other case what might, and probably will
ultimately, be a legitimate result of induction. In both these cases
motion is resolved into motion. The assertion is, that a case of motion,
which was supposed to be special, and to follow a distinct law of its
own, conforms to and is included in the general law which regulates
another class of motions. But, from these and similar generalizations,
countenance and currency dhaved been given to attempts to resolve, not
motion into motion, but heat into motion, light into motion, Edition:
current; Page: [787] sensation itself into motione; states of
consciousness into states of the nervous system, as in the ruder forms
of the materialist philosophy; vital phenomena into mechanical or
chemical processes, as in some schools of physiology.

Now I am far from pretending that it may not be capable of proof, or
that it fis not anf important addition to our knowledge if proved, that
certain motions in the particles of bodies areg the conditions of the
production of heat or light; that certain assignable physical
modifications of the nerves may beh the conditions not only of our
sensations or emotions, but even of our thoughts; that certain
mechanical and chemical conditions may, in the order of nature, be
sufficient to determine to action the physiological laws of life. All I
insist upon, in common with every ithinker who entertains any clear idea
of the logic of sciencei, is, that it shall not be supposed that by
proving these things one step would be made towards a real explanation
of heat, light, or sensation; or that the generic peculiarity of those
phenomena can be in the least degree evaded by any such discoveries,
however well established. Let it be shown, for instance, that the most
complex series of physical causes and effects succeed one another in the
eye and in the brain to produce a sensation of colour; rays falling on
the eye, refracted, converging, crossing one another, making an inverted
image on the retina, and after this a motion—let it be a vibration, jorj
a rush of nervous fluid, or whatever else you are pleased to suppose,
along the optic nerve—a propagation of this motion to the brain itself,
and as many more different motions as you choose; still, at the end of
these motions, there is something which is notk motion, there is a
feeling or sensation of colour. Whatever number of motions we may be
able to interpolate, and whether they be real or imaginary, we shall
still find, at the end of the series, a motion antecedent and a colour
consequent. The mode in which any one of the motions produces the next,
lmayl possibly be susceptible of explanation by some general law of
motionm: but the mode in which the last motion produces the sensation of
colour, cannot be explained by any law of motion; it is the law of
colour: which is, and must always remain, a peculiar thing. Where our
consciousness recognises between two phenomena an inherent distinction;
where we are sensible of a difference which is not merely of degree, and
feel that no adding one of the phenomena Edition: current; Page: [788]
to itself would produce the other; any theory which attempts to bring
either under the laws of the other must be false; though a theory which
nmerelyn treats the one as a cause or condition of the other, may
possibly be true.

§ 4. [Fallacy of mistaking empirical for causal laws] Among the
remaining forms of erroneous generalization, several of those most
worthy of and most requiring notice have fallen under our examination in
former places, where, in investigating the rules of correct induction,
we have had occasion to advert to the distinction between it and some
common mode of the incorrect. In this number is what I have formerly
called the natural Induction of uninquiring minds, the induction of the
ancients, which proceeds per enumerationem simplicem: “This, that, and
the other A are B, I cannot think of any A which is not B, therefore
every A is B.” As a final condemnation of this rude and slovenly mode of
generalization, I will quote Bacon’s emphatic denunciation of it; the
most important part, as I have more than once ventured to assert, of the
permanent service rendered by him to philosophy. “Inductio quæ procedit
per enumerationem simplicem, res puerilis est, et precario concludit”
(concludes only by your leave, or provisionally,) “et periculo exponitur
ab instantiâ contradictoriâ, et plerumque secundum pauciora quam par
est, et ex his tantummodo quæ præsto sunt pronunciat. At Inductio quæ ad
inventionem et demonstrationem Scientiarum et Artium erit utilis,
Naturam separare debet, per rejectiones et exclusiones debitas; ac
deinde post negativas tot quot sufficiunt, super affirmativas
concludere.”[*]

I have already said that the mode of Simple Enumeration is still the
common and received method of Induction in whatever relates to man and
society. Of this a very few instances, more by way of memento than of
instruction, may suffice. What, for example, is to be thought of all the
“common-sense” maxims for which the following may serve as the universal
formula, “Whatsoever has never been, will never be.” As for example:
negroes have never been as civilized as whites sometimes are, therefore
it is impossible they should be so. Women, as a class, aare supposed not
to have hitherto been equal in intellect to mena, therefore they are
necessarily inferior. Society cannot prosper without this or the other
institution; e.g. in Aristotle’s time, without slavery; in later times,
without an established priesthood, without artificial distinctions of
brankb, &c. One cpoor personc in a Edition: current; Page: [789]
thousand, educated, while the nine hundred and ninety-nine remain
uneducated, has usually aimed at raising himself out of his class,
therefore education makes people dissatisfied with dthe condition of a
labourerd. Bookish men, taken from speculative pursuits and set to work
on something they eknowe nothing about, have generally been found or
thought to do it ill; therefore philosophers are unfit for business, &c.
&c. All these are inductions by simple enumeration. Reasons having some
reference to the canons of scientific investigation fhave beenf
attempted to be giveng, however unsuccessfully, for someg of these
propositions; but to the multitude of those who parrot them, the
enumeratio simplex, ex his tantummodo quæ præsto sunt pronuncians, is
the sole evidence. Their fallacy consists in this, that they are
inductions without elimination: there has been no real comparison of
instances, nor even ascertainment of the material hfactsh in any given
instance. There is also the further error, of forgetting that such
generalizations, even if well established, icould not be ultimate
truths, but must be results ofi laws much more elementary; and
thereforej, until deduced from such,j could at most be admitted as
empirical laws, holding good within the limits of space and time by
which the particular observations that suggested the generalization were
bounded.

This error, of placing mere empirical laws, and laws in which there is
no direct evidence of causation, on the same footing of certainty as
laws of cause and effect, an error which is at the root of perhaps the
greater number of bad inductions, is exemplified only in its grossest
form in the kind of generalizations to which we have now referred.
These, indeed, do not possess even the degree of evidence which pertains
to a well-ascertained empirical law; but admit of refutation on the
empirical ground itself, without ascending to kcausalk laws. A little
reflection, indeed, will show that mere negations can only form the
ground of the lowest and least valuable kind of empirical law. A
phenomenon has never been noticed; this only proves that the conditions
of that phenomenon have not yet occurred inl experience, but does not
prove that they may not occur mhereafterm. There is a nbettern kind of
empirical law than this, namely, when a phenomenon which is observed
presents within the limits of observation a series of gradations, in
which a regularity, or something like a mathematical law, is
perceptible: from which, therefore, something may be rationally presumed
as to those terms of the series which are Edition: current; Page: [790]
beyond the limits of observation. But in negation there are no
gradations, and no series: the generalizations, therefore, which deny
the possibility of any given condition of man and society merely because
it has never yet been witnessed, cannot possess this higher degree of
validity even as empirical laws. What is more, the minuter examination
which that higher order of empirical laws presupposes, being applied to
the subject-matter of these, not only does not confirm but actually
refutes them. For in reality the past history of Man and Society,
instead of exhibiting them as immovable, unchangeable, incapable of ever
presenting new phenomena, shows them on the contrary to be, in many most
important particulars, not only changeable, but actually undergoing a
progressive change. The empirical law, therefore, best expressive, in
most cases, of the genuine result of observation, would be, not that
such and such a phenomenon will continue unchanged, but that it will
continue to change in some particular manner.

Accordingly, while almost all generalizations relating to Man and
Society, antecedent to the last fifty oor sixtyo years, have erred in
the gross way which we have attempted to characterize, namely, by
implicitly assuming that human nature and society will for ever revolve
in the same orbit, and exhibit essentially the same phenomena; which is
also the vulgar error of pthe ostentatiously practical, qtheq votaries
of so-calledp common sense, in ourr day, especially in Great Britain;
the more thinking minds of the present age, having applied a more minute
analysis to the past records of our race, have for the most part adopted
sas contrary opinion, that the human species is in a state of necessary
progression, and that from the terms of the series which are past we may
infer tpositivelyt those which are yet to come. Of this doctrine,
considered as a philosophical tenet, we shall have occasion to speak
umoreu fully in the concluding Book. If not, in all its forms, free from
error, it is at leastv free from the gross and stupid error which we
previously exemplified. But, in all except the most eminently
philosophical minds, it is infected with precisely the same kind of
fallacy as that is. For we must remember that even this other and better
generalization, the progressive change in the condition of the human
species, is, after all, but an empirical law: to which, wtoow, it is not
difficult to point out exceedingly large exceptions; and even if these
could be got rid of, either by disputing the facts or by explaining and
limiting the theory, the general objection remains valid against the
supposed law, as applicable to any other than what, in our third book,
were termed Adjacent Cases. For not only xis itx no ultimate, but not
even a ycausaly law. Changes Edition: current; Page: [791] do indeed
take place in human affairs, but every one of those changes depends on
determinate causes; the “zprogressivenessz of the species” is not a
cause, but a summary expression for the general result of all the
causes. So soon as, by a quite different sort of induction, it shall be
ascertained what causes have produced these successive changes, from the
beginning of history, in so far as they have really taken place, and by
what causes of a contrary tendency they have been occasionally checked
or entirely counteracted, we amay then be prepared to predict the future
with reasonable foresight; we may be in possession of the real law of
the future; and maya be able to declare on what circumstances the
continuance of the same onward movement will eventually depend. But this
it is the error of many of the more advanced thinkers, in the present
age, to overlook; and to imagine that the empirical law collected from a
mere comparison of the condition of our species at different past times,
is a real law, is the law of its changes, not only past but also to
come. The truth is, that the causes on which the phenomena of the moral
world depend, are in every age, and almost in every country, combined in
some different proportion; so that it is scarcely to be expected that
the general result of them all should conform bvery closely,b in its
details at least, to any uniformly progressive series. And all
generalizations which affirm that mankind have a tendency to grow better
or worse, richer or poorer, more cultivated or more barbarous, that
population increases faster than subsistence, or subsistence than
population, that inequality of cfortunec has a tendency to increase or
to break down, and the like, propositions of considerable value as
empirical laws within certain (but generally rather narrow) limits, are
in reality true or false according to times and circumstances.

What we have said of empirical generalizations from times past to times
still to come, holds equally true of similar generalizations from
present times to times past; when dpersonsd whose acquaintance with
moral and social facts is confined to their own age, take the men and
the things of that age for the type of men and things in general, and
apply without scruple to the interpretation of the events of history,
the empirical laws which represent sufficiently for daily guidance the
common phenomena of human nature at that time and in that particular
state of society. If examples are wanted, almost every historical work,
until a very recent period, abounded in them. The same may be said of
those who generalize empirically from the people of their own country to
the people of other countries, as if human beings felt, judged, and
acted everywhere in the same manner.

Edition: current; Page: [792]
§ 5. [Post hoc, ergo propter hoc; and the deductive fallacy
corresponding to it] In the foregoing instances, the distinction is
confounded between empirical laws, which express merely the customary
order of the succession of effects, and the laws of causation on which
the effects depend. There may, however, be incorrect generalization when
this mistake is not committed; when the investigation takes its proper
direction, that of causes, and the result erroneously obtained purports
to be a really acausala law.

The most vulgar form of this fallacy is that which is commonly called
post hoc, ergo propter hoc, or, cum hoc, ergo propter hoc. As when it
bwas inferred that England owedb her industrial pre-eminence to her
restrictions on commerce: as when the old school of financiers, and
csome speculative writersc, maintained that the national debt was one of
the causes ofd national prosperity; as when the excellence of the
Church, of the Houses of Lords and Commons, of the procedure of the law
courts, &c., eweree inferred from the mere fact that the country fhadf
prospered under them. In gsuch cases as theseg, if it can be rendered
probable by other evidence that the supposed causes have some tendency
to produce the effect ascribed to them, the fact of its having been
produced, though only in one instance, is of some value as a
verification by specific experience: but in itself it goes scarcely any
way at all towards establishing such a tendency, since, admitting the
effect, a hundred other antecedents could show an equally strong title
of that kind to be considered as the cause.

In these examples we see bad generalization à posteriori, or empiricism
properly so called: causation inferred from casual conjunction, without
either due elimination, or any presumption arising from known properties
of the supposed agent. But bad generalization à priori is fully as
common: which is properly called false theory; conclusions drawnh, by
way of deduction,h from properties of some one agent which is known or
supposed to be present, all other coexisting agents being overlooked. As
the former is the error of sheer ignorance, so the latter is especially
that of isemi-instructedi minds; and is mainly committed in attempting
to explain complicated phenomena by a simpler theory than their nature
admits of. As when one school of physicians sought for the universal
principle of all disease in “lentor and morbid viscidity of the blood,”
and imputing most bodily derangements to mechanical obstructions,
Edition: current; Page: [793] thought to cure them by mechanical
remedies;* while another, the chemical school, “acknowledged no source
of disease but the presence of some hostile acid or alkali, or some
deranged condition in the chemical composition of the fluid or solid
parts,” and conceived, therefore, that

all remedies must act by producing chemical changes in the body. We find
Tournefort busily engaged in testing every vegetable juice, in order to
discover in it some traces of an acid or alkaline ingredient, which
might confer upon it medicinal activity. The fatal errors into which
such an hypothesis was liable to betray the practitioner, jreceivedj an
awful illustration in the history of the memorable fever that raged at
Leyden in the year 1699, and which consigned two-thirds of the
population of that city to an untimely grave; an event which in a great
measure depended upon the Professor Sylvius de la Boe, who having just
embraced the chemical doctrines of Van Helmont, assigned the origin of
the distemper to a prevailing acid, and declared that its cure could
alone k[only]k be effected by the copious administration of absorbent
and testaceous medicines.†l

These aberrations in medical theory have their exact parallels in
mpoliticsm. All the doctrines which ascribe absolute goodness to
particular forms of government, particular social arrangements, and even
to particular modes of education, without reference to the state of
civilization and the various distinguishing characters of the society
for which they are intended, are open to the same objection—that of
assuming one class of influencing circumstances to be the paramount
rulers of phenomena which depend in an equal or greater degree on many
others. But on these considerations it is the less Edition: current;
Page: [794] necessary that we should now dwell, as they will occupy our
attention nmoren largely in the concluding Book.

§ 6. [Fallacy of False Analogies] The last of the modes of erroneous
generalization to which I shall advert, is that to which we may give the
name of False Analogies. This Fallacy stands distinguished from those
already treated of by the peculiarity, that it does not even simulate a
complete and conclusive induction, but consists in the misapplication of
an argument which is at best only admissible as an inconclusive
presumption, where real proof is unattainable.

An argument from analogy, is an inference that what is true in a certain
case, is true in a case known to be somewhat similar, but not known to
be exactly parallel, that is, ato bea similar in all the material
circumstances. An object has the property B: another object is not known
to have that property, but resembles the first in a property A, not
known to be connected with B; and the conclusion to which the analogy
points, is that this object has the property B also. As, for example,
that the planets are inhabited, because the earth is bsob. The planets
resemble the earth in describing elliptical orbits round the sun, in
being attracted by it and by one another, in being cnearlyc spherical,
revolving on their axes, &c.; dand, as we have now reason to believe
from the revelations of the spectroscope, are composed, in great part at
least, of similar materials;d but it is not known that any of these
properties, or all of them together, are the conditions on which the
possession of inhabitants is dependent, or aree marks of those
conditions. Nevertheless, so long as we do not know what the conditions
are, they may be connected by some law of nature with those common
properties; and to the extent of that possibility the planets are more
likely to be inhabited, than if they did not resemble the earth at all.
This non-assignable and generally small increase of probability, beyond
what would otherwise exist, is all the evidence which a conclusion can
derive from analogy. For if we havef the slightest reason to suppose any
real connexion between the two properties A and B, the argument is no
longer one of analogy. If it had been ascertained (gIg purposely put an
absurd supposition) that there was hah connexion by causation between
the fact of revolving ioni an axis and the existence of animated beings,
or if there were any reasonable ground for even suspecting such a
connexion, a probability would arise of the existence of inhabitants in
the planets, which might be of any degree of strength, up to a complete
induction; but we should Edition: current; Page: [795] then infer the
fact from the ascertained or jpresumedj law of causation, and not from
the analogy of the earth.

The name analogy, however, is sometimes employed by extension to denote
those arguments of an inductive character but not amounting to a real
induction, which are employed to strengthen the argument drawn from a
simple resemblance. Though A, the property common to the two cases,
cannot be shown to be the cause or effect of B, the analogical reasoner
will endeavourk to show that there is some less close degree of
connexion between them; that A is one of a set of conditions from which,
when all united, B would result; or is an occasional effect of some
cause which has been known also to produce B; and the like. Any of which
things, if shown, would render the existence of B by so much more
probable, than if there had not been even that amount of known connexion
between B and A.

Now an error or fallacy of analogy may occur in two ways. Sometimes it
consists in employing an argument of either of the above kinds with
correctness indeed, but overrating its probative force. This very common
aberration is sometimes supposed to be particularly incident to persons
distinguished for their imagination; but in reality it is the
characteristic intellectual vice of those whose imaginations are barren,
either from want of exercise, natural defect, or the narrowness of their
range of ideas. To such minds objects present themselves clothed in but
few properties; and as, therefore, few analogies between one object and
another occur to them, they almost invariably overrate the degree of
importance of those few: while lonel whose fancy takes a wider range,
perceives and remembers so many analogies tending to conflicting
conclusions, that he is mmuch lessm likely to lay undue stress on any of
them. We always find that those are the greatest slaves to metaphorical
language, who have but one set of metaphors.

But this is only one of the modes of error in the employment of
arguments of analogy. There is another, more properly deserving the name
of fallacy; namely, when resemblance in one point is inferred from
resemblance in another point, though there is not only no evidence to
connect the two circumstances by way of causation, but the evidence
tends positively to disconnect them. This is properly the Fallacy of
False Analogies.

As a first instance, we may cite that favourite argument in defence of
absolute power, drawn from the analogy of paternal government in a
family, which governmentn, however much in need of control, is not and
cannot be Edition: current; Page: [796] controlled by the children
themselves, while they remain children. Paternal government, says the
argument, works well; thereforen, despotic government in a state will
work wello. I wave, as not pertinent in this place, all that could be
said in pqualificationp of the alleged excellence of paternal
government. However this might be, the argument from the family to the
state would not the less proceed on a false analogy; implyingo that the
beneficial working of parental government depends, in the family, on the
only point which it has in common with political despotism, namely,
irresponsibility. Whereas it qdepends, when real, not on that but on two
other circumstances of the caseq, the affection of the parent for the
children, and rthe superiority of the parentr in wisdom and experience;
neither of which properties can be reckoned on, or are at all likely to
exist, between a political despot and his subjects; ands when either of
these circumstances fails even in the family, and the influence of the
irresponsibility is allowed to work uncorrected, the result is anything
but good government. This, therefore, is a false analogy.

Another example is the not uncommon dictum, that bodies politic have
youth, maturity, old age, and death, like bodies natural: that after a
certain duration of prosperity, they tend spontaneously to decay. This
also is a false analogy, because the decay of the vital powers in an
animated body can be distinctly traced to the natural progress of those
very changes of structure which, in their earlier stages, constitute its
growth to maturity: while in the body politic the progress of those
changes cannot, generally speaking, have any effect but the still
further continuance of growth: it is the stoppage of that progress, and
the commencement of retrogression, that alone would constitute decay.
Bodies politic die, but it is of disease, or violent death: they have no
old age.

The following sentence from Hooker’s Ecclesiastical Polity is an
instance of a false analogy from physical bodies to what are called
bodies politic. “As there could be in natural bodies no motion of
anything unless there were some which moveth all things, and continueth
immovable: even so in politic societies there must be some unpunishable,
or else no man shall suffer punishment.”[*] There is a double fallacy
here, for not only the analogy, but the premise from which it is drawn,
is untenable. The notion that there must be something immovable which
moves all tother thingst, is the old scholastic error of a primum
mobile.

Edition: current; Page: [797]
uThe following instance vI quotev from Archbishop Whately’s Rhetoric:

It would be admitted that a great and permanent diminution in the
quantity of some useful commodity, such as corn, or coal, or iron,
throughout the world, would be a serious and lasting loss; and again,
that if the fields and coal mines yielded regularly double quantities,
with the same labour, we should be so much the richer; hence it might be
inferred, that if the quantity of gold and silver in the world were
diminished one-half, or were doubled, like results would follow; the
utility of these metals, for the purposes of coin, being very great. Now
there are many points of resemblance and many of difference, between the
precious metals on the one hand, and corn, coal, &c., on the other; but
the important circumstance to the supposed argument is, that the utility
of gold and silver (as coin, which is far the chief) depends on their
value, which is regulated by their scarcity; or rather, to speak
strictly, by the difficulty of obtaining them; whereas, if corn and coal
were ten times as abundant (i.e. more easily obtained), a bushel of
either would still be as useful as now. But if it were twice as easy to
procure gold as it is, a sovereign would be twice as large; if only half
as easy it would be of the size of a half-sovereign, and this (besides
the trifling circumstance of the cheapness or dearness of gold
ornaments) would be all the difference. The analogy, therefore, fails in
the point essential to the argument.[*]

The same author notices, after Bishop Copleston, the case of False
Analogy which consists in inferring from the similarity in many respects
between the metropolis of a country and the heart of the animal body,
that the increased size of the metropolis is a disease.u[†]

Some of the false analogies on which systems of physics were confidently
grounded in the time of the Greek philosophers, are such as we now call
fanciful, not that the resemblances are not often real, but that it is
long since any one has been inclined to draw from them the inferences
which were then drawn. Such, for instance, are the curious speculations
of the Pythagoreans on the subject of numbers. Finding that the
distances of the planets bore or seemed to bear to one another a
proportion not varying much from that of the divisions of the monochord,
they inferred from it the existence of an inaudible music, that of the
spheres: as if the music of a harp had depended solely on the numerical
proportions, and not on the material, nor even on the existence of any
material, any strings at all. It has been similarly imagined that
certain combinations of numbers, which were found to prevail in some
natural phenomena, must run through the whole of nature: as that there
must be four elements, because there are four possible combinations of
hot and cold, wet and dry:[‡] that there must be seven planets, because
there were Edition: current; Page: [798] seven metals, and even because
there were seven days of the week. Kepler himself thought that there
could be only six planets because there were only five regular solids.
With these we may class the reasonings, so common in the speculations of
the ancients, founded on a supposed perfection in nature: meaning by
nature the customary order of events as they take place of themselves
without human interference. This also is a rude guess at an analogy
supposed to pervade all phenomena, however dissimilar. Since what was
thought to be perfection appeared to obtain in some phenomena, it was
inferred w(in opposition to the plainest evidence)w to obtain in all.
“We always suppose that which is better to take place in nature, if it
be possible,” says Aristotle:[*] and the vaguest and most heterogeneous
qualities being confounded together under the notion of being better,
there was no limit to the wildness of the inferences. Thus, because the
heavenly bodies were “perfect,” they must move in circles and uniformly.
For “they” (the Pythagoreans) “would not allow,” says Geminus,* “of any
such disorder among divine and eternal things, as that they should
sometimes move quicker and sometimes slower, and sometimes stand still;
for no one would tolerate such anomaly in the movements even of a man,
who was decent and orderly. The occasions of life, however, are often
reasons for men going quicker or slower; but in the incorruptible nature
of the stars, it is not possible than any cause can be alleged of
quickness or slowness.” It is seeking an argument of analogy very far,
to suppose that the stars must observe the rules of decorum in gait and
carriage, prescribed for themselves by the long-bearded philosophers
satirized by Lucian.

As late as the Copernican controversy it was urged as an argument in
favour of the true theory of the solar system, that xit placed the fire,
the noblest element, in the centre of the universe.x This was a remnant
of the notion that the order of nature must be perfect, and that
perfection consisted in conformity to rules of precedency in dignity,
either real or conventional. Again, reverting to numbers: certain
numbers were perfect, therefore those numbers must obtain in the great
phenomena of nature. Six was a perfect number, that is, equal to the sum
of all its factors; an additional reason why there must be exactly six
planets. The Pythagoreans, on the other hand, attributed perfection to
the number ten; but agreed in thinking that the perfect number must be
somehow realized in the heavens; and knowing only of nine heavenly
bodies, to make up the enumeration, they asserted “that there was an
antichthon or counter-earth, on the other side of the sun, invisible
Edition: current; Page: [799] to us.”* Even Huygens was persuaded that
when the number of the heavenly bodies had reached twelve, it could not
admit of any further increase. Creative power could not go beyond that
sacred number.

Some curious instances of false analogy are to be found in the arguments
of the Stoics to prove the equality of all crimes, and the equal
wretchedness of all who had not realized their idea of perfect virtue.
Cicero, towards the end of his Fourth Book De Finibus, states some of
these as follows. “Ut, inquit, in fidibus plurimis, si nulla earum ita
contenta numeris sit, ut concentum servare possit, omnes æque incontentæ
ysunty; sic peccata, quia discrepant, æque discrepant; paria sunt
igitur.” To which Cicero himself aptly answers, “æque contingit omnibus
fidibus, ut incontentæ sint; illud non continuo, ut æque incontentæ.”
The Stoic resumes: “Ut enim, inquit, gubernator æque peccat, si palearum
navem evertit, et si auri; item æque peccat qui parentem, et qui servum,
injuriâ verberat;” assuming, that because the magnitude of the interest
at stake makes no difference in the mere defect of skill, it can make
none in the moral defect: a false analogy. Again, “Quis ignorat, si
plures ex alto emergere velint, propius fore eos quidem ad respirandum,
qui ad summam jam aquam appropinquant, sed nihilo magis respirare posse,
quam eos, qui sunt in profundo? Nihil ergo adjuvat procedere, et
progredi in virtute, quominus miserrimus sit, antequam ad eam
pervenerit, quoniam in aquâ nihil adjuvat: et quoniam catuli, qui jam
despecturi sunt, cæci æque, et ii qui modo nati; Platonem quoque necesse
est, quoniam nondum videbat sapientiam, æque cæcum animo, ac Phalarim
fuisse.” Cicero, in his own person, combats these false analogies by
other analogies tending to an opposite conclusion. “Ista similia non
sunt, Cato. . . . Illa sunt similia; hebes acies est cuipiam oculorum:
corpore alius languescit: hi curatione adhibitâ levantur in dies: alter
valet plus quotidie: alter videt. Hi similes sunt omnibus, qui virtuti
student; levantur vitiis, levantur erroribus.”[*]

§ 7. [Function of metaphors in reasoning] In these and all other
arguments drawn from remote analogies, and from metaphors, which are
cases of analogy, it is apparent (especially when we consider the
extreme facility of raising up contrary analogies and conflicting
metaphors) that so far from the metaphor or analogy proving anything,
the applicability of the metaphor is the very thing to be made out. It
has to be shown that in the two cases asserted to be analogous, the same
law is really operating; that between the known resemblance and the
inferred one there is some connexion by means of causation. Cicero and
Cato might have bandied opposite analogies for Edition: current; Page:
[800] ever; it rested with each of them to prove by just induction, or
at least to render probable, that the case resembled the one set of
analogous cases and not the other, in the circumstances on which the
disputed question really hinged. Metaphors, for the most part,
therefore, assume the proposition which they are brought to prove: their
use is, to aid the apprehension of it; to make clearly and vividly
comprehended what it is that the person who employs the metaphor is
proposing to make out; and sometimes also, by what media he proposes to
do so. For an apt metaphor, though it cannot prove, often suggests the
proof.

For instance, when aD’Alembert (I believe) remarked that in certain
governments, only two bcreaturesb find their way to the highest places,
the eagle and the serpent; the metaphor not only conveys with great
vividness the assertion intended, but contributes towards substantiating
it, by suggesting, in a lively manner, the means by which the two
opposite characters thus typified effect their rise. When it is said
that a certain person misunderstands another because the lesser of two
objects cannot comprehend the greater, the application of what is true
in the literal sense of the word comprehend, to its metaphorical sense,
points to the fact which is the ground and justification of the
assertion, viz., that one mind cannot thoroughly understand another
unless it can contain it in itself, that is, unless it possesses all
that is contained in the other. When it is urged as an argument for
education, that if the soil is left uncultivated, weeds will spring up,
the metaphor, though no proof, but a statement of the thing to be
proved, states it in terms which, by suggesting a parallel case, put the
mind upon the track of the real proof. For, the reason Edition: current;
Page: [801] why weeds grow in an uncultivated soil, is that the seeds of
worthless products exist everywhere, and can germinate and grow in
almost all circumstances, while the reverse is the case with those which
are valuable; and this being equally true of mental products, this modea
of conveying an argument, independently of its rhetorical advantages,
has a logical value; since it not only suggests the grounds of the
conclusion, but points ctoc another case in which those grounds have
been found, or at least deemed to be, sufficient.

On the other hand, when Bacon, who is equally conspicuous in the use and
abuse of figurative illustration, says that the stream of time has
brought down to us only the least valuable part of the writings of the
ancients, as a river carries froth and straws floating on its surface,
while more weighty objects sink to the bottom;[*] this, even if the
assertion illustrated by it were true, would be no good illustration,
there being no parity of cause. The levity by which substances float on
a stream, and the levity which is synonymous with worthlessness, have
nothing in common except the name; and (to show how little value there
is in the metaphor) we need only change the word into buoyancy, to turn
the semblance of argument involved in Bacon’s illustrationd against
himself.

A metaphor, then, is not to be considered as an argument, but as an
assertion that an argument exists; that a parity subsists between the
case from which the metaphor is drawn and that to which it is applied.
This parity may exist though the two casese be apparently very remote
from one another; the only resemblance existing between them may be a
resemblance of relations, an analogy in Ferguson’s[†] and Archbishop
Whately’s sensef: as in the preceding instance, in which an illustration
from agriculture was applied to mental cultivation.f

§ 8. [How fallacies of generalization grow out of bad classification] To
terminate the subject of Fallacies ofa Generalization, it remains to be
said, Edition: current; Page: [802] that the most fertile source of them
is bad classification: bringing together in one group, and under one
name, things which have no common properties, or none but such as are
too unimportant to allow general propositions of any considerable value
to be made respecting the class. The misleading effect is greatest, when
a word which in common use expresses some definite fact, is extended by
slight links of connexion to cases in which that fact does not exist,
but some other or others, only slightly resembling it. Thus Bacon,* in
speaking of the Idola or Fallacies arising from notions temere et
inæqualiter à rebus abstractæ, exemplifies them by the notion of Humidum
or Wet, so familiar in the physics of antiquity and of the middle ages.

Invenietur verbum istud, Humidum, nihil aliud quam nota confusa
diversarum actionum, quæ nullam constantiam aut reductionem patiuntur.
Significat enim, et quod circa aliud corpus facile se circumfundit; et
quod in se est indeterminabile, nec consistere potest; et quod facile
cedit undique; et quod facile se dividit et dispergit; et quod facile se
unit et colligit; et quod facile fluit, et in motu ponitur; et quod
alteri corpori facile adhæret, idque madefacit; et quod facile reducitur
in liquidum, sive colliquatur, cum antea consisteret. Itaque quum ad
hujus nominis prædicationem et impositionem ventum sit; si alia
accipias, flamma humida est; si alia accipias, aer humidus non est; si
alia, pulvis minutus humidus est; si alia, vitrum humidum est: ut facile
appareat, istam notionem ex aquâ tantum, et communibus et vulgaribus
liquoribus, absque ullâ debitâ verificatione, temere abstractam esse.

Bacon himself is not exempt from a similar accusation when inquiring
into the nature of heat: where he occasionally proceeds like one who
seeking for the cause of hardness, after examining that quality in iron,
flint, and diamond, should expect to find that it is something which can
be traced also in hard water, a hard knot, and a hard heart.

The word κίνησις in the Greek philosophy, and the words Generation and
Corruption both then and long afterwards, denoted such a multitude of
heterogeneous phenomena, that any attempt at philosophizing in which
those words were used was almost as necessarily abortive as if the word
hard had been taken to denote a class including all the things mentioned
above. Κίνησις, for instance, which properly signified motion, was taken
to denote not only all motion but even all change: ἀλλοίωσις being
recognised as one of the modes of κίνησις. The effect was, to connect
with every form of ἀλλοίωσις or change, ideas drawn from motion in the
proper and literal sense, and which had no real connexion with any other
kind of κίνησις than that. Aristotle and Plato laboured under a
continual embarrassment from this misuse of terms. But if we proceed
further in this direction we shall encroach upon the Fallacy of
Ambiguity, which belongs to a different class, the last in order of our
classification, Fallacies of Confusion.

Edition: current; Page: [803]


CHAPTER VI: Fallacies of aRatiocination

§ 1. [Introductory remarks] We have now, in our progress through the
classes of Fallacies, arrived at those to which, in the common books of
logic, the appellation is in general exclusively appropriated; those
which have their seat in the ratiocinative or deductive part of the
investigation of truth. On these fallacies it is the less necessary for
us to insist at any length, as they have been bmost satisfactorilyb
treated in a work familiar to almost all, in this country at least, who
feel any interest in these speculations, Archbishop Whately’s Logic.
Against the more obvious forms of this class of fallacies, the rules of
the syllogism are a complete protection. Not (as we have so often said)
thatc ratiocination cannot be good unless it be in the form of a
syllogism; but that, by dshowing it ind that form, we are sure to
discover if it be bad, or at least if it contain any fallacy of this
class.

§ 2. [Fallacies in the conversion and æquipollency of propositions]
Among Fallacies of Ratiocination, we ought perhaps to include the errors
committed in processes which have the appearance only, not the reality,
of an inference from premises; the fallacies connected with the
conversion and æquipollency of propositions. I believe errors of this
description to be far more frequently committed than is generally
supposed, or than their extreme obviousness might seem to admit of. For
example, the simple conversion of an universal affirmative proposition,
All A are B, therefore all B are A, I take to be a very common form of
error: though committed, like many other fallacies, oftener in the
silence of thought than in express words, for it can scarcely be clearly
enunciated without being detected. And so with another form of fallacy,
not substantially different from the preceding: the erroneous conversion
of an hypothetical proposition. The proper converse of an hypothetical
proposition is this: If the consequent be false, the antecedent is
false; but this, If the consequent be true, the antecedent is true, by
no means holds good, but is an error corresponding to the simple
conversion of an universal Edition: current; Page: [804] affirmative.
Yet hardly anything is more common than for people, in their private
thoughts, to draw this inference. As when the conclusion is accepted,
which it so often is, for proof of the premises. That the premises
cannot be true if the conclusion is false, is the unexceptionable
foundation of the legitimate mode of reasoning calleda reductio ad
absurdum. But bpeopleb continually think and express themselves, as if
they also believed that the premises cannot be false if the conclusion
is true. The truth, or supposed truth, of the inferences which follow
from a doctrine, coftenc enables it to find acceptance in spite of gross
absurdities in it. How many dphilosophical systemsd which had scarcely
any intrinsic recommendation, have been received by thoughtful men
because they were supposed to lend additional support to religion,
morality, some favourite view of politics, or some other cherished
persuasion: not merely because their wishes were thereby enlisted on its
side, but because its leading to what they deemed sound conclusions
appeared to them a strong presumption in favour of its truth: though the
presumption, when viewed in its true light, amounted only to the absence
of that particulare evidence of falsehood, which would have resulted
from its leading by correct inference to something already fknown to bef
false.

Again, the very frequent error in conduct, of mistaking reverse of wrong
for right, is the practical form of a logical error with respect to the
Opposition of Propositions. It is committed for want of the habit of
distinguishing the contrary of a proposition from the contradictory of
it, and of attending to the logical canon, that contrary propositions,
though they cannot both be true, may both be false. If the error were to
express itself in words, it would run distinctly counter to this canon.
It generally, however, does not so express itself, and to compel it to
do so is the gmost effectualg method of detecting and exposing it.

§ 3. [Fallacies in the syllogistic process] Among Fallacies of
Ratiocination are to be ranked in the first place, all the cases of
vicious syllogism laid down in the books. These generally resolve
themselves into having more than three terms to the syllogism, either
avowedly, or in the covert mode of an undistributed middle term, or an
illicit process of one of the two extremes. It is not, indeed, very easy
fully to convict an argument of falling under any one of these vicious
cases in particular; for the reason already amore than once referred
toa, that the premises are seldom formally set out: if they were, the
fallacy would impose upon nobody; and while they are not, it is almost
Edition: current; Page: [805] always to a certain degree optional in
what manner the suppressed link shall be filled up. The rules of the
syllogism are rules for compelling a person to be aware of the whole of
what he must undertake to defend if he persists in maintaining his
conclusion. He has it balmostb always in his power to make his syllogism
good by introducing a false premise; and hence it is scarcely ever
possible decidedly to affirm that any argument involves a bad syllogism:
but this detracts nothing from the value of the syllogistic rules, since
it is by them that a reasoner is compelled distinctly to make his
election what premises he is prepared to maintain. The election made,
there is generally so little difficulty in seeing whether the conclusion
follows from the premises set out, that we might without much logical
impropriety have merged this fourth class of fallacies in the fifth, or
Fallacies of Confusion.

§ 4. [Fallacy of changing the premises] Perhaps, however, the commonest,
and certainly the most dangerous fallacies of this class, are those
which do not lie in a single syllogism, but slip in between one
syllogism and another in a chain of argument, and are committed by
changing the premises. A proposition is proved, or an acknowledged truth
laid down, in the first part of an argumentation, and in the second a
further argument is founded not on the same proposition, but on some
other, resembling it sufficiently to be mistaken for it. Instances of
this fallacy will be found in almost all the argumentative discourses of
unprecise thinkers; and we need only here advert to one of the obscurer
forms of it, recognised by the schoolmen as the fallacy à dicto secundum
quid ad dictum simpliciter. This is acommitteda when, in the premises, a
proposition is asserted with a qualification, and the qualification lost
sight of in the conclusion; or oftener, when a limitation or condition,
though not asserted, is necessary to the truth of the proposition, but
is forgotten when that proposition comes to be employed as a premise.
Many of the bad arguments in vogue belong to this class of error. The
premise is some admitted truth, some common maxim, the reasons or
evidence for which have been forgotten, or are not thought of at the
time, but if they had been thought of would have shown the necessity of
so limiting the premise that it would no longer have supported the
conclusion drawn from it.

Of this nature is the fallacy in what is called, by Adam Smith and
others, the Mercantile Theory binb Political Economy.[*] That theory
sets out from the common maxim, that whatever brings in money enriches;
or that every Edition: current; Page: [806] one is rich in proportion to
the quantity of money he obtains. From this it is concluded that the
value of any branch of trade, or of the trade of the country altogether,
consists in the balance of money it brings in; that any trade which
carries more money out of the country than it draws into it is a losing
trade; that therefore money should be attracted into the country and
kept there, by prohibitions and bounties: and a train of similar
corollaries. All for want of reflecting that if the riches of an
individual are in proportion to the quantity of money he can command, it
is because that is the measure of his power of purchasing money’s worth;
and is therefore subject to the proviso that he is not debarred from
employing his money in such purchases. The premise, therefore, is only
true secundum quid; but the theory assumes it to be true absolutely, and
infers that increase of money is increase of riches, even when produced
by means subversive of the condition under which alone money ccan bec
riches.

A second instance is, the argument by which it used to be contended,
before the commutation of tithe, that tithes fell on the landlord, and
were a deduction from rent; because the rent of tithe-free land was
always higher than that of land of the same quality, and the same
advantages of situation, subject to tithe. Whether it be true dor not
that a tithe falls on rentd, a treatise on Logic is not the place to
examine; but it is certain that this is no proof of it. Whether the
proposition be true or false, tithe-free land must, by the necessity of
the case, pay a higher rent. For if tithes do not fall on rent, it must
be because they fall on the consumer; because they raise the price of
eagricultural produce. But if the producee be raised fin pricef, the
farmer of tithe-free as well as the farmer of tithed land gets the
benefit. To the latter the rise is but a compensation for the tithe he
pays; to the first, who pays none, it is clear gain, and therefore
enables him, and if there be freedom of competition forces him, to pay
so muchg more rent to his landlord.h The question remains, to what class
of fallacies ithisi belongs. The premise is, that the owner of tithed
land receives less rent than the owner of tithe-free land; the
conclusion is, jthatj therefore he receives less than he himself would
receive if tithe were abolished. But the premise is only true
conditionally; the owner of tithed land receives less than what the
owner of tithe-free land is enabled to receive when other lands are
tithed; while the conclusion is applied to a state of circumstances in
which that condition fails, and in which, Edition: current; Page: [807]
by consequence, the premise kwillk not be true. The fallacy, therefore,
is à dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter.

A third example is the opposition sometimes made to legitimate
interferences of government in the economical affairs of society,
grounded on a misapplication of the maxim, that an individual is a
better judge than the government, of what is for his own pecuniary
interest. This objection was urged to Mr. Wakefield’s lprinciple of
colonization;m thel concentration of the settlers, by fixing such a
price on unoccupied land as may preserve the most desirable proportion
between the quantity of land in culture, and the labouring population.
Against this it was argued, that if individuals found it for their
advantage to occupy extensive tracts of land, they, being better judges
of their own interest than the legislature (which can only proceed on
general rules) ought not to be restrained from doing so. But in this
argument it was forgotten that the fact of a nperson’sn taking a large
tract of land is evidence only that it is his interest to take as much
as other people, but not that it might not be for his interest to
content himself with less, if he could be assured that other people
would do so too; an assurance which nothing but a government regulation
can give. If all other people took much, and he only a little, he would
reap none of the advantages derived from the concentration of the
population and the consequent possibility of procuring labour for hire,
but would have placed himself, without equivalent, in a situation of
voluntary inferiority. The proposition, therefore, that the quantity of
land which people will take when left to themselves is that whicho is
most for their interest to take, is true only secundum quid: it is only
their interest while they have no guarantee for the conduct of one
another. But the argument disregards the limitation, and takes the
proposition for true simpliciter.

One of the conditions oftenest dropped, when what would otherwise be a
true proposition is employed as a premise for proving others, is the
condition of time. It is a principle of political economy that prices,
profits, wages, &c. “always find their level;” but this is often
interpreted as if it meant that they are always, or generally, at their
level; while the truth is, as Coleridge epigrammatically expresses it,
that they are always finding their level, “which might be taken as a
paraphrase or ironical definition of a storm.”[*]

Edition: current; Page: [808]
Under the same head of fallacy (à dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter) might be placed all the errors which are vulgarly called
misapplications of abstract truths: that is, where a principle, true (as
the common expression is) in the abstract, that is, all modifying causes
being supposed absent, is reasoned on as if it were true absolutely, and
no modifying pcircumstancep could ever by possibility exist. This very
common form of error it is not requisite that we should exemplify here,
as it will be particularly treated of hereafter in its application to
the subjects on which it is most frequent and most fatal, those of
politics and society.*

Edition: current; Page: [809]


CHAPTER VII: Fallacies of Confusion

§ 1. [Fallacy of Ambiguous Terms] Under this fifth and last class ait
isa convenient to arrange all those fallacies, in which the source of
error is not so much a false estimate of the probative force of known
evidence, as an indistinct, indefinite, and fluctuating conception of
what the evidence is.

At the head of these stands that multitudinous body of fallacious
reasonings, in which the source of error is the ambiguity of terms: when
something which is true if a word be used in a particular sense, is
reasoned on as if it were true in another sense. In such a case there is
not a mal-estimation of evidence, because there is not properly any
evidence to the point at all; there is evidence, but to a different
point, which from a confused apprehension of the meaning of the terms
used, is supposed to be the same. This error will naturally be oftener
committed in our ratiocinations than in our direct inductions, because
in the former we are deciphering our own or other people’s notes, while
in the latter we have the things themselves present, either to bthe
senses or to theb memory. Except, indeed, when the induction is not from
individual cases to a generality, but from generalities to a still
higher generalization; in that case the fallacy of ambiguity may affect
the inductive process as well as the ratiocinative. It occurs in
ratiocination in two ways: when the middle term is ambiguous, or when
one of the terms of the syllogism is taken in one sense in the premises,
and in another sense in the conclusion.

Some good exemplifications of this fallacy are given by Archbishop
Whately.[*]

One case, [says he,] which may be regarded as coming under the head of
Ambiguous Middle, is c(what I believe logical writers mean by ‘Fallacia
Figuræ Dictionis,’)c the fallacy built on the grammatical structure of
language, from men’s usually taking for granted that paronymous d(or
conjugate) words, i.e. those belonging to each other, as the
substantive, adjective, verb, &c., of the same root,d have a precisely
ecorrespondinge meaning; which is by no means universally the Edition:
current; Page: [810] case. Such a fallacy could not indeed be even
exhibited in strict logical form, which would preclude even the attempt
at it, since it has two middleterms in sound as well as sense. But
nothing is more common in practice than to vary continually the terms
employed, with a view to grammatical convenience; nor is there anything
unfair in such a practice, as long as the meaning is preserved
unaltered; e.g. ‘murder should be punished with death; this man is a
murderer, therefore he deserves to die,’ &c. Here we proceed on the
assumption (in this case just) that to commit murder, and to be a
murderer,—to deserve death, and to be one who ought to die, are,
respectively, equivalent expressions; and it would frequently prove a
heavy inconvenience to be debarred this kind of liberty; but the abuse
of it gives rise to the Fallacy in question: e.g. projectors are unfit
to be trusted; this man has formed a project, therefore he is unfit to
be trusted: here the sophist proceeds on the hypothesis that he who
forms a project must be a projector: whereas the bad sense that commonly
attaches to the latter word, is not at all implied in the former. This
fallacy may often be considered as lying not in the Middle, but in one
of the terms of the Conclusion; so that the conclusion drawn shall not
be, in reality, at all warranted by the premises, though it will appear
to be so, by means of the grammatical affinity of the words: e.g. to be
acquainted with the guilty is a presumption of guilt; this man is so
acquainted, therefore we may presume that he is guilty: this argument
proceeds on the supposition of an exact correspondence between presume
and presumption, which, however, does not really exist; for
‘presumption’ is commonly used to express a kind of slight suspicion;
whereas, ‘to presume’ amounts to factualf belief. There are innumerable
instances of a non-correspondence in paronymous words, similar to that
above instanced; as between art and artful, design and designing, faith
and faithful, &c.; and the more slight the variation of gtheg meaning,
the more likely is the fallacy to be successful; for when the words have
become so widely removed in sense as ‘pity’ and ‘pitiful,’ every one
would perceive such a fallacy, nor could it be employed but in jest.*

The present Fallacyi is nearly allied to, or rather, perhaps, may be
regarded as a branch of, that founded on etymology; viz., when a term is
used, at one time in its customary, and at another in its etymological
sense. Perhaps no example of this can be found that is more extensively
and mischievously employed than in the case of the word representative:
assuming that its right meaning must correspond exactly with the strict
and original sense of the verb ‘represent,’ the sophist persuades the
multitude, that a member of the House of Commons is bound to be guided
in all points by the opinion of his constituents; and, in short,
Edition: current; Page: [811] to be merely their spokesman; whereas law
and custom, which in this case may be considered as fixing the meaning
of the term, require no such thing, but enjoin the representative to act
according to the best of his own judgment, and on his own
responsibility.

The following are instances of great practical importance, in which
arguments are habitually founded on a verbal ambiguity.

The mercantile public are frequently led into this fallacy by the
phrase, “scarcity of money.” In the language of commerce “money” has two
meanings: currency, or the circulating medium; and capital seeking
investment, especially investment on loan. In this last sense the word
is used when the “money market” is spoken of, and when the “value of
money” is said to be high or low, the rate of interest being meant. The
consequence of this ambiguity is, that as soon as scarcity of money in
the latter of these senses begins to be felt,—as soon as there is
difficulty of obtaining loans, and the rate of interest is high,—it is
concluded that this must arise from causes acting upon the quantity of
money in the other and more popular sense; that the circulating medium
must have diminished in quantity, or ought to be increased. I am aware
that, independently of the double meaning of the term, there are in jthe
factsj themselves some peculiarities, giving an apparent support to this
error; but the ambiguity of the language stands on the very threshold of
the subject, and intercepts all attempts to throw light upon it.

Another ambiguous expression which continually meets us in the political
controversies of the present time, especially in those which relate to
organic changes, is the phrase “influence of property:” which is
sometimes used for the influence of respect for superior intelligence,
or gratitude for the kind offices which persons of large property have
it so much in their power to bestow; at other times for the influence of
fear; fear of the worst sort of power, which large property kalsok gives
to its possessor, the power of doing mischief to dependents. To confound
these two, is the standing fallacy of ambiguity brought against those
who seek to purify lthel electoral system from corruption and
intimidation.m Persuasive influence, acting through the conscience of
the voter, and carrying his heart and mind with it, is
beneficial—therefore n(it is pretended)n coercive influence, which
compels him to forget that he is a moral agent, or to act in opposition
to his moral convictions, ought not to be placed under restraint.

Edition: current; Page: [812]
Another word which is often turned into an instrument of the fallacy of
ambiguity, is Theory. In its most proper acceptation, theory means the
completed result of philosophical induction from experience. In that
sense, there are erroneous as well as true theories, for induction may
be incorrectly performed, but theory of some sort is the necessary
result of knowing anything of a subject, and having put one’s knowledge
into the form of general propositions for the guidance of practice. oIn
this, the proper sense of the word, Theory is the explanation of
practice.o In another and pap more vulgar sense, theory means any mere
fiction of the imagination, endeavouring to conceive how a thing may
possibly have been produced, instead of examining how it was produced.
In this sense only are theory, and theorists, unsafe guides; but because
of this, ridicule or discredit is attempted to be attached to theory in
its proper sense, that is, to legitimate generalization, the end and aim
of all philosophy; and a conclusion is represented as worthless, just
because that has been done, which if done correctly, constitutes the
highest worth that a principle for the guidance of practice can possess,
namely, to comprehend in a few words the real law on which a phenomenon
depends, or some property or relation which is universally true of it.

“The Church” is sometimes understood to mean the clergy alone, sometimes
the whole body of believers, or at least of communicants. The
declamations respecting the inviolability of church property are
indebted for the greater part of their apparent force to this ambiguity.
The clergy, being called the church, are supposed to be the real owners
of what is called church property; whereas they are in truth only the
managing members of a much larger body of proprietors, and enjoy on
their own part a mere usufruct, not extending beyond a life interest.

qThe following is a Stoical argument taken from Cicero De Finibus, book
the third: “Quod est bonum, omne laudabile est. Quod autem laudabile
est, Edition: current; Page: [813] omne honestum est. Bonum igitur quod
est, honestum est.”[*] Here the ambiguous word is laudabile, which in
the minor premise means anything which mankind are accustomed, on good
grounds, to admire or value; as beauty, for instance, or good fortune:
but in the major, it denotes exclusively moral qualities. In much the
same manner the Stoics rendeavoured logically to justify as
philosophical truths, their figurative and rhetorical expressions of
ethical sentiment:r as that the virtuous man is alone free, alone
beautiful, alone a king, &c. Whoever has virtue has Good (because it has
been previously determined not to call anything else good); but, again,
Good necessarily includes freedom, beauty, and even skingships, allt
these being good things; therefore whoever has virtue has all these.

The following is an argument of Descartes to prove, in his à priori
manner, the being of uau God. The conception, says he, of an infinite
Being proves the real existence of such a being. For if there is not
really any such being, I must have made the conception; but if I could
make it, I can also unmake it; which evidently is not true; therefore
there must be, externally to myself, an archetype, from which the
conception was derived. vIn this argument (which, it may be observed,
would equally prove the real existence of ghosts and of witches) the
ambiguityv is in the pronoun I, by which, in one place, is to be
understood my will, in another the laws of my nature. If the conception,
existing as it does in my mind, had no original without, the conclusion
would unquestionably follow that I made it; that is, the laws of my
nature must have wsomehoww evolved it: but that my will made it, would
not follow. Now when Descartes afterwards adds that I cannot unmake the
conception, he means that I cannot get rid of it by an act of my will:
which is true, but is not the proposition required. xI can as much
unmake this conception as I can any other: no conception which I have
once had, can I ever dismiss byy mere volition: butx what some of the
laws of my nature have produced, other laws, or those same laws in other
circumstances, zmay, and often do, subsequently effacez.

Edition: current; Page: [814]
Analogous to this are some of the ambiguities in the free-will
controversy; which, as they will come under special consideration in the
concluding Book, I only mention memoriæ causâ. In that discussion, too,
the word I is often shifted from one meaning to another, at one time
standing for my volitions, at another time for the actions which are the
consequences of them, or the mental dispositions from which they
proceed. The latter ambiguity is exemplified in an argument of Coleridge
(in his Aids to Reflection), in support of the freedom of the will. It
is not true, he says, that aaa man is governed by motives; “the man
makes the motive, not the motive the man;” the proof being that “what is
a strong motive to one man is no motive at all to another.”[*] The
premise is true, but only amounts to this, that different persons have
different degrees of susceptibility to the same motive; as they have
also to the same intoxicating bliquidb, which however does not prove
that they are free to be drunk or not drunk, whatever cquantity of the
fluidc they may drink. What is proved is, that certain mental conditions
in the dpersond himself, must co-operate, in the production of the act,
with the external inducement: but those mental conditions also are the
effect of causes; and there is nothing in the argument to prove that
they can arise without a cause—that a spontaneous determination of thee
will, without any cause at all, ever takes place, as the free-will
doctrine supposes.

The double use, in the free-will controversy, of the word Necessity,
which sometimes stands only for Certainty, at other times for
Compulsion; sometimes for what cannot be prevented, at other times only
for what we have reason to be assured will not; fwe shall have occasion
hereafter to pursuef to some of its ulterior consequences.

A most important ambiguity, both in common and in metaphysical language,
is thus pointed out by Archbishop Whately in the Appendix to his
Logic:[†]

Same (as well as One, Identical, and other words derived from them,) is
used frequently in a sense very different from its primary one, as
applicable to a single object; being employed to denote great
similarity. When several objects are undistinguishably alike, one single
description will apply equally to any of them; and thence they are said
to be all of one and the same nature, appearance, &c. As, e.g. when we
say ‘this house is built of the same stone with such another,’ we only
mean that the stones are undistinguishable in their qualities; not that
the one Edition: current; Page: [815] building was pulled down, and the
other constructed with the materials. Whereas sameness, in the primary
sense, does not even necessarily imply similarity; for if we say of any
man that he is greatly altered since such a time, we understand, and
indeed imply by the very expression, that he is one person, though
different in several qualities. It is worth observing also, that Same,
in the secondary sense, admits, according to popular usage, of degrees:
we speak of two things being nearly the same, but not entirely: personal
identity does not admit of degrees. Nothing, perhaps, has contributed
more to the error of Realism than inattention to this ambiguity. When
several persons are said to have one and the same opinion, thought, or
idea, gmanyg men, overlooking the true simple statement of the case,
which is, that they are all thinking alike, look for something more
abstruse and mystical, and imagine there must be some One Thing, in the
primary sense, though not an individual, which is present at once in the
mind of each of these persons; and thence readily sprung Plato’s theory
of Ideas, each of which was, according to him, one real, eternal object,
existing entire and complete in each of the individual objects that are
known by one name.

It is, indeed, not a matter of inference, but of authentic history, that
Plato’s doctrine of Ideas, and the Aristotelian doctrine (hin this
respect similar toh the Platonic) of substantial forms and second
substances, grew up in the precise way here pointed out; from the
supposed necessity of finding, in things which were said to have the
same nature, or the same qualities, something which was the same in the
very sense in which a man is the same as himself. All the idle
speculations respecting τὸ ὅν, τὸ ἕν, τὸ ὅμοιον, and similar
abstractions, so common in the ancient and in some modern schools of
ithought, sprangi from the same source. The Aristotelian logicians jsaw,
however,j one case of the ambiguity, and provided against it with their
peculiar felicity in the invention of technical language, when they
distinguished things which differed both specie and numero, from those
which differed numero tantum, that is, which were exactly alike (in some
particular respect at least) but were distinct individuals. An extension
of this distinction to the two meanings of the word Same, namely, things
which are the same specie tantum, and a thing which is the same numero
as well as specie, would have prevented the confusion which has been a
source of so much darkness and such an abundance of positive error in
kmetaphysicalk philosophy.

One of the most singular examples of the length to which a lthinkerl of
eminence may be led away by an ambiguity of language, is afforded by
this very case. I refer to the famous argument by which Bishop Berkeley
flattered himself that he had for ever put an end to “scepticism,
atheism, and irreligion.”[*] It is briefly as follows. I thought of a
thing yesterday; I ceased to Edition: current; Page: [816] think of it;
I think of it again to-day, I had, therefore, in my mind yesterday an
idea of the object; I have also an idea of it to-day; this idea is
evidently not another, but the very same idea. Yet an intervening time
elapsed in which I had it not. Where was the idea during this interval?
It must have been somewhere; it did not cease to exist; otherwise the
idea I mhad yesterdaym could not be the same idea; no more than the man
I see alive to-day can be the same whom I saw yesterday if the man has
died in the meanwhile. Now an idea cannot be conceived to exist anywhere
except in a mind; and hence there must exist an Universal Mind, in which
all ideas have their permanent residence, during the intervals of their
conscious presence in our own minds.

nIt is evident thatn Berkeley here confounded sameness numero with
sameness specie, that is, with exact resemblance, and assumed the former
owhereo there was only the latter p;not perceivingp that when we say we
have the same thought to-day which we had yesterday, we do not mean the
same individual thought, but a thought exactly similar: as we say that
we have the same illness which we had last year, qmeaning only the same
sortq of illness.

In one remarkable instance the scientific world was divided into two
furiously hostile parties by an ambiguity of language affecting a branch
of science which, more completely than most others, enjoys the advantage
of a precise and well-defined terminology. I refer to the famous dispute
respecting the vis viva, the history of which is given at large in
Professor Playfair’s Dissertation. The question was, whether the force
of a moving body was proportional (its mass being given) to its velocity
simply, or to the square of its velocity: and the ambiguity was in the
word Force. “One of the effects,” says Playfair, “produced by a moving
body is proportional to the square of the velocity, while another is
proportional to the velocity simply:”[*] from whence clearer thinkers
were subsequently led to establish a double measure of the efficiency of
a moving power, one being called vis viva, and the other momentum. About
the facts, both parties were from the first agreed: the only question
was, with which of the two effects the term force should be, or could
most conveniently be, associated. But the disputants were by no means
aware that this was all; they thought that force was one thing, the
production of effects another; and the question, by which set of effects
the force which produced both the one and the other should be measured,
was supposed to be a question not of terminology, but of fact.

The ambiguity of the word Infinite is the real fallacy in the amusing
logical Edition: current; Page: [817] puzzle of Achilles and the
Tortoise, a puzzle which has been too hard for the ingenuity or patience
of many philosophers, and rwhich no less a thinker than Sir William
Hamilton consideredr as insoluble; as a sound argument though leading to
a palpable falsehoods.[*] The fallacy, as Hobbes hinted,[†] lies in the
tacit assumption that whatever is infinitely divisible is infinite; but
tthe following solution (to the invention of which I have no claim) is
more precise and satisfactory.t

The argument is, let Achilles run ten times as fast as the tortoise, yet
if the tortoise has the start, Achilles will never overtake him. For
suppose them to be at first separated by an interval of a thousand feet:
when Achilles has run these thousand feet, the tortoise will have got on
a hundred; when Achilles has run those hundred, the tortoise will have
run ten, and so on for ever: therefore Achilles may run for ever without
overtaking the tortoise.

Now the “for ever,” in the conclusion, means, for any length of time
that can be supposed; but in the premises, “ever” does not mean any
length of time; it means any number of subdivisions of time. It means
that we may divide a thousand feet by ten,u and that quotient again by
ten, and so on as often as we please; that there never needs be an end
to the subdivisions of the distance, nor consequently to those of the
time in which it is performed. But an unlimited number of subdivisions
may be made of that which is itself limited. The argument proves no
other infinity of duration than may be embraced within five minutes. As
long as the five minutes are not expired, what remains of them may be
divided by ten, and again by ten, as often as we like, which is
perfectly compatible with their being only five minutes altogether. It
proves, in short, that to pass through this finite space requires a time
which is infinitely divisible, but not an infinite time; the confounding
of which distinction Hobbes had already seen to be the gist of the
fallacy.

The following ambiguities of the word right (in addition to the obvious
and familiar one of a right and the adjective right) are vextractedv
from a forgotten paper of my own, in a periodicalw:[‡]

Edition: current; Page: [818]
Speaking morally, you are said to have a right to do a thing, if all
persons are morally bound not to hinder you from doing it. But, in
another sense, to have a right to do a thing is the opposite of having
no right to do it, xi.e.x of being under a moral obligation to forbeary
doing it. In this sense, to say that you have a right to do a thing,
means that you may do it without any breach of duty on your part; that
other persons not only ought not to hinder you, but have no cause to
thinkz worse of you for doing it. This is a perfectly distinct
proposition from the preceding. The right which you have by virtue of a
duty incumbent upon other persons, is obviously quite a different thing
from a right consisting in the absence of any duty incumbent upon
yourself. Yet the two things are perpetually confounded. Thus a man will
say he has a right to publish his opinions; which may be true in this
sense, that it would be a breach of duty in any other person to
interfere and prevent the publication: but he assumes thereupon, that in
publishing his opinions, he himself violates no duty; which may either
be true or false, depending, as it does, on his having taken due pains
to satisfy himself, first, that the opinions are true, and next, that
their publication in this manner, and at this particular juncture, will
probably be beneficial to the interests of truth on the whole.

The second ambiguity is that of confounding a right of any kind, with a
right to enforce that right by resisting or punishing a violation of it.
aPeoplea will say, for example, that they have a right tob good
government, which is undeniably true, it being the moral duty of their
governors to govern them well. But in granting this, you are supposed to
have admitted their right or liberty to turn out their governors, and
perhaps to punish them, for having failed in the performance of this
duty; which, far from being the same thing, is by no means universally
true, but depends on an immense number of varying circumstances,c

requiring to be conscientiously weighed before adopting or acting on
such a resolution.c dThis lastd example is (like eothers which have
beene cited) a case of fallacy within fallacy; it involves not only the
second of the two ambiguities pointed out, but the first likewise.

One not unusual form of the Fallacy of Ambiguous Terms, is known
technically as the Fallacy of Composition and Division: when the same
term is collective in the premises, distributive in the conclusion, or
vice versâ: or when the middle term is collective in one premise,
distributive in the other. As if one were to say (I quote from
Archbishop Whately) “All the angles of a triangle are equal to two right
angles: ABC is an angle of a triangle; therefore ABC is equal to two
right angles. . . . There is no fallacyf more common, or more likely to
deceive, than the one now before us. The form in which it is most
usually employed is to establish some truth, separately, concerning
Edition: current; Page: [819] each single member of a certain class, and
thence to infer the same of the whole collectively.”[*] As in the
argument one gsometimes hearsg, to prove that the world could do without
great men. If Columbus (it is said) had never lived, America would still
have been discovered, at most only a few years later; if Newton had
never lived, some other person would have discovered the law of
gravitation; and so forth. Most true: these things would have been done,
but in all probability not htillh some one had again been found with the
qualities of iColumbus ori Newton. Because any one great man might have
had his place supplied by jother great menj, the argument concludes that
all great men could have been dispensed with. The term “great men” is
distributive in the premises and collective in the conclusion.

Such alsok is the fallacy which probably operates on most adventurers in
lotteries; e.g. ‘the gaining of a high prize is no uncommon occurrence;
and what is no uncommon occurrence may reasonably be expected; therefore
the gaining of a high prize may reasonably be expected:’ the conclusion
when applied to the individual (as in practice it is) must be understood
in the sense of ‘reasonably expected by a certain individual;’ therefore
for the major premise to be true, the middle term must be understood to
mean, ‘no uncommon occurrence to some one particular person;’ whereas
for the minor (which has been placed first) to be true, you must
understand it of ‘no uncommon occurrence to some one or other;’ landl
thus you will have the Fallacy of Composition.[†]

This is a Fallacy with which men are extremely apt to deceive
themselves; for when a multitude of particulars are presented to the
mind, many are too weak or too indolent to take a comprehensive view of
them, but confine their attention to each single point, by turns; and
then decide, infer, and act, accordingly: e.g. the imprudent
spendthrift, finding that he is able to afford this, or that, or the
other expense, forgets that all of them together will ruin him.[‡]

The debauchee destroys his health by successive acts of intemperance,
because no one of those acts would be of itself sufficient to do him any
serious harm. A sick person reasons with himself, “one, and another, and
another, of my symptoms, do not prove that I have a fatal disease;” and
practically concludes that all taken together do not prove it.

§ 2. [Fallacy of Petitio Principii] We have now sufficiently exemplified
one of the principal Genera in this Order of Fallacies; where, the
source of Edition: current; Page: [820] error being the ambiguity of
terms, the premises are verbally what is required to support the
conclusion, but not really so. In the second great Fallacy of Confusion
they are neither verbally nor really sufficient, though, from their
multiplicity and confused arrangement, and still oftener from defect of
memory, they are not seen to be what they are. The fallacy I mean is
that of Petitio Principii, or begging the question; including athea more
complex and not uncommon variety of it, which is termed Reasoning in a
Circle.

Petitio Principii, as defined by Archbishop Whately, is the fallacy “in
which the premise either appears manifestly to be the same as the
conclusion, or is actually proved from the conclusion, or is such as
would naturally and properly so be proved.”[*] By the last clause I
presume is meant, that it is not susceptible of any other proof; for
otherwise, there would be no fallacy. To deduce from a proposition,
propositions from which it would itself more naturally be deduced, is
often an allowable deviation from the usual didactic order; or at most,
what, by an adaptation of a phrase familiar to mathematicians, may be
called a logical inelegance.*

The employment of a proposition to prove that on which it is itself
dependent for proof, by no means implies the degree of mental imbecility
which might at first be supposed. The difficulty of comprehending how
this fallacy could possibly be committed, disappears when we reflect
that all persons, even bthe instructedb, hold a great number of opinions
without exactly recollecting how they came by them. Believing that they
have at some former time verified them by sufficient evidence, but
having forgotten what the evidence was, they may easily be betrayed into
deducing from them the very propositions which are alone capable of
serving as premises for their establishment. c“As if,” says Archbishop
Whately, “onec should attempt to prove the being of a God from the
authority of Holy Writ;”[†] which might easily happen to one with whom
both ddoctrines, as fundamental tenets of his religious creedd, stand on
the same ground of familiar and traditional belief.

Arguing in a circle, however, is a stronger case of the fallacy, and
implies Edition: current; Page: [821] more than the mere passive
reception of a premise by one who does not remember how it is to be
proved. It implies an actual attempt to prove two propositions
reciprocally from one another; and is seldom resorted to, at least in
express terms, by any person in his own speculations, but is committed
by those who, being hard pressed by an adversary, are forced into giving
reasons for an opinion of which, when they began to argue, they had not
sufficiently considered the grounds. As in the following example from
Archbishop Whately: “Some mechanicians attempt to prove (what they ought
to lay down as a probable but doubtful hypothesis*) that every particle
of matter gravitates equally: ‘why?’ ‘because those bodies which contain
more particles ever gravitate more strongly, i.e. are heavier:’ ‘but,
(it may be urged,) those which are heaviest are not always more bulky;’
‘no, but they contain more particles, though more closely condensed:’
‘how do you know that?’ ‘because they are heavier:’ ‘how does that prove
it?’ ‘because all particles of matter gravitating equally, that mass
which is specifically the heavier must needs have the more of them in
the same space.’ ”[*] It appears to me that the fallacious reasoner, in
his private thoughts, would not be likely to proceed beyond the first
step.g He would acquiesce in the sufficiency of the reason first given,
“bodies which contain more particles are heavier.” It is when he finds
this questioned, and is called upon to prove it, without knowing how,
that he tries to establish his premise by supposing proved what he is
attempting to prove by it. The most effectual way, in fact, of exposing
a Petitio Principii, when circumstances allow of it, is by challenging
the reasoner to prove his premises; which if he attempts to do, he is
necessarily driven into arguing in a circle.

It is not uncommon, however, for thinkers, and those not of the lowest
description, to be led even in their own thoughts, not indeed into
formally proving each of two propositions from the other, but into
admitting propositions which can only be so proved. In the preceding
example the two Edition: current; Page: [822] together form a complete
and consistent, though hypothetical, explanation of the facts concerned.
And the tendency to mistake mutual coherency for truth; to trust one’s
safety to a strong chain though it has no point of support; is at the
bottom of much which, when reduced to the strict forms of argumentation,
can exhibit itself no otherwise than as reasoning in a circle. All
experience bears testimony to the enthralling effect of neat
concatenation in a system of doctrines, and the difficulty with which
hpeopleh admit the persuasion that anything which holds so well together
can possibly fall.

Since every case where a conclusion which can only be proved from
certain premises is used for the proof of those premises, is a case of
petitio principii, that fallacy includes a very great proportion of all
incorrect reasoning. It is necessary, for completing our view of the
fallacy, to exemplify some of the disguises under which it is accustomed
to mask itself, and to escape exposure.

A proposition would not be admitted by any person in his senses as a
corollary from itself, unless it were expressed in language which made
it seem different. One of the commonest modes of so expressing it, is to
present the proposition itself in abstract terms, as a proof of the same
proposition expressed in concrete language. This is a very frequent
mode, not only of pretended proof, but of pretended explanation; and is
parodied iwhen Molière makes one of his absurd physicians say,i

-   

    jMihi à docto doctore,
-   

    Domandatur causam et rationem quare
-   

    Opium facit dormire.
-   

    A quoi respondeo,
-   

    Quia est in eo
-   

    Virtus dormitiva,
-   

    Cujus est natura
-   

    Sensus assoupire.j[*]

The words Nature and Essence are grand instruments of this mode of
begging the question. As in the well-known argument of the scholastic
theologians, that the mind thinks always, because the essence of the
mind is to think. Locke had to point out, that if by essence is here
meant some property which must manifest itself by actual exercise at all
times, the Edition: current; Page: [823] premise is a direct assumption
of the conclusion; while if it only means that to think is the
distinctive property of a mind, there is no connexion between the
premise and the conclusion, since it is not necessary that a distinctive
property should be perpetually in action.

The following is one of the modes in which these abstract terms, Nature
and Essence, are used as instruments of this fallacy. Some particular
properties of a thing are selected, more or less arbitrarily, to be
termed its nature or essence; and when this has been done, kthesek
properties are supposed to be invested with a kind of indefeasibleness;
to have become paramount to all the other properties of the thing, and
incapable of being prevailed over or counteracted by them. As when
Aristotle, in a passage lalready citedl, “decides that there is no void
on such arguments as this: in a void there could be no difference of up
and down; for as in nothing there are no differences, so there are none
in a privation or negation; but a void is merely a privation or negation
of matter; therefore, in a void, bodies could not move up and down,
which it is in their nature to do.”* In other words; it is minm the
nature of bodies to move up and down, ergo any physical fact which
supposes them not so to move, cannot be authentic. This mode of
reasoning, by which a bad generalization is made to overrule all facts
which contradict it, is petitio principii in one of its most palpable
forms.

None of the modes of assuming what should be proved are in more frequent
use than what are termed byn Bentham “question-begging appellatives;”[*]
names which beg the question under the odisguiseo of stating it. The
most potent of these are such as have a laudatory or vituperative
character. For instance, in politics, the word Innovation. The
dictionary meaning of this term being merely “a change to something
new,” it is difficult for the defenders even of the most salutary
improvement to deny that it is an innovation; yet the word having
acquired in common usage a vituperative connotation in addition to its
dictionary meaning, the admission is always construed as a large
concession to the disadvantage of the thing proposed.

The following passage from the argument in refutation of the Epicureans,
in the second book of Cicero De Finibus, affords a fine example of this
sort of fallacy. “Et quidem illud ipsum non nimium probo (et tantum
patior) philosophum loqui de cupiditatibus finiendis. An potest
cupiditas finiri? tollenda Edition: current; Page: [824] est, atque
extrahenda radicitus. Quis est enim, in quo sit cupiditas, quin recte
cupidus dici possit? Ergo et avarus erit, sed finite: adulter, verum
habebit modum: et luxuriosus eodem modo. Qualis ista philosophia est,
quæ non interitum afferat pravitatis, sed sit contenta mediocritate
vitiorum?” The question was, whether certain desires, when kept withinp
bounds, are vices or not; and the argument decides the point by applying
to them a word (cupiditas) which implies vice. It is shown, however, in
the remarks which follow, that Cicero did not intend this as a serious
argument, but as a criticism on what he deemed an inappropriate
expression. “Rem ipsam prorsus probo: elegantiam desidero. Appellet hæc
desideria naturæ; cupiditatis nomen servet alio,” &c.[*] But many
persons, both ancient and modern, have employed this, or something
equivalent to it, as a real and conclusive argument. We may remark that
the passage respecting cupiditas and cupidus is also an example of
another fallacy already noticed, that of Paronymous Terms.

Many more of the arguments of the ancient moralists, and especially of
the Stoics, fall within the definition of Petitio Principii. In the De
Finibus, for example, which I continue to quote as being probably the
best extant exemplification at once of the doctrines and the methods of
the schools ofq philosophy existing at that time; rof what value as
arguments are such pleas as those of Cato in the third bookr: That if
virtue were not happiness, it could not be a thing to boast of: That if
death or pain were evils, it would be impossible not to fear them, and
it could not, therefore, be laudable to despise them, &c.[†] In one way
of viewing these arguments, they may be regarded as appeals to the
authority of the general sentiment of mankind which had stamped its
approval upon certain actions and characters by the phrases referred to;
but that such could have been the meaning intended is very unlikely,
considering the contempt of the ancient philosophers for vulgar opinion.
In any other sense they are clear cases of Petitio Principii, since the
word laudable, and the idea of boasting, imply principles of conduct;
and practical maxims can only be proved from speculative truths, namely
from the properties of the subject matter, and cannot, therefore, be
employed to prove those properties. As well might it be argued that a
government is good because we ought to support it, or that there is a
God because it is our duty to pray to him.

It is assumed by all the disputants in the De Finibus as the foundation
of Edition: current; Page: [825] the inquiry into the summum bonum, that
“sapiens semper beatus est.”[*] sNot simply that wisdom gives the best
chance of happiness, or that wisdom consists in knowing what happiness
is, and by what things it is promoted; these propositions would not have
been enough for them:—but that the sage always is, and must of necessity
be, happy.s The idea that wisdom could be consistent with unhappiness,
was always rejected as inadmissible: the reason assigned by one of the
interlocutors, near the beginning of the third book, being, that if the
wise could be unhappy, there was tlittlet use in pursuing wisdom.[†] But
by unhappiness they did not mean pain or suffering; to that it was
granted that the wisest person was liable in common with others: he was
happy, because in possessing wisdom he had the most valuable of uallu
possessions, the most to be sought and prized of all things, and to
possess the most valuable thing was to be the most happy. By laying it
down, therefore, at the commencement of the inquiry, that the sage must
be happy, the disputed question respecting the summum bonum was in fact
begged; with the further assumption, that pain and suffering, so far as
they can coexist with wisdom, are not unhappiness, and are no evil.

The following are additional instances of Petitio Principii, under more
or less of disguise.

Plato, in the Sophistes, attempts to prove that things may exist which
are incorporeal, by the argument that justice and wisdom are
incorporeal, and justice and wisdom must be something.[‡] Here, if by
something be meant, as Plato did in fact mean, a thing capable of
existing in and by itself, and not as a quality of some other thing, he
begs the question in asserting that justice and wisdom must be
something: if he means anything else, his conclusion is not proved. This
fallacy might also be classed under ambiguous middleterm: something, in
the one premise, meaning some substance, in the other merely some object
of thought, whether substance or attribute.

It was formerly an argument vemployedv in proof of what is now no longer
a popular doctrine, the infinite divisibility of matter, that every
portion of matter, however small, must at least have an upper and an
under surface. Those who used this argument did not see that it assumed
the very point in dispute, the impossibility of arriving at a minimum of
thickness; for if there be a minimum, its upper and under surface will
of course be one: it will be itself a surface, and no more. The argument
owes its very considerable plausibility to this, that the premise does
actually seem more obvious than Edition: current; Page: [826] the
conclusion, though really identical with it. As expressed in the
premise, the proposition appeals directly and in concrete language to
the incapacity of the human imagination for conceiving a minimum. Viewed
in this light, it becomes a case of the à priori fallacy or natural
prejudice, that whatever cannot be conceived cannot exist. Every fallacy
of Confusion (it is almost unnecessary to repeat) will, if cleared up,
become a fallacy of some other sort; and it will be found of deductive
or ratiocinative fallacies generally, that when they mislead, there is
mostly, as in this case, aw fallacy of some other description lurking
under them, by virtue of which chiefly it is that the verbal juggle,
which is the outside or body of this kind of fallacy, passes undetected.

Euler’s Algebra, a book otherwise of great merit, but full, to
overflowing, of logical errors in respect to the foundation of the
science, xcontainsx the following argument to prove that minus
multiplied by minus gives plus, a doctrine the opprobrium of all ymere
mathematiciansy, and which Euler had not a glimpse of the true method of
proving. He says minus multiplied by minus cannot give minus; for minus
multiplied by plus gives minus, and minus multiplied by minus cannot
give the same product as minus multiplied by plus.[*] Now one is obliged
to ask, why minus multiplied by minus must give any product at all? and
if it does, why its product cannot be the same as that of minus
multiplied by plus? for this would seem, at the first glance, not more
absurd than that minus by minus should give the same as plus by plus,
the proposition which Euler prefers to it. The premise requires proof,
as much as the conclusion: nor can it be proved, except by that more
comprehensive view of the nature of multiplication, and of algebraic
processes in general, which would also supply a far better proof of the
mysterious doctrine which Euler is here endeavouring to demonstrate.

Az striking instance of reasoning in a circle is that of some ethical
awritersa, who first take for their standard of moral truth what, being
the general, they deem to be the natural or instinctive sentiments and
perceptions of mankind, and then explain away the numerous instances of
divergence from their assumed standard, by representing them as cases in
which the perceptions are unhealthy. Some particular mode of conduct or
feeling is affirmed to be unnatural; why? because it is abhorrent to the
universal and natural sentiments of mankind. Finding no such sentiment
in yourself, you question the fact; and the answer is (if your
antagonist is polite), that you Edition: current; Page: [827] are an
exception, a peculiar case. But neither (say you) do I find in the
people of some other country, or of some former age, any such feeling of
abhorrence; “ay, but their feelings were sophisticated and unhealthy.”

One of the most notable specimens of reasoning in a circle is the
doctrine of Hobbes, Rousseau, and others, which rests the obligations by
which human beings are bound as members of society, on a supposed social
compact. I wave the consideration of the fictitious nature of the
compact itself; but when bHobbes, through the whole Leviathan,b
elaborately deduces the obligation of obeying the sovereign, not from
the necessity or utility of doing so, but from a promise supposed to
have been made by our ancestors, on renouncing savage life and agreeing
to establish political society, it is impossible not to retort by the
question, why are we bound to keep a promise made for us by others? or
why bound to keep a promise at all? No satisfactory ground can be
assigned for the obligation, except the mischievous consequences of the
absence of faith and mutual confidence among mankind. We are, therefore,
brought round to the interests of society, as the ultimate ground of the
obligation of a promise; and yet those interests are not admitted to be
a sufficient justification for the existence of government and law.
Without a promise it is thought that we should not be bound to that
cwhich is implied in all modes of living in societyc, namely, to yield a
general obedience to the laws therein established; and so necessary is
the promise deemed, that if none has actually been made, some additional
safety is supposed to be given to the foundations of society by feigning
one.

§ 3. [Fallacy of Ignoratio Elenchi] Two principal subdivisions of the
class of Fallacies of Confusion having been disposed of; there remains a
third, in which the confusion is not, as in the Fallacy of Ambiguity, in
misconceiving the import of the premises, nor, as in Petitio Principii,
in forgetting what the premises are, but in mistaking the conclusion
which is to be proved. This is the fallacy of Ignoratio Elenchi, in the
widest sense of the phrase; also called by Archbishop Whately the
Fallacy of Irrelevant Conclusion. His aexamplesa and remarks are highly
worthy of citation.

Various kinds of propositions are, according to the occasion,
substituted for the one of which proof is required: sometimes the
particular for the universal; sometimes a proposition with different
terms; and various are the contrivances employed to effect and to
conceal this substitution, and to make the conclusion which the sophist
has drawn, answer practically the same purpose as the one he ought to
have established. We say, ‘practically the same purpose,’ because it
will very often happen that some emotion will be excited, some sentiment
impressed on the mind, (by a dexterous employment of this fallacy), such
as shall bring men into the Edition: current; Page: [828] disposition
requisite for your purpose; though they may not have assented to, or
even stated distinctly in their own minds, the proposition which it was
your business to establish. Thus if a sophist has to defend one who has
been guilty of some serious offence, which he wishes to extenuate,
though he is unable distinctly to prove that it is not such, yet if he
can succeed in making the audience laugh at some casual matter, he has
gained practically the same point. So also if any one has pointed out
the extenuating circumstances in some particular case of offence, so as
to show that it differs widely from the generality of the same class,
the sophist if he find himself unable to disprove these circumstances,
may do away the force of them, by simply referring the action to that
very class, which no one can deny that it belongs to, and the very name
of which will excite a feeling of disgust sufficient to counteract the
extenuation; e.g. let it be a case of peculation, and that many
mitigating circumstances have been brought forward which cannot be
denied; the sophistical opponent will reply, ‘Well, but after all, the
man is a rogue, and there is an end of it;’ now in reality this was (by
hypothesis) never the question; and the mere assertion of what was never
denied, ought not, in fairness, to be regarded as decisive: but,
practically, the odiousness of the word, arising in great measure from
the association of those very circumstances which belong to most of the
class, but which we have supposed to be absent in this particular
instance, excites precisely that feeling of disgust, which in effect
destroys the force of the defence. In like manner we may refer to this
head all cases of improper appeal to the passions, and everything else
which is mentioned by Aristotle as extraneous to the matter in hand (ἔξω
του̑ πράγματος).[*]

bAgain,

instead of proving that ‘this prisoner has committed an atrocious
fraud,’ you prove that the fraud he is accused of is atrocious: instead
of proving (as in the well-known tale of Cyrus and the two coats) that
the taller boy had a right to force the other boy to exchange coats with
him, you prove that the exchange would have been advantageous to both:
instead of proving that the poor ought to be relieved in this way rather
than in that, you prove that the poor ought to be relieved: instead of
proving that cthec irrational agent—whether a brute or a madman—can
never be deterred from any act by apprehension of punishment (as for
instance a dog from sheep-biting, by fear of being beaten), you prove
that the beating of one dog does not operate as an example to other
dogs, &c.b

It is evident that ignoratio elenchi may be employed as well for the
apparent refutation of your opponent’s proposition, as for the apparent
establishment of your own; for it is substantially the same thing, to
prove what was not denied or to disprove what was not asserted. The
latter practice is not less common, and it Edition: current; Page: [829]
is more offensive, because it frequently amounts to a personal affront,
in attributing to a person, opinions, &c., which he perhaps holds in
abhorrence. Thus, when in a discussion one party vindicates, on the
ground of general expediency, a particular instance of resistance to
government in a case of intolerable oppression, the opponent may gravely
maintain, that ‘we ought not to do evil that good may come;’ a
proposition which of course had never been denied, the point in dispute
being, ‘whether resistance in this particular case were doing evil or
not.’ dOr again, by way of disproving the assertion of the right of
private judgment in religion, one may hear a grave argument to prove
that ‘it is impossible every one can be right in his judgment.’d[*]

The works of controversial writers are seldom free from this fallacy.e
The attempts, for instance, to disprove the population doctrines of
Malthus, have been mostly cases of ignoratio elenchi. Malthus has been
supposed to be refuted if it could be shown that in some countries or
ages population has been nearly stationary; as if he had asserted that
population always increases in a given ratio, or had not expressly
declared that it increases only in so far as it is not restrained by
prudence, or kept down by poverty and disease. Or, perhaps, af
collection of facts is produced to prove that in some one country the
people are better off with a dense population than they are in another
country with a thin one; or that the people have become more numerous
and better off at the same time. As if the assertion were that a dense
population could not possibly be well off: as if it were not part of the
very doctrine, and essential to it, that where there is a more abundant
gproductiong there may be a greater population without any increase of
poverty, or even with a diminution of it.

The favourite argument against Berkeley’s theory of the non-existence of
matter, and the most popularly effective, next to a “grin”*—an argument,
moreover, which is not confined to “coxcombs,” nor to men like Samuel
Johnson,[†] iwhose greatly overrated ability certainly did not lie in
the direction ofi metaphysical speculation, but is the stock argument of
the Scotch school of metaphysicians—is a palpable ignoratio elenchi. The
argument is perhaps as frequently expressed by gesture as by words, and
one of its commonest Edition: current; Page: [830] forms consists in
knocking a stick against the ground. This short and easy confutation
overlooks the fact, that in denying matter, Berkeley did not deny
anything to which our senses bear witness, and therefore cannot be
answered by any appeal to them. His scepticism related to the supposed
substratum, or hidden cause of the appearances perceived by our senses:
the evidence of which, whatever may be jthought ofj its conclusiveness,
is certainly not the evidence of sense. And it will always remain a
signal proof of the want of metaphysical profundity of Reid, Stewart,
and, I am sorry to add, of Brown, that they should have persisted in
asserting that Berkeley, if he believed his own doctrine, was bound to
walk into the kennel, or run his head against a post. As if kpersonsk
who do not recognise an occult cause of their sensations, could not
possibly believe that a fixed order subsists among the sensations
themselves. Such a want of comprehension of the distinction between a
thing and its sensible manifestation, or, in lmetaphysicall language,
between the noumenon and the phenomenon, would be impossible to even the
dullest disciple of Kant or Coleridge.

It would be easy to add a greater number of examples of this fallacy, as
well as of the others which I have attempted to characterize. But a more
copious exemplification does not seem to be necessary; and the
intelligent reader will have little difficulty in adding to the
catalogue from his own reading and experience. We shall therefore here
close our exposition of the general principles of logic, and proceedm to
the nsupplementaryn inquiry which is necessary to complete our design.

Edition: current; Page: [831]


BOOK VI: ON THE LOGIC OF THE MORAL SCIENCES

Edition: current; Page: [832]
a“Si l’homme peut prédire, avec une assurance presque entière, les
phénomènes dont il connaît les lois; si lors même qu’elles lui sont
inconnues, il peut, d’après l’expérience, prévoir avec une grande
probabilité les événemens de l’avenir; pourquoi regarderait-on comme une
entreprise chimérique, celle de tracer avec quelque vraisemblance le
tableau des destinées futures de l’espèce humaine, d’après les résultats
de son histoire? Le seul fondement de croyance dans les sciences
naturelles, est cette idée, que les lois générales, connues ou ignorées,
qui règlent les phénomènes de l’univers, sont nécessaires et constantes;
et par quelle raison ce principe serait-il moins vrai pour le
développement des facultés intellectuelles et morales de l’homme, que
pour les autres opérations de la nature? Enfin, puisque des opinions
formées d’après l’expérience . . . sont la seule règle de la conduite
des hommes les plus sages, pourquoi interdirait-on au philosophe
d’appuyer ses conjectures sur cette même base, pourve qu’il ne leur
attribue pas une certitude supérieure à celle qui peut naître du nombre,
de la constance, de l’exactitude des observations?” [Marie Jean Caritat,
marquis de] Condorcet, Esquisse d’un Tableau Historique des Progrès de
l’Esprit Humain [Paris: Agasse, 1795, pp. 327-8].a

Edition: current; Page: [833]


CHAPTER I: Introductory Remarks

§ 1. [The backward state of the Moral Sciences can only be remedied by
applying to them the methods of Physical Science, duly extended and
generalized] Principles of Evidence and Theories of Method are not to be
constructed à priori. The laws of our rational faculty, like those of
every other natural agency, are only learnt by seeing the agent at work.
The earlier achievements of science were made without the conscious
observance of any Scientific Method; and we should never have known by
what process truth is to be ascertained, if we had not previously
ascertained many truths. But it was only the easier problems which could
be thus resolved: natural sagacity, when it tried its strength against
the more difficult ones, either failed altogether, or if it succeeded
here and there in obtaining a solution, had no sure means of convincing
others that its solution was correct. In scientific investigation, as in
all other works of human skill, the way of aobtaininga the end is seen
as it were instinctively by superior minds in some comparatively simple
case, and is then, by judicious generalization, adapted to the variety
of complex cases. We learn to do a thing in difficult circumstances, by
attending to the manner in which we have spontaneously done the same
thing in beasierb ones.

This truth is exemplified by the history of the various branches of
knowledge which have successively, in the ascending order of their
complication, assumed the character of sciences; and will doubtless
receive fresh confirmation from those, of which the final scientific
constitution is yet to come, and which are still abandoned to the
uncertainties of vague and popular discussion. Although several other
sciences have emerged from this state at a comparatively recent date,
none now remain in it except those which relate to man himself, the most
complex and most difficult subject of study on which the human mind can
be engaged.

Concerning the physical nature of man, as an organized being,—though
there is still much uncertainty and much controversy, which can only be
terminated by the general acknowledgment and employment of stricter
rules of induction than are commonly recognised,—there is, however, a
considerable Edition: current; Page: [834] body of truths which all who
have attended to the subject consider to be fully established; nor is
there now any radical imperfection in the method observed in this
department of science by its most distinguished modern teachers. But the
laws of Mind, and, in even a greater degree, those of Society, are so
far from having attained a similar state of even partial recognition,
that it is still a controversy whether they are capable of becoming
subjects of science in the strict sense of the term: and among those who
are agreed on this point, there reigns the most irreconcileable
diversity on almost every other. Here, therefore, if anywhere, the
principles laid down in the preceding Books may be expected to be
useful.

If, on matters so much the most important with which human intellect can
occupy itself, a more general agreement is ever to exist among thinkers;
if what has been pronounced “the proper study of mankind”[*] is not
destined to remain the only subject which Philosophy cannot succeed in
rescuing from Empiricism; the same cprocessc through which the laws of
dmanyd simpler phenomena have by general acknowledgment been placed
beyond dispute, must be consciously and deliberately applied to those
more difficult inquiries. If there are some subjects on which the
results obtained have finally received the unanimous assent of all who
have attended to the proof, and others on which mankind have not yet
been equally successful; on which the most sagacious minds have occupied
themselves from the earliest date,e and have never succeeded in
establishing any considerable body of truths, so as to be beyond denial
or doubt; it is by generalizing the methods successfully followed in the
former inquiries, and fadaptingf them to the latter, that we may hope to
remove this blot on the face of science. The remaining chapters are an
gendeavourg to facilitate this most desirable object.

§ 2. [How far this remedy of the backward state of the Moral Sciences
can be attempted in the present work] In attempting this, I am not
unmindful how little can be done towards it in a mere treatise on Logic,
or how vague and unsatisfactory all precepts of Method must necessarily
appear, when not practically exemplified in the establishment of a body
of doctrine. Doubtless, the most effectual amodea of showing how the
sciences of Ethics and Politics may be constructed, would be to
construct them: a task which, it needs Edition: current; Page: [835]
scarcely be said, I am not about to undertake. But even if there were no
other examples, the memorable one of Bacon would be sufficient to
demonstrate, that it is sometimes both possible and useful to point out
the way, though without being oneself prepared to adventure far into it.
And if more were to be attempted, this at least is not a proper place
for the attempt.

In substance, whatever can be done in a work like this for the Logic of
the Moral Sciences, has been or ought to have been accomplished in the
five preceding Books; to which the present can be only a kind of
supplement or appendix, since the methods of investigation applicable to
moral and social science must have been balready describedb, if I have
succeeded in enumerating and characterizing those of science in general.
It cremains, however,c to examine which of those methods are more
especially suited to the various branches of moral inquiry; under what
peculiar facilities or difficulties they are there employed; how far the
unsatisfactory state of those inquiries is owing to a wrong choice of
methods, how far to want of skill in the application of right ones; and
what degree of ultimate success may be attained or hoped for, by a
better choice or more careful employment of logical processes
appropriate to the case. In other words, whether moral sciences exist,
or can exist; to what degree of perfection they are susceptible of being
carried; and by what selection or adaptation of the methods brought to
view in the previous part of this work, that degree of perfection is
attainable.

At the threshold of this inquiry we are met by an objection, which, if
not removed, would be fatal to the attempt to treat human conduct as a
subject of science. Are the actions of dhuman beingsd, like all other
natural events, subject to invariable laws? Does that constancy of
causation, which is the foundation of eeverye scientific theory of
successive phenomena, really obtain among them? This is often denied;
and for the sake of systematic completeness, if not from any very urgent
practical necessity, the question should receive a deliberate answer in
this place. We shall devote to the subject a chapter apart.

Edition: current; Page: [836]


CHAPTER II: Of Liberty and Necessity

§ 1. [Are human actions subject to the law of causality?] The question,
whether the law of causality applies in the same strict sense to human
actions as to other phenomena, is the celebrated controversy concerning
the freedom of the will: which, from at least as far back as the time of
Pelagius, has divided both the philosophical and the religious world.
The affirmative opinion is commonly called the doctrine ofa Necessity,
as asserting human volitions and actions to be necessary and inevitable.
The negative maintains that the will is not determined, like other
phenomena, by antecedents, but determines itself; that our volitions are
not, properly speaking, the effects of causes, or at least have no
causes which they uniformly and implicitly obey.

I have already made it sufficiently bapparentb that the former of these
opinions is that which I consider the true one; but the misleading terms
in which it is often expressed, and the indistinct manner in which it is
usually apprehended, have both obstructed its reception, and perverted
its influence when received. The metaphysical theory of free will, as
held by philosophers, (for the practical feeling of it, common in a
greater or less degree to all mankind, is in no way inconsistent with
the contrary theory,) was invented because the supposed alternative of
admitting human actions to be necessary, was deemed inconsistent with
every one’s instinctive consciousness, as well as humiliating to the
pride and even degrading to the moral nature of man. Nor do I deny that
the doctrine, as sometimes held, is open to these imputations; for the
misapprehension in which I shall be able to show that they originate,
unfortunately is not confined to the opponents of the doctrine, but cisc
participated in by many, perhaps we might say by most, of its
supporters.

§ 2. [The doctrine commonly called Philosophical Necessity, in what
sense true?] Correctly conceived, the doctrine called Philosophical
Necessity is simply this: that, given the motives which are present to
an individual’s mind, and given likewise the character and disposition
of the individual, the Edition: current; Page: [837] manner in which hea
will act bmightb be unerringly inferred: that if we knew the person
thoroughly, and knew all the inducements which are acting upon him, we
could foretell his conduct with as much certainty as we can predict any
physical event. This proposition I take to be a mere interpretation of
universal experience, a statement in words of what every one is
internally convinced of. No one who believed that he knew thoroughly the
circumstances of any case, and the characters of the different persons
concerned, would hesitate to foretell how all of them would act.
Whatever degree of doubt he may in fact feel, arises from the
uncertainty whether he really knows the circumstances, or the character
of some one or other of the persons, with the degree of accuracy
required: but by no means from thinking that if he did know these
things, there could be any uncertainty what the conduct would be. Nor
does this full assurance conflict in the smallest degree with what is
called our feeling of freedom. We do not feel ourselves the less free,
because those to whom we are intimately known are well assured how we
shall will to act in a particular case. We often, on the contrary,
regard the doubt what our conduct will be, as a mark of ignorance of our
character, and sometimes even resent it as an imputation. cThe religious
metaphysicians who have asserted the freedom of the will, have always
maintained it to be consistent with divine foreknowledge of our actions:
and if with divine, then with any other foreknowledge.c We may be free,
and yet another may have reason to be perfectly certain what use we
shall make of our freedom. It is not, therefore, the doctrine that our
volitions and actions are invariable consequents of our antecedent
states of mind, that is either contradicted by our consciousness, or
felt to be degrading.

But the doctrine of causation, when considered as obtaining between our
volitions and their antecedents, is almost universally conceived as
involving more than this. Many do not believe, and very few practically
feel, that there is nothing in causation but invariable, certain, and
unconditional sequence. There are few to whom mere constancy of
succession appears a sufficiently stringent bond of union for so
peculiar a relation as that of cause and effect. Even if the reason
repudiates, dthed imagination retains, the feeling of some Edition:
current; Page: [838] more intimate connexion, of some peculiar tie, or
mysterious constraint exercised by the antecedent over the consequent.
Now this it is which, considered as applying to the human will,
conflicts with our consciousness, and revolts our feelings. We are
certain that, in the case of our volitions, there is not this mysterious
constraint. We know that we are not compelled, as by a magical spell, to
obey any particular motive. We feel, that if we wished to prove that we
have the power of resisting the motive, we could do so, (that wish
being, it needs scarcely be observed, a new antecedent;) and it would be
humiliating to our pride, and e(what is of more importance)e paralysing
to our desire of excellence, if we thought otherwise. But neither is any
such mysterious compulsion now supposed, by the best philosophical
authorities, to be exercised by fany otherf cause over its effect. Those
who think that causes draw their effects after them by a mystical tie,
are right in believing that the relation between volitions and their
antecedents is of another nature. But they should go farther, and admit
that this is also true of all other effects and their antecedents. If
such a tie is considered to be involved in the word necessity, the
doctrine is not true of human actions; but neither is it then true of
inanimate objects. It would be more correct to say that matter is not
bound by necessity, than that mind is so.

That the free-will gmetaphysiciansg, being mostly of the school which
rejects Hume’s and Brown’s analysis of Cause and Effect, should miss
their way for want of the light which that analysis affords, cannot
surprise us. The wonder is, that the hnecessitariansh, who usually admit
that philosophical theory, should in practice equally lose sight of it.
The very same misconception of the doctrine called Philosophical
Necessity, which prevents the opposite party from recognising its truth,
I believe to exist more or less obscurely in the minds of most
necessitarians, ihoweveri they may in words disavow it. I am much
mistaken if they habitually feel that the necessity which they recognise
in actions is but uniformity of order, and capability of being
predicted. They have a feeling as if there were at bottom a stronger tie
between the volitions and their causes: as if, when they asserted that
jthej will is governed by the balance of motives, they meant something
more cogent than if they had only said, that whoever knew the motives,
and our habitual susceptibilities to them, could predict how we should
will to act. They commit, in opposition to their own kscientifick
system, the very same mistake Edition: current; Page: [839] which their
adversaries commit in obedience to theirs; and in consequence do really
in some instancesl suffer those depressing consequences, which their
opponents erroneously impute to the doctrine itself.

§ 3. [Inappropriateness and pernicious effect of the term Necessity] I
am inclined to think that this error is almost wholly an effect of the
associations with a word; and that it would be prevented, by forbearing
to employ, for the expression of the simple fact of causation, so
extremely inappropriate a term as Necessity. That word, in its other
acceptations, involves much more than mere uniformity of sequence: it
implies irresistibleness. Applied to the will, it only means that the
given cause will be followed by the effect, subject to all possibilities
of counteraction by other causes: but in common use it stands for the
operation of those causes exclusively, which are supposed too powerful
to be counteracted at all. When we say that all human actions take place
of necessity, we only mean that they will certainly happen if nothing
prevents:—when we say that dying of want, to those who cannot get food,
is a necessity, we mean that it will certainly happen whatever may be
done to prevent it. The application of the same term to the agencies on
which human actions depend, as is used to express those agencies of
nature which are really uncontrollable, cannot fail, when habitual, to
create a feeling of uncontrollableness in the former also. This however
is a mere illusion. There are physical sequences which we call
necessary, as death for want of food or air; there are others whicha,
though as much cases of causation as the former,a are not said to be
necessary, as death from poison, which an antidote, or the use of the
stomach-pump, will sometimes avert. It is apt to be forgotten by
people’s feelings, even if remembered by their understandings, that
human actions are in this last predicament: they are never (except in
some cases of mania) ruled by any one motive with such absolute sway,
that there is no room for the influence of any other. The causes,
therefore, on which action depends, are never uncontrollable; and any
given effect is only necessary provided that the causes tending to
produce it are not controlled. That whatever happens, could not have
happened otherwise unless something had taken place which was capable of
preventing it, no one surely needs hesitate to admit. But to call this
by the name necessity is to use the term in a sense so different from
its primitive and familiar meaning, from that which it bears in the
common occasions of life, as to amount almost to a play upon words. The
associations derived from the ordinary sense of the term will adhere to
it in spite of all we can do: and though the doctrine of Necessity, as
stated by most who hold it, is very remote from fatalism, it is probable
that most necessitarians are fatalists, more or less, in their feelings.

Edition: current; Page: [840]
A fatalist believes, or half believes (for nobody is a consistent
fatalist), not only that whatever is about to happen, will be the
infallible result of the causes which produce it, (which is the true
necessitarian doctrine), but moreover that there is no use in struggling
against it; that it will happen however we may strive to prevent it.
Now, a necessitarian, believing that our actions follow from our
characters, and that our characters follow from our organization, our
education, and our circumstances, is apt to be, with more or less of
consciousness on his part, a fatalist as to his own actions, and to
believe that his nature is such, or that his education and circumstances
have so moulded his character, that nothing can now prevent him from
feeling and acting in a particular way, or at least that no effort of
his own can hinder it. In the words of the sect which in our own day has
bmost perseveringly inculcated and mostb perversely misunderstood this
great doctrine, his character is formed for him, candc not by him;
therefore his wishing that it had been formed differently is of no use;
he has no power to alter it. But this is a grand error. He has, to a
certain extent, a power to alter his character. Its being, in the
ultimate resort, formed for him, is not inconsistent with its being, in
part, formed by him as one of the intermediate agents. His character is
formed by his circumstances (including among these his particular
organization); but his own desire to mould it in a particular way, is
one of those circumstances, and by no means done of the least
influentiald. We cannot, indeed, directly will to be different from what
we are. But neither did those who are supposed to have formed our
characters, directly will that we should be what we are. Their will had
no direct power except over their own actions. They made us what they
did make us, by willing, not the end, but the requisite means; and we,
when our habits are not too inveterate, can, by similarly willing the
requisite means, make ourselves different. If they could place us under
the influence of certain circumstances, we, in like manner, can place
ourselves under the influence of other circumstances. We are exactly as
capable of making our own character, if we will, as others are of making
it for us.

Yes (answers the Owenite), but these words, “if we will,” surrender the
whole point: since the will to alter our own character is given us, not
by any efforts of ours, but by circumstances which we cannot help; it
comes to us either from external causes, or not at all. Most true: if
the Owenite stops here, he is in a position from which nothing can expel
him. Our character is formed by us as well as for us; but the wish which
induces us to attempt to form it is formed for us; and how? Not, in
general, by our organizatione, Edition: current; Page: [841] nor wholly
by oure education, but by our experience; experience of the painful
consequences of the character we previously had: or by some strong
feeling of admiration or aspiration, accidentally aroused. But to think
that we have no power of altering our fcharacterf, and to think that we
shall not use our power unless we gdesire to use itg, are very different
things, and have a very different effect on the mind. A person who does
not wish to alter his character, cannot be the person who is supposed to
feel discouraged or paralysed by thinking himself unable to do it. The
depressing effect of the fatalist doctrine can only be felt where there
is a wish to do what that doctrine represents as impossible. It is of no
consequence what we think forms our character, when we have no desire of
our own about forming it; but it is of great consequence that we should
not be prevented from forming such a desire by thinking the attainment
impracticable, and that if we have the desire, we should know that the
work is not so irrevocably done as to be incapable of being altered.

And indeed, if we examine closely, we shall find that this feeling, of
our being able to modify our own character if we wish, is itself the
feeling of moral freedom which we are conscious of. A person feels
morally free who feels that his habits or his temptations are not his
masters, but he theirs: who even in yielding to them knows that he could
resist; that were heh desirous of altogether throwing them off, there
would not be required for that purpose a stronger desire than he knows
himself to be capable of feeling. It is of course necessary, to render
our consciousness of freedom complete, that we should ihave succeeded in
makingi our character all we have hitherto jattemptedj to make it; for
if we have wished and not attained, we havek, to that extent,k not power
over our own character,l we are not free. Or at least, we must feel that
our wish, if not strong enough to alter our character, is strong enough
to conquer our character when the two are brought into conflict in any
particular case of conduct. mAnd hence it is said with truth, that none
but a person of confirmed virtue is completely free.m

The application of so improper a term as Necessity to the doctrine of
cause and effect in the matter of human character, seems to me one of
the most signal instances in philosophy of the abuse of terms, and its
practical consequences one of the most striking examples of the power of
language over our associations. The subject will never be generally
understood, until that objectionable term is dropped. The free-will
doctrine, by keeping in view precisely that portion of the truth which
the word Necessity puts out of sight, namely the power of the mind to
co-operate in the formation of its own Edition: current; Page: [842]
character, has given to its adherents a practical feeling much nearer to
the truth than has generally (I believe) existed in the minds of
necessitarians. The latter may have had a stronger sense of the
importance of what human beings can do to shape the characters of one
another; but the free-will doctrine has, I believe, fostered nin its
supportersn a much stronger spirit of self-culture.

§ 4. [A motive not always the anticipation of a pleasure or pain] There
is still one fact which requires to be noticed (in addition to the
existence of a power of self-formation) before the doctrine of the
causation of human actions can be freed from the confusion and
misapprehensions which surround it in many minds. When the will is said
to be determined by motives, a motive does not mean always, or solely,
the anticipation of a pleasure or of a pain. I shall not here inquire
whether it be true that, in the commencement, all our voluntary actions
are mere means consciously employed to obtain some pleasure, or avoid
some pain. It is at least certain that we gradually, through the
influence of association, come to desire the means without thinking of
the end: the action itself becomes an object of desire, and is performed
without reference to any motive beyond itself. Thus far, it may still be
objected, that, the action having through association become
pleasurable, we are, as much as before, moved to act by the anticipation
of a pleasure, namely, the pleasure of the action itself. But granting
this, the matter does not end here. As we proceed in the formation of
habits, and become accustomed to will a particular act or a particular
course of conduct because it is pleasurable, we at last continue to will
it awithout any reference to its being pleasurablea. Although, from some
change in us or in our circumstances, we have ceased to find any
pleasure in the action, or bperhapsb to anticipate any pleasure as the
consequence of it, we still continue to desire the action, and
consequently to do it. In this manner it is that habits of hurtful
cexcessc continue to be practised although they have ceased to be
pleasurable; and in this manner also it is that the habit of willing to
persevere in dthe course which he has chosen,d does not desert the moral
hero, even when the reward, however real, which he doubtless receives
from the consciousness of well-doing, is anything but an equivalent for
the sufferings he undergoes, or thee wishes which he may have to
renounce.

A habit of willing is commonly called a purpose; and among the causes of
our volitions, and of the actions which flow from them, must be reckoned
not only likings and aversions, but also purposes. It is only when our
purposes Edition: current; Page: [843] have become independent of the
feelings of pain or pleasure from which they originally took their rise,
that we are said to have a confirmed character. “A character,” says
Novalis, “is a completely fashioned will:”[*] and the will, once so
fashioned, may be steady and constant, when the passive susceptibilities
of pleasure and pain are greatly weakened, or materially changed.

With the corrections and explanations now given, the doctrine of the
causation of our volitions by motives, and of motives by the desirable
objects offered to us, combined with our particular susceptibilities of
desire, may be considered, I hope, as sufficiently established ffor the
purposes of this treatisef.*

Edition: current; Page: [844]


CHAPTER III: That There is, or May Be, a Science of Human Nature

§ 1. [There may be sciences which are not exact sciences] It is a common
notion, or at least it is implied in many common modes of speech, that
the thoughts, feelings, and actions of sentient beings are not a subject
of science, in the same strict sense in which this is true of the
objects of outward nature. This notion seems to involve some confusion
of ideas, which it is necessary to begin by clearing up.

Any facts are fitted, in themselves, to be a subject of science, which
follow one another according to constant laws; although those laws may
not have been discovered, nor even be discoverable by our existing
resources. Take, for instance, the most familiar class of meteorological
phenomena, those of rain and sunshine. Scientific inquiry has not yet
succeeded in ascertaining the order of antecedence and consequence among
these phenomena, so as to be able, at least in our regions of the earth,
to predict them with certainty, or even with any high degree of
probability. Yet no one doubts that the phenomena depend on laws, and
that these must be derivative laws resulting from known ultimate laws,
those of heat, aelectricity,a vaporization, and elastic fluids. Nor can
it be doubted that if we were acquainted with all the antecedent
circumstances, we could, even from those more general laws, predict
(saving difficulties of calculation) the state of the weather at any
future time. Meteorology, therefore, not only has in itself every
natural requisite for being, but actually is, a science; though, from
the difficulty of observing the facts on which the phenomena depend (a
difficulty inherent in the peculiar nature of those phenomena) the
science is bextremelyb imperfect; and were it perfect, might probably be
of little avail in practice, since the data requisite for applying its
principles to particular instances would rarely be procurable.

A case may be conceived, of an intermediate character between the
perfection of science, and this its extreme imperfection. It may happen
that the greater causes, those on which the principal part of cthe
phenomenac depends, Edition: current; Page: [845] are within the reach
of observation and measurement; so that if no other causes intervened, a
complete explanation could be given not only of the phenomenon in
general, but of all the variations and modifications which it dadmitsd
of. But inasmuch as other, perhaps many other causes, separately
insignificant in their effects, co-operate or conflict in many or in all
cases with those greater causes; the effect, accordingly, presents more
or less of aberration from what would be produced by the greater causes
alone. Now if these minor causes are not so constantly accessible, or
not accessible at all, to accurate observation; the principal mass of
the effect may still, as before, be accounted for, and even predicted;
but there will be variations and modifications which we eshall not bee
competent to explain thoroughly, and our predictions will not be
fulfilled accurately, but only approximately.

It is thus, for example, with the theory of the tides. No one doubts
that Tidology (as Dr. Whewell proposes to call it)[*] is really a
science. As much of the phenomena as depends on the attraction of the
sun and moon is completely understood, and may in any, even unknown,
part of the earth’s surface, be foretold with certainty; and the far
greater part of the phenomena depends on those causes. But circumstances
of a local or casual nature, such as the configuration of the bottom of
the ocean, the degree of confinement from shores, the direction of the
wind, &c., influence, in many or in all places, the height and time of
the tide; and a portion of these circumstances being either not
accurately knowable, not precisely measurable, orf not capable of being
certainly foreseen, the tide in known places commonly varies from the
calculated result of general principles by some difference that we
cannot explain, and in unknown ones may vary from it by a difference
that we are not able to foresee or conjecture. Nevertheless, not only is
it certain that these variations depend on causes, and follow their
causes by laws of unerring uniformity; not only, therefore, is tidology
a science, like meteorology, but it is, what ghitherto at least
meteorology is notg, a science largely available in practice. General
laws may be laid down respecting the tides, predictions may be founded
on those laws, and the result will in the main, though often not with
complete accuracy, correspond to the predictions.

And this is what is or ought to be meant by those who speak of sciences
which are not exact sciences. Astronomy was once a science, without
being an exact science. It could not become exact until not only the
general course of the planetary motions, but the perturbations also,
were accounted for, and referred to their causes. It hash become an
exact science, because its phenomena Edition: current; Page: [846] have
been brought under laws comprehending the whole of the causes by which
the phenomena are influenced, whether in a great or only in a trifling
degree, whether in all or only in some cases, and assigning to each of
those causes the share of effect which really belongs to it. But in ithe
theory of the tidesi the only laws as yet accurately ascertained, are
those of the causes which affect the phenomenon in all cases, and in a
considerable degree; while others which affect it in some cases only,
or, if in all, only in a slight degree, have notj been sufficiently
ascertained and studied to enable us to lay down their laws; still less
to deduce the completed law of the phenomenon, by compounding the
effects of the greater with those of the minor causes. Tidology,
therefore, is not yet an exact science; not from any inherent incapacity
of being so, but from the difficulty of ascertaining with complete
precision the real derivative uniformities. By combining, however, the
exact laws of the greater causes, and of such of the minor ones as are
sufficiently known, with such empirical laws or such approximate
generalizations krespectingk the miscellaneous variations as can be
obtained by specific observation, we can lay down general propositions
which will be true in the main, and on which, with allowance for the
degree of their probable inaccuracy, we may safely ground our
expectations and our conduct.

§ 2. [To what scientific type the Science of Human Nature corresponds]
The science of human nature is of this description. It falls far short
of the standard of exactness now realized in Astronomy; but there is no
reason that it should not be as much a science as Tidology is, or as
Astronomy was when its calculations had only mastered the main
phenomena, but not the perturbations.

The phenomena with which this science is conversant being the thoughts,
feelings, and actions of human beings, it would have attained the ideal
perfection of a science if it enabled us to foretell how an individual
would think, feel, or act, throughout life, with the same certainty with
which astronomy enables us to predict the places and the occultations of
the heavenly bodies. It needs scarcely be stated that nothing
approaching to this can be done. The actions of individuals could not be
predicted with scientific accuracy, were it only because we cannot
foresee the whole of the circumstances in which those individuals will
be placed. But further, even in any given combination of (present)
circumstances, no assertion, which is both precise and universally true,
can be made respecting the manner in which human beings will think,
feel, or act. This is not, however, because every person’s modes of
thinking, feeling, and acting, do not depend on causes; nor can we doubt
Edition: current; Page: [847] that if, in the case of any individual,
our data could be complete, we even now know enough of the ultimate laws
by which mental phenomena are determined, to enable us ain many casesa
to predict, with tolerable certainty, bwhat, in the greater number of
supposable combinationsb of circumstances, his conduct or sentiments
would be. But the impressions and actions of human beings are not solely
the result of their present circumstances, cbutc the joint result of
those circumstances and of the characters of the individuals: and the
agencies which determine human character are so numerous and
diversified, (nothing which has happened to the person throughout life
being without its portion of influence,) that in the aggregate they are
never in any two cases exactly similar. Hence, even if our science of
human nature were theoretically perfect, that is, if we could calculate
any character as we can calculate the orbit of any planet, from given
data; still, as the data are never all given, nor ever precisely alike
in different cases, we could neither make dpositived predictions, nor
lay down universal propositions.

Inasmuch, however, as many of those effects which it is of most
importance to render amenable to human foresight and control are
determined, like the tides, in an incomparably greater degree by general
causes, than by all partial causes taken together; depending in the main
on those circumstances ande qualities which are common to all mankind,
orf at least to large bodies of them, and only in a small degree on the
idiosyncrasies of organization or the peculiar history of individuals;
it is evidently possible with regard to all such effects, to make
predictions which will almost always be verified, and general
propositions which are almost always true. And whenever it is sufficient
to know how the great majority of the human race, or of some nation or
class of persons, will think, feel, and act, these propositions are
equivalent to universal ones. For the purposes of political and social
science this is sufficient. As we formerly remarked,* an approximate
generalization isg, in social inquiries, for most practical purposesg
equivalent to an exact one: that which is only probable when asserted of
hindividual human beings indiscriminately selectedh, being certain when
affirmed of the character and collective conduct of masses.

It is no disparagement, therefore, to the science of Human Nature, that
Edition: current; Page: [848] those of its general propositions which
descend sufficiently into detail to serve as a foundation for predicting
phenomena in the concrete, are for the most part only approximately
true. But iin orderi to give a genuinely scientific character to the
study, it is indispensable that these approximate generalizations, which
in themselves would amount only to the lowest kind of empirical laws,
should be connected deductively with the laws of nature from which they
result; should be resolved into the properties of the causes on which
the phenomena depend. In other words, the science of Human Nature may be
said to exist, in proportion as jthej approximate truths, which compose
a practical knowledge of mankind, can be exhibited as corollaries from
the universal laws of human nature on which they rest; whereby the
proper limits of those approximate truths would be shown, and we should
be enabled to deduce others for any new state of circumstances, in
anticipation of specific experience.

The proposition now stated is the text on which the two succeeding
chapters will furnish the comment.

Edition: current; Page: [849]


CHAPTER IV: Of the Laws of Mind

§ 1. [What is meant by Laws of Mind] What the Mind is, as well as what
Matter is, or any other question respecting Things in themselves, as
distinguished from their sensible manifestations, it would be foreign to
the purposes of this treatise to consider. Here, as throughout our
inquiry, we shall keep clear of all speculations respecting the mind’s
own nature, and shall understand by the laws of mind, those of mental
Phenomena; of the various feelings or states of consciousness of
sentient beings. These, according to the classification we have
uniformly followed, consist of Thoughts, Emotions, Volitions, and
Sensations; the last being as truly states of Mind as the three former.
It is usual indeed to speak of sensations as states of body, not of
mind. But this is the common confusion, of giving one and the same name
to a phenomenon and to the proximate cause or conditions of the
phenomenon. The immediate antecedent of a sensation is a state of body,
but the sensation itself is a state of mind. If the word mind means
anything, it means that which feels. aWhatever opinion we hold
respecting the fundamental identity or diversity of matter and mind, bin
any caseb the distinction between mental and physical facts, between the
internal and the external world, will always remain, as a matter of
classification: and in that classification, sensations, like all other
feelings, must be ranked as mental phenomena. The mechanism of their
production, both in the body itself and in what is called outward
nature, is all that can with any propriety be classed as physical.a

The phenomena of mind, then, are the various feelings of our nature,
both those cimproperlyc called physical, and those peculiarly designated
as mental: and by the laws of mind, I mean the laws according to which
those feelings generate one another.

§ 2. [Is there a science of Psychology?] All states of mind are
immediately caused either by other states of mind, or by states of body.
When a state of mind is produced by a state of mind, I call the law
concerned in the case, a Edition: current; Page: [850] law of Mind. When
a state of mind is produced directly by a state of body, the law is a
law of Body, and belongs to physical science.

With regard to those states of mind which are called sensations, all are
agreed that these have for their immediate antecedents, states of body.
Every sensation has for its proximate cause some affection of the
portion of our frame called the nervous system; whether this affection
originate in the action of some external object, or in some pathological
condition of the nervous organization itself. The laws of this portion
of our nature—the varieties of our sensations, and the physical
conditions on which they proximately depend—manifestly abelong toa the
province of Physiology.

Whether bthe remainderb of our mental states are similarly dependent on
physical conditions, is one of cthe vexatæ questiones in the science of
human nature. It is still disputedc whether our thoughts, emotions, and
volitions are generated through the intervention of material mechanism;
whether we have organs of thought and of emotion, in the same sense in
which we have organs of sensation. Many eminent physiologists hold the
affirmative. These contend that a thought (for example) is as much the
result of nervous agency, as a sensation: that some particular state of
our nervous system, in particular of that central portion of it called
the brain, invariably precedes, and is presupposed by, every state of
our consciousness. According to this theory, one state of mind is never
really produced by another: all are produced by states of body. When one
thought seems to call up another by association, it is not really a
thought which recals a thought; the association did not exist between
the two thoughts, but between the two states of the brain or nerves
which preceded the thoughts: one of those states drecalsd the other,
each being attended, in its passage, by the particular estate of
consciousnesse which is consequent on it. On this ftheoryf the
uniformities of succession among states of mind would be mere derivative
uniformities, resulting from the laws of succession of the bodily states
which cause them. There would be no original mental laws, no Laws of
Mind in the sense in which I use the term, at all: gandg mental science
would be a mere branch, though the highest and most recondite branch, of
the science of physiology. hM. Comte, accordingly,h claims the
scientific cognizance of moral and intellectual phenomena exclusively
for physiologists; and not only denies to Psychology, or Mental
Philosophy properly so called, the character of a science, but places
it, in the Edition: current; Page: [851] chimerical nature of its
objects and pretensions, almost on a par with astrology.[*]

But, after all has been said which can be said, it remains incontestable
ithat therei exist uniformities of succession among states of mind, and
that these can be ascertained by observation and experiment. jFurther,
that every mental state has a nervous state for its immediate antecedent
and proximate cause, though extremely probable, cannot hitherto be said
to be proved, in the conclusive manner in which this can be proved of
sensations; and even were it certain,j yet every one must admit that we
are wholly ignorant of the characteristics of these nervous states; we
know not, kand at present have no means of knowingk, in what respect one
of them differs from another; and our only mode of studying their
successions or coexistences must be by observing the successions and
coexistences of the mental states, of which they are supposed to be the
generators or causes. The successions, therefore, which obtain among
mental phenomena, do not admit of being deduced from the physiological
laws of our nervous organization: and all real knowledge of them must
continue, for a long time at least, if not lalwaysl, to be sought in the
direct study, by observation and experiment, of the mental successions
themselves. Since therefore the order of our mental phenomena must be
studied in those phenomena, and not inferred from the laws of any
phenomena more general, there is a distinct and separate Science of
Mind.

mThe relations, indeed, of that science to the science of physiology
must never be overlooked or undervalued. It must by no means be
forgotten that the laws of mind may be derivative laws resulting from
laws of animal life, and that their truth therefore may ultimately
depend on physical conditions; and the influence of physiological states
or physiological changes in altering or counteracting the mental
successions, is one of the most important departments of psychological
study. nBut, on the other hand, to reject the resource of psychological
analysis, and construct the theory of the mind solely on such data as
physiology at present affords, seems to me as great an error in
principle, and an even more serious one in practice. Imperfect as is the
science of mind, I do not scruple to affirm, that it is in a
considerably more advanced state than the portion of physiology which
corresponds to it; and to discard the former for the latter appears to
me an infringement of the true Edition: current; Page: [852] canons of
inductive philosophy, which must produce, and which does produce,
erroneous conclusions in some very important departments of the science
of human nature.n

§ 3. [The principal investigations of Psychology characterized] The
subject, then, of Psychology, is the uniformities of succession, the
laws, whether ultimate or derivative, according to which one mental
state succeeds another; is caused by, or ata least, is caused to follow,
another. Of these laws, some are general, others more special. The
following are examples of the most general laws.

First: Whenever any state of consciousness has once been excited in us,
no matter by what cause; an inferior degree of the same state of
consciousness, a state of consciousness resembling the former, but
inferior in intensity, is capable of being reproduced in us, without the
presence of any such cause as excited it at first. Thus, if we have once
seen or touched an object, we can afterwards think of the object though
it be absent from our sight or from our touch. If we have been joyful or
grieved at some event, we can think of, or remember our past joy or
grief, though no new event of a happy orb painful nature has taken
place. When a poet has put together a mental picture of an imaginary
object, a Castle of Indolence, a Una, or a cHamletc,[*] he can
afterwards think of the ideal object he has created, without any fresh
act of intellectual combination. This law is expressed by saying, in the
language of Hume, that every mental impression has its idea.

Secondly: These ideas, or secondary mental states, are excited by our
impressions, or by other ideas, according to certain laws which are
called Laws of Association. Of these laws the first is, that similar
ideas tend to excite one another. The second is, that when two
impressions have been frequently experienced (or even thought of) either
simultaneously or in immediate succession, then whenever doned of
ethesee impressions, or the idea of it, recurs, it tends to excite the
idea of the other. The third law is, that greater intensity in either or
both of the impressions, is equivalent, in rendering them excitable by
one another, to a greater frequency of conjunction. These are the laws
of ideas: on which I shall not enlarge in this place, but refer the
reader to works professedly psychological, in particular to Mr. fJamesf
Mill’s Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind, where the Edition:
current; Page: [853] gprincipalg laws of association, halong withh many
of their applications, are copiously exemplified, and with a masterly
hand.*

These simple or elementary Laws of Mind havem been ascertained by the
ordinary methods of experimental inquiry; nor could they have been
ascertained in any other manner. But a certain number of elementary laws
having thus been obtained, it is a fair subject of scientific inquiry
how far those laws can be made to go in explaining the actual phenomena.
It is obvious that complex laws of thought and feeling not only may, but
must, be generated from these simple laws. And it is to be remarked,
that the case is not always one of Composition of Causes: the effect of
concurring causes is not always precisely the sum of the effects of
those causes when separate, nor even always an effect of the same kind
with them. Reverting to the distinction which occupies so prominent a
place in the theory of induction; the laws of the phenomena of mind are
sometimes analogous to mechanical, but sometimes also to chemical laws.
When many impressions or ideas are operating in the mind together, there
sometimes takes place a process of a similar kind to chemical
combination. When impressions have been so often experienced in
conjunction, that each of them calls up readily and instantaneously the
ideas of the whole group, those ideas sometimes melt and coalesce into
one another, and appear not several ideas, but one; in the same manner
as, when the seven prismatic colours are presented to the eye in rapid
succession, the sensation produced is that of white. But as in this last
case it is correct to say that the seven colours when they rapidly
follow one another generate white, Edition: current; Page: [854] but not
that they actually are white; so it appears to me that the Complex Idea,
formed by the blending together of several simpler ones, should, when it
really appears simple, (that is, when the separate elements are not
consciously distinguishable in it,) be said to result from, or be
generated by, the simple ideas, not to consist of them. Our idea of an
orange really consists of the simple ideas of a certain colour, a
certain form, a certain taste and smell, &c., because we can, by
interrogating our consciousness, perceive all these elements in the
idea. But we cannot perceive, in so apparently simple a feeling as our
perception of the shape of an object by the eye, all that multitude of
ideas derived from other senses, without which it is well ascertained
that no such visual perception would ever have had existence; nor, in
our idea of Extension, can we discover those elementary ideas of
resistance, derived from our muscular frame, in which nit has been
conclusively shownn that the idea originates. These therefore are cases
of mental chemistry: in which it is proper to say that the simple ideas
generate, rather than that they compose, the complex ones.

With respect to all the other constituents of the mind, its beliefs, its
abstruser conceptions, its sentiments, emotions, and volitions; there
are some (among whom are Hartley, and the author of the Analysis) who
think that the whole of these are generated from simple ideas of
sensation, by a chemistry similar to that which we have just
exemplified. oThese philosophers have made out a great part of their
case, but I am not satisfied that they have established the whole of it.
They haveo shown that there is such a thing as mental chemistry; that
the heterogeneous nature of a feeling A, considered in relation to B and
C, is no conclusive argument against its being generated from B and C.
Having proved this, they proceed to show, that where A is found, B and C
were or may have been present, and why therefore, they paskp, should not
A have been generated from B and C? But even if this evidence were
carried to the highest degree of completeness which it admits of; if it
were qshown (which hitherto it has not, in all cases, been)q that
certain groups of associated ideas not only might have been, but
actually were, present whenever the more recondite mental feeling was
experienced; Edition: current; Page: [855] this would amount only to the
Method of Agreement, and could not prove causation until confirmed by
the more conclusive evidence of the Method of Difference. If the
question be whether Belief is a mere case of close association of ideas,
it would be necessary to examine experimentally if it be true that any
ideas whatever, provided they are associated rwith the required degree
of closeness,r give rise to belief. If the inquiry be into the origin of
moral feelings, the sfeelings for example of moral reprobation, tit is
necessaryt to compare all the varieties of actions or states of mind
which are ever morally disapproved, and see whether in all these cases
it can be shownu, or reasonably surmised,u that the action or state of
mind had become connected by association, in the disapproving mind, with
some particular class of hateful or disgusting ideas; and the method
employed is, thus far, that of Agreement. But this is not enough.
Supposing this proved, we must try further by the Method of Difference,
whether this particular kind of hateful or disgusting ideas, when it
becomes associated with an action previously indifferent, will render
that action a subject of moral disapproval. If this question can be
answered in the affirmative, it is shown to be a law of the human mind,
that an association of that particular description is the generating
cause of moral reprobation. vThat all this is the case has been rendered
extremely probable, but the experiments have not been tried with the
degree of precision necessary for a complete and absolutely conclusive
induction.v*

It is further to be remembered, that even if all which this theory of
mental phenomena contends for could be proved, we should not be the more
enabled to resolve the laws of the more complex feelings into those of
the simpler ones. The generation of one class of mental phenomena from
another, whenever it can be made out, is a highly interesting fact in
psychological chemistry; but it no more supersedes the necessity of an
experimental study of the generated phenomenon, than a knowledge of the
properties of Edition: current; Page: [856] oxygen and sulphur enables
us to deduce those of sulphuric acid without specific observation and
experiment. Whatever, therefore, may be the final issue of the attempt
to account for the origin of our judgments, our desires, wor our
volitions,w from simpler mental phenomena, it is not the less imperative
to ascertain the sequences of the complex phenomena themselves, by
special study in conformity to the canons of Induction. Thus, in respect
xtox Belief, ypsychologistsy will always have to inquire, what beliefs
we have zby direct consciousnessz, and according to what laws one belief
produces another; awhat area the laws, in virtue of which one thing is
recognised by the mind, either rightly or erroneously, as evidence of
another thing. In regard to Desire, bthey will have tob examine what
objects we desire naturally, and by what causes we are made to desire
things originally indifferent, or even disagreeable to us; and so forth.
It may be remarked, that the general laws of association prevail among
cthesec more intricate states of mind, in the same manner as among the
simpler ones. A desire, an emotion, an idea of the higher order of
abstraction, even our judgments and volitions when they have become
habitual, are called up by association, according to precisely the same
laws as our simple ideas.

§ 4. [Relation of mental facts to physical conditions] In the course of
these inquiries it will be natural and necessary to examine, how far the
production of one state of mind by another is influenced by any
assignable state of body. The commonest observation shows that different
minds are susceptible in very different degrees to the action of the
same psychological causes. The idea, for example, of a given desirable
object, will excite in different minds very different degrees of
intensity of desire. The same subject of meditation, presented to
different minds, will excite in them very unequal degrees of
intellectual action. These differences of mental susceptibility in
different individuals may be, first, original and ultimate facts, or,
secondly, they may be consequences of the previous mental history of
those individuals, or thirdly and lastly, they may depend on varieties
of physical organization. That the previous mental history of the
individuals must have some share in producing or in modifying the whole
of theira mental character, is an inevitable consequence of the laws of
mind; but that differences of bodily structure also co-operate, is the
bopinion of all physiologists, confirmed by common experience. It is to
be regretted that hitherto this experience, Edition: current; Page:
[857] being accepted in the gross, without due analysis, has been made
the groundwork of empirical generalizations most detrimental to the
progress of real knowledge.b

It is certain that the natural differences which really exist in the
mental predispositions or susceptibilities of different persons, are
often not unconnected with diversities in their organic constitution.
But it does not therefore follow that these organic differences must in
all cases influence the mental phenomena directly and immediately. Theyc
often affect them through the medium of their psychological causes. For
example, the idea of some particular pleasure may excite in different
persons, even independently of habit or education, very different
strengths of desire, and this may be the effect of their different
degrees or kinds of nervous susceptibility; but these organic
differences, we must remember, will render the pleasurable sensation
itself more intense in one of these persons than in the other; so that
the idea of the pleasure will also be an intenser feeling, and will, by
the operation of mere mental laws, excite an intenser desire, without
its being necessary to suppose that the desire itself is directly
influenced by the physical peculiarity. As in this, so in manyd cases,
such differences in the kind or in the intensity of the physical
sensations as must necessarily result from differences of bodily
organization, will of themselves account for many differences not only
in the degree, but even in the kind, of the other mental phenomena. So
true is this, that even different equalitiese of mind, different types
of mental character, will naturally be produced by mere differences foff
intensity in the sensations generallyg: as is well pointed out in hthe
able essay on Dr. Priestley, by Mr. Martineau,h mentioned in a former
chapterg:

The sensations which form the elements of all knowledge are received
either simultaneously or successively; when several are received
simultaneously, as the smell, the taste, the colour, the form, &c. of a
fruit, their association together constitutes our idea of an object;
when received successively, their association makes Edition: current;
Page: [858] up the idea of an event. Anything, then, which favours the
associations of synchronous ideas, will tend to produce a knowledge of
objects, a perception of qualities; while anything which favours
association in the successive order, will tend to produce a knowledge of
events, of the order of occurrences, and of the connexion of cause and
effect: in other words, in the one case a perceptive mind, with a
idiscriminatei feeling of the pleasurable and painful properties of
things, a sense of the grand and the beautiful, will be the result: in
the other, a mind attentive to the movements and phenomena, a
ratiocinative and philosophic intellect. Now it is an acknowledged
principle, that all sensations experienced during the presence of any
vivid impression, become strongly associated with it, and with each
other; and does it not follow, that the synchronous feelings of a
sensitive constitution (i.e. the one which has vivid impressions,) will
be more intimately blended than in a differently formed mind? If this
suggestion has any foundation in truth, it leads to an inference not
unimportant; that where nature has endowed an individual with great
original susceptibility, he will probably be distinguished by fondness
for natural history, a relish for the beautiful and great, and moral
enthusiasm; where there is but a mediocrity of sensibility, a love of
science, of abstract truth, with a deficiency of taste and of fervour,
is likely to be the result.[*]

We see from this example, that when the general laws of mind are more
accurately known, and above all, more skilfully applied to the detailed
explanation of mental peculiarities, they will account for many more of
those peculiarities than is ordinarily supposed. jUnfortunately the
reaction of the last and present generation against the philosophy of
the eighteenth century has produced a very general neglect of this great
department of analytical Edition: current; Page: [859] inquiry; of
which, consequently, the recent progress has been by no means
proportional to its early promise. The majority of those who speculate
on human nature, prefer dogmatically to assume that the mental
differences which they perceive, or think they perceive, among human
beings, are ultimate facts, incapable of being either explained or
altered, rather than take the trouble of fitting themselves, by the
requisite processes of thought, for referring those mental differences
to the outward causes by which they are for the most part produced, and
on the removal of which they would cease to exist. The German school of
metaphysical speculation, which has not yet lost its temporary
predominance in European thought, has had this among many other
injurious influences: and at the opposite extreme of the psychological
scale, no writer, either of early or of recent date, is chargeable in a
higher degree with this aberration from the true scientific spirit, than
M. Comte.

It is certain that, in human beings at least, differences in education
and in outward circumstances are capable of affording an adequate
explanation of by far the greatest portion of character; and that the
remainder may be in great part accounted for by physical differences in
the sensations produced in different individuals by the same external or
internal cause.j There are, however, ksomek mental facts which do not
seem to admit of lthese modesl of explanation. Such, to take the
strongest case, are the various instincts of animals, mand them portion
of human nature which corresponds to nthose instinctsn. No mode has been
suggested, even by way of hypothesis, in which theseo can receive any
satisfactory, or even plausible, explanation from psychological causes
alone; and pthere is qgreatq reason to think that theyp have as
positive, and evenr as direct and immediate, a connexion with physical
conditions of the brain and nerves, as any of our mere sensations have.
sA supposition which (it is perhaps not superfluous to add) in no way
conflicts with the indisputable fact, that these instincts may be
modified to any extent, or entirely conquered, in human beingst, and to
no inconsiderable extent even in some of the domesticated animals,t by
other mental influences, and by education.

Edition: current; Page: [860]
Whether organic causes exercise a direct influence over any other
classes of mental phenomena, is hitherto as far from being ascertained,
as is the precise nature of the organic conditions even in the case of
instincts. The physiology, however, of the brain and nervous system is
in a state of such rapid advance, and is continually bringing forth such
new and interesting results, that if there be really a connexion between
mental peculiarities and any varieties cognizable by our senses in the
structure of the cerebral and nervous apparatus, the nature of that
connexion is now in a fair way of being found out. The latest
discoveries in cerebral physiology appear to have proved, that any such
connexion which may exist is of a radically different character from
that contended for by Gall and his followers, and that whatever may
hereafter be found to be the true theory of the subject, phrenology at
least is untenable.s

Edition: current; Page: [861]


CHAPTER V: Of Ethology, or the Science of the Formation of Character

§ 1. [The Empirical Laws of Human Nature] The laws of mind as
characterized in the preceding chapter, acomposea the universal or
abstract portion of the philosophy of human nature; and all theb truths
of common experience, constituting a practical knowledge of mankind,
must, to the extent to which they are truths, be results or consequences
of these. Such familiar maxims, when collected à posteriori from
observation of life, occupy among the truths of the science the place of
what, in our analysis of Induction, have so often been spoken of under
the title of Empirical Laws.

An Empirical Law (it will be remembered) is an uniformity, whether of
succession or of coexistence, which holds true in all instances within
our limits of observation, but is not of a nature to afford any
assurance that it would hold beyond those limits; either because the
consequent is not really the effect of the antecedent, but forms part
along with it of a chain of effects, flowing from prior causes not yet
ascertained; or because there is ground to believe that the sequence
(though a case of causation) is resolvable into simpler sequences, and,
depending therefore on a concurrence of several natural agencies, is
exposed to an unknown multitude of possibilities of counteraction. In
other words, an empirical law is a generalization, of which, not content
with finding it true, we are obliged to ask, why is it true? knowing
that its truth is not absolute, but cdependentc on some more general
conditions, and that it can only be relied on in so far as there is
ground of assurance that those conditions are realized.

Now, the observations concerning human affairs collected from common
experience, are precisely of this nature. Even if they were universally
and exactly true within the bounds of experience, which they never are,
still they are not the ultimate laws of human action; they are not the
principles of human nature, but results of those principles under the
circumstances in Edition: current; Page: [862] which mankind have
happened to be placed. When the Psalmist d“said in his haste that alld
men are liars,”[*] he enunciated what in some ages and countries is
borne out by ample experience; but it is not a law of man’s nature to
lie; though it is one of the consequences of the laws of ehuman nature,
thate lying is nearly universal when certain external circumstances
exist universally, especially circumstances productive of habitual
distrust and fear. When the character of the old is asserted to be
cautious, and of the young impetuous, this, again, is but an empirical
law; for it is not because of their youth that the young are impetuous,
nor because of their age that the old are cautious. It is fchiefly, if
not wholly,f because the old, during their many years of life, ghaveg
generally had much experience of its various evils, and having suffered
or seen others suffer much from incautious exposure to them, have
acquired associations favourable to circumspection: while the young, as
well from the absence of similar experience as from the greater strength
of the inclinations which hurge them to enterprise, engage themselves
inh it more readily. Here, then, is the explanation of the empirical
law; here are the conditions which ultimately determine whether the law
holds good or not. If an old man has not been oftener than most young
men in contact with danger and difficulty, he will be equally
incautious: if a youth has not stronger iinclinationsi than an old man,
he probably will be as little enterprising. The empirical law derives
whatever truth it has, from the causal laws of which it is a
consequence. If we know those laws, we know what are the limits to the
derivative law: while, if we have not yet accounted for the empirical
law—if it jrestsj only on observation—there is no safety in applying it
far beyond the limits of time, place, and circumstance, in which the
observations were made.

The really scientific truths, then, are not these empirical laws, but
the causal laws which explain them. The empirical laws of those
phenomena which depend on known causes, and of which a general theory
can therefore be constructed, have, whatever may be their value in
practice, no other function in science than that of verifying the
conclusions of theory. Still more must this be the case when most of the
empirical laws amount, even within the limits of observation, only to
approximate generalizations.

Edition: current; Page: [863]
§ 2. [The Empirical Laws of Human Nature are merely approximate
generalizations. The universal laws are those of the formation of
character] This however is not, so much as is sometimes supposed, a
peculiarity of the sciences called moral. It is only in the simplest
branches of science that empirical laws are ever exactly true; and not
always in those. Astronomy, for example, is the simplest of all the
sciences which explain, in the concrete, the actual course of natural
events. The causes or forces, on which astronomical phenomena depend,
are fewer in number than those which determine any other of the great
phenomena of nature. Accordingly, as each effect results from the
conflict of but few causes, a great degree of regularity and uniformity
might be expected to exist among the effects; and such is really the
case: they have a fixed order, and return in cycles. But propositions
which should express, with absolute correctness, all the successive
positions of a planet until the cycle is completed, would be of almost
unmanageable complexity, and could be obtained from theory alone. The
generalizations which can be collected on the subject from direct
observation, even such as Kepler’s law, are mere approximations: the
planets, owing to their perturbations by one another, do not move in
exact ellipses. Thus even in astronomy, perfect exactness in the mere
empirical laws is not to be looked for; much less, then, in more complex
subjects of inquiry.

The same example shows how little can be inferred against the
universality or even the simplicity of the ultimate laws, from the
impossibility of establishing any but aapproximatea empirical laws of
the effects. The laws of causation according to which a class of
phenomena are produced may be very few and simple, and yet the effects
themselves may be so various and complicated that it shall be impossible
to trace any regularity whateverb completely through them. For the
phenomena in question may be of an eminently modifiable character;
insomuch that innumerable circumstances are capable of influencing the
effect, although they may all do it according to a very small number of
laws. Suppose that all which passes in the mind of man is determined by
a few simple laws: still, if those laws be such that there is not one of
the facts surrounding a human being, or of the events which happen to
him, that does not influence in some mode or degree his subsequent
mental history, and if the circumstances of different human beings are
extremely different, it will be no wonder if very few propositions can
be made respecting the details of their conduct or feelings, which will
be true of all mankind.

Now, without deciding whether the ultimate laws of our mental nature are
few or many, it is at least certain that they are of the above
description. It is certain that our mental states, and our mental
capacities and susceptibilities, Edition: current; Page: [864] are
modified, either for a time or permanently, by everything which happens
to us in life. Considering therefore how much these modifying causes
differ in the case of any two individuals, it would be unreasonable to
expect that the empirical laws of the human mind, the generalizations
cwhich can be madec respecting the feelings or actions of mankind
without reference to the causes that determine them, should be anything
but approximate generalizations. They are the common wisdom of common
life, and as such are invaluable; especially as they are mostly to be
applied to cases not very dissimilar to those from which they were
collected. But dwhen maxims of this sort, collected from Englishmen,
come to be applied to Frenchmen, or when thosed collected from the
present day are applied to past or future generations, they are apt to
be very much at fault. Unless we have resolved the empirical law into
the laws of the causes on which it depends, and ascertained that those
causes extend to the case which we have in view, there can be no
reliance placed in our inferences. For every individual is surrounded by
circumstances different from those of every other individual; every
nation or generation of mankind from every other nation or generation:
and none of these differences are without their influence in forming a
different type of character. There is, indeed, also a certain general
resemblance; but peculiarities of circumstances are continually
constituting exceptions even to the propositions which are true in the
great majority of cases.

Although, however, there is scarcely any mode of feeling or conduct
which is, in the absolute sense, common to all mankind; and though the
generalizations which assert that any given variety of conduct or
feeling will be efounde universally, (however nearly they may
approximate to truth within given limits of observation,) will be
considered as scientific propositions by no one who is at all familiar
with scientific investigation; yet all modes of feeling and conduct met
with among mankind have causes which produce them; and in the
propositions which assign those causes, will be found the explanation of
the empirical laws, and the limiting principle of our reliance on them.
fHuman beings do not all feel and act alike in the same circumstances;
but it is possible to determine what makes one personf, in a given
position, feel or act in one way, another in another; how any given mode
of feeling and conduct, compatible with the general laws (physical and
mental) of human nature, has been, or may be, formed. In other words,
mankind have not one universal character, but there exist universal laws
of the Formation of Character. And since it is by these laws, combined
with the facts of each particular case, that the whole of the phenomena
of human action and feeling are produced, it is on these that every
rational attempt to construct the Edition: current; Page: [865] science
of human nature in the concrete, and for practical purposes, must
proceed.

§ 3. [The laws of the formation of character cannot be ascertained by
observation and experiment] The laws, then, of the formation of
character being the principal object of scientific inquiry into human
nature; it remains to determine the method of investigation best fitted
for ascertaining them. And the logical principles according to which
this question is to be decided, must be those which preside over aeverya
other attempt to investigate the laws of very complex phenomena. For it
is evident that both the character of any human being, and the aggregate
of the circumstances by which that character has been formed, are facts
of a high order of complexity. Now to such cases we have seen that the
Deductive Method, setting out from general laws, and verifying their
consequences by specific experience, is alone applicable. The grounds of
this great logical doctrine have formerly been stated: and its truth
will derive additional support from a brief examination of the
specialities of the present case.

There areb only two modes in which laws of nature can be ascertained:
deductively, and experimentally: including under the denomination of
experimental inquiry, observation as well as artificial experiment. Are
the laws of the formation of character susceptible of a satisfactory
investigation by the method of experimentation? Evidently not; because,
even if we suppose unlimited power of varying the experiment, (which is
abstractedly possible, though no one but an oriental despot chas that
power, or if he had, would probablyc be disposed to exercise it,) a
still more essential condition is wanting; the power of performing any
of the experiments with scientific accuracy.

The instances requisite for the prosecution of a directly experimental
inquiry into the formation of character, would be a number of human
beings to bring up and educate, from infancy to mature age. And to
perform any one of these experiments with scientific propriety, it would
be necessary to know and record every sensation or impression received
by the young pupil from a period long before it could speak; including
its own notions respecting the sources of all those sensations and
impressions. It is not only impossible to do this completely, but even
to do so much of it as should constitute a tolerable approximation. One
apparently trivial circumstance which eluded our vigilance, might let in
a train of impressions and associations sufficient to vitiate the
experiment as an authentic exhibition of the effects flowing from given
causes. No one who has sufficiently reflected on education is Edition:
current; Page: [866] ignorant of this truth: and whoever has not, will
find it most instructively illustrated in the writings of Rousseau and
Helvetius on that great subject.

Under this impossibility of studying the laws of the formation of
character by experiments purposely contrived to elucidate them, there
remains the resource of simple observation. But if it be impossible to
ascertain the influencing circumstances with any approach to
completeness even when we have the shaping of them ourselves, much more
impossible is it when the cases are further removed from our
observation, and altogether out of our control. Consider the difficulty
of the very first step—of ascertaining what actually is the character of
the individual, in each particular case that we examine. There is hardly
any person living, concerning some essential part of whose character
there are not differences of opinion even among his intimate
dacquaintancesd: and a single action, or conduct continued only for a
short time, goes a very little waye towards ascertaining it. We can only
make our observations in a rough way, and en masse; not attempting to
ascertain completely in any given instance, what character has been
formed, and still less by what causes; but fonly observingf in what
state of previous circumstances it is found that certain marked mental
qualities or deficiencies oftenest exist. These conclusions, besides
gthat they areg mere approximate generalizations, deserve no reliance,
even as such, unless the instances are sufficiently numerous to
eliminate not only chance, but every hassignableh circumstance in which
a number of the cases examined may happen to have resembled one another.
So numerous and various, itooi, are the circumstances which form
individual character, that the consequence of any particular combination
is hardly ever some definite and strongly marked character, always found
where that combination exists, and not otherwise. What is obtained, even
after the most extensive and accurate observation, is merely a
comparative result; as for example, that in a given number of Frenchmen,
taken indiscriminately, there will be found more persons of a particular
mental tendency, and fewer of the contrary tendency, than among an equal
number of Italians or English, similarly taken; or thus: of a hundred
Frenchmen and an equal number of Englishmen, fairly selected, and
arranged according to the degree in which they possess a particular
jmental characteristic, each number, 1, 2, 3, &c., of the one series,
will be found to possess more of that characteristic thanj the
corresponding number of the other. Edition: current; Page: [867] Since,
therefore, the comparison is not one of kinds, but of ratios and
degrees; and since in proportion as the differences are slight, it
requires a greater number of instances to eliminate chance; it cannot
often happen to any one to know a sufficient number of cases with the
accuracy requisite for making the sort of comparison last mentioned;
less than which, however, would not constitute a real induction.
Accordingly there is hardly one current opinion respecting the
characters of nations, classes, or descriptions of persons, which is
universally acknowledged as indisputable.*

And finally, if we could even obtain by way of experiment a much more
satisfactory assurance of these generalizations than is really possible,
they would still be only empirical laws. They would show, indeed, that
there was some connexion between the type of character formed, and the
circumstances existing in the case; but not what the precise connexion
was, nor to which of the peculiarities of those circumstances the effect
was really owing. They could only, therefore, be received as results of
causation, requiring to be resolved into the general laws of the causes:
until the determination of which, we could not judge within what limits
the derivative laws might serve as presumptions in cases yet unknown, or
even be depended on as permanent in the very cases from which they were
collected. The French people had, or were supposed to have, a certain
national character: but they drive out their royal family and
aristocracy, alter their institutions, pass through a series of
extraordinary events for lthe greater part ofl a century, and at the
Edition: current; Page: [868] end of that time mtheir character is found
to have undergone important changesm. nA long list of mental and moral
differences are observed, or supposed, to exist between men and women:
but at some future, and, it may be hoped, not distant period, equal
freedom and an equally independent social position come to be possessed
by both, and their differences of character are eithero removed or
totally altered.n

But if the differences which pwe think wep observe between French and
English, or between qmen and womenq, can be connected with more general
laws; if they be such as rmight be expected to be produced by the
differences of government, former customs, and physical peculiarities in
the two nations, and byr the sdiversities of education, occupations,
personal independence, and social privileges, and whatever original
differences there may be in bodily strength and nervous sensibility
between the two sexess;t then, indeed, the coincidence of the two kinds
of evidence justifies us in believing that we have both reasoned rightly
and observed rightly. Our observation, though not sufficient as proof,
is ample as verification. And havingu ascertained not only the empirical
laws, but the causes, of the peculiarities, we need be under no
difficulty in judging how far they may be expected to be permanent, or
by what circumstances they would be modified or destroyed.

§ 4. [The laws of the formation of character must therefore be studied
deductively] Since, then, it is impossible to obtain really accurate
propositions respecting the formation of character from observation and
experiment Edition: current; Page: [869] alone, we are driven perforce
to that which, even if it had not been the indispensable, would have
been the most perfect, mode of investigation, and which it is one of the
principal aims of philosophy to extend; namely, that which tries its
experiments not on the complex facts, but on the simple ones of which
they are compounded; and after ascertaining the laws of the causes, the
composition of which gives rise to the complex phenomena, then considers
whether these will not explain and account for the approximate
generalizations which have been framed empirically respecting the
sequences of athosea complex phenomena. The laws of the formation of
character are, in short, derivative laws, resulting from the general
laws of bmind; andb are to be obtained by deducing them from those
general laws; by supposing any given set of circumstances, and cthenc
considering what, according to the laws of mind, will be the influence
of those circumstances on the formation of character.

A science is thus formed, to which I would propose to give the name of
Ethology, or the Science of Character; from ἠ̑θος, a word more nearly
corresponding to the term “character” as I here use it, than any other
word in the same language. The name is perhaps etymologically applicable
to the entire science of our mental and moral nature; but if, as is
usual and convenient, we employ the name Psychology for the science of
the elementary laws of mind, Ethology will serve for the dulteriord
science which determines the kind of character produced in conformity to
those general laws, by any set of circumstances, physical and moral.
According to this definition, Ethology is the science which corresponds
to the art of education; in the widest sense of the term, including the
formation of national eor collectivee character as well as individual.
fIt would indeedf be vain to expect (however completely the laws of the
formation of character might be ascertained) that we could know so
accurately the circumstances of any given case as to be able positively
to predict the character that would be produced in that caseg. But weg
must remember that a degree of knowledge far short of the power of
actual prediction, is often of hmuchh practical value. There may be
great power of influencing phenomena, with a very imperfect knowledge of
the causes by which they are in any given instance determined. It is
enough that we know that certain means have a tendency to produce a
given effect, and that others have a tendency to frustrate it. When the
circumstances of an individual or of a nation are in any considerable
degree under our control, we may, by our knowledge of tendencies, be
enabled to shape those circumstances in a manner much more favourable to
the ends we desire, than the Edition: current; Page: [870] shape which
they would of themselves assume. This is the limit of our power; but
within this limit the power is a most important one.

iThisi science of Ethology may be called the Exact Science of Human
Nature; for its truths are not, like the empirical laws which depend on
them, approximate generalizations, but real laws. It is, however, (as in
all cases of complex phenomena) necessary to the exactness of the
propositions, that they should be hypothetical only, and affirm
tendencies, not facts. They must not assert that something will always,
or certainly, happen; but only that such and such will be the effect of
a given cause, so far as it operates uncounteracted. It is a scientific
proposition, that jbodily strength tends to make men courageousj, not
that it always makes them so: that an interest on one side of a question
tends to bias the judgment; not that it invariably does so: that
experience tends to give wisdom; not that such is always its effect.
These propositions, being assertive only of tendencies, are not the less
universally true because the tendencies may be kfrustratedk.

§ 5. [The principles of Ethology are the axiomata media of mental
science] While on the one hand Psychology is altogether, or principally,
a science of observation and experiment, Ethology, as I have conceived
it, is, as I have already remarked, altogether deductive. The one
ascertains the simple laws of Mind in general, the other traces their
operation in complex combinations of circumstances. Ethology stands to
Psychology in a relation very similar to that in which the various
branches of natural philosophy stand to mechanics. The principles of
Ethology are properly the middle principles, the axiomata media (as
Bacon would have said) of the science of mind: as distinguished, on the
one hand from the empirical laws resulting from simple observation, and
on the other from the highest generalizations.

And this seems a asuitablea place for a logical remark, which, though of
general application, is of peculiar importance in reference to the
present subject. Bacon has judiciously observed that the axiomata media
of every science principally constitute its value.[*] The lowest
generalizations, until explained by and resolved into the middle
principles of which they are the consequences, have only the imperfect
accuracy of empirical laws; while the most general laws are too general,
and include too few circumstances, to give sufficient indication of what
happens in individual cases, where the circumstances are almost always
immensely numerous. In the importance, therefore, which Bacon assigns,
in every science, to the middle principles, it Edition: current; Page:
[871] is impossible not to agree with him. But I conceive him to have
been radically wrong in his doctrine respecting the mode in which these
axiomata media should be arrived at; though there is no one proposition
laid down in his works for which he has been bmoreb extravagantly
eulogized. He enunciates as an universal rule, that induction should
proceed from the lowest to the middle principles, and from those to the
highest, never reversing that order, and consequently, leaving no room
for the discovery of new principles by way of deduction at all. It is
not to be conceived that a man of chisc sagacity could have fallen into
this mistake, if there had existed in his time, among the sciences which
treat of successive phenomena, one single instance of a deductive
science, such as mechanics, astronomy, optics, acoustics, &c. now are.
In those sciences it is evident that the higher and middle principles
are by no means derived from the lowest, but the reverse. In some of
them the very highest generalizations were dthosed earliest ascertained
with any scientific exactness; as, for example (in mechanics), the laws
of motion. Those general laws had not indeed at first the acknowledged
universality which they acquired after having been successfully employed
to explain many classes of phenomena to which they were not originally
seen to be applicable; as when the laws of motion eweree employed, in
conjunction with other laws, to explain deductively the celestial
phenomena. Still, the fact remains, that the propositions which were
afterwards recognised as the most general truths of the science, were,
of all its accurate generalizations, those earliest arrived at. Bacon’s
greatest merit cannot therefore consist, as we are so often told that it
did, in exploding the vicious method pursued by the ancients of flying
to the highest generalizations first, and deducing the middle principles
from them; since this is neither a vicious nor an exploded, but the
universally accredited method of modern science, and that to which it
owes its greatest triumphs. The error of ancient speculation did not
consist in making the largest generalizations first, but in making them
without the aid or warrant of rigorous inductive methods, and applying
them deductively without the needful use of that important part of the
Deductive Method termed Verification.

The order in which truths of the various degrees of generality should be
ascertained, cannot, I apprehend, be prescribed by any unbending rule. I
know of no maxim which can be laid down on the subject, but to obtain
those first, in respect to which the conditions of a real induction can
be first and most completely realized. Now, wherever our means of
investigation can reach causes, without stopping at the empirical laws
of the effects, the simplest cases, being those in which fewest causes
are simultaneously concerned, will be most amenable to the inductive
process; and these are the Edition: current; Page: [872] cases which
elicit laws of the greatest comprehensiveness. In every science,
therefore, which has reached the stage at which it becomes a science of
causes, it will be usual as well as desirable first to obtain the
highest generalizations, and then deduce the more special ones from
them. Nor can I discover any foundation for the Baconian maxim, so much
extolled by subsequent writers, except this: That before we attempt to
explain deductively from more general laws any new class of phenomena,
it is desirable to have gone as far as is practicable in ascertaining
the empirical laws of those phenomena; so as to compare the results of
deduction, not with one individual instance after another, but with
general propositions expressive of the points of agreement which have
been found among fmanyf instances. For if Newton had been obliged to
verify the theory of gravitation, not by deducing from it Kepler’s laws,
but by deducing all the observed planetary positions which had served
Kepler to establish those laws, the Newtonian theory would probably
never have emerged from the state of an hypothesis.*

The applicability of these remarks to the special case under
consideration, cannot admit of question. The science of the formation of
character is a science of causes. The subject is one to which those
among the canons of induction, by which laws of causation are
ascertained, can be rigorously applied. It is, therefore, both natural
and advisable to ascertain the simplest, which are necessarily the most
general, laws of causation first, and to deduce the middle principles
from them. In other words, Ethology, the deductive science, is a system
of corollaries from Psychology, the experimental science.

§ 6. [Ethology characterized] Of these, the earlier alone has been, as
yet, really conceived or studied as a science; the other, Ethology, is
still to be Edition: current; Page: [873] created. But aits creation has
at length become practicablea. The empirical laws, destined to verify
its deductions, have been bformedb in abundance by every successive age
of humanity; and the premises for the deductions are now sufficiently
complete. Excepting the degree of uncertainty which still exists as to
the extent of the natural differences of cindividualc minds, and the
physical circumstances on which these may be dependent, (considerations
which are of secondary importance when we are considering mankind in the
average, or en masse,) I believe most competent judges will agree that
the general laws of the different constituent elements of human nature
are devend now sufficiently understood, to render it possible for a
competent thinker to deduce from those laws ewith a considerable
approach to certainty,e the particular type of character which would be
formed, in mankind generally, by any assumed set of circumstances. A
science of Ethology, founded on the laws of Psychology, is therefore
possible; though little has yet been done, and that little not at all
systematically, towards forming it. The progress of this important but
most imperfect science will depend on a double process: first, that of
deducing theoretically the ethological consequences of particular
circumstances of position, and comparing them with the recognised
results of common experience; and secondly, the reverse operation;
increased study of the various types of human nature that are to be
found in the world; conducted by persons not only capable of analysing
and recording the circumstances in which these types severally prevail,
but also sufficiently acquainted with psychological laws, to be able to
explain and account for the characteristics of the type, by the
peculiarities of the circumstances: the residuum falone, when there
proves to bef any, being set down to the account of congenital
predispositions.

gFor theg experimental or à posteriori part of this processh, the
materials are continually accumulating by the observation of mankind. So
far as thought is concerned, the great problem ofh Ethology is to deduce
the requisite middle principles from the general laws of Psychology. The
subject to be studied is, the iorigin and sourcesi of all those
qualities in human beings which arej interesting to us, either as facts
to be produced, to be avoided, or Edition: current; Page: [874] merely
to be understood: and the object is, to determine, from the general laws
of mind, combined with the general position of our species in the
universe, what actual or possible combinations of circumstances are
capable of promoting or of preventing the production of those qualities.
A science which possesses middle principles of this kind, arranged in
the order, not of causes, but of the effects which it is desirable to
produce or to prevent, is duly prepared to be the foundation of the
corresponding Art. And when Ethology shall be thus prepared, practical
education will be the mere transformation of those principles into a
parallel system of precepts, and the adaptation of these to the sum
total of the individual circumstances which exist in each particular
case.

It is hardly necessary again to repeat, that, as in every other
deductive science, kverification à posteriori must proceed pari passu
withk deduction à priori. The inference given by theory as to the type
of character which would be formed by any given circumstances, must be
tested by specific experience of those circumstances whenever
obtainable; and the lconclusions of the science as a whole,l must
undergo a perpetual verification and correction from the general remarks
afforded by common experience respecting human nature in our own age,
and by history respecting times gone by. The conclusions of theory
cannot be trusted, unless confirmed by observation; nor those of
observation, unless they can be affiliated tom theory, by deducing them
from the laws of human nature, and from a close analysis of the
circumstances of the particular situation. It is the accordance of these
two kinds of evidence separately taken—the nconsiliencen of à priori
reasoning and specific experience—which forms the only sufficient ground
for the principles of any science so “immersed in matter,” dealing with
osuch complex ando concrete phenomena, as Ethology.

Edition: current; Page: [875]


CHAPTER VI: General Considerations on the Social Science

§ 1. [Are Social Phenomena a subject of Science?] Next after the science
of individual man, comes the science of man in society: of the actions
of collective masses of mankind, and the various phenomena which
constitute social life.

If the formation of individual character is already a complex subject of
study, this subject amust be, in appearance at least, stilla more
complex; because the number of concurrent causes, all exercising more or
less influence on the total effect, is greater, in the proportion in
which a nation, or the species at large, exposes a larger surface to the
operation of agents, psychological and physical, than any single
individual. If it was necessary to prove, in opposition to an existing
prejudice, that the simpler of the two is capable of being a subject of
science; the prejudice is likely to be yet stronger against the
possibility of giving a scientific character to the study of Politics,
and of the phenomena of Society. It is, accordingly, but of yesterday
that the conception of a political or social science has existed,
anywhere but in the mind of here and there an insulated thinker,
generally very ill prepared for its realization: though the subject
itself has of all others engaged the most general attention, and been a
theme of interested and earnest discussions, almost from the beginning
of recorded time.

The condition indeed of politics, as a branch of knowledge, was until
very lately, and has scarcely even yet ceased to be, that which Bacon
animadverted on, as the natural state of the sciences while their
cultivation is abandoned to practitioners; not being carried on as a
branch of speculative inquiry, but only with a view to the exigencies of
daily practice, and the fructifera experimenta, therefore, being aimed
at, almost to the exclusion of the lucifera.[*] Such was medical
binvestigationb, before physiology and natural history began to be
cultivated as branches of general knowledge. The only questions Edition:
current; Page: [876] examined were, what diet is wholesome, or what
medicine will cure some given disease; without any previous systematic
inquiry into the laws of nutrition, and of the healthy and morbid action
of the different organs, on which laws the effect of any diet or
medicine must evidently depend. And in politics, the questions which
engaged general attention were similar:—Is such an enactment, or such a
form of government, beneficial or the reverse—either universally, or to
some particular community? without cany previousc inquiry into the
general conditions by which the operation of legislative measures, or
the effects produced by forms of government, are determined.d Students
in politics thus attempted to study the pathology and therapeutics of
the social body, before they had laid the necessary foundation in its
physiology; to cure disease without understanding the laws of health.
And the result was such as it must always be when epersons, even of
ability,e attempt to deal with the complex questions of a science before
its simpler and more elementary ftruthsf have been established.

No wonder that when the phenomena of society have so rarely been
contemplated in the point of view characteristic of science, the
philosophy of society should have made little progress; should contain
few general propositions sufficiently precise and certain, for common
inquirers to recognise in them a scientific character. The vulgar notion
accordingly is, that all pretension to lay down general truths on
politics and society is quackery; that no universality and no certainty
are attainable in such matters. What partly excuses this common notion
is, that it is really not without foundation in one particular sense. A
large proportion of those who have laid claim to gthe character ofg
philosophic politicians, have attempted, not to ascertain universal
sequences, but to frame universal precepts. They have himaginedh some
one form of government, or system of laws, to fit all cases; a
pretension Edition: current; Page: [877] well meriting the ridicule with
which it is treated by practitioners, and wholly unsupported by the
analogy of the art to which, from the nature of its subject, that of
politics must be the imost nearlyi allied. No one now supposes it
possible that one remedy can cure all diseases, or even the same disease
in all constitutions and habits of body.j

It is not necessary keven tok the perfection of a science, that the
corresponding art should possess universal, or even general, rules. The
phenomena of society might not only be lcompletely dependent on knownl
causes, but the mode of action of all those causes might be reducible to
laws of considerable simplicity, and yet no two cases might admit of
being treated in precisely the same manner. So great might be the
variety of circumstances on which the results in different cases depend,
that mthem art might not have a single general precept to give, except
that of watching the circumstances of the nparticularn case, and
adapting our measures to the effects which, according to the principles
of the science, result from those circumstances. But oalthougho, in so
complicated a class of subjects, it is pimpossiblep to lay down
practical maxims of universal application, it does not follow that the
phenomena do not conform to universal laws.

§ 2. [Of what nature the Social Science must be] All phenomena of
society are phenomena of human nature, generated by the action of
outward circumstances upon amasses of human beingsa: and if, therefore,
the phenomena of human thought, feeling, and action, are subject to
fixed laws, the phenomena of society cannot but conform to fixed laws,
the bconsequenceb of the preceding. There is, indeed, no hope that these
laws, though our knowledge of them were as certain and as complete as it
is in astronomy, would enable us to predict the history of society, like
that of the celestial appearances, for thousands of years to come. But
the difference of certainty is not in the laws themselves, it is in the
data to which cthesec laws are to be applied. In astronomy the causes
influencing the result are few, and change little, and that little
according to known laws; we can ascertain what they are now, and thence
determine what they will be at any epoch of a distant future. Edition:
current; Page: [878] The data, therefore, in astronomy, are as certain
as the laws themselves. The circumstances, on the contrary, which
influence the condition and progress of society, are innumerable, and
perpetually changing; and though they all change in obedience to causes,
and therefore to laws, the multitude of the causes is so great as to
defy our limited powers of calculation. Not to say that the
impossibility of applying precise numbers to facts of such a
description, would set an impassable limit to the possibility of
calculating them beforehand, even if the powers of the human intellect
were otherwise adequate to the task.

But, asd before remarked, an amount of knowledge quite insufficient for
prediction, may be most valuable for guidance. The science of society
would have attained a very high point of perfection, if it enabled us,
in any given condition of social affairs, in the condition for instance
of Europe or any European country at the present time, to understand by
what causes it had, in any and every particular, been made what it was;
whether it was tending to any, and to what, changes; what effects each
feature of its existing state was likely to produce in the future; and
by what means any of those effects might be prevented, modified, or
accelerated, or a different class of effects superinduced. There is
nothing chimerical in the hope that general laws, sufficient to enable
us to answer these various questions for any country or time with the
individual circumstances of which we are well acquainted, do really
admit of being ascertained; ande that the other branches of human
knowledge, which this undertaking presupposes, are so far advanced that
the time is ripe for its fcommencementf. Such is the object of the
Social Science.

That the nature of what I consider the true method of the science may be
made more palpable, by first showing what that method is not; it will be
expedient to characterize briefly two radical misconceptions of the
proper mode of philosophizing on society and government, one or other of
which is, either explicitly or more often unconsciously, entertained by
almost all who have meditated or argued respecting the logic of politics
since the notion of treating it by strict rules, and on Baconian
principles, has been current among the more advanced thinkers. These
erroneous methods, if the word method can be applied to erroneous
tendencies arising from the absence of any sufficiently distinct
conception of method, may beg termed the Experimental, or Chemical, mode
of investigation, and the Abstract, or Geometrical, mode. We shall begin
with the former.

Edition: current; Page: [879]


CHAPTER VII: Of the Chemical, or Experimental, Method in the Social Science

§ 1. [Characters of the mode of thinking which deduces political
doctrines from specific experience] The laws of the phenomena of society
are, and can be, nothing but the laws of the actions and passions of
human beings united together in the social state. Men, however, in a
state of society, are still men; their actions and passions are obedient
to the laws of individual human nature. Men are not, when brought
together, converted into another kind of substance, with different
properties; as hydrogen and oxygen are different from water, or as
hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, and azote, are different from nerves, muscles,
and tendons. Human beings in society have no properties but those which
are derived from, and may be resolved into, the laws of the nature of
individual man. In social phenomena the Composition of Causes is the
universal law.

Now, the method of philosophizing which may be termed chemical overlooks
this fact, and proceeds as if the nature of man as an individual were
not concerned at all, or awerea concerned in a very inferior degree, in
the operations of bhuman beingsb in society. All reasoning in
cpoliticalc or social affairs, grounded on principles of human nature,
is objected to by reasoners of this sort, under such names as “abstract
theory.” For dthe direction ofd their opinions and conduct, they profess
to demand, in all cases without exception, specific experience.

This mode of thinking is not only general with practitioners in
politics, and with that very numerous class who (on a subject which no
one, however ignorant, thinks himself incompetent to discuss) profess to
guide themselves by common sense rather than by science; but is often
countenanced by persons with greater pretensions to instruction; persons
who, having sufficient acquaintance with books and with the current
ideas to have heard that Bacon taught emankinde to follow experience,
and to ground their conclusions on facts instead of metaphysical
dogmas—think that, by treating political facts Edition: current; Page:
[880] in as directly experimental a method as chemical facts, they are
showing themselves true Baconians, and proving their adversaries to be
mere syllogizers and schoolmen. As, however, the notion of the
applicability of experimental methods to political philosophy cannot
coexist with any just conception of fthesef methods themselves, the kind
of arguments from experience which the chemical theory brings forth as
its fruits (and which form the staple, in this country especially, of
parliamentary and hustings oratory,) are such as, at no time since
Bacon, would have been admitted to be valid in chemistry itself, or in
any other branch of experimental science. They are such as these; that
the prohibition of foreign commodities must conduce to national wealth,
because England has flourished under it, or because countries in general
which have adopted it have flourished; that our laws, or our internal
administration, or our constitution, are excellent for a similar reason:
and the eternal arguments from historical examples, from Athens or Rome,
from the fires in Smithfield or the French Revolution.

I will not waste time in contending against modes of argumentation which
no person, with the smallest practice in estimating evidence, could
possibly be betrayed into; which draw conclusions of general application
from a single unanalysed instance, or arbitrarily refer an effect to
some one among its antecedents, without any process of elimination or
comparison of instances. It is a rule both of justice and of good sense
to grapple not with the absurdest, but with the most reasonable form of
a wrong opinion. We shall suppose our inquirer acquainted with the true
conditions of experimental investigation, and competent in point of
gacquirementsg for realizing them, hso far as they can be realizedh. He
shall know as much of the facts of history as mere erudition can
teach—as much as can be proved by testimony, without the assistance of
any theory; and if those mere facts, properly collated, can fulfil the
conditions of a real induction, he shall be qualified for the task.

But, that no such attempt can have the smallest chance of success, has
been abundantly shown in the tenth chapter of the Third Book.* We there
examined whether effects which depend on a complication of causes can be
made the isubjecti of a true induction by observation and experiment;
and concluded, on the most convincing grounds, that they cannot. Since,
of all effects, none depend on so great a complication of causes as
social phenomena, we might leave our case to rest in safety on that
previous showing. But a logical principle as yet so little familiar to
the ordinary run of thinkers, Edition: current; Page: [881] requires to
be insisted on more than once, in order to make the due impression; and
the present being the case which of all others exemplifies it the most
strongly, there will be advantage in re-stating the grounds of the
general maxim, as applied to the specialities of the class of inquiries
now under consideration.

§ 2. [In the Social Science experiments are impossible] The first
difficulty which meets us in the attempt to apply experimental methods
for ascertaining the laws of social phenomena, is that we are without
the means of making artificial experiments. Even if we could contrive
experiments at leisure, and try them without limit, we should do so
under immense adisadvantagea; both from the impossibility of
ascertaining and taking note of all the facts of each case, and because
(those facts being in a perpetual state of change) before sufficient
time had elapsed to ascertain the result of the experiment, some
material circumstances would always have ceased to be the same. But it
is unnecessary to consider the logical objections which would exist to
the conclusiveness of our experiments, since we palpably never have the
power of trying any. We can only watch those which nature produces, orb
which are produced for other reasons. We cannot adapt our logical means
to our wants, by varying the circumstances as the exigencies of
elimination may require. If the spontaneous instances, formed by
ccotemporaryc events and by the successions of phenomena recorded in
history, afford a sufficient variation of circumstances, an induction
from specific experience is attainable; otherwise not. The question to
be resolved is, therefore, whether the requisites for induction
respecting the causes of political effects or the properties of
political agents, are to be met with in history? including under the
term, dcotemporaryd history. And in order to give fixity to our
conceptions, it will be advisable to suppose this question asked in
reference to some special subject of political inquiry or controversy;
such as that efrequente topic of debate in the present fcenturyf, the
operation of restrictive and prohibitory commercial legislation upon
national wealth. Let this, then, be the scientific question to be
investigated by specific experience.

§ 3. [The Method of Difference inapplicable in the Social Science] In
order to apply to the case the most perfect of the methods of
experimental inquiry, the Method of Difference, we require to find two
instances, which tally in every particular except the one which is the
subject of inquiry. If two nations can be found which are alike in all
natural advantages and disadvantages; Edition: current; Page: [882]
whose people resemble each other in every quality, physical and moral,
aspontaneousa and acquired; whose habits, usages, opinions, laws and
institutions are the same in all respects, except that one of them has a
more protective tariff, or in other respects interferes more with the
freedom of industry;b if one of these nations is found to be rich, and
the other poor, or one richer than the other, this will be an
experimentum crucis: a real proof by experience, which of the two
systems is most favourable to national riches. But the supposition that
two such instances can be met with is cmanifestly absurdc. Nor is such a
concurrence even abstractedly possible. Two nations which agreed in
everything except their commercial policy, would agree also in that.
Differences of legislation are not inherent and ultimate diversities;
are not properties of Kinds. They are effects of pre-existing causes. If
the two nations differ in this portion of their institutions, it is from
some difference in their position, and thence in their apparent
interests, or in some portion or other of their opinions, habits, and
tendencies; which opens a view of further differences without any
assignable limit, capable of operating on their industrial prosperity,
as well as on every other feature of their condition, in more ways than
can be enumerated or imagined. There is thus a demonstrated
impossibility of obtaining, in the investigations of the social science,
the conditions required for the most conclusive form of inquiry by
specific experience.

In the absence of the direct, we may next try, as in other cases, the
supplementary resource, called in a former place the Indirect Method of
Difference: which, instead of two instances differing in nothing but the
presence or absence of a given circumstance, compares two classes of
instances respectively agreeing in nothing but the presence of a
circumstance on the one side and its absence on the other. To choose the
most advantageous case conceivable, (a case far too advantageous to be
ever obtained,) suppose that we compare one nation which has a
restrictive policy, with two or more nations agreeing in nothing but in
permitting free trade. We need not now suppose that either of these
nations agrees with the first in all its circumstances; one may agree
with it in some of its circumstances, and another in the remainder. And
it may be argued, that if these nations remain poorer than the
restrictive nation, it cannot be for want either of the first or of the
second set of circumstances, but it must be for want of the dprotectived
system. If (we might say) the restrictive nation had prospered from the
one set of causes, the first of the free-trade nations would have
prospered equally; if by reason of the other, the second would: but
neither has: therefore the prosperity was owing to the restrictions.
This will be allowed to be a very favourable specimen of an argument
from specific experience in politics, Edition: current; Page: [883] and
if this be inconclusive, it would not be easy to find another preferable
to it.

Yet, that it is inconclusive, scarcely requires to be pointed out. Why
must the prosperous nation have prospered from one cause exclusively?
National prosperity is always the collective result of a multitude of
favourable circumstances; and of these, the restrictive nation may unite
a greater number than either of the others, though it may have all of
those circumstances in common with either one or the other of them. Its
prosperity may be partly owing to circumstances common to it with one of
those nations, and partly with the other, while they, having each of
them only half the number of favourable circumstances, have remained
inferior. So that the closest imitation which can be made, in the social
science, of a elegitimatee induction from direct experience, gives but a
specious semblance of conclusiveness, without any real value.

§ 4. [The Methods of Agreement, and of Concomitant Variations,
inconclusive in the Social Science] The Method of Difference in either
of its forms being thus completely out of the question, there remains
the Method of Agreement. But we are already aware of how little value
this method is, in cases admitting Plurality of Causes: and social
phenomena are those in which the plurality prevails in the utmost
possible extent.

Suppose that the observer makes the luckiest hit which could be givena
by any conceivable combination of chances: that he finds two nations
which agree in no circumstance whatever, except in having a restrictive
system, and in being prosperous; or a number of nations, all prosperous,
which have no antecedent circumstances common to them all but that of
having a restrictive policy. It is unnecessary to go into the
consideration of the impossibility of ascertaining from history, or even
from bcotemporaryb observation, that such is really the fact: that the
nations agree in no other circumstance capable of influencing the case.
Let us suppose this impossibility vanquished, and the fact ascertained
that they cagreec only in a restrictive system as an antecedent, and
industrial prosperity as a consequent. What degree of presumption does
this raise, that the restrictive system caused the prosperity? One so
trifling as to be equivalent to none at all. That some one antecedent is
the cause of a given effect, because all other antecedents have been
found capable of being eliminated, is a just inference, only if the
effect can have but one cause. If it admits of several, nothing is more
natural than that each of these should separately admit of being
eliminated. Now, in the case of political phenomena, the supposition of
unity of cause is not only wide of the truth, but at Edition: current;
Page: [884] an immeasurable distance from it. The causes of every social
phenomenon which we are particularly interested about, security, wealth,
freedom, good government, public virtue, dgenerald intelligence, or
their opposites, are infinitely numerous, especially the external or
remote causes, which alone are, for the most part, accessible to direct
observation. No one cause suffices of itself to produce anye of these
phenomena; while there are countless causes which have some influence
over them, and may co-operate either in their production or in their
prevention. From the mere fact, therefore, of our having been able to
eliminate some circumstance, we can by no means infer that this
circumstance was not instrumental to the effect fin some off the very
instances from which we have eliminated it. We gcang conclude that the
effect is sometimes produced without it; but not that, when present, it
does not contribute its hshareh.

Similar objections will be found to apply to the Method of Concomitant
Variations. If the causes which act upon the state of any society
produced effects differing from one another in kind; if wealth depended
on one cause, peace on another, a third madei people virtuous, a fourth
intelligent; we might, though unable to sever the causes from one
another, refer to each of them that property of the effect which waxed
as it waxed, and which waned as it waned. But every attribute of the
social body is influenced by innumerable causes; and such is the mutual
action of the coexisting elements of society, that whatever affects any
one of the more important of them, will by that alone, if it does not
affect the others directly, affect them indirectly. The effects,
therefore, of different agents not being different in quality, while the
quantity of each is the mixed result of all the agents, the variations
of the aggregate cannot bear janj uniform proportion to those of any one
of its component parts.

§ 5. [The Method of Residues aalso inconclusive in the Social Science,
anda presupposes Deduction] There remains the Method of Residues; which
appears, on the first view, less foreign to this kind of inquiry than
the three other methods, because it only requires that we should
accurately note the circumstances of some one country, or state of
society. Making allowance, thereupon, for the effect of all causes whose
tendencies are known, the residue which those causes are inadequate to
explain may plausibly be imputed to the remainder of the circumstances
which are known to have Edition: current; Page: [885] existed in the
case. Something similar to this is the method which Coleridge* describes
himself as having followed in his political essays in the Morning Post.
“On every great occurrence I endeavoured to discover in past history the
event that most nearly resembled it. I procured, bwheneverb it was
possible, the contemporary historians, memorialists, and pamphleteers.
Then fairly subtracting the points of difference from those of likeness,
as the balance favoured the former or the latter, I conjectured that the
result would be the same or different.” As, for instance, “in the series
of essays entitled ‘A comparison of France under Napoleon with Rome
under the first Cæsars,’ and in those which followed, ‘on the probable
final restoration of the Bourbons.’ . . . The same plan I pursued at the
commencement of the Spanish Revolution, and with the same success,
taking the war of the United Provinces with Philip II as the groundwork
of the comparison.” In cthis inquiry hec no doubt employed the Method of
Residues; for, in “subtracting the points of difference from those of
likeness,” he doubtless weighed, and did not content himself with
numbering, them: he doubtless took those points of agreement only, which
dhe presumedd from their own nature to be capable of influencing the
effect, and, allowing for that influence, concluded that the remainder
of the result would be referable to the points of difference.

Whatever may be the efficacy of this method, it is, as we long ago
remarked, not a method of pure observation and experiment; it concludes,
not from a comparison of instances, but from the comparison of an
instance with the result of a previous deduction. Applied to social
phenomena, it presupposes that the causes from which part of the effect
proceeded are already known; and as we have shown that these cannot have
been known by specific experience, they must have been learnt by
deduction frome principles of human nature; experience being called in
only as a supplementary resource, to determine the causes which produced
an unexplained residue. But if the principles of human nature may be had
recourse to for the establishment of some political truths, they may for
all. If it be admissible to say, England must have prospered by reason
of fthef prohibitory system, because after allowing for all the other
tendencies which have been operating, there is a portion of prosperity
still to be accounted for; it must be admissible to go to the same
source for the effect of the prohibitory system, and examine what
account the laws of human motives and actions will enable us to give of
its tendencies. Nor, in fact, will the experimental argument amount to
anything, Edition: current; Page: [886] except ging verification of a
conclusion drawn from those general laws. For we may subtract the effect
of one, two, three, or four causes, but we shall never succeed in
subtracting the effect of all causes except one: while it would be a
curious instance of the dangers of too much caution, if, to avoid
depending on à priori reasoning concerning the effect of a single cause,
we should oblige ourselves to depend on as many separate à priori
reasonings as there are causes operating concurrently with that
particular cause in some given instance.

We have now sufficiently characterized the hgrossh misconception of the
mode of investigation proper to political phenomena, which I have termed
the Chemical Method. So lengthened a discussion would not have been
necessary, if the claim to decide authoritatively on political doctrines
were confined to persons who had competently studied any one of the
higher departments of physical science. But since the generality of
those who reason on political subjects, satisfactorily to themselves and
to a more or less numerous body of admirers, know nothing whatever of
the methods of physical investigation beyond a few precepts which they
continue to parrot after Bacon, being entirely unaware that Bacon’s
conception of scientific inquiry has done its work, and that science has
now advanced into a higher stage; there are probably many to whom such
remarks as the foregoing may still be useful. In an age in which
chemistry itself, when attempting to deal with the more complex chemical
sequences, those of the animal or even the vegetable organism, has found
it necessary to become, and has succeeded in becoming, a Deductive
Science—it is not to be apprehended that any person of scientific
habits, who has kept pace with the general progress of the knowledge of
nature, can be in danger of applying the methods of elementary chemistry
to explore the sequences of the most complex order of phenomena in
existence.

Edition: current; Page: [887]


CHAPTER VIII: Of the Geometrical, or Abstract Method

§ 1. [Characters of this mode of thinking] The misconception discussed
in the preceding chapter is, as we said, chiefly committed by persons
not much accustomed to scientific investigation: practitioners in
politics, who rather employ the commonplaces of philosophy to justify
their practice, than seek to guide their practice by aphilosophic
principlesa: or imperfectly educated bpersonsb, who, in ignorance of the
careful selection and elaborate comparison of instances required for the
formation of a sound theory, attempt to found one upon a few
coincidences which they have casually noticed.

The erroneous method of which we are now to treat, is, on the contrary,
peculiar to thinking and studious minds. It never could have suggested
itself but to persons of some familiarity with the nature of scientific
research; who,—being aware of the impossibility of establishing, by
casual observation or direct experimentation, a true theory of sequences
so complex as are those of the social phenomena,—have recourse to the
simpler laws which are immediately operative in those phenomena, and
which are no other than the laws of the nature of the human beings
therein concerned. These thinkers perceive (what the partisans of the
chemical or experimental theory do not) that the cscience of society
must necessarily be deductivec. But, from an insufficient consideration
of the specific nature of the subject matter,—and often because (their
own scientific education having stopped short in too early a stage)
geometry stands in their minds as the type of all deductive science,—it
is to geometry, rather than to astronomy and natural philosophy, that
they unconsciously assimilate the deductive science of society.

Among the differences between geometry (a science of coexistent facts,
altogether independent of the laws of the succession of phenomena), and
those physical Sciences of Causation which have been rendered deductive,
the following is one of the most conspicuous: That geometry affords no
room Edition: current; Page: [888] for what so constantly occurs in
mechanics and its applications, the case of conflicting forces; of
causes which counteract or modify one another. In mechanics we
continually find two or more moving forces producing, not motion, but
rest; or motion in a different direction from that which would have been
produced by either of the generating forces. It is true that the effect
of the joint forces is the same when they act simultaneously, as if they
had acted one after another, or by turns; and it is in this that the
difference between mechanical and chemical laws consists. But still the
effects, whether produced by successive or by simultaneous action, do,
wholly or in part, cancel one another: what the one force does, the
other, partly or altogether, undoes. There is no similar state of things
in geometry. The result which follows from one geometrical principle has
nothing that dconflicts withd the result which follows from another.
What is proved true from one geometrical theorem, what would be true if
no other geometrical principles existed, cannot be altered and made no
longer true by reason of some other egeometricale principle. What is
once proved true fisf true in all cases, whatever supposition may be
made in regard to any other matter.

Now a conception, similar to this last, would appear to have been formed
of the social science, in the minds of the earlier of those who have
attempted to cultivate it by a deductive method. Mechanics would be a
science very similar to geometry, if every motion resulted from one
force alone, and not from a conflict of forces. In the geometrical
theory of society, it seems to be supposed that this is really the case
with the social phenomena;g that each of them results always from only
one force, one single property of human nature.

At the point which we have now reached, it cannot be necessary to say
anything either in proof or in illustration of the assertion that such
is not the true character of the social phenomena. There is not, among
htheseh most complex and (for that reason) most modifiable of all
phenomena, any one over which innumerable forces do not exercise
influence; which does not depend on a conjunction of very many causes.
We have not, therefore, to prove the notion in question to be an error,
but to prove that the error has been committed; that so mistaken a
conception of the mode in which the phenomena of society are produced,
has actually been iascertainedi.

§ 2. [Examples of the Geometrical Method] One numerous division of the
reasoners who have treated social facts according to geometrical
methods, Edition: current; Page: [889] not admittinga any modification
of one law by another, must for the present be left out of
consideration; because in them this error is complicated with, and is
the effect of, another fundamental misconception, of which we have
already taken some notice, and which will be bfurther treated ofb before
we conclude. I speak of those who deduce political conclusions not from
laws of nature, not from sequences of phenomena, real or imaginary, but
from unbending practical maxims. Such, for example, are all who found
their ctheoryc of politics on what is called abstract right, that is to
say, on universal precepts; a pretension of which we have already
noticed the chimerical nature. Such, in like manner, are those who make
the assumption of a social contract, or any other kind of original
obligation, dand apply itd to particular cases by mere interpretation.
But in this the fundamental error is the attempt to treat an art like a
science, and to have a deductive art; the irrationality of which will be
shown in a future chapter. It will be proper to take our exemplification
of the geometrical theory from those thinkers who have avoided this
additional error, and who entertain, so far, a juster idea of the nature
of political inquiry.

We may cite, in the first instance, those who assume as the principle of
their political philosophy that government is founded on fear; that the
dread of each other is the one motive by which human beings were
originally brought into a state of society, and are still held in it.
Some of the earlier scientific inquirers into politics, in particular
Hobbes, assumed this proposition, not by implication, but avowedly, as
the foundation of their doctrine, and attempted to build a complete
philosophy of politics thereupon. It is true that Hobbese did not find
this one maxim sufficient to carry him through the whole of his subject,
but was obliged to eke it out by the double sophism of an original
contract. I call this a double sophism; first, as passing off a fiction
for a fact, and, secondly,f assuming a practical principle, or precept,
as the basis of a theory; which is a petitio principii, since (as we
noticed in treating of that Fallacy) every rule of conduct, even though
it be so binding a one as the observance of a promise, must rest its own
gfoundationsg on the theory of the subject, and the theory, therefore,
cannot rest upon it.

§ 3. [The interest-philosophy of the Bentham School] Passing over less
important instances, aIa shall come at once to the most remarkable
example afforded by our own times of the geometrical method in politics;
emanating from persons who bareb well aware of the distinction between
science and Edition: current; Page: [890] art; who cknewc that rules of
conduct must follow, not precede, the ascertainment of laws of nature,
and that the latter, not the former, is the legitimate field for the
application of the deductive method. I allude to the interest-philosophy
of the Bentham school.

The profound and original thinkers who are commonly known under this
description, founded their general theory of government on one
comprehensive premise, namely, that men’s actions are always determined
by their interests. There is an ambiguity in this last expression; for,
as the same philosophers, despecially Benthamd,e gave the name of an
interest to anything which a person likes, the proposition may be
understood to mean only this, that men’s actions are always determined
by their wishes. In this sense, however, it would not bear out any of
the consequences which these fwritersf drew from it; and the word,
therefore, in their political reasonings, must be understood to mean
(which is also the explanation they themselves, on such occasions, gave
of it) what is commonly termed private, or worldly, interest.

Taking the doctrine, then, in this sense, an objection presents itself
in limine which might be deemed a fatal one, namely, that so sweeping a
proposition is far from being universally true. gHuman beingsg are not
governed in all their actions by their worldly interests. This, however,
is by no means so conclusive an objection as it at first appears;
because in politics we are for the most part concerned with the conduct,
not of individual hpersons, but either of a series of persons (as a
succession of kings), or a body or mass of personsh, as a nation, an
aristocracy, or a representative assembly. And whatever is true of a
large majority of mankind, may without much error be taken for true of
any succession of persons, considered as a whole, or of any collection
of persons in which the act of the majority becomes the act of the whole
body. Although, therefore, the maxim is sometimes expressed in a manner
unnecessarily paradoxical, the consequences drawn from it will hold
equally good if the assertion be limited as follows—Any succession of
ipersons, or the majority of any body of personsi, will be governed in
the bulk of their conduct by their personal interests. We are bound to
allow to this school of jthinkersj the benefit of this more rational
statement of their fundamental maxim, which kis alsok in strict
conformity to the explanations which, when considered to be called for,
have been given by themselves.

The theory goes on to infer, lquite correctlyl, that if the actions of
mankind are determined in the main by their selfish interests, the only
rulers who will govern according to the interest of the governed, are
those whose selfish Edition: current; Page: [891] interests are in
accordance with it. And to this is added a third proposition, namely,
that no rulers have their selfish interest identical with that of the
governed, unless it be rendered so by accountability, that is, by
dependence on the will of the governed. In other words (and as the
result of the whole), that the desire of retaining or the fear of losing
their power, and whatever is thereon consequent, is the sole motive
which can be relied on for producing on the part of rulers a course of
conduct in accordance with the general interest.

We have thus a fundamental theorem of political science, consisting of
three syllogisms, and depending chiefly on two general premises, in each
of which a certain effect is considered as determined only by one cause,
not by a concurrence of causes. In the one, it is assumed that the
actions of average rulers are determined solely by self-interest; in the
other, that the sense of identity of interest with the governed, is
produced and producible by no other cause than responsibility.

Neither of these propositions is by any means true; the last is
extremely wide of the truth.

It is not true that the actions even of average rulers are wholly, or
anything approaching to wholly, determined by their personal interest,
or even by their own opinion of their personal interest. I do not speak
of the influence of a sense of duty, or feelings of philanthropy,
motives never to be mmainlym relied on, though (except in countries or
during periods of great moral debasement) they influence almost all
rulers in some degree, and some rulers in a very great degree. But I
insist only on what is true of all rulers, viz., that the character and
course of their actions is largely influenced (independently of personal
calculation) by the habitual sentiments and feelings, the general modes
of thinking and acting, which prevail throughout the community of which
they are members; as well as by the feelings, habits, and modes of
thought which characterize the particular class in that community to
which they themselves belong. And no one will understand or be able to
decipher their system of conduct, who does not take all these things
into account. They are also much influenced by the maxims and traditions
which have descended to them from other rulers, their predecessors;
nwhich maxims and traditions have been known to retain an ascendancy
during long periods, even in oppositionn to the private interests of the
rulers for the time being. oIo put aside the influence of other less
general causes. Although, therefore, the private interest of the rulers
or of the ruling class is a very powerful force, constantly in action,
and exercising the most important influence upon their Edition: current;
Page: [892] conduct; there is also, in what they do, a large portion
which that private interest by no means affords a sufficient explanation
of: and even the particulars which constitute the goodness or badness of
their government, are in some, and no small degree, influenced by those
among the circumstances acting upon them, which cannot, with any
propriety, be included in the term self-interest.

Turning now to the other proposition, that responsibility to the
governed is the only cause capable of producing pin the rulers a sense
of identity of interest with the communityp; this is still less
admissible as an universal truth, than even the former. qI am not
speaking of perfect identity of interest, which is an impracticable
chimera; which, most assuredly, responsibility to the people does not
give. Iq speak of identity in essentials; and the essentials are
different at different places and times. There are a large number of
cases in which those things which it is most for the rgeneral interest
that the rulers should do, are also those which they are prompted to do
by their strongest personal interest, the consolidation of theirr power.
The suppression, for instance, of anarchy and resistance to law,—the
complete establishment of the authority of the central government, in a
state of society like that of Europe in the middle ages,—is sone of the
strongest interestss of the people, and also of tthet rulers simply
because they are the rulers: and responsibility on their part could not
strengthen, though in many conceivable ways it might weaken, the motives
prompting them to pursue this object. During the greater part of the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, and of many other monarchs who might be named,
the sense of identity of interest between the sovereign and the majority
of the people was probably stronger than it usually is in responsible
governments: everything that the people had most at heart, the monarch
had at heart too. Had Peter the Great, or the rugged savages whom he
began to civilize, the truest inclination towards the things which were
for the real interest of those savages?

I am not here attempting to establish a theory of government, and am not
called upon to determine the proportional weight which ought tobe given
to the circumstances which this school of geometrical politicians left
out of their system, and those which they took into it. I am only
concerned to show that their method was unscientific; not to measure the
amount of error which may have affected their practical conclusions.

It is but justice to them, however, to remark, that their mistake was
not Edition: current; Page: [893] so much one of substance as of form;
and uconsisted in presentingu in a systematic shape, and as the
scientific treatment of a great philosophical question, what should have
passed for that which it really was, the mere polemics of the day.
Although the actions of rulers are by no means wholly determined by
their selfish interests, it is vchieflyv as a security against those
selfish interests that constitutional checks are required; and for that
purpose such checks, in England, and wthe other nations of modern
Europew, can in no manner be dispensed with. It is xlikewise true, that
in these same nations, and in the present age, responsibility to the
governedx is the only means practically available to create a feeling of
identity of interest, in the cases, and on the points, where that
feeling does not sufficiently exist. To all this, and to the arguments
which may be founded on it in favour of measures for the correction of
our representative system, I have nothing to object; but I confess my
regret, that the small though highly important portion of the philosophy
of government, which was wanted for the immediate purpose of serving the
cause of parliamentary reform, should have been held forth by ythinkersy
of such eminence as a complete theory.

It is not to be imagined possible, nor is it true in point of fact, that
these philosophers regarded the few premises of their theory as
including all that is required for explaining social phenomena, or for
determining the choice of forms of government and measures of
legislation and administration. They were too highly instructed, of too
comprehensive intellect, and some of them of too sober and practical a
character, for such an error. They would have applied, and did apply,
their principles with innumerable allowances. But it is not allowances
that are wanted. There is little chance of making due amends in the
superstructure of a theory for the want of sufficient breadth in its
foundations. It is unphilosophical to construct a science out of a few
of the agencies by which the phenomena are determined, and leave the
rest to the routine of practice or the sagacity of conjecture. We either
ought not to pretend to scientific forms, or we ought to study all the
determining agencies equally, and endeavour, so far as it can be done,
to include all of them within the pale of the science; else we shall
infallibly bestow a disproportionate attention upon those which our
theory takes zinto accountz, while we misestimate the rest, and probably
underrate their importance. That the deductions Edition: current; Page:
[894] should be from the whole and not from a part only of the laws of
nature that are concerned, would be desirable even if those omitted were
so insignificant in comparison with the others, that they might, for
most purposes and on most occasions, be left out of the account. But
this is far indeed from being true in the social science. The phenomena
of society do not depend, in essentials, on asomea one agency or law of
human nature, with only inconsiderable modifications from others. The
whole of the bqualitiesb of human nature influence those phenomena, and
there is not one which influences them in a small degree. There is not
one, the removal or any great alteration of which would not materially
affect the whole aspect of society, and change more or less cthe
sequences of social phenomena generallyc.

The theory which has been the subject of these remarks is in this
country at least, the principal dcontemporaryd example of what I have
styled the geometrical method of philosophizing in the social science;
and our examination of it has, for this reason, been more detailed than
ewoulde otherwise have been fsuitable tof a work like the present.
Having now sufficiently illustrated the two erroneous methods, we shall
pass without further preliminary to the true method; that which proceeds
(conformably to the practice of the gmore complex physical sciencesg)
deductively indeed, but by deduction from many, not from one or a very
few, original premises; considering each effect as (what it really is)
an aggregate result of many causes, operating sometimes through the
same, sometimes through different mental agencies, or laws of human
nature.

Edition: current; Page: [895]


CHAPTER IX: Of the Physical, or Concrete Deductive Method

§ 1. [The Direct and Inverse Deductive Methods] After what has been said
to illustrate the nature of the inquiry intoa social phenomena, the
general character of the method proper to that inquiry is sufficiently
evident, and needs only to be recapitulated, not proved. However complex
the phenomena, all their sequences and coexistences result from the laws
of the separate elements. The effectb produced, in social phenomena, by
any complex set of circumstances, amounts precisely to the sum of the
effects of the circumstances taken singly: and the complexity does not
arise from the number of the laws themselves, which is not remarkably
great; but from the extraordinary number and variety of the data or
elements—of the agents which, in obedience to that small number of laws,
co-operate towards the effect. The Social Science, therefore (whichc, by
a convenient barbarism, has been termedc Sociology,) is a deductive
science; not, indeed, after the model of geometry, but after that of the
dmore complexd physical sciences. It infers the law of each effect from
the laws of causation on which ethat effecte depends; not, however, from
the law merely of one cause, as in the geometrical method; but by
considering all the causes which conjunctly influence the effect, and
compounding their laws with one another. Its method, in short, is the
Concrete Deductive Method; that of which astronomy furnishes the most
perfect, natural philosophy a somewhat less perfect example, and the
employment of which, with the adaptations and precautions required by
the subject, is beginning to regenerate physiology.

Nor does it admit of doubt, that similar adaptations and precautions are
indispensable in sociology. In applying, to that most complex of all
studies, what is demonstrably the sole method capable of throwing the
light of science even upon phenomena of a far inferior degree of
complication, we ought to Edition: current; Page: [896] be aware that
the same superior complexity which renders the instrument of Deduction
more necessary, renders it also more precarious; and we must be prepared
to meet, by appropriate contrivances, this increase of difficulty.

The actions and feelings of human beings in the social state, are, no
doubt, entirely governed by psychological and ethological laws: whatever
influence any cause exercises upon the social phenomena, it exercises
through those laws. Supposing therefore the laws of human actions and
feelings to be sufficiently known, there is no extraordinary difficulty
in determining from those laws, the nature of the social effects which
any given cause tends to produce. But when the question is that of
compounding several tendencies together, and computing the aggregate
result of many coexistent causes; and especially when, by attempting to
predict what will actually occur in a given case, we incur the
obligation of estimating and compoundingf the influences of all the
causes which happen to exist in that case; we attempt a task to proceed
far in which,g surpasses the compass of the human faculties.

If all the resources of science are not sufficient to enable us to
calculate à priori, with complete precision, the mutual action of three
bodies gravitating towards one another; it may be judged with what
hprospecth of success we should endeavouri to calculate the result of
the conflicting tendencies which are acting in a thousand different
directions and promoting a thousand different changes at a given instant
in a given society: although we might and ought to be able, from the
laws of human nature, to distinguish correctly enough the tendencies
themselves, so far as they depend on causes accessible to our
observation; and to determine the direction which each of them, if
acting alone, would impress upon society, as well as, in a general way
at least, to pronounce that some of these tendencies are more powerful
than others.

But, without dissembling the necessary imperfections of the à priori
method when applied to such a subject, neither ought we, on the other
hand, to exaggerate them. The same objections, which apply to the Method
of Deduction in this its most difficult employment, apply to it, as we
formerly showed,* in its easiest; and would even there have been
insuperable, if there had not existed, as was then fully explained, an
appropriate remedy. This remedy consists in the process which, under the
name of Verification, we have characterized as the third essential
constituent part of the Deductive Method; that of collating the
conclusions of the ratiocination either with the concrete phenomena
themselves, or, when such are obtainable, with their empirical laws. The
ground of confidence in any concrete deductive science Edition: current;
Page: [897] is not the à priori reasoning jitself, but the accordancej
between its results and those of observation à posteriori. kEitherk of
these processes, lapartl from the other, diminishes in value as the
subject increases in complication, and this in so rapid a ratio as soon
to become entirely worthlessm; but them reliance to be placed in the
concurrence of the two sorts of evidence, not only does not diminish in
anything like the same proportion, but is not necessarily much
diminished at all. nNothing more results thann a disturbance in the
order of precedency of the two processes, sometimes amounting to its
actual inversion: insomuch that instead of deducing our conclusions by
reasoning, and verifying them by observation, we in some cases obegin by
obtainingo them pprovisionallyp from specific experience, and
qafterwards connect them with the principles of human nature by à priori
reasonings, which reasonings are thus aq real Verification.

Ther only sthinkers who, with a competent knowledge of tscientific
methods in generalt, has attempted to characterize the Method of
Sociology, M. Comte, considers this inverse order as inseparably
inherent in the nature of sociological speculation. He looks upon the
social science as essentially consisting of generalizations from
history, verified, not originally suggested, by deduction from the laws
of human nature.[*] uThough there is a truth contained in this opinion,
of whichu I shall presently endeavour to show the vimportancev, I cannot
but think that this truth is enunciated in too unlimited a manner, and
that there is considerable scope in sociological inquiry for the direct,
as well as for the inverse, Deductive Method.

It will, in fact, be shown in the next chapter, that there is a kind of
sociological inquiries to which, from their prodigious complication, the
method of direct deduction is altogether inapplicable, while by a happy
compensation it is precisely in these cases that we are able to obtain
the best empirical laws: to these inquiries, therefore, the Inverse
Method is exclusively Edition: current; Page: [898] adapted. But there
are also, as will presently appear, other cases in which it is
impossible to obtain from direct observation anything worthy the name of
an empirical law; and it fortunately happens that these are the very
cases in which the Direct Method is least affected by the objection
which undoubtedly must always affect it in a certain degree.

We shall begin, then, by looking at wthe Social Sciencew as a science of
direct Deduction, and considering what can be accomplished in it, and
under what limitations, by that mode of investigation. We shall, then,
in a separate chapter, examine and endeavour to characterize the inverse
process.

§ 2. [Difficulties of the Direct Deductive Method in the Social Science]
It is aevident, in the first place,a that Sociology, considered as a
system of deductions à priori, cannot be a science of positive
predictions, but only of tendencies. We may be able to conclude, from
the laws of human nature applied to the circumstances of a given state
of society, that a particular cause will operate in a certain manner
unless counteracted; but we can never be assured to what extent or
amount it will so operate, or affirm with certainty that it will not be
counteracted; because we can seldom know, even bapproximatelyb, all the
agencies which may coexist with it, and still less calculate the
collective result of so many combined elements. The remark, however,
must here be once more repeated, that knowledge insufficient for
prediction may be most valuable for guidance. It is not necessary for
the wise conduct of the affairs of society, no more than of any cone’sc
private concerns, that we should be able to foresee infallibly the
results of what we do. We must seek our objects by means which may
perhaps be defeated, and take precautions against dangers which possibly
may never be realized. The aim of practical politics is to surround dany
given societyd with the greatest possible number of circumstances of
which the tendencies are beneficial, and to remove or counteract, as far
as practicable, those of which the tendencies are injurious. A knowledge
of the tendencies only, though without the power of accurately
predicting their conjunct result, gives us to a econsiderablee extent
this power.

It would, however, be an error to suppose that even with respect to
tendencies, we could arrive in this manner at any great number of
propositions which will be true in all societies without exception.
fSuch a supposition would be inconsistent withf the eminently modifiable
nature of the social phenomena, and the multitude and variety of the
circumstances by which Edition: current; Page: [899] they are modified;
circumstances never the same, or even nearly the same, in two different
societies, or in two different periods of the same society. This would
not be so serious an obstacle if, though the causes acting upon society
in general are numerous, those which influence any one feature of
society were limited in number; for we might then insulate any
particular social phenomenon, and investigate its laws without
disturbance from the rest. But the truth is the very opposite of this.
Whatever affects, in an appreciable degree, any one element of the
social state, affects through it all the other elements. The mode of
production of all social phenomena is one great case of Intermixture of
Laws. We can never either understand in theory or command in practice
the condition of a society in any one respect, without taking into
consideration its condition in all other respects. There is no social
phenomenon which is not more or less influenced by every other part of
the condition of the same society, and therefore by every cause which is
influencing any other of the contemporaneous social phenomenag. There
is, in short, what physiologists term a consensus,g similar to that
existing among the various organs and functions of the physical frame of
man and the more perfect animals; and constituting one of the many
analogies which have rendered universal such expressions as the “body
politic” and “body natural.” It follows from this consensus, that unless
two societies could be alike in all the circumstances which surround and
influence them, (which would imply their being alike in their previous
history,) no portion whatever of htheh phenomena will, unless by
accident, precisely correspond; no one cause will produce exactly the
same ieffectsi in both. jEvery cause, as its effect spreads through
society, comes somewhere in contact with different sets of agencies, and
thus hasj its effects on some of the social phenomena differently
modified; and these differences, by their reaction, produce a difference
even in those of the effects which would otherwise have been the same.
We can never, therefore, affirm with certainty that a cause which has a
particular tendency in one people or in one age will have exactly the
same tendency in another, without referring back to our premises, and
performing over again for the second age or nation, that analysis of the
whole of its influencing circumstances which we had already performed
for the first. The deductive science of society kwillk not lay down a
theorem, asserting in an universal manner the effect of any cause; but
lwill rather teachl us how to frame the proper Edition: current; Page:
[900] theorem for the circumstances of any given case. It mwill not
givem the laws of society in general, but the means of determining the
phenomena of any given society from the particular elements or data of
that society.

All the general propositions nwhich can be framed byn the deductive
science, are therefore, in the strictest sense of the word,
hypothetical. They are grounded on some supposititious set of
circumstances, and declare how some given cause owould operate in those
circumstances, supposing that no others wereo combined with them. If the
set of circumstances supposed have been pcopiedp from those of any
existing society, the conclusions will be true of that society,
provided, and in as far as, the effect of those circumstances shall not
be modified by others which have not been taken into the account. If we
desire a nearer approach to concrete truth, we can only aim at it by
taking, or endeavouring to take, a greater number of individualizing
circumstances into the computation.

Considering, however, in how accelerating a ratio the uncertainty of our
conclusions increases, as we attempt to take the effect of a greater
number of concurrent causes into our calculations; the hypothetical
combinations of circumstances on which we construct the general theorems
of the science, cannot be made very complex, without so
rapidly-accumulating a liability to error as must soon deprive our
conclusions of all value. This mode of inquiry, considered as a means of
obtaining general propositions, must, therefore, on pain ofq frivolity,
be limited to those classes of social facts which, though influenced
like the rest by all sociological agents, are under the immediate
influence, principally at least, of a few only.

§ 3. [To what extent the different branches of sociological speculation
can be studied apart. Political Economy characterized] Notwithstanding
the universal consensus of the social phenomena, whereby nothing which
takes place in any part of the operations of society is without its
share of influence on every other part; and notwithstanding the
paramount ascendancy which the general state of civilization and social
progress in any given society must hence exercise over all the partial
and subordinate phenomena; it is not the less true that different
species of social facts are in the main dependent, immediately and in
the first resort, on different kinds of causes; and therefore not only
may with advantage, but must, be studied apart: just as in the natural
body we study separately the physiology and pathology of each of the
principal organs and tissues, though every one is acted upon by the
astatea of all the others: and though the peculiar constitution and
general state of Edition: current; Page: [901] health of the organism
co-operates with, and often preponderates over, the local causes, in
determining the state of any particular organ.

On these considerations is grounded the existence of distinct and
separate, though not independent, branches or departments of
sociological speculation.

There is, for example, one large class of social phenomena, in which the
immediately determining causes are principally those which act through
the desire of wealth; and in which the psychological law mainly
concerned is the familiar one, that a greater gain is preferred to a
smaller. I mean, of course, that portion of the phenomena of society
which emanate from the industrial, or productive, operations of mankind;
and from those of their acts through which the distribution of the
products of those industrial operations takes place, in so far as not
effected by force, or modified by voluntary gift. bBy reasoning from
that one law of human nature, and from the principal outward
circumstances (whether universal or confined to particular states of
society) which operate upon the human mind through that law, we may be
enabledb to explain and predict this portion of the phenomena of
society, so far as they depend on that class of circumstances only;
overlooking the influence of any other of the circumstances of society;
and therefore neither tracing back the circumstances which cwe doc take
into account, to their possible origin in some other facts in the social
state, nor making allowance for the manner in which any of those other
circumstances may interfere with, and counteract or modify, the effect
of the former. dA department of science may thus be constructed, whichd
has received the name of Political Economy.

The motive which suggests the separation of this portion of the social
phenomena from the rest, and the creation of a distinct ebranch ofe
science relating to them is,—that they do mainly depend, at least in the
first resort, on one class of circumstances only; and that even when
other circumstances interfere, the ascertainment of the effect due to
the one class of circumstances alone, is a sufficiently intricate and
difficult business to make it expedient to perform it once for all, and
then fallow forf the effect of the modifying circumstances; especially
as certain fixed combinations of the former are apt to recur often, in
conjunction with ever-varying circumstances of the latter class.

Political Economy, as I have said on another occasion, concerns itself
only with

such of the phenomena of the social state as take place in consequence
of the pursuit of wealth. It makes entire abstraction of every other
human passion or Edition: current; Page: [902] motive; except those
which may be regarded as perpetually antagonizing principles to the
desire of wealth, namely, aversion to labour, and desire of the present
enjoyment of costly indulgences. These it takes, to a certain extent,
into its calculations, because these do not merely, like our other
desires, occasionally conflict with the pursuit of wealth, but accompany
it always as a drag or impediment, and are therefore inseparably mixed
up in the consideration of it. Political Economy considers mankind as
occupied solely in acquiring and consuming wealth; and aims at showing
what is the course of action into which mankind, living in a state of
society, would be impelled, if that motive, except in the degree in
which it is checked by the two perpetual counter-motives above adverted
to, were absolute ruler of all their actions. Under the influence of
this desire, it shows mankind accumulating wealth, and employing that
wealth in the production of other wealth; sanctioning by mutual
agreement the institution of property; establishing laws to prevent
individuals from encroaching upon the property of others by force or
fraud; adopting various contrivances for increasing the productiveness
of their labour; settling the division of the produce by agreement,
under the influence of competition (competition itself being governed by
certain laws, which laws are therefore the ultimate regulators of the
division of the produce); and employing certain expedients (as money,
credit, &c.) to facilitate the distribution. All these operations,
though many of them are really the result of a plurality of motives, are
considered by political economy as flowing solely from the desire of
wealth. The science then proceeds to investigate the laws which govern
these several operations, under the supposition that man is a being who
is determined, by the necessity of his nature, to prefer a greater
portion of wealth to a smaller, in all cases, without any other
exception than that constituted by the two countermotives already
specified. Not that any political economist was ever so absurd as to
suppose that mankind are really thus constituted, but because this is
the mode in which science must necessarily proceed. When an effect
depends on a concurrence of causes, these causes must be studied one at
a time, and their laws separately investigated, if we wish, through the
causes, to obtain the power of either predicting or controlling the
effect; since the law of the effect is compounded of the laws of all the
causes which determine it. The law of the centripetal and that of the
gprojectileg force must have been known, before the motions of the earth
and planets could be explained, or many of them predicted. The same is
the case with the conduct of man in society. In order to judge how he
will act under the variety of desires and aversions which are
concurrently operating upon him, we must know how he would act under the
exclusive influence of each one in particular. There is, perhaps, no
action of a man’s life in which he is neither under the immediate nor
under the remote influence of any impulse but the mere desire of wealth.
hWith respect to those parts of human conduct of which wealth is not
even the principal object,h to these political economy does not pretend
that its conclusions are applicable. But there are also certain
departments of human affairs, in which the acquisition of wealth is the
main and acknowledged end. It is only of these that political economy
takes notice. The manner in which it necessarily proceeds is that of
treating the main and acknowledged end as if it were the sole end;
which, of all hypotheses equally simple, is the nearest to the truth.
The Edition: current; Page: [903] political economist inquires, what are
the actions which would be produced by this desire, if within the
departments in question it were unimpeded by any other. In this way a
nearer approximation is obtained than would otherwise be practicable to
the real order of human affairs in those departments. This approximation
has then to be corrected by making proper allowance for the effects of
any impulses of a different description, which can be shown to interfere
with the result in any particular case. Only in a few of the most
striking cases (such as the important one of the principle of
population) are these corrections interpolated into the expositions of
political economy itself; the strictness of purely scientific
arrangement being thereby somewhat departed from, for the sake of
practical utility. So far as it is known, or may be presumed, that the
conduct of mankind in the pursuit of wealth is under the collateral
influence of any other of the properties of our nature, than the desire
of obtaining the greatest quantity of wealth with the least labour and
self-denial, the conclusions of political economy will so far fail of
being applicable to the explanation or prediction of real events, until
they are modified by a correct allowance for the degree of influence
exercised by the other cause.*

iExtensive and important practical guidancei may be derived, in any
given state of society, from general propositions such as those above
indicated; even though the modifying influence of the miscellaneous
causes which the theory does not take into account, as well as the
effect of the general social changes in progress, jbe provisionally
overlookedj. And though it has been a very common error of political
economists to draw conclusions from the elements of one state of
society, and apply them to other states in which many of the elements
are not the same; it is even then not difficult, by tracing back the
demonstrations, and introducing the new premises in their proper places,
to make the same general course of argument which served for the one
case, serve for the others too.

For example, it has been greatly the custom of English political
economists to discuss thek laws of the distribution of the produce of
industry, on a supposition which is scarcely realized anywhere out of
England and Scotland, namely, that the produce is

shared among three classes, altogether distinct from one another,
labourers, capitalists, and landlords; and that all these are free
agents, permitted in law and in fact to set upon their labour, their
capital, and their land, whatever price they are able to get for it. The
conclusions of the science, being all adapted to a society thus
constituted, require to be revised whenever they are applied to any
other. Edition: current; Page: [904] They are inapplicable where the
only capitalists are the landlords, and the labourers are their
property, as in slave countries. They are inapplicable where the
lalmostl universal landlord is the state, as in India. They are
inapplicable where the agricultural labourer is generally the owner both
of the land itself and of the capital, as mfrequentlym in France, or of
the capital only, as in Ireland.

But though it may often be nveryn justly objected to the existing race
of political economists “that they attempt to construct a permanent
fabric out of transitory materials; that they take for granted the
immutability of arrangements of society, many of which are in their
nature fluctuating or progressive, and enunciate with as little
qualification as if they were universal and absolute truths,
propositions which are perhaps applicable to no state of society except
the particular one in which the writer happened to live;” this does not
take away the value of the propositions, considered with reference to
the state of society from which they were drawn. And even as applicable
to other states of society, “it must not be supposed that the science is
so incomplete and unsatisfactory as this might seem to prove. Though
many of its conclusions are only locally true, its method of
investigation is applicable universallyo; and as whoevero has solved a
certain number of algebraic equations, can without difficulty solve all
others of the same kind, so pwhoeverp knows the political economy of
England, or even of Yorkshire, knows that of all nations, actual or
possible, provided he have good sense enough not to expect the same
conclusion to issue from varying premises.” Whoever qhas mastered with
the degree of precision which is attainableq the laws which, under free
competition, determine the rent, profits, and wages, received by
landlords, capitalists, and labourers, in a state of society in which
the three classes are completely separate, will have no difficulty in
determining the very different laws which regulate the distribution of
the produce among the classes interested in it, in any of the states of
cultivation and landed property set forth in the foregoing extract.*

§ 4. [Political Ethology, or the science of national character] I would
not here undertake to decide what other hypothetical or abstract
sciences similar to Political Economy, may admit of being carved out of
the general body of Edition: current; Page: [905] the social science;
what other portions of the social phenomena are in a sufficiently close
and complete dependence, in the first resort, on a peculiar class of
causes, to make it convenient to create a preliminary science of those
causes; postponing the consideration of the causes which act through
them, or in concurrence with them, to a later period of the inquiry.
There is however among these separate departments one which cannot be
passed over in silence, being of a more comprehensive and commanding
character than any of the other branches into which the social science
may admit of being divided. Like them, it is directly conversant with
the causes of only one class of social facts, but a class which
exercises, immediately or remotely, a paramount influence over the rest.
I allude to what may be termed Political Ethology, or the atheorya of
the causes which determine the type of character belonging to a people
or to an age. Of all the subordinate branches of the social science,
this is the most completely in its infancy. The causes of national
character are scarcely at all understood, and the effect of institutions
or social arrangements upon bthe character of the peopleb is generally
that portion of their effects which is least attended to, and least
comprehended. Nor is this wonderful, when we consider the infant state
of the Science of Ethology itself, from whence the laws must be drawn,
of which the truths of political ethology ccan bec but results and
exemplifications.

Yet to whoever well considers the matter, it must appear that the laws
of national d(or collective)d character are by far the most important
class of sociological laws. In the first place, the character which is
formed by any state of social circumstances is in itself the most
interesting phenomenon which that state of society can possibly present.
Secondly, it is also a fact which enters largely into the production of
all the other phenomena. And above all, the character, that is, the
opinions, feelings, and habits, of the people, though greatly the
results of the state of society which precedes them, are also greatly
the causes of the state of society which follows them; and are the power
by which all those of the circumstances of society which are artificial,
laws and customs for instance, are altogether moulded: customs
evidently, laws no less really, either by the direct influence of public
sentiment upon the ruling powers, or by the effect which the state of
national opinion and feeling has in determining the form of government,
and shaping the character of the governors.

As might be expected, the most imperfect part of those branches of
esocial inquirye which have been cultivated as separate sciences, is the
theory of the manner in which their conclusions are affected by
ethological considerations. The omission is no defect in them as
abstract or hypothetical sciences, but it Edition: current; Page: [906]
vitiates them in their practical application as branches of faf
comprehensive social science. In political economy for instance,
empirical laws of human nature are tacitly assumed by English thinkers,
which are calculated only for Great Britain and the United States. Among
other things, an intensity of competition is constantly supposed, which,
as a general mercantile fact, exists in no country in the world except
those two. An English political economist, like his countrymen in
general, has seldom learned that it is possible that men, in conducting
the business of selling their goods over a counter, should care more
about their ease or their vanity than about their pecuniary gain. Yet
those who know the habits of the Continent of Europe are aware how
apparently small a motive often outweighs the desire of money-getting,
even in the operations which have money-getting for their direct object.
The more highly the science of ethology is cultivated, and the better
the diversities of gindividual andg national character are understood,
the smaller, probably, will the number of propositions become, which it
will be considered safe to build on as universal principles of human
nature.

These considerations show that the process of dividing off the social
science into compartments, in order that each may be studied separately,
and its conclusions afterwards corrected for practice by the
modifications supplied by the others, must be subject to at least one
important limitation. Those portions alone of the social phenomena can
with advantage hbe madeh the subjects, even provisionally, of distinct
branches of science, into which the diversities of character between
different nations or different itimesi enter as influencing causes only
in a secondary degree. Those phenomena, on the contrary, with which the
influences of the ethological state of the people are mixed up at every
step (so that the connexion of effects and causes cannot be even rudely
marked out without taking those influences into consideration) could not
with any advantage, nor without great disadvantage, be treated
independently of political ethology, nor, therefore, of all the
circumstances by which the qualities of a people are influenced. For
this reason (as well as for others which will hereafter appear) there
can be no separate Science of Government; that jbeingj the fact which,
of all others, is most mixed up, both as cause and effect, with the
qualities of the particular people or of the particular age. All
questions respecting the tendencies of forms of government must stand
part of the general science of society, not of any separate branch of
it.

This general Science of Society, as distinguished from the separate
departments of the science (each of which asserts its conclusions only
conditionally, Edition: current; Page: [907] subject to the paramount
control of the laws of the general science) know remains to be
characterizedk. And as will be shown presently, nothing of a really
scientific character is here possible, except by the inverse deductive
method. But before we quit the subject of those sociological
speculations which proceed by way of direct deduction, we must examine
in what relation they stand to that indispensable element in all
deductive sciences, Verification by Specific Experience—l comparison
between the conclusions of reasoning and the results of observation.

§ 5. [The Empirical Laws of the Social Science] We have seen that, in
most deductive sciences, and among the rest in Ethology itself, which is
the immediate foundation of the Social Science, a preliminary work of
preparation is performed on the observed facts, to fit them for being
rapidly and accurately collated (sometimes even for being collated at
all) with the conclusions of theory. This preparatory treatment consists
in finding general propositions which express concisely what is common
to large classes of observed facts: and these are called the empirical
laws of the phenomena. We have, athereforea, to inquire, whether any
similar preparatory process can be performed on the facts of the social
science; whether there are any empirical laws in history or statistics.

In statistics, it is evident that empirical laws may sometimes be
traced; andb the tracing them forms an important part of that system of
indirect observation on which we must often rely for the data of the
Deductive Science. The process of the science consists in inferring
effects from their causes; but we have often no means of observing the
causes, except through the medium of their effects. cIn such cases the
deductive science isc unable to predict the effects, for want of the
necessary data; it can ddetermined what causes are capable of producing
any given effect, but not with what frequency and in what quantities
those causes exist. An instance in point is afforded by a newspaper now
lying before me. A statement was furnished by one of the official
assignees in bankruptcy, showing, among the various bankruptcies which
it had been his duty to investigate, in how many cases the losses had
been caused by misconduct of different kinds, and in how many by
unavoidable misfortunes. The result was, that the number of failures
caused by misconduct greatly preponderated over those arising from all
other causes whatever. Nothing but specific experience could have given
sufficient ground for a conclusion to this purport. To collect,
therefore, such empirical laws Edition: current; Page: [908] (which are
never more than approximate generalizations) from direct observation, is
an important part of the process of sociological inquiry.

The experimental process is not here to be regarded as a distinct road
to the truth, but as a means (happening accidentally to be the only, or
the best, available) for obtaining the enecessary data for the deductive
sciencee. When the immediate causes of social facts are not open to
direct observation, the empirical law of the effects gives us the
empirical law (which in that case is all that we can obtain) of the
causes likewise. But those immediate causes depend on remote causes; and
the empirical law, obtained by this indirect mode of observation, can
only be relied on as applicable to unobserved cases, so long as there is
reason to think that no change has taken place in any of the remote
causes on which the immediate causes depend. In making use, therefore,
of even the best statistical generalizations for the purpose of
inferring (though it be only conjecturally) that the same empirical laws
will hold in any new case, it is necessary that we bef well acquainted
with the remoter causes, in order that we mayg avoid applying the
empirical law to cases which differ in any of the circumstances on which
the truth of the law ultimately depends. And thus, even where
conclusions derived from specific observation are available for
practical inferences in new cases, it is necessary that the deductive
science should stand sentinel over the whole process; that it should be
constantly referred to, and its sanction obtained to every inference.

The same thing holds true of all generalizations which can be grounded
on history. Not only there are such generalizations, but it will
presently be shown that the general science of society, which inquires
into the laws of succession and coexistence of the great facts
constituting the state of society and civilization at any time, can
proceed in no other manner than by making such
generalizations—afterwards to be confirmed by connecting them with the
psychological and ethological laws on which they must really depend.

§ 6. [The Verification of the Social Science] But (reserving this
question for its proper place) in those more speciala inquiries which
form the subject of the separate branches of the social science, this
twofold logical process and reciprocal verification is not possible:
specific experience affords nothing amounting to empirical laws. This is
particularly the case where the object is to determine the effect of any
one bsocialb cause among a great number acting simultaneously; the
effect, for example, of corn laws, or of a prohibitive commercial system
generally. Though it may be perfectly certain, from theory, what kind of
effects corn laws must produce, and in what general Edition: current;
Page: [909] direction their influence must tellc upon industrial
prosperity; their effect is yet of necessity so much disguised by the
similar or contrary effects of dother influencing agentsd, that specific
experience can at most only show that eone the average of some great
number of instances, the cases where there were corn laws exhibited the
effect in a greater degree than those where there were not. Now the
number of instances necessary to fexhaustf the whole round of
combinations of the various influential circumstances, and thus afford a
fair average, never can be obtainedg. Not only we can never learn with
sufficient authenticity the facts of so many instances, butg the world
itself does not afford them in sufficient numbers, within the limits of
the given state of society and civilization which such inquiries always
presuppose. Having thus no previous empirical generalizations with which
to collate the conclusions of theory, the only mode of direct
verification which remains is to compare those conclusions with the
result of an individual experiment or instance. But here the difficulty
is equally great. For in order to verify a theory by an experiment, the
circumstances of the experiment must be exactly the same with those
contemplated in the theory. But in social phenomena the circumstances of
no two hcasesh are exactly alike. A trial of corn laws in another
country or in a former generation, would go a very little way towards
verifying iai conclusion drawn respecting their effect in this
generation and in this country. It thus happens, in most cases, that the
only jindividual instance really fitted to verify the predictions of
theory is the veryj instance for which the predictions were made; and
the verification comes too late to be of any avail for practical
guidance.

Although, however, direct verification is impossible, there is an
indirect verification, which is scarcely of less value, and which is
always practicable. kThe conclusion drawn as to the individual case, can
only be directly verified in that casek; but it is verified indirectly,
by the verification of other conclusions, drawn in other individual
cases from the same laws. The experience which comes too late to verify
the particular proposition to which it refers, is not too late to help
towards verifying the general sufficiency of the theory. The test of the
degree in which the science affords safe ground for predicting Edition:
current; Page: [910] (and consequently for practically dealing with)
what has not yet happened, is the degree in which it would have enabled
us to predict what has actually occurred. Before our theory of the
influence of a particular cause, in a given state of circumstances, can
be lentirelyl trusted, we must be able to explain and account for the
existing state of all that portion of the social phenomena which that
cause has a tendency to influence. If, for instance, we would apply our
speculations in political economy to the prediction or guidance of the
phenomena of any country, we must be able to explain all the mercantile
or industrial facts of a general character, appertaining to the present
state of that country: to point out causes sufficient to account for all
of them, and prove, or show good ground for supposing, that mthesem
cause nhave really existedn. If we cannot do this, it is a proof either
that the facts which ought to be taken into accounto are not yet
completely known to us, or that although we know the facts, we are not
masters of a sufficiently perfect theory to enable us to assign their
consequences. In either case we are not, in the present state of our
knowledge, pfully competent to draw conclusions,p speculative or
practical, for that country. In like manner, if we would attempt to
judge of the effect which any political institution would have,
supposing that it could be introduced into any given country; we must be
able to show that the existing state of the practical government of that
country, and of whatever else depends thereon, together with the
particular character and tendencies of the people, and their state in
respect to the various elements of social well-being, are such as the
institutions they have lived under, in conjunction with the other
circumstances of their nature or of their position, were calculated to
produce.

qTo prove (in short)q that our science, and our knowledge of the
particular case, render us competent to predict the future, we must show
that they would have enabled us to predict the present and the past. If
there be anything which we could not have predicted, this constitutes a
residual phenomenon, requiring further study for the purpose of
explanation; and we must either search among the circumstances of the
particular case until we find one which, on the principles of our
existing theory, accounts for the unexplained phenomenon, or we must
turn back, and seek the explanation by an extension and improvement of
the theory itself.

Edition: current; Page: [911]


CHAPTER X: Of the Inverse Deductive, or Historical Method

§ 1. [Distinction between the general Science of Society, and special
sociological inquiries] There are two kinds of sociological inquiry. In
the first kind, the question proposed is, what effect will follow from a
given cause, a certain general condition of social circumstances being
presupposed. As, for example, what would be the effect of imposing or of
repealing corn laws, of abolishing monarchy or introducing universal
suffrage, in the present condition of society and civilization in any
European country, or under any other given supposition with regard to
the circumstances of society in general: without reference to the
changes which might take place, or which may already be in progress, in
those circumstances. But there is also a second inquiry, namely, what
are the laws which determine those general circumstances themselves. In
this last the question is, not what will be the effect of a given cause
in a certain state of society, but what aare the causes which produce,
and the phenomena whicha characterize, States of Society generally. In
the solution of this question consists the general Science of Society;
by whichb the conclusions of the other and more special kind of inquiry
must be limited and controlled.

§ 2. [What is meant by a State of Society?] In order to conceive
correctly the scope of this general science, and distinguish it from the
subordinate departments of sociological speculation, it is necessary to
fixa the ideas attached to the phrase, “a State of Society.” What is
called a state of society, is the bsimultaneousb state of all the
greater social facts or phenomena. Such are, the degree of knowledge,
and of intellectual and moral culture, existing in the community, and in
every class of it; the state of industry, of wealth and Edition:
current; Page: [912] its distribution; the habitual occupations of the
community; their division into classes, and the relations of those
classes to one another; the common beliefs which they entertain on all
the subjects most important to cmankindc, and the degree of assurance
with which those beliefs are held; their tastes, and the character and
degree of their æsthetic development; their form of government, and the
more important of their laws and customs. The condition of all these
things, and of many more which will dreadilyd suggest themselves,
constitute the state of society or the state of civilization at any
given time.

When states of society, and the causes which produce them, are spoken of
as a subject of science, it is implied that there exists a natural
correlation among these different elements; that not every variety of
combination of these general social facts is possible, but only certain
combinations; that, in short, there exist Uniformities of Coexistence
between the states of the various social phenomena. And such is the
truth; as is indeed a necessary consequence of the influence exercised
by every one of those phenomena over every other. It is a fact implied
in the consensus of the various parts of the social body.

States of society are like different constitutions or different ages in
the physical frame; they are conditions not of one or a few organs or
functions, but of the whole organism. Accordingly, the information which
we possess respecting past ages, and respecting the various states of
society now existing in different regions of the earth, does, when duly
analysed, exhibite uniformities. It is found that when one of the
features of society is in a particular state, a state of fmanyf other
features, more or less precisely determinate, always gor usuallyg
coexists with it.

But the uniformities of coexistence obtaining among phenomena which are
effects of causes, must (as we have so often observed) beh corollaries
from the laws of causation by which ithesei phenomena are jreallyj
determined. The mutual correlation between the different kelementsk of
each state of society, is therefore a derivative law, resulting from the
laws which regulate the succession between one state of society and
another; for the proximate cause of every state of society is the state
of society immediately preceding it. The fundamental problem, therefore,
of lthe social science,l is to find the laws according to which any
state of society produces the state which succeeds it and takes its
place. This opens the great and vexed question of the progressiveness of
man and society; an idea involved in every just conception of social
phenomena as the subject of a science.

Edition: current; Page: [913]
§ 3. [The Progressiveness of Man and Society] It is one of the
characters, not absolutely peculiar to the sciences of human nature and
society, but belonging to them in a peculiar degree, to be conversant
with a subject-matter whose properties are changeable. I do not mean
changeable from day to day, but from age to age; so that not only the
qualities of individuals vary, but those of the majority are not the
same in one age as in another.

The principal cause of this peculiarity is the extensive and constant
reaction of the effects upon their causes. The circumstances in which
mankind are placed, operating according to their own laws and to the
laws of human nature, form the characters of the ahuman beings; but the
human beingsa, in their turn, mould and shape the circumstances for
themselves and for those who come after them. From this reciprocal
action there must necessarily result either a cycle or a progress. In
astronomy also, every fact is at once effect and cause; the successive
positions of the various heavenly bodies produce changes both in the
direction and in the intensity of the forces by which those positions
are determined. But in the case of the solar system, these mutual
actions bring round again, after a certain number of changes, the former
state of circumstances; which of course leads to the perpetual
recurrence of the same series in an unvarying order. Those bodies, in
short, revolve in orbits: but there are (or, conformably to the laws of
astronomy, there might be) others which, instead of an orbit, describe a
btrajectory—b a course not returning into itself. One or other of these
must be the type to which human affairs mustc conform.

One of the thinkers who earliest conceived the succession of historical
events as subject to fixed laws, and endeavoured to discover these laws
by an analytical survey of history, Vico, the celebrated author of the
Scienza Nuova,[*] adopted the former of these opinions. He conceived the
phenomena of human society as revolving in an orbit; as going through
periodically the same series of changes. Though there were not wanting
circumstances tending to give some plausibility to this view, it would
not bear a close scrutiny: and those who have succeeded Vico in this
kind of speculations have universally adopted the idea of a trajectory
or progress, in lieu of an orbit or cycle.

The words Progress and Progressiveness are not here to be understood as
synonymous with improvement and tendency to improvement. It is
conceivable that the laws of human nature might determine, and even
necessitate, a certain series of changes in man and society, which might
not in every case, or which might not on the whole, be improvements. It
is my belief indeed Edition: current; Page: [914] that the general
tendency is, and will continue to be, saving occasional dand temporaryd
exceptions, one of improvement; a tendency towards a better and happier
state. eThis, however,e is not a question of the method of the social
science, but fa theoremf of the science itself. For our purpose it is
sufficient, that there is a progressive change both in the character of
the human race, and in their outward circumstances so far as moulded by
themselves: that in each successive age the principal phenomena of
society are different from what they were in the age preceding, and
still more different from any previous gage: the periods which most
distinctly mark these successive changes beingg intervals of one
generation, during which a new set of human beings have been educated,
have grown up from childhood, and taken possession of society.

The progressiveness of the human race is the foundation on which a
method of philosophizing in the social science has been of late years
erected, far superior to either of the two modes which had previously
been prevalent, the chemical or experimental, and the geometrical modes.
This method, which is now generally adopted by the most advanced
thinkers on the Continent,h consists in attempting, by a study and
analysis of the general facts of history, to discover (what these
philosophers term) the law of progress: which law, once ascertained,
must according to them enable us to predict future events, just as after
a few terms of an infinite series in algebra we are able to detect the
principle of regularity in their iformationi, and to predict the rest of
the series to any number of terms we please. The principal aim of
historical speculation in France, of late years, has been to ascertain
this law. But while I gladly acknowledge the great services which have
been rendered to historical knowledge by this school, I cannot but deem
them jto be mostlyj chargeable with a fundamental misconception of the
true method of social philosophy. The misconception kconsists ink
supposing that the order of succession which we may be able to trace
among the different states of society and civilization which history
presents to us, even if that order were more rigidly uniform than it has
yet been proved to be, could ever amount to a law of nature. It can only
be an empirical law. The succession of states of the human mind and of
human society cannot have an independent law of its own; it must depend
on the psychological and ethological laws which govern the action of
circumstances on men and of men on circumstances. It is conceivable
Edition: current; Page: [915] that those laws lmightl be such, and the
general circumstances of the human race such, as to determine the
successive transformations of man and society to one given and unvarying
order. But even if the case mwerem so, it cannot be the ultimate aim of
science to discover an empirical law. Until that law ncould be connected
with the psychological and ethological laws on which it must depend,
and, by the consilience of deduction à priori with historical evidence,
could be converted from an empirical law into a scientific one, it could
notn be relied on for the prediction of future events, beyond, at
omosto, strictly adjacent cases.p M. Comte aloneq, among the new
historical school,q has seen the necessity of thus connecting all our
generalizations from history with the laws of human naturer.

§ 4. [The laws of the succession of states of society can only be
ascertained by the Inverse Deductive Method] But, while it is an
imperative rule never to introduce any generalization from history into
the social science unless sufficient grounds can be pointed out for it
in human nature, I do not think any one will contend that it would have
been possible, setting out from the principles of human nature and from
the general circumstances of athe position of our speciesa, to determine
à priori the order in which human development must take place, and to
predict, consequently, the general facts of history up to the present
time. bAfterb the first few terms of the series, the influence exercised
over each generation by the generations which preceded it, becomes c(as
is well observed by the writer last referred to)c[*] more and more
preponderant over all other influences; until at length what we now are
and do, is in a very small degree the result of the universal
circumstances of the human race, or even of our own circumstances acting
through the Edition: current; Page: [916] original qualities of our
species, but mainly of the qualities produced in us by the whole
previous history of humanity. So long a series of actions and reactions
between Circumstances and Man, each successive term being composed of an
ever greater number and variety of parts, could not possibly be
dcomputed by human faculties from the elementary laws which produce itd.
The mere length of the series would be a sufficient obstacle, since a
slight error in any one of the terms would augment in rapid progression
at every subsequent step.

If, therefore, the series of the effects themselves did not, when
examined as a whole, manifest any regularity, we should in vain attempt
to construct a general science of societye. We must in that casee have
contented ourselves with that subordinate order of sociological
speculation formerly noticed, namely, with endeavouring to ascertain
what would be the effect of the introduction of any new cause, in a
state of society supposed to be fixed; a knowledge sufficient for fthe
more commonf exigencies of daily political practice, but liable to fail
in all cases in which the progressive movement of society is one of the
influencing elements; and therefore more precarious in proportion as the
case is more important. But since both the natural varieties of mankind,
and the original diversities of local circumstances, are much less
considerable than the points of agreement, there will naturally be a
certain degree of uniformity in the progressive development of gthe
species and of itsg works. And this uniformityh tends to become greater,
not less, as society advances; since the evolution of each people, which
is at first determined exclusively by the nature and circumstances of
that people, is gradually brought under the influence (which becomes
stronger as civilization advances) of the other nations of the earth,
and of the circumstances by which they have been influenced. History
accordingly does, when judiciously examined, afford Empirical Laws of
Society. And the problem of general sociology is to ascertain these, and
connect them with the laws of human nature, by deductions ishowingi that
such were the derivative laws naturally to be expected as the
consequences of those ultimate ones.

It is, indeed, jhardly everj possible, even after history has suggested
the derivative law, to demonstrate à priori that such was the only order
of succession or of coexistence in which the effects could, consistently
with the laws of human nature, have been produced. We can at most make
out that there were strong à priori reasons for expecting it, and that
no other order of Edition: current; Page: [917] succession or
coexistence would have beenk so likely to result from the nature of man
and lthe general circumstances of his position. Often we cannot do even
this; we cannot even show that what did take place was probable à
priori, but only that it was possible.l This, however,—which, in the
Inverse Deductive Method that we are now characterizing, is a real
process of verification,—is as indispensablem, as verification by
specific experience nhas been shown to be,n where the conclusion is
originally obtained by the direct way of deduction. The empirical laws
must be the result of but a few instances, since few nations have ever
attained at all, and still fewer by their own independent development, a
high stage of social progress. If, therefore, even one or two of these
few instances be insufficiently known, or imperfectly analysed into
otheiro elements, and therefore not adequately compared with other
instances, nothing is more probable than that a wrong empirical law will
pemergep instead of the right one. Accordingly, the most erroneous
generalizations are continually made from the course of history: not
only in this country, where history cannot yet be said to be at all
cultivated as a science, but in other countries, where it is so
cultivated, and by persons well versed in it. The only check or
corrective is, constant verification by psychological and ethological
laws. We may add to this, that no one but a person competently skilled
in those laws is capable of preparing the materials for historical
generalization, by analysing the facts of history, or even by observing
the social phenomena of his own timeq. Noq other will be aware of the
comparative importance of different facts, nor consequently know what
facts rto look for, orr to observe; still less will he be capable of
estimating the evidence of sfactss which, as is the case with most,
cannot be tascertained by direct observation or learnt from testimonyt,
but must be inferred from marks.

§ 5. [Social Statics, or the science of the Coexistences of Social
Phenomena] The Empirical Laws of Society are of two kinds; some are
uniformities of coexistence, some of succession. According as the
science is occupied in ascertaining and verifying the former sort of
uniformities or the latter, M. Comte gives it the title of Social
Statics, or of Social Dynamics; conformably to the distinction in
mechanics between the conditions of equilibrium and those of movement;
or in biology, between the laws of organization and those Edition:
current; Page: [918] of life. The first branch of the science ascertains
the conditions of stability in the social union: the second, the laws of
progress. Social Dynamics is the theory of Society considered in a state
of progressive movement; while Social Statics is the theory of the
consensus already spoken of as existing among the different parts of the
social organism; in other words, the theory of the mutual actions and
reactions of contemporaneous social phenomena;

making* provisionally, as far as possible, abstraction, for scientific
purposes, of the fundamental movement which is at all times gradually
modifying the whole of them.

In this first point of view,b the previsions of sociology willc enable
us to infer one from another (subject to ulterior verification by direct
observation) the various characteristic marks of each distinct mode of
social existence; in a manner essentially analogous to what is now
habitually practised in the anatomy of the physical body. This
preliminary aspect, therefore, of political science, of necessity
supposes that (contrary to the existing habits of philosophers) each of
the numerous elements of the social state, ceasing to be looked at
independently and absolutely, shall be always and exclusively considered
relatively to all the other elements, with the whole of which it is
united by mutual interdependence. It would be superfluous to insist here
upon the great and constant utility of this branch of sociological
speculation. It is, in the first place, the indispensable basis of the
theory of social progressd. It may, moreover, be employed, immediately,
and of itself, to supply the place, provisionally at least, of direct
observation, which in many cases is not always practicable for some of
the elements of society, the real condition of which emay howevere be
sufficiently judged of by means of the relations which connect them with
others previously known. The history of the sciences may give us some
notion of the habitual importance of this auxiliary resource, by
reminding us, for example, how the vulgar errors of mere erudition
concerning the pretended acquirements of the ancient Egyptians in the
higher astronomy, were irrevocably dissipated (even before sentence had
been passed on them by a sounder erudition) from the single
consideration of the inevitable connexion between the general state of
astronomy and that of abstract geometry, then evidently in its infancy.
It would be easy to cite a multitude of analogous cases, the character
of which could admit of no dispute. In order to avoid exaggeration,
however, it should be remarked, that these necessary relations among the
different aspects of society cannot, from their very nature, be so
simple and precise that the results observed could only have arisen from
some one mode of mutual co-ordination. Such a notion, already too narrow
in the science of life, would be completely at variance with the still
more complex nature of sociological speculations. But the exact
estimation of these limits of variation, both in the healthy and in the
morbid state, constitutes, at least as much as in the anatomy of the
natural body, Edition: current; Page: [919] an indispensable complement
to every theory of Sociological Statics; without which the indirect
exploration above spoken of would often lead into error.

This is not the place for methodically demonstrating the existence of a
necessary relation famongf all the possible aspects of the same social
organism; a point on which,g in principle at least, there is now little
difference of opinion among sound thinkers. From whichever of the social
elements we choose to set out, we may easily recognise that it has
always a connexion, more or less immediate, with all the other elements,
even with those which at first sight appear the most independent of it.
The dynamical consideration of the progressive development of civilized
humanity, affords, no doubt, a still more efficacious means of effecting
this interesting verification of the consensus of the social phenomena,
by displaying the manner in which every change in any one part, operates
immediately, or very speedily, upon all the rest. But this indication
may be preceded, or at all events followed, by a confirmation of a
purely statical kind; for, in politics as in mechanics, the
communication of motion from one object to another proves a connexion
between them. Without descending to the minute interdependence of the
different branches of any one science or art, is it not evident that
among the different sciences, as well as among most of the arts, there
exists such a connexion, that if the state of any one well-marked
division of them is sufficiently known to us, we can with real
scientific assurance infer, from their necessary correlation, the
contemporaneous state of every one of the others? By a further extension
of this consideration, we may conceive the necessary relation which
exists between the condition of the sciences in general and that of the
arts in general, except that the mutual dependence is less intense in
proportion as it is more indirect. The same is the case, when, instead
of considering the aggregate of the social phenomena in some one people,
we examine it simultaneously in different contemporaneous nations;
between which the perpetual reciprocity of influence, especially in
modern times, cannot be contested, though the consensus must in this
case be ordinarily of a less decided character, and must decrease
gradually with the affinity of the cases and the multiplicity of the
points of contact, so as at last, in some cases, to disappear almost
entirely; as for example between Western Europe and Eastern Asia, of
which the various general states of society appear to have been hitherto
almost independent of one another.

hThese remarks are followed by illustrations ofh one of the most
important, and until lately,i most neglected, of the jgeneralj
principles which, in this division of the social science, may be
considered as established; namely, the necessary correlation between the
form of government existing in any society and the contemporaneous state
of civilization: a natural law which stamps the endless discussions and
innumerable theories respecting forms of government Edition: current;
Page: [920] in the abstract, as fruitless and worthless, kfor any other
purpose than as a preparatory treatment of materials to be afterwards
used for the construction ofk a better philosophy.

As already remarked, one of the main results of the science of social
statics would be to ascertain the requisites of stable political union.
There are some circumstances which, being found in all societies without
exception, and in the greatest degree where the social union is most
complete, may be considered (when psychological and ethological laws
confirm the indication) as conditions of the existence of lthe complex
phenomenon called a Statel. For example, no mnumerousm society has ever
been held together without laws, or usages equivalent to them; without
tribunals, and an organized force of some sort to execute their
decisions. There have always been npublic authoritiesn whom, with more
or less strictness and in cases more or less accurately defined, the
rest of the community obeyed, or according to general opinion were bound
to obey. By following out this course of inquiry we oshallo find a
number of requisites, which have been present in every society that has
pmaintained a collective existence, and on the cessation of which it has
either merged in some other society, or reconstructed itself onp some
new basis, in which the conditions were conformed to. qAlthoughq these
results, obtained by comparing different forms and states of society,
amount in themselves only to empirical laws; rsome of themr, when once
suggested, are found to follow with so much probability from general
laws of human nature, that the consilience of the two processes raises
the evidence tos proof, and the generalizations to the rank of
scientific truths.

This seems to be affirmable (for instance) of the conclusions arrived at
in the following passage; textracted, with some alterations, fromt a
criticism on the negative philosophy of the eighteenth century,* and
which I quote, Edition: current; Page: [921] though (as in some former
instances) from myself, because I have no better way of illustrating the
conception I have formed of the kind of theorems uof which sociological
statics would consistu.

The very first element of the social union, obedience to a government of
some sort, has not been found so easy a thing to establish in the world.
Among a timid and spiritless race like the inhabitants of the vast
plains of tropical countries, passive obedience may be of natural
growth; though even there we doubt whether it has ever been found among
any people with whom fatalism, or in other words, submission to the
pressure of circumstances as va divine decreev, did not prevail as a
religious doctrine. But the difficulty of inducing a brave and warlike
race to submit their individual arbitrium to any common umpire, has
always been felt to be so great, that nothing short of supernatural
power has been deemed adequate to overcome it; and such tribes have
always assigned to the first institution of civil society a divine
origin. So differently did those judge who knew savage wmenw by actual
experience, from those who had no acquaintance with xthemx except in the
civilized state. In modern Europe itself, after the fall of the Roman
empire, to subdue the feudal anarchy and bring the whole people of any
European nation into subjection to government (though Christianity in
ythe most concentrated form of its influence was co-operatingy in the
work) required thrice as many centuries as have elapsed since that time.

Now if these philosophers had known human nature under any other type
than that of their own age, and of the particular classes of society
among whom they zlivedz, it would have occurred to them, that wherever
this habitual submission to law and government has been firmly and
durably established, and yet the vigour and manliness of character which
resisted its establishment have been in any degree preserved, certain
requisites have existed, certain conditions have been fulfilled, of
which the following may be regarded as the principal.

First: there has existed, for all who were accounted citizens,—for all
who were not slaves, kept down by brute force,—a system of education,
beginning with infancy and continued through life, of which whatever
else it might include, one main and incessant ingredient was restraining
discipline. To train the human being in the habit, and thence the power,
of subordinating his personal impulses and aims, to what were considered
the ends of society; of adhering, against all temptation, to the course
of conduct which those ends prescribed; of controlling in himself alla
feelings which were liable to militate against those ends, and
encouraging all such as tended towards them; this was the purpose, to
which every outward motive that the authority directing the system could
command, and every inward power or principle which its knowledge of
human nature enabled it Edition: current; Page: [922] to evoke, were
endeavoured to be rendered instrumental. bThe entire civil and military
policy of the ancient commonwealths was such a system of training; in
modern nations its place has been attempted to be supplied, principally,
by religious teaching.b And whenever and in proportion as the strictness
of cthe restrainingc discipline was relaxed, the natural tendency of
mankind to anarchy re-asserted itself; the state became disorganized
from within; mutual conflict for selfish ends, neutralized the energies
which were required to keep up the contest against natural causes of
evil; and the nation, after a longer or briefer interval of progressive
decline, became either the slave of a despotism, or the prey of a
foreign invader.

The second condition of permanent political society has been found to
be, the existence, in some form or other, of the feeling of allegiance
or loyalty. This feeling may vary in its objects, and is not confined to
any particular form of government; but whether in a democracy or in a
monarchy, its essence is always the same; viz. that there be in the
constitution of the state something which is settled, something
permanent, and not to be called in question; something which, by general
agreement, has a right to be where it is, and to be secure against
disturbance, whatever else may change. This feeling may attach itself,
as among the Jews (andd in most of the commonwealths of antiquity), to a
common God or gods, the protectors and guardians of their state. Or it
may attach itself to certain persons, who are deemed to be, whether by
divine appointment, by long prescription, or by the general recognition
of their superior capacity and worthiness, the rightful guides and
guardians of the rest. Or it may econnect itself with laws; with ancient
liberties or ordinances. Or, finally, (and this is the only shape in
which the feeling is likely to exist hereafter), it may attach itself to
the principles of individual freedom and political and social equality,
as realized in institutions which as yet exist nowhere, or exist only in
a rudimentary state.e But in all political societies which have had a
durable existence, there has been some fixed point: something which
fpeoplef gagreedg in holding sacred; which h,wherever freedom of
discussion was a recognised principle, it was of courseh lawful to
contest in theory, but which no one could either fear or hope to see
shaken in practice; which, in short (except perhaps during some
temporary crisis) was in the common estimation placed ibeyondi
discussion. And the necessity of this may easily be made evident. A
state never is, nor until mankind are vastly improved, can hope to be,
for any long time exempt from internal dissension; for there neither is
nor has ever been any state of society in which collisions did not occur
between the immediate interests and passions of powerful sections of the
people. Edition: current; Page: [923] What, then, enables jnationsj to
weather these storms, and pass through turbulent times without any
permanent weakening of the ksecurities for peaceable existencek?
Precisely this—that however important the interests about which men
lfell out, the conflict didl not affect the fundamental mprinciplem of
the system of social union which nhappened to exist; nor threaten large
portions of the community with the subversion of that on which they had
built their calculations, and with which their hopes and aims hadn
become identified. But when the questioning of these fundamental
principles is (not othe occasional disease, or salutary medicineo, but)
the habitual condition of the body politic, and when all the violent
animosities are called forth, which spring naturally from such a
situation, the state is virtually in a position of civil war; and can
never long remain free from it in act and fact.

The third essential condition pof stability in political society, is a
strong and active principle of cohesion among the members of the same
community or statep. We need scarcely say that we do not mean
qnationality, in the vulgar sense of the term;q a senseless antipathy to
foreigners;r sindifference to the general welfare of the human race, or
an unjust preference of the supposed interests of our own country;s a
cherishing of tbadt peculiarities because they are national, or a
refusal to adopt what has been found good by other countries.u We mean a
principle of sympathy, not of hostility; of union, not of separation. We
mean a feeling of common interest among those who live under the same
government, and are contained within the same natural or historical
boundaries. We mean, that one part of the community vdov not consider
themselves as foreigners with regard to another part; that they wset a
value on their connexion—w feel that they are one people, that their lot
is cast together, that evil to any of their fellow-countrymen is evil to
themselves, and xdo not desire selfishly tox free themselves from their
share of any common inconvenience by severing the connexion. How strong
this feeling was in ythose ancient commonwealths which attained any
durable greatness,y every one knows. How happily Rome, in spite of all
her tyranny, succeeded in establishing the feeling of a common country
among the provinces of her vast and divided empire, will appear when any
one who has given due attention to the subject shall take the trouble to
point it out. In modern times the countries which have had that feeling
in the strongest degree have been the most powerful countries; Edition:
current; Page: [924] England, France, and, in proportion to their
territory and resources, Holland and Switzerland; while England in her
connexion with Ireland, is one of the most signal examples of the
consequences of its absence. Every Italian knows why Italy is under a
foreign yoke; every German knows what maintains despotism in the
Austrian empire;* the zevilsz of Spain flow as much from the absence of
nationality among the Spaniards themselves, as from the presence of it
in their relations with foreigners: while the completest illustration of
all is afforded by the republics of South America, where the parts of
one and the same state adhere so slightly together, that no sooner does
any province think itself aggrieved by the general government than it
proclaims itself a separate nation.[*]

§ 6. [Social Dynamics, or the science of the Successions of Social
Phenomena] While the derivative laws of social statics are ascertained
by analysing different states of society, and comparing them with one
another, without regard to the order of their succession; the
consideration of the successive order is, on the contrary, predominant
in the study of social dynamics, of which the aim is to observe and
explain the sequences of social conditions. This branch of the social
science would be as complete as it can be made, if every one of the
leading general circumstances of each generation were traced to its
causes in the generation immediately preceding. But the consensus is so
complete, (especially in modern history,) that in the filiation of one
generation and another, it is the whole which produces the whole, rather
than any part a part. Little progress, therefore, can be made in
establishing the filiation, directly from laws of human nature, without
having first ascertained the immediate or derivative laws according to
which social states generate one another as society advances; the
axiomata media of General Sociology.

The empirical laws which are most readily obtained by generalization
from history do not amount to this. They are not the “middle principles”
themselves, but only evidence towards the establishment of such
principles. They aconsista of certain general tendencies which may be
perceived in society; a progressive increase of some social elements,
and diminution of others, or a gradual change in the general character
of certain elements. It is easily seen, for instance, that as society
advances, mental tend more and more to prevail over bodily qualities,
and masses over individuals: that the occupation of all that portion of
mankind who are not under external restraint is at first chiefly
military, but society becomes progressively more and Edition: current;
Page: [925] more engrossed with productive pursuits, and the military
spirit gradually gives way to the industrial; to which manyb similar
truths mightc be added. And with generalizations of this description,
ordinary inquirers, even of the historical school now predominant on the
Continent, are satisfied. But these and all such results are still at
too great a distance from the elementary laws of human nature on which
they depend,—too many links intervene, and the concurrence of causes at
each link is far too complicated,—to enable these propositions to be
presented as direct corollaries from those elementary principlesd. Theyd
have, therefore, in the minds of most inquirers, remained in the state
of empirical laws, applicable only within the bounds of actual
observation; without any means of determining their real limits, and
eofe judging whether the changes which have hitherto been in progress
are destined to continue indefinitely, or to terminate, or even to be
reversed.

§ 7. [Outlines of the Historical Method] In order to obtain better
empirical laws, we must not rest satisfied with noting the progressive
changes which manifest themselves in the separate elements of society,
and in which nothing is indicated but the relation ofa fragments of the
effect to corresponding fragments of the cause. It is necessary to
combine the statical view of social phenomena with the dynamical,
considering not only the progressive changes of the different elements,
but the contemporaneous condition of each; and thus obtain empirically
the law of correspondence not only between the simultaneous states, but
between the simultaneous changes, of those elements. This law of
correspondence it is, which, bduly verified à priori, wouldb become the
real scientific derivative law of the development of humanity and human
affairs.

In the difficult process of observation and comparison which is here
required, it would evidently be ac great assistance if it should happen
to be the fact, that some one element in the complex existence of social
man is preeminent over all others as the prime agent of the social
movement. For we could then take the progress of that one element as the
central chain, to each successive link of which, the corresponding links
of all the other progressions being appended, the succession of the
facts would by this alone be presented in a kind of spontaneous order,
far more nearly approaching to the real order of their filiation than
could be obtained by any other merely empirical process.

Edition: current; Page: [926]
Now, the evidence of history and dthatd of human nature combine, by ae
striking instance of consilience, to show that there really is one
social element which is thus predominant, and almost paramount, among
the agents of the social progression. This is, the state of the
speculative faculties of mankind; fincludingf the nature of theg beliefs
which by any means they have arrived at, concerning themselves and the
world by which they are surrounded.

It would be a great error, and one very little likely to be committed,
to assert that speculation, intellectual activity, the pursuit of truth,
is among the more powerful propensities of human nature, or hholds a
predominatingh place in the lives of any, save decidedly exceptional,
individuals. But, notwithstanding the relative weakness of this
principle among other sociological agents, its influence is the main
determining cause of the social progress; all the other dispositions of
our nature which contribute to that progress, being dependent on it for
the means of accomplishing their share of the work. Thus (to take the
most obvious case first,) the impelling force to most of the
improvements effected in the arts of life, is the desire of increased
material comfort; but as we can only act upon external objects in
proportion to our knowledge of them, the state of knowledge at any time
is thei limit of the industrial improvements possible at that time; and
the progress of industry must follow, and depend on, the progress of
knowledge. The same thing may be shown to be true, though it is not
quite so obvious, of the progress of the fine arts. Further, as the
strongest propensities of juncultivated or half-cultivatedj human nature
(being the purely selfish ones, and those of a sympathetic character
which partake most of the nature of selfishness) evidently tend in
themselves to disunite mankind, not to unite them,—to make them rivals,
not confederates; social existence is only possible by a disciplining of
those more powerful propensities, which consists in subordinating them
to a common system of opinions. The degree of this subordination is the
measure of the completeness of the social union, and the nature of the
common opinions determines its kind. But in order that mankind should
conform their actions to any set of opinions, kthesek opinions must
exist, must be believed by them. And lthus, the state of the speculative
faculties, the character of the propositions assented to by the
intellect,l essentially determines the moral and political state of the
community, as we have already seen that it determines the physical.

These conclusions, deduced from the laws of human nature, are in entire
accordance with the general facts of history. Every considerable change
Edition: current; Page: [927] historically known to us in the condition
of any portion of mankind, mwhen not brought about by external force,m
has been preceded by a change, of proportional extent, in the state of
their knowledge, or in their prevalent beliefs. As between any given
state of speculation, and the correlative state of everything else, it
was almost always the former which first showed itself; though the
effects, no doubt, reacted potently upon the cause. Every considerable
advance in material civilization has been preceded by an advance in
knowledge: and when any great social change has come to pass, neither in
the way of gradual development or of sudden conflict, it has had for its
precursor a great change in the opinions and modes of thinking of
societyn. Polytheism, Judaism, Christianity, Protestantism, the
ocriticalo philosophy of modern Europe, and its positive science—each of
these has been a primary agent in making society what it was at each
successive period, while society was but secondarily instrumental in
making them, each of pthem (so far as causes can be assigned for its
existence) beingp mainly an emanation not from the practical life of the
period, but from the qprevious state of belief and thoughtq. The
weakness of the speculative propensity rin mankind generally,r has not,
therefore, prevented the progress of speculation from governing that of
society at large; it has only, and too often, prevented progress
altogether, where the intellectual progression has come to an early
stand for want of sufficiently favourable circumstances.

From this accumulated evidence, we are justified in concluding, that the
order of human progression in all respects will smainly depend on the
order of progression in the intellectual convictions of mankind, that
is, ons the law of the successive transformations of thuman opinionst.
The question remains, whether this law can be determined; at first from
history as an empirical law, then converted into a scientific theorem by
deducing it à priori from the principles of human nature. As the
progress of knowledge and the changes in the opinions of mankind are
very slow, and manifest themselves in a well-defined manner only at long
intervals; it cannot be expected that the general order of sequence
should be discoverable from the examination of less than a very
considerable part of the duration of the social progress. It is
necessary to take into consideration the whole of past time, from the
first recorded Edition: current; Page: [928] condition of the human
raceu, to the memorable phenomena of the last and present generationsu.

§ 8. [Further prospects of Sociological Inquiry] The investigation which
I have thus endeavoured to characterize, has been systematically
attempted, up to the present time, by M. Comte alone. aHis work is
hitherto the only known example of the study of social phenomena
according to this conception of the Historical Method. Without
discussing here the worth of his conclusions, and especially of his
predictions and recommendations with respect to the Future of society,
which appear to me greatly inferior in value to his appreciation of the
Past, I shall confine myself to mentioning one important generalization,
which M. Comtea regards as the fundamental law of the progress of human
knowledge. Speculation he conceives to have, on every subject of human
inquiry, three successive stages; in the first of which it tends to
explain the phenomena by supernatural agencies, in the second by
metaphysical abstractions, and in the third or final state confines
itself to ascertaining their laws of succession and similitude. This
generalization appears to me to have that high degree of scientific
evidence, which is derived from the concurrence of the indications of
history with the probabilities derived from the constitution of the
human mind. Nor could it be easily conceived, from the mere enunciation
of such a proposition, what a flood of light it lets in upon the whole
course of history; when its consequences are traced, by connecting with
each of the three states of human intellect which it distinguishes, and
with each successive modification of those three states, the
bcorrelative condition ofbc other social phenomena.*

Edition: current; Page: [929]
But whatever decision competent judges may pronounce on the results
arrived at by any individual inquirer, the method dnow characterized is
that by which the derivative laws of social order and of social progress
must be sought. By its aidd we may hereafter succeed not only in looking
far forward into the future history of the human race, but in
determining what artificial means may be used, and to what extent, to
accelerate the natural progress in so far as it is beneficial; to
compensate for whatever may be its inherent inconveniences Edition:
current; Page: [930] or disadvantages; and to guard against the dangers
or accidents to which our species is exposed from the necessary
incidents of its progression. Such practical instructions, founded on
the highest branch of speculative sociology, will form the noblest and
most beneficial portion of the Political Art.

That of this science and art even the foundations are but beginning to
be laid, is sufficiently evident. But the esuperior mindse are fairly
turning themselves towards that objectf. Itf has become the aim of
greallyg scientific thinkers to connect by theories the facts of
universal history: hit is acknowledged to be one of the requisites of a
general system of social doctrine, that it should explain, so far as the
data exist, the main facts of history; and a Philosophy of History is
igenerally admittedi to beh at once the verification, and the initial
form, of the Philosophy of the Progress of Society.

If the endeavours now making in all the more cultivated nations, and
beginning to be made even in England (jusually the last to enter into
the general movement of the European mindj) for the construction of a
Philosophy of History, shall be directed and controlled by those views
of the nature of sociological evidence which I have k(very briefly and
imperfectly) attempted to characterizek; they cannot fail to give birth
to a sociological system widely removed from the vague and conjectural
character of all former attempts, and worthy to take its place, at last,
among lthel sciences. When this time shall come, no important branch of
human affairs will be any longer abandoned to empiricism and
unscientific surmise: the circle of human knowledge will be complete,
and it can only thereafter receive further enlargement by perpetual
expansion from within.

Edition: current; Page: [931]


CHAPTER XI: aAdditional Elucidations of the Science of History

§ 1. [The subjection of historical facts to uniform laws is verified by
statistics] The doctrine which the preceding chapters were intended to
enforce and elucidate—that the collective series of social phenomena, in
other words the course of history, is subject to general laws, which
philosophy may possibly detect—has been familiar for generations to the
scientific thinkers of the Continent, and has for the last quarter of a
century passed out of their peculiar domain, into that of newspapers and
ordinary political discussion. In our own country, however, at the time
of the first publication of this Treatise, it was almost a novelty, and
the prevailing habits of thought on historical subjects were the very
reverse of a preparation for it. Since then a great change has taken
place, and has been eminently promoted by the important work of Mr.
Buckle;[*] who, with characteristic energy,b flung down this great
principle, together with many striking exemplifications of it, into the
arena of popular discussion, to be fought over by a sort of combatants,
in the presence of a sort of spectators, who would never even have been
aware that there existed such a principle if they had been left to learn
its existence from the speculations of pure science. And hence has
arisen a considerable amount of controversy, tending not only to make
the principle rapidly familiar to the majority of cultivated minds, but
also to clear it from the confusions and misunderstandings by which it
was but natural that it should for a time be clouded, and which impair
the worth of the doctrine to those who accept it, and are the
stumbling-block of many who do not.

Among the impediments to the general acknowledgment, by thoughtful
minds, of the subjection of historical facts to scientific laws, the
most fundamental continues to be that which is grounded on the doctrine
of Free Will, or in other words, on the denial that the law of
invariable Causation holds true of human volitions: for if it does not,
the course of history, being the Edition: current; Page: [932] result of
human volitions, cannot be a subject of scientific laws, since the
volitions on which it depends can neither be foreseen, nor reduced to
any canon of regularity even after they have occurred. I have discussed
this question, as far as seemed suitable to the occasion, in a former
chapter:[*] and I only think it necessary to repeat, that the doctrine
of the Causation of human actions, improperly called the doctrine of
Necessity, affirms no mysterious nexus, or overruling fatality: it
asserts only that men’s actions are the joint result of the general laws
and circumstances of human nature, and of their own particular
characters; those characters again being the consequence of the natural
and artificial circumstances that constituted their education, among
which circumstances must be reckoned their own conscious efforts. Any
one who is willing to take (if the expression may be permitted) the
trouble of thinking himself into the doctrine as thus stated, will find
it, I believe, not only a faithful interpretation of the universal
experience of human conduct, but a correct representation of the mode in
which he himself, in every particular case, spontaneously interprets his
own experience of that conduct.

But if this principle is true of individual man, it must be true of
collective man. If it is the law of human life, the law must be realized
in history. The experience of human affairs when looked at en masse,
must be in accordance with it if true, or repugnant to it if false. The
support which this à posteriori verification affords to the law, is the
part of the case which has been most clearly and triumphantly brought
out by Mr. Buckle.

The facts of statistics, since they have been made a subject of careful
recordation and study, have yielded conclusions, some of which have been
very startling to persons not accustomed to regard moral actions as
subject to uniform laws. The very events which in their own nature
appear most capricious and uncertain, and which in any individual case
no attainable degree of knowledge would enable us to foresee, occur,
when considerable numbers are taken into the account, with a degree of
regularity approaching to mathematical. What act is there which all
would consider as more completely dependent on individual character, and
on the exercise of individual free will, than that of slaying a fellow
creature? Yet in any large country, the number of murders, in proportion
to the population, varies (it has been found) very little from one year
to another, and in its variations never deviates widely from a certain
average. What is still more remarkable, there is a similar approach to
constancy in the proportion of these murders annually committed with
every particular kind of instrument. There is a like approximation to
identity, as between one year and another, in the comparative number of
legitimate and of illegitimate births. The same thing is found Edition:
current; Page: [933] true of suicides, accidents, and all other social
phenomena of which the registration is sufficiently perfect; one of the
most curiously illustrative examples being the fact, ascertained by the
registers of the London and Paris post-offices, that the number of
letters posted which the writers have forgotten to direct, is nearly the
same, in proportion to the whole number of letters posted, in one year
as in another. “Year after year,” says Mr. Buckle, “the same proportion
of letter-writers forget this simple act; so that for each successive
period we can actually foretell the number of persons whose memory will
fail them in regard to this trifling, and as it might appear, accidental
occurrence.”*

This singular degree of regularity en masse, combined with the extreme
of irregularity in the cases composing the mass, is a felicitous
verification à posteriori of the law of causation in its application to
human conduct. Assuming the truth of cthatc law, every human action,
every murder for instance, is the concurrent result of two sets of
causes. On the one part, the general circumstances of the country and
its inhabitants; the moral, educational, economical, and other
influences operating on the whole people, and constituting what we term
the state of civilization. On the other part, the great variety of
influences special to the individual: his temperament, and other
peculiarities of organization, his parentage, habitual associates,
temptations, and so forth. If we now take the whole of the instances
which occur within a sufficiently large field to exhaust all the
combinations of these special influences, or in other words, to
eliminate chance; and if all these instances have occurred within such
narrow limits of time, that no material change can have taken place in
the general influences constituting the state of civilization of the
country; we may be certain, that if human actions are governed by
invariable laws, the aggregate result will be something like a constant
quantity. The number of murders committed within that space and time,
being the effect partly of general causes which have not varied, and
partly of partial causes the whole round of whose variations has been
included, will be, practically speaking, invariable.

Literally and mathematically invariable it is not, and could not be
expected to be: because the period of a year is too short to include all
the possible combinations of partial causes, while it is, at the same
time, sufficiently long to make it probable that in some years at least,
of every series, there will have been introduced new influences of a
more or less general character; such as a more vigorous or a more
relaxed police; some temporary excitement from political or religious
causes; or some incident generally notorious, of a nature to act
morbidly on the imagination. That in spite of these unavoidable Edition:
current; Page: [934] imperfections in the data, there should be so very
trifling a margin of variation in the annual results, is a brilliant
confirmation of the general theory.

§ 2. [The subjection of historical facts to uniform laws does not imply
the insignificance of moral causes] The same considerations which thus
strikingly corroborate the evidence of the doctrine, that historical
facts are the invariable effects of causes, tend equally to clear that
doctrine from various misapprehensions, the existence of which has been
put in evidence by the recent discussions. Some persons, for instance,
seemingly imagine the doctrine to imply, not merely that the total
number of murders committed in a given space and time, is entirely the
effect of the general circumstances of society, but that every
particular murder is so too: that the individual murderer is, so to
speak, a mere instrument in the hands of general causes; that he himself
has no option, or if he has, and chose to exercise it, some one else
would be necessitated to take his place: that if any one of the actual
murderers had abstained from the crime, some person who would otherwise
have remained innocent, would have committed an extra murder to make up
the average. Such a corollary would certainly convict any theory which
necessarily led to it of absurdity. It is obvious, however, that each
particular murder depends, not on the general state of society only, but
on that combined with causes special to the case, which are generally
much more powerful: and if these special causes, which have greater
influence than the general ones in causing every particular murder, have
no influence on the number of murders in a given period, it is because
the field of observation is so extensive as to include all possible
combinations of the special causes—all varieties of individual character
and individual temptation compatible with the general state of society.
The collective experiment, as it may be termed, exactly separates the
effect of the general from that of the special causes, and shows the net
result of the former: but it declares nothing at all respecting the
amount of influence of the special causes, be it greater or smaller,
since the scale of the experiment extends to the number of cases within
which the effects of the special causes balance one another, and
disappear in that of the general causes.

I will not pretend that all the defenders of the theory have always kept
their language free from this same confusion, and have shown no tendency
to exalt the influence of general causes at the expense of special. I am
of opinion, on the contrary, that they have done so in a very great
degree, and by so doing have encumbered their theory with difficulties,
and laid it open to objections, which do not necessarily affect it.
Some, for example a(among whom is Mr. Buckle himself)a, have inferred,
or allowed it to be supposed Edition: current; Page: [935] that they
inferred, from the regularity in the recurrence of events which depend
on moral qualities, that the moral qualities of mankind are little
capable of being improved, or are of little importance in the general
progress of society, compared with intellectual or economic causes. But
to draw this inference bisb to forget that the statistical tables, from
which the invariable averages are deduced, were compiled from facts
occurring within narrow geographical limits and in a small number of
successive years; that is, from a field the whole of which was under the
operation of the same general causes, and during too short a time to
allow of much change therein. All moral causes but those common to the
country generally, have been eliminated by the great number of instances
taken; and those which are common to the whole country have not varied
considerably, in the short space of time comprised in the observations.
If we admit the supposition that they have varied; if we compare one age
with another, or one country with another, or even one part of a country
with another, differing in position and character as to the moral
elements, the crimes committed within a year give no longer the same,
but a widely different numerical aggregate. And this cannot but be the
case: for inasmuch as every single crime committed by an individual
mainly depends on his moral qualities, the crimes committed by the
entire population of the country must depend in an equal degree on their
collective moral qualities. To render this element inoperative upon the
large scale, it would be necessary to suppose that the general moral
average of mankind does not vary from country to country or from age to
age; which is not true, and even if it were true, could not possibly be
proved by any existing statistics. I do not on this account the less
agree in the opinion of Mr. Buckle, that the intellectual element in
mankind, including in that expression the nature of their beliefs, the
amount of their knowledge, and the development of their intelligence, is
the predominant circumstance in determining their progress. But I am of
this opinion, not because I regard their moral orc economical condition
either as less powerful or less variable agencies, but because these are
in a great degree the consequences of the intellectual condition, and
are, in all cases, limited by it; as was observed in the preceding
chapter. The intellectual changes are dthe most conspicuous agentsd in
history, not from their superior force, considered in themselves, but
because practically they work with the united power belonging to all
three.*

Edition: current; Page: [936]
§ 3. [The subjection of historical facts to uniform laws also does not
imply the inefficacy of the characters of individuals and of the acts of
government] There is another distinction often neglected in the
discussion of this subject,a which it is extremely important to observe.
The theory of the subjection of social progress to invariable laws, is
often held in conjunction with the doctrine, that social progress cannot
be materially influenced by the exertions of individual persons, or by
the acts of governments. But though these opinions are often held by the
same persons, they are two very different opinions, and the confusion
between them is the eternally recurring error of confounding Causation
with Fatalism. Because whatever happens will be the effect of causes,
human volitions among the rest, it does not follow that volitions, even
those of peculiar individuals, are not of great efficacy as causes. If
any one in a storm at sea, because about the same number of persons in
every year perish by shipwreck, should conclude that it was useless for
him to attempt to save his own life, we should call him a Fatalist; and
should remind him that the efforts of shipwrecked persons to save their
lives are so far from being immaterial, that the average amount of those
efforts is one of the causes on which the ascertained annual number of
deaths by shipwreck bdependb. However universal the laws of social
development may be, they cannot be more universal or more rigorous than
those of the physical agencies of nature; yet human will can convert
these into instruments of its designs, and the extent to which it does
so makes the chief difference between savages and the most highly
civilized people. Human and social facts, from their more complicated
nature, are not less, but more, modifiable, than Edition: current; Page:
[937] mechanical and chemical facts; human agency, therefore, has still
greater power over them. And accordingly, those who maintain that the
evolution of society depends exclusively, or almost exclusively, on
general causes, always include among these the collective knowledge and
intellectual development of the race. But if of the race, why not also
of some powerful monarch or thinker, or cofc the ruling portion of some
political society, acting through its government? Though the varieties
of character among ordinary individuals neutralize one another on any
large scale, exceptional individuals in important positions do not in
any given age neutralize one another; there was not another
Themistocles, or Luther, or Julius Cæsar, of equal powers and contrary
dispositions, who exactly balanced the given Themistocles, Luther, and
Cæsar, and prevented them from having any permanent effect. Moreover,
for aught that appears, the volitions of exceptional persons, or the
opinions and purposes of the individuals who at some particular time
compose a government, may be indispensable links in the chain of
causation by which even the general causes produce their effects; and I
believe this to be the only tenable form of the theory.

Lord Macaulay, in a celebrated passage of one of his early essays (let
me add that it was one which he did not himself choose to reprint),
gives expression to the doctrine of the absolute inoperativeness of
great men, more unqualified, I should think, than has been given to it
by any writer of equal abilities. He compares them to persons who merely
stand on a loftier height, and thence receive the sun’s rays a little
earlier, than the rest of the human race. “The sun illuminates the hills
while it is still below the horizon, and truth is discovered by the
highest minds a little before it becomes manifest to the multitude. This
is the extent of their superiority. They are the first to catch and
reflect a light which, without their assistance, must in a short time be
visible to those who lie far beneath them.”* If this metaphor is to be
carried out, it follows that if there had been no Newton, the world
would not only have had the Newtonian system, but would have had it
equally soon; as the sun would have risen just as early to spectators in
the plain if there had been no mountain at hand to catch still earlier
rays. And so it would be, if truths, like the sun, rose by their own
proper motion, without human effort; but not otherwise. I believe that
if Newton had not lived, the world must have waited for the Newtonian
philosophy until there had been another Newton, or his equivalent. No
ordinary man, and no succession of ordinary men, could have achieved it.
I will not go the length of saying that what Newton did in a single
life, might not have been done in successive steps by some of those
Edition: current; Page: [938] who followed him, each singly inferior to
him in genius. But even the least of those steps required a man of great
intellectual superiority. Eminent men do not merely see the coming light
from the hill-top, they mount on the hill-top and evoke it; and if no
one had ever ascended thither, the light, in many cases, might never
have risen upon the plain at all. Philosophy and religion are abundantly
amenable to general causes; yet few will doubt, that had there been no
Socrates, no Plato, and no Aristotle, there would have been no
philosophy for the next two thousand years, nor in all probability then;
and that if there had been no Christ, and no St. Paul, there would have
been no Christianity.

The point in which, above all, the influence of remarkable individuals
is decisive, is in determining the celerity of the movement. In most
states of society it is the existence of great men which decides even
whether there shall be any progress. It is conceivable that Greece, or
that Christian Europe, might have been progressive in certain periods of
their history through general causes only: but if there had been no
Mahomet, would Arabia have produced Avicenna or Averroes, or Caliphs of
Bagdad or of Cordova? In determining, however, in what manner and order
the progress of mankind shall take place if it take place at all, much
less depends on the character of individuals. There is a sort of
necessity established in this respect by the general laws of human
nature; by the constitution of the human mind. Certain truths cannot be
discovered, or inventions made, unless certain others have been made
first; certain social improvements, from the nature of the case, can
only follow, and not precede, others. The order of human progress,
therefore, may to a certain extent have definite laws assigned to it:
while as to its celerity, or even as to its taking place at all, no
generalization, extending to the human species generally, can possibly
be made; but only some very precarious approximate generalizations,
confined to the small portion of mankind in whom there has been anything
like consecutive progress within the historical period, and deduced from
their special position, or collected from their particular history. Even
looking to the manner of progress, the order of succession of social
states, there is need of great flexibility in our generalizations. The
limits of variation in the possible development of social, as of animal
life, are a subject of which little is yet understood, and are one of
the great problems in social science. It is, at all events, a fact, that
different portions of mankind, under the influence of different
circumstances, have developed themselves in a more or less different
manner and into different forms; and among these determining
circumstances, the individual character of their great speculative
thinkers or practical organizers may well have been one. Who can tell
how profoundly the whole subsequent history of China may have been
influenced by the individuality of Confucius? and of Sparta (and hence
of Greece and the world) by that of Lycurgus?

Edition: current; Page: [939]
Concerning the nature and extent of what a great man under favourable
circumstances can do for mankind, as well as of what a government can do
for a nation, many different opinions are possible; and every shade of
opinion on these points is consistent with the fullest recognition that
there are invariable laws of historical phenomena. Of course the degree
of influence which has to be assigned to these more special agencies,
makes a great difference in the precision which can be given to the
general laws, and in the confidence with which predictions can be
grounded on them. Whatever depends on the peculiarities of individuals,
combined with the accident of the positions they hold, is necessarily
incapable of being foreseen. Undoubtedly these casual combinations might
be eliminated like any others, by taking a sufficiently large cycle: the
peculiarities of a great historical character make their influence felt
in history sometimes for several thousand years, but it is highly
probable that they dwilld make no difference at all at the end of fifty
millions. Since, however, we cannot obtain an average of the vast length
of time necessary to exhaust all the possible combinations of great men
and circumstances, as much of the law of evolution of human affairs as
depends upon this average, is and remains inaccessible to us: and within
the next thousand years, which are of considerably more importance to us
than the whole remainder of the fifty millions, the favourable and
unfavourable combinations which will occur will be to us purely
accidental. We cannot foresee the advent of great men. Those who
introduce new speculative thoughts or great practical conceptions into
the world, cannot have their epoch fixed beforehand. What science can
do, is this. It can trace through past history the general causes which
had brought mankind into that preliminary state, which when the right
sort of great man appeared, rendered them accessible to his influence.
If this state continues, experience renders it tolerably certain that in
a longer or shorter period the great man will be produced; provided that
the general circumstances of the country and people are (which very
often they are not) compatible with his existence; of which point also,
science can in some measure judge. It is in this manner that the results
of progress, except as to the celerity of their production, can be, to a
certain extent, reduced to regularity and law. And the belief that they
can be so, is equally consistent with assigning very great, or very
little efficacy, to the influence of exceptional men, or of the acts of
governments. And the same may be said of all other accidents and
disturbing causes.

§ 4. [The historical importance of eminent men and of the policy of
governments illustrated] It would nevertheless be a great error to
assign only a trifling importance to the agency of eminent individuals,
or of governments. It must not be concluded that the influence of either
is small, because they Edition: current; Page: [940] cannot bestow what
the general circumstances of society, and the course of its previous
history, have not prepared it to receive. Neither thinkers nor
governments effect all that they intend, but in compensation they often
produce important results which they did not in the least foresee. Great
men, and great actions, are seldom wasted: they send forth a thousand
unseen influences, more effective than those which are seen; and though
nine out of every ten things done, with a good purpose, by those who are
in advance of their age, produce no material effect, the tenth thing
produces effects twenty times as great as any one would have dreamed of
predicting from it. Even the men who for want of sufficiently favourable
circumstances left no impress at all upon their own age, have often been
of the greatest value to posterity. Who could appear to have lived more
entirely in vain, than some of the early heretics? They were burnt or
massacred, their writings extirpated, their memory anathematized, and
their very names and existence left for seven or eight centuries in the
obscurity of musty manuscripts—their history to be gathered, perhaps,
only from the sentences by which they were condemned. Yet the memory of
these men—men who resisted certain pretensions or certain dogmas of the
Church in the very age in which the unanimous assent of Christendom was
aafterwardsa claimed as having been given to them, and asserted as the
ground of their authority—broke the chain of tradition, established a
series of precedents for resistance, inspired later Reformers with the
courage, and armed them with the weapons, which they needed when mankind
were better prepared to follow their impulse. To this example from men,
let us add another from governments. The comparatively enlightened rule
of which Spain had the benefit during a considerable part of the
eighteenth century, did not correct the fundamental defects of the
Spanish people; and in consequence, though it did great temporary good,
so much of that good perished with it, that it may plausibly be affirmed
to have had no permanent effect. The case has been cited as a proof how
little governments can do in opposition to the causes which have
determined the general character of the nation. It does show how much
there is which they cannot do; but not that they can do nothing. Compare
what Spain was at the beginning of that half century of liberal
government, with what she had become at its close. That period fairly
let in the light of European thought upon the more educated classes; and
it never afterwards ceased to go on spreading. Previous to that time the
change was in an inverse direction; culture, light, intellectual and
even material activity, were becoming extinguished. Was it nothing to
arrest this downward and convert it into an upward course? How much that
Charles the Third and Aranda could not do, has been the ultimate
consequence of what they did! To that half century Spain owes that she
has got rid of the Inquisition, that she has got rid of the monks, that
she now has Edition: current; Page: [941] parliaments and b(save in
exceptional intervals)b a free press, and the feelings of freedom and
citizenship, and is acquiring railroads and all the other constituents
of material and economical progress. In the Spain which preceded that
era, there was not a single element at work which could have led to
these results in any length of time, if the country had continued to be
governed as it was by the last princes of the Austrian dynasty, or if
the Bourbon rulers had been from the first what, both in Spain and in
Naples, they afterwards became.

And if a government can do much, even when it seems to have done little,
in causing positive improvement, still greater are the issues dependent
on it in the way of warding off evils, both internal and external, which
else would stop improvement altogether. A good or a bad counsellor, in a
single city at a particular crisis, has affected the whole subsequent
fate of the world. It is as certain as any contingent judgment
respecting historical events can be, that if there had been no
Themistocles there would have been no victory of Salamis; and had there
not, where would have been all our civilization? How different again
would have been the issue if Epaminondas, or Timoleon, or even
Iphicrates, instead of Chares and Lysicles, had commanded at Chæroneia.
As is well said in the second of two Essays on the Study of History,* in
my judgment the soundest and most philosophical productions which the
crecent controversies on this subject havec called forth; historical
science authorizes not absolute, but only conditional predictions.
General causes count for much, but individuals also “produce great
changes in history, and colour its whole complexion long after their
death. . . . No one can doubt that the Roman republic would have
subsided into a military despotism if Julius Cæsar had never lived;”
(thus much was rendered practically certain by general causes): “but is
it at all clear that in that case Gaul would ever have formed a province
of the empire? Might not Varus have lost his three legions on the banks
of the Rhone? and might not that river have become the frontier instead
of the Rhine? This might well have happened if Cæsar and Crassus had
changed provinces; and it is surely impossible to say that in such an
event the venue (as lawyers say) of European civilization might not have
been changed. The Norman Conquest in the same way was as much the act of
a single man, as the writing of a newspaper article; and knowing as we
do the history of that man and his family, we can retrospectively
predict with all but infallible certainty, that no other person” (no
other in that age, I presume, is meant), “could have accomplished the
enterprise. If it had not been Edition: current; Page: [942]
accomplished, is there any ground to suppose that either our history or
our national character would have been what they are?”[*]

As is most truly remarked by the same writer, the whole stream of
Grecian history, as cleared up by Mr. Grote,[†] is one series of
examples how often events on which the whole destiny of subsequent
civilization turned, were dependent on the personal character for good
or evil of some one individual. It must be said, however, that Greece
furnishes the most extreme example of this nature to be found in
history, and is a very exaggerated specimen of the general tendency. It
has happened only that once, and will probably never happen again, that
the fortunes of mankind depended upon keeping a certain order of things
in existence in a single town, or a country scarcely larger than
Yorkshire; capable of being ruined or saved by a hundred causes, of very
slight magnitude in comparison with the general tendencies of human
affairs. Neither ordinary accidents, nor the characters of individuals,
can ever again be so vitally important as they then were. The longer our
species lasts, and the more civilized it becomes, the more, as Comte
remarks,[‡] does the influence of past generations over the present, and
of mankind en masse over every individual in it, predominate over other
forces: and though the course of affairs never ceases to be susceptible
of alteration both by accidents and by personal qualities, the
increasing preponderance of the collective agency of the species over
all minor causes, is constantly bringing the general evolution of the
race into something which deviates less from a certain and preappointed
track. Historical science, therefore, is always becoming more possible:
not solely because it is better studied, but because, in every
generation, it becomes better adapted for study.a

Edition: current; Page: [943]


aCHAPTER XIIa: Of the Logic of Practice, or Art; Including Morality and Policy

§ 1. [Morality not a Science, but an Art] In the preceding chapters we
have endeavoured to characterize the present state of those among the
branches of knowledge called Moral, which are sciences in the only
proper sense of the term, that is, inquiries into the course of nature.
It is customary, however, to include under the term moral knowledge, and
even (though improperly) under that of moral science, an inquiry the
results of which do not express themselves in the indicative, but in the
imperative mood, or in periphrases equivalent to it; what is called the
knowledge ofb duties; practical ethics, or morality.

Now, the imperative mood is the characteristic of art, as distinguished
from science. Whatever speaks in rules, or precepts, not in assertions
respecting matters of fact, is art: and ethics, or morality, is properly
a portion of the art corresponding to the sciences of human nature and
societyc.*

The Method, therefore, of Ethics, can be no other than that of Art, or
Practice, in general: and the portion yet uncompleted, of the task which
we proposed to ourselves in the concluding Book, is to characterize the
general Method of Art, as distinguished from Science.

§ 2. [Relation between rules of art and the theorems of the
corresponding science] In all branches of practical business, there are
cases in which aindividuals are bound to conform their practice to a
pre-established rule, while Edition: current; Page: [944] there are
others in which it is part of their task to find or construct the rule
by which they are to govern theira conduct. The first, for example, is
the case of a judge, under a definite written code. The judge is not
called upon to determine what course would be intrinsically the most
advisable in the particular case in hand, but only within what rule of
law it falls; what the blegislatureb has cordainedc to be done in the
kind of case, and must therefore be presumed to have intended in the
individual case. The method must here be wholly and exclusively one of
ratiocination, or syllogism; and the process is obviously, what in our
analysis of the syllogism we showed that all ratiocination is, namely
the interpretation of a formula.

In order that dourd illustration of the opposite case may be taken from
the same class of subjects as the former, we will suppose, in contrast
with the situation of the judge, the position of ethee legislator. As
the judge has laws for his guidance, so the legislator has rules, and
maxims of policy; but it would be a manifest error to suppose that the
legislator is bound by these maxims in the same manner as the judge is
bound by the laws, and that all he has to do is to argue down from them
to the particular case, as the judge does from the laws. The legislator
is bound to take into consideration the freasonsf or grounds of the
maxim; the judge has nothing to do with those of the law, except so far
as a consideration of them may throw light upon the intention of the
law-maker, where his words have left it doubtful. To the judge, the
rule, once positively ascertained, is final; but the legislator, or
other practitioner, who goes by rules rather than by their reasons, like
the old-fashioned German tacticians who were vanquished by Napoleon, or
the physician who preferred that his patients should die by rule rather
than recover contrary to it, is rightly judged to be a mere pedant, and
the slave of his formulas.

Now, the reasons of a maxim of policy, or of any other rule of art, can
be no other than the theorems of the corresponding science.

The relation in which rules of art stand to doctrines of science may be
thus characterized. The art proposes to itself an end to be attained,
defines the end, and hands it over to the science. The science receives
it, considers it as a phenomenon or effect to be studied, and having
investigated its causes and conditions, sends it back to art with a
theorem of the combinations of circumstances by which it could be
produced. Art then examines these combinations of circumstances, and
according as any of them are or are not in human power, pronounces the
end attainable or not. The only one of the premises, therefore, which
Art supplies, is the original major premise, which asserts that the
attainment of the given end is desirable. Science then lends Edition:
current; Page: [945] to Art the proposition (obtained by a series of
inductions or of deductions) that the performance of certain actions
will attain the end. From these premises Art concludes that the
performance of these actions is desirable, and finding it also
practicable, converts the theorem into a rule or precept.

§ 3. [What is the proper function of rules of art?] It deserves
particular notice, that the theorem or speculative truth is not ripe for
being turned into a precept, until athe whole, and not a part merely, of
the operation which belongs to science, has beena performed. Suppose
that we have completed the scientific process only up to a certain
point; have discovered that a particular cause will produce the desired
effect, but bhaveb not ascertained all the negative conditions which are
necessary, that is, all the circumstances which, if present, would
prevent its production. If, in this imperfect state of the scientific
theory, we attempt to frame a rule of art, we perform that operation
prematurely. Whenever any counteracting cause, overlooked by the
theorem, takes place, the rule will be at fault: we shall employ the
means and the end will not follow. No arguing from or about the rule
itself will then help us through the difficulty: there is nothing for it
but to turn back and finish the scientific process which should have
preceded the formation of the rule. We must re-open the investigation,
to inquire into the remainder of the conditions on which the effect
depends; and only after we have ascertained the whole of these, are we
prepared to transform the completed law of the effect into a precept, in
which those circumstances or combinations of circumstances which the
science exhibits as conditions, are prescribed as means.

It is true that, for the sake of convenience, rules must be formed from
something less than this ideally perfect theory; in the first place,
because the theory can seldom be made ideally perfect; and next,
because, if all the counteracting contingencies, whether of frequent or
of rare occurrence, were included, the rules would be too cumbrous to be
apprehended and remembered by ordinary capacities, on the common
occasions of life. The rules of art do not attempt to comprise more
conditions than require to be attended to in ordinary cases; and are
therefore always imperfect. In the manual arts, where the requisite
conditions are not numerous, and where those which the rules do not
specify are generally either plain to common observation or speedily
learnt from practice, rules may coftenc be safely acted on by persons
who know nothing more than the rule. But in the complicated affairs of
life, and still more in those of states and societies, rules cannot be
relied on, without constantly referring back to the scientific laws on
which they are founded. To know what are the practical contingencies
which require a modification Edition: current; Page: [946] of the rule,
or which are altogether exceptions to it, is to know what combinations
of circumstances would interfere with, or entirely counteract, the
consequences of those laws: and this can only be learnt by a reference
to the dtheoreticd grounds of the rule.

By a wise practitioner, therefore, rules of conduct will only be
considered as provisional. Being made for the most numerous cases, or
for those of most ordinary occurrence, they point out the manner in
which it will be least perilous to act, where time or means do not exist
for analysing the actual circumstances of the case, or wheree we cannot
trust our judgment in estimating them. But they do not at all supersede
the propriety of going through (when circumstances permit) the
scientific process requisite for framing a rule from the data of the
particular case before us. At the same time, the common rule may very
properly serve as an admonition that a certain mode of action has been
found by ourselves and others to fbe well adapted tof the cases of most
common occurrence; so that if it be unsuitable gtog the case in hand,
the reason of its being so will be likely to arise from some unusual
circumstance.

§ 4. [Art cannot be deductive] The error ais thereforea apparent, of
those who would deduce the line of conduct proper to particular cases,
from supposed universal practical maxims; overlooking the necessity of
constantly referring back to the principles of the speculative science,
in order to be sure of attaining even the specific end which the rules
have in view. How much greater still, then, must the error be, of
setting up such unbending principles, not merely as universal rules for
attaining a given end, but as rules of conduct generally; without regard
to the possibility, not only that some modifying cause may prevent the
attainment of the given end by the means which the rule prescribes, but
that success itself may conflict with some other end, which may possibly
chance to be more desirable.

This is the habitual error of many of the political speculators whom I
have characterized as the geometrical school; especially in France,
where ratiocination from rules of practice forms the staple commodity of
journalism and political oratory; a misapprehension of the functions of
Deduction which has brought much discredit, in the estimation of bother
countriesb, upon the spirit of generalization so honourably
characteristic of the French mind. The common-places of politics, in
France, are large and sweeping practical maxims, from which, as ultimate
premises, men reason downwards to particular applications, and this they
call being logical and consistent. For instance, they Edition: current;
Page: [947] are perpetually arguing that such and such a measure ought
to be adopted, because it is a consequence of the principle on which the
form of government is founded; of the principle of legitimacy, or the
principle of the sovereignty of the people. To which it may be answered,
that if these be really practical principles, they must rest on
speculative grounds; the sovereignty of the people (for example) must be
a right foundation for government, because a government thus constituted
tends to produce certain beneficial effects. Inasmuch, however, as no
government produces all possible beneficial effects, but all are
attended with more or fewer inconveniences; and since these cannot
cusuallyc be combated by means drawn from the very causes which produce
them; it would be often a much stronger recommendation of some practical
arrangement, that it does not follow from what is called the general
principle of the government, than that it does. Under a government of
legitimacy, the presumption is far rather in favour of institutions of
popular origin; and in a democracy, in favour of arrangements tending to
check the impetus of popular will. The line of argumentation so commonly
mistaken in France for political philosophy, tends to the practical
conclusion that we should exert our utmost efforts to aggravate, instead
of alleviating, whatever are the characteristic imperfections of the
system of institutions which we prefer, or under which we happen to
live.

§ 5. [aEvery Art consists ofa truths of Science, arranged in the order
suitable for bsomeb practical use] cThe grounds, then, of every rule of
art, are to be found in the theorems of science.c An art, or a body of
art, consists of the rules, together with as much of the speculative
propositions as comprises the justification of those rules. The complete
art of any matter, includes a selection of such a portion from the
science, as is necessary to show on what conditions the effects, which
the art aims at producing, depend. And Art in general, consists of the
truths of Science, arranged in the most convenient order for practice,
instead of the order which is the most convenient for thought. Science
groups and arranges its truths, so as to enable us to take in at one
view as much as possible of the general order of the universe. Art,
though it must assume the same general laws, follows them only into such
of their detailed consequences as have led to the formation of rules of
conduct; and brings together from parts of the field of science most
remote from one Edition: current; Page: [948] another, the truths
relating to the production of the different and heterogeneous conditions
necessary to each effect which the exigencies of practical life require
to be produced.*

dScience, therefore, following one cause to its various effects, while
art traces one effect to its multiplied and diversified causes and
conditions; there is need ofd a set of intermediate scientific truths,
derived from the higher generalities of science, and destined to serve
as the generalia or first principles of the various arts. The scientific
operation of framing these intermediate principles, M. Comte
echaracterizese as one of those results of philosophy which are reserved
for futurity.[*] The only complete example which he fpointsf out as
actually realized, and which can be held up as a type to be imitated in
more important matters, is the general theory of the art of Descriptive
Geometry, as conceived by M. Monge.[†] It is not, however, difficult to
understand what the nature of these intermediate gprinciples must
generallyg be. After framing the most comprehensive hpossible
conceptionh of the end to be aimed at, that is, of the effect to be
produced, and determining in the same comprehensive manner the set of
conditions on which that effect depends; there remains to be taken, a
general survey of the resources which can be commanded for realizing
this set of conditions; and when the result of this survey has been
embodied in the fewest and most extensive propositions possible, those
propositions will express the general relation between the available
means and the end, and iwill constitute the general scientific theory of
the art; from which its practical methods will follow as corollaries.i

Edition: current; Page: [949]
§ 6. a[Teleology, or the Doctrine of Ends] But though the reasonings
which connect the end or purpose of every art with its means, belong to
the domain of Science, the definition of the end itself belongs
exclusively to Art, and forms its peculiar province. Every art has one
first principle, or general major premise, not borrowed from science;
that which enunciates the object aimed at, and affirms it to be a
desirable object. The builder’s art assumes that it is desirable to have
buildings; architecture (as one of the fine arts), that it is desirable
to have them beautiful or imposing. The hygienic and medical arts
assume, the one that the preservation of health, the other that the cure
of disease, are fitting and desirable ends. These are not propositions
of science. Propositions of science assert a matter of fact: an
existence, a coexistence, a succession, or a resemblance. The
propositions now spoken of do not assert that anything is, but enjoin or
recommend that something should be. They are a class by themselves. A
proposition of which the predicate is expressed by the words ought or
should be, is generically different from one which is expressed by is,
or will be. It is true, that in the largest sense of the words, even
these propositions assert something as a matter of fact. The fact
affirmed in them is, that the conduct recommended excites in the
speaker’s mind the feeling of approbation. This, however, does not go to
the bottom of the matter; for the speaker’s approbation is no sufficient
reason why other people should approve; nor ought it to be a conclusive
reason even with himself. For the purposes of practice, every one must
be required to justify his approbation: and for this there is need of
general premises, determining what are the proper objects of
approbation, and what the proper order of precedence among those
objects.

These general premises, together with the principal conclusions which
may be deduced from them, form (or rather might form) a body of
doctrine, which is properly the Art of Life, in its three departments,
Morality, Prudence or Policy, and Æsthetics; the Right, the Expedient,
and the Beautiful or Noble, in human conduct and works. To this art,
(which, in the main, is unfortunately still to be created,) all other
arts are subordinate; since its principles are those which must
determine whether the special aim of any particular art is worthy and
desirable, and what is its place in the scale of desirable things. Every
art is thus a joint result of laws of nature disclosed by science, and
of the general principles of what has been called Teleology, or the
Doctrine of Ends;* which, borrowing the language of the German
metaphysicians, Edition: current; Page: [950] may also be termed, not
improperly, the principles of Practical Reason.

A scientific observer or reasoner, merely as such, is not an adviser for
practice. His part is only to show that certain consequences follow from
certain causes, and that to obtain certain ends, certain means are the
most effectual. Whether the ends themselves are such as ought to be
pursued, and if so, in what cases and to how great a length, it is no
part of his business as a cultivator of science to decide, and science
alone will never qualify him for the decision. In purely physical
science, there is not much temptation to assume this ulterior office;
but those who treat of human nature and society invariably claim it;
they always undertake to say, not merely what is, but what ought to be.
To entitle them to do this, a complete doctrine of Teleology is
indispensable. A scientific theory, however perfect, of the subject
matter, considered merely as part of the order of nature, can in no
degree serve as a substitute. bIn this respect the various subordinate
arts afford a misleading analogy. In them there is seldom any visible
necessity for justifying the end, since in general its desirableness is
denied by nobody, and it is only when the question of precedence is to
be decided between that end and some other, that the general principles
of Teleology have to be called in: but a writer on Morals and Politics
requires those principles at every step.b The most elaborate and
well-digested exposition of the laws of succession and coexistence among
mental or social phenomena, and of their relation to one another as
causes and effects, will be of no avail towards the art of Life or of
Society, if the ends to be aimed at by that art are left to the vague
suggestions of the intellectus sibi permissus, or are taken for granted
without analysis or questioning.c

Edition: current; Page: [951]
§ 7. [Necessity of an ultimate standard, or first principle of
Teleology] There is, then, a Philosophia Prima peculiar to Art, as there
is one which belongs to Science. There are not only first principles of
Knowledge, but first principles of Conduct. There must be some standard
by which to determine the goodness or badness, absolute and comparative,
of ends, or objects of desire. And whatever that standard is, there can
be but one: for if there were several ultimate principles of conduct,
the same conduct might be approved by one of those principles and
condemned by another; and there would be needed some more general
principle, as umpire between them.

Accordingly, writers on moral philosophy have mostly felt the necessity
not only of referring all rules of conduct, and all judgments of praise
and blame, to principles, but of referring them to some one principle;
some rule, or standard, with which all other rules of conduct were
required to be consistent, and from which by ultimate consequence they
could all be deduced. Those who have dispensed with the assumption of
such an universal standard, have only been enabled to do so by supposing
that a moral sense, or instinct, inherent in our constitution, informs
us, both what principles of conduct we are bound to observe, and also in
what order these should be subordinated to one another.

The theory of the foundations of morality is a subject which it would be
out of place, in a work like this, to discuss at large, and which could
not to any useful purpose be treated incidentally. I shall content
myself therefore with saying, that the doctrine of intuitive moral
principles, even ifa true, would provide only for that portion of the
field of conduct which is properly called moral. For the remainder of
the practice of life some general principle, or standard, must still be
sought; and if that principle be rightly chosen, it will be found, I
apprehend, to serve quite as well for the ultimate principle of
Morality, as for that of Prudence, Policy, or Taste.

Without attempting in this place to justify my opinion, or even to
define the kind of justification which it admits of, I merely declare my
conviction, that the general principle to which all rules of practice
ought to conform, and the test by which they should be tried, is that of
conduciveness to the happiness of mankind, or rather, of all sentient
beings: in other words, that the promotion of happiness is the ultimate
principle of Teleology.*

Edition: current; Page: [952]
I do not mean to assert that the promotion of happiness should be itself
the end of all actions, or even of all rules of action. It is the
justification, and ought to be the controller, of all ends, but is not
itself the sole end. There are many virtuous actions, and even virtuous
modes of action (though the cases are, I think, less frequent than is
often supposed) by which happiness in the particular instance is
sacrificed, more pain being produced than pleasure. But conduct of which
this can be truly asserted, admits of justification only because it can
be shown that on the whole more happiness will exist in the world, if
feelings are cultivated which will make people, in certain cases,
regardless of happiness. I fully admit that this is true: that the
cultivation of an ideal nobleness of will and conduct, should be to
individual human beings an end, to which the specific pursuit either of
their own happiness or of that of others (except so far as included in
that idea) should, in any case of conflict, give way. But I hold that
the very question, what constitutes this elevation of character, is
itself to be decided by a reference to happiness as the standard. The
character itself should be, to the individual, a paramount end, simply
because the existence of this ideal nobleness of character, or of a near
approach to it, in any abundance, would go further than all things else
towards making human life happy; both in the comparatively humble sense,
of pleasure and freedom from pain, and in the higher meaning, of
rendering life, not what it now is almost universally, puerile and
insignificant—but such as human beings with highly developed faculties
can care to have.a

a§ 8.a [Conclusion] With these remarks we must close this summary view
of the application of the general logic of scientific inquiry to the
moral and social departments of science. Notwithstanding the extreme
generality of the principles of method which I have laid down, (a
generality which, I trust, is not, in this instance, synonymous with
vagueness) I have indulged the hope that to some of those on whom the
task will devolve of bringing those most important of all sciences into
a more satisfactory state, these observations may be useful; both in
removing erroneous, and in clearing up the true, conceptions of the
means by which, on subjects of so high a degree of complication, truth
can be attained. Should this bhope be realized,b what is probably
destined to be the great intellectual achievement of the next two or
three generations of European thinkers cwill have been in some degree
forwardedc.

Edition: current; Page: [953]


APPENDICES

Edition: current; Page: [954] Edition: current; Page: [955]


Appendix A


THE EARLY DRAFT OF THE LOGIC


Editor’s Note

The manuscript, bound in brown morocco, is in the Pierpoint Morgan
Library, New York (catalogued V/11/A), having been obtained in Britain
sometime before 1909. As folioed by the library, it consists of 344
folios, c. 23.9 cm. × 19 cm. At the head of the first folio (above the
title, “Introductory Matter”) is written “ “Mill’s Logic” 2 Vols divide
where marked cloth bds”, and on the first folio of the equivalent of
Book II is written “Vol 2”. On an attached initial sheet the following
note appears: “This copy of Mr. Mill’s Logic being an early manuscript
draft was sent by the author to my Father the late Professor J. P.
Nichol.”

The manuscript is in three scribal hands (henceforth referred to as A,
B, and C), with corrections, additions, and some footnotes in Mill’s
hand. The text is written on recto throughout, with the versos reserved
for footnotes, except for the final five ff., which are covered recto
and verso with text. Following one of his common practices, Mill used a
sequence of letters, A to P, with a second N, placed in the upper
right-hand corner of rectos, to indicate “gatherings,” usually of 20
folios. Three of these letters, the K, L, and M, are inscribed over
partly erased letters G, H, and I. The paper is of various makes, and
three dates, 1833, 1834, and 1836.

This evidence, plus short pages and gatherings, one long cancelled
passage (ff. 114-20), the content, and some external evidence,
establishes that the scribes copied parts of the manuscript at different
times. The table on the following two pages sets out the relevant
internal evidence. Inferences drawn from this evidence will be found in
the section of the Textual Introduction dealing with the history of the
text of the Logic (see lvii ff.).

In that section a summary comparison is made of the texts of the Early
Draft and the Press-copy Manuscript. To facilitate comparison of the
early and final versions, parallel passages are indicated in the text of
the Early Draft. The book and chapter titles of the final version are
given in square brackets as, for example, at 969 below, where it will be
seen that the chapter of the Early Draft entitled “Statement of the
Problem” corresponds to Bk. I, Chap. i of the final version. Because the
wording is in many cases very close in the two versions, it is possible
to indicate section and paragraph parallels, which are also placed in

Edition: current; Page: [956]
GATHERING
SCRIBE
FOLIOS
CHAPTER
PAPER MAKE AND DATE
COMMENTS
*This gathering begins the equivalent of Book I in the final version of
the _Logic._
†This gathering concludes the equivalent of Book I in the final version
of the _Logic._
‡The square-bracketed letter is erased and written over.
‡The square-bracketed letter is erased and written over.
‡The square-bracketed letter is erased and written over.
§This gathering concludes the equivalent of Book II in the final version
of the _Logic._
§§The superscript number is editorially added to distinguish this
gathering from N above.
A
A
1-20
Introductory Matter
Dewdney, 1833
f. 1 has only chap. title in JSM’s hand; ff. 19-20 blank
B*
A
21-30
Statement of the Problem
Whatman, 1834
31-40
Of Names
C
A
41-56
” (cont.)
Whatman, 1834
57-60
Classification of Things
D
A
61-80
” (cont.)
Whatman, 1834
f. 80 is short about 2 lines, but f. 81 begins with new ¶
E
A
81-5
” (cont.)
Dewdney, 1833 (ff. 81-2, 99-100), and Whatman, 1834 (ff. 83-98)
86-100
Of Predication
F
A
101-20
” (cont.)
Dewdney, 1833
ff. 114-20 cancelled, beginning at 2nd ¶ on f. 114; cancelled f. 120 is
short
G
B
121-33
” (cont.)
Magnay, 1834
ff. 121-33 replace cancelled ff. 114-20
134-40
Of the Predicables or Universals
H
B
141-54
” (cont.)
Balston, 1833 (ff. 141-4, 151-6), and Whatman, 1833 (ff. 145-50, 157-60)
155-60
Of Definition
I
B
161-80
” (cont.)
Balston, 1833 (ff. 161-4, 169-70, 173-6), and Whatman, 1833 (ff. 165-8,
171-2, 177-80)
J†
B
181-97
” (cont.)
Balston, 1833 (ff. 187-90), 195-7), and Whatman, 1833 (ff. 181-6, 191-4)
f. 188 short; ff. 189-97 blank. Gathering short 3 ff.
K[G]‡
A
198-204
Of Inference, or Reasoning
Dewdney, 1833
A pencilled note, “Vol 2”, on f. 198 may be in JSM’s hand
205-17
Of Ratiocination, or Syllogism
L[H]‡
A
218-35
” (cont.)
Whatman, 1834
Gathering short 2 ff.
M[I]‡
A
236-54
” (cont.)
Dewdney, 1833
ff. 244-54 blank; Gathering short 1 f.
N
C
255-63
Of Trains of Reasoning
Wilmot, 1836
264-74
Of Deductive Sciences
O
C
275-94
Of Demonstration, and Necessary Truths
Magnay, 1834 (ff. 275-6, 293-4), and Wilmot, 1836 (ff. 277-92).
Though of the same date, the Magnay paper here differs in watermark from
that used in Gathering G
P§
C
295-314
” (cont.)
Magnay, 1834 (ff. 299-310), Wilmot, 1836 (ff. 295-8, 311-14)
ff. 299-314 blank
N^2^§§
C
315-22
Of Induction in General
Whatman, 1833 (ff. 315-16, 325-32), and Balston, 1833 (ff. 317-24,
333-4)
Written recto and verso.
323-9
Of the Various Grounds of Induction
There are some differences between this hand and that in Gatherings N,
O, and P, but not more than can be explained by the difference in time
of inditing
330-4
Of the Uniformity in the Course of Nature

Edition: current; Page: [958]
square brackets. These indicators are normally in roman type; when they
are in italic type they indicate that, while the wording is different in
the two versions, the relevant section or paragraph in the final version
replaced that in the Early Draft.

The final version being much fuller, there are gaps in the sequence of
the inserted indicators, but an attempt has been made to show what
happened to each paragraph of the Early Draft: when the material was
deleted or greatly rewritten, footnotes are added; when the sequence was
altered, the normal indicators appear non-sequentially (see, for
example, 966, where in the Introductory Matter—equivalent to the
Introduction—after the first paragraph of §7, the Early Draft has the
equivalent of the second paragraph of §1, and then returns to the second
paragraph of §7). When there is neither a footnote nor an indicator at
the beginning of a paragraph, the preceding footnote or indicator gives
the disposition; that is, in most cases, the paragraph was incorporated
with the previous one. Sometimes Mill divided paragraphs in rewriting;
in such cases indicators appear within the paragraphs of the Early
Draft. It should be noted that the indicated parallels are between the
Early Draft and the 8th edition, so that comparisons can be made by
using the texts here printed. The Early Draft is, of course, closer to
the Press-copy Manuscript, and therefore the variants between the 8th
edition and the Press-copy Manuscript must be consulted.

Editorial alterations in the text have been kept to the minimum
compatible with fluent reading. Footnotes describe those changes in
Mill’s hand that indicate later rethinking of a point, but no indication
is given of the places where Mill had to supply or correct a word that
the scribe could not read, or of the places where the scribe made a
current correction. The editorial footnotes are, with their indicators,
given in square brackets; the manuscript’s footnote indicators have been
regularized. Superscript abbreviations have been lowered.

The spelling of the original has been accepted (except in the few cases
listed in the note below), as a record of the scribes’ habits. Only
where there are syntactic oddities does “[sic]” appear. The corrections
that have been made may be categorized as follows: 1. scribal
repetitions deleted, 2. missing words supplied in square brackets, 3.
words corrected, 4. italics regularized, 5. quotation marks regularized,
6. punctuation and capitalization regularized.*

Edition: current; Page: [959]
As a further aid to the study of the development of Mill’s thoughts on
logic, the Bibliographic Appendix and the Index list references to the
Early Draft, italicized and in parentheses, immediately after the
parallel references to the text of the 8th edition. References that
appear only in the Early Draft are given in italics at the end of the
list of references to the 8th edition.

Edition: current; Page: [960] Edition: current; Page: [961]


INTRODUCTORY MATTER[*]
 [Introduction]

[§1]

[¶1] There is as great a diversity in the modes which different authors
have adopted of defining Logic, as in their modes of treating of it.
This is no more than we might expect, on all those subjects on which
different authors have availed themselves of the same language, as a
means of delivering ideas in any respect different. Morals and
Jurisprudence are liable to this remark in common with Logic. Almost
every philosopher having taken a different view of some of the
particulars which these branches of knowledge are usually understood to
include, each has so framed his definition of the subjects themselves as
to indicate beforehand his own peculiar tenets, and perhaps to beg the
question in their favour.

[§2]

[¶1] Logic has been often said to be the Art of Reasoning. This
definition has been adopted, and improved, by a recent writer of great
eminence, who defines Logic to be the Science, as well as the Art, of
Reasoning: the analysis of the mental process which takes place whenever
we reason, as well as the practical rules, which have been grounded upon
that analysis, for conducting the process correctly. The propriety of
this emendation is obvious. A right understanding of the mental
operation itself, is the only basis on which a connected or
comprehensive system of rules fitted for the direction of it, can
possibly be founded. Art necessarily presupposes Science: and every Art
should bear the name of the Science on which it rests, were it not that
several Sciences are often necessary to form the groundwork of one
single Art. Such is the complication of human affairs that to enable one
thing to be done, it is often requisite to know the natures and
properties of many.

[¶2] Logic, then, comprises a Science as well as an Art. But it admits
of question whether even when thus amended, the above definition of
Logic is coextensive with the received employment of the term.

The word Reasoning, like almost all scientific terms which are in common
use, abounds in ambiguities. With some persons, Reasoning means
Syllogizing; or, in other words, that mode of inference which may be
called with sufficient accuracy for the present purpose, concluding from
generals to particulars. With others again, to reason is simply to infer
any truth from truths already known. Induction, therefore, according to
this nomenclature, is as much entitled to be called Reasoning, as the
demonstrations in Euclid.

[¶3] Writers on Logic have generally preferred the former acceptation of
the term; the latter, and more extensive signification is that in which
I shall use it. The reasons for this departure from the custom of
professed Logicians will appear Edition: current; Page: [962] as we
advance. To the general usage of the English language, I believe mine to
be the nearer approximation.

[§3]

[¶1] But even this, the widest sense in which the term Reasoning is ever
employed, is not so wide as to be coextensive with the ordinary
acceptation of the word Logic. The practice of using the denomination
Logic to denote peculiarly the Science which treats of Argumentation,
originated with the Schoolmen: yet even in their systematic treatises,
Argumentation formed the subject only of the third Part: the two former
treated of Terms, and of Propositions; under one or other of which heads
were included, Definition, and Division. Professedly, indeed, all these
subjects were attended to only on account of their connexion with
Reasoning, and as a preparation for understanding the doctrine and rules
of the Syllogism. Yet they were treated much more minutely, and dwelt on
at much greater length than that purpose required. More recent writers
on Logic have generally understood that term nearly in the sense in
which it was employed by the Authors of the Port Royal Logic; viz: as
synonymous with the Art of Thinking. Nor is this large acceptation of
the word confined to philosophers. Even in common conversation, the
ideas which seem to be connected with the word Logic, include at least
precision of language and accuracy of classification: and we, perhaps,
oftener hear ordinary persons speak of a logical arrangement, or of
expressions logically defined, than of a conclusion logically deduced
from premises. But to name, to affirm or deny, to define, to classify,
are not acts of inference; they are not processes by which, from
premises, we deduce a conclusion. Whether, therefore, we assume as a
standard the practice of those, who have made the subject their
particular study, or that of popular writers & common discourse, we
shall find reason to include in the province of Logic several operations
of the intellect which it is not customary to consider as falling within
the meaning of the terms Reasoning or Argumentation.

[¶2] These operations might be brought within the compass of the
Science, and the additional advantage be obtained, of a very simple
definition, if an extension, sanctioned by very high authorities, were
given to the meaning of the term; by defining Logic to be the Science
which explains, and the rules which may be devised to assist, the
operations of the human understanding in the pursuit of truth. For to
this ultimate end, naming, classification, definition, and all the other
operations over which Logic has ever claimed jurisdiction, are merely
subsidiary. The object of all of them is that a person may enable
himself to know at any given time, all those truths the knowledge of
which is needful for him at that time. Naming has, indeed, in addition
to this, an ulterior object; to enable him to communicate this knowledge
to others. But when viewed with reference to this purpose, it has never
been considered to fall within the province of Logic; the sole object of
which is the guidance of one’s own thoughts. The fittest means of
communicating them to others, fall under the consideration of Rhetoric,
in the large extent in which that Art was conceived by the ancients; or
of the still more extensive art of Education. Logic takes cognizance of
any of our intellectual operations, only as they conduce to the
perfection of our own knowledge, and of our command over that knowledge
for the purposes of our own use. If there were but one rational being in
the universe, that being might be a perfect Edition: current; Page:
[963] Logician; & the Science & Art of Logic would be precisely the same
for that one person, as for the whole human race.

[§4]

[¶1] The definition, however, which we have now suggested, although
exempt from the fault which was chargeable upon the former one, that of
including too little, labours under the opposite vice of including too
much. It comprehends some things never yet considered as belonging to
Logic; and some which are altogether unfit to be classed, in any
scientific arrangement, under the same head with those which will be
treated of in the present work.

[¶2] Truths are known to us in two ways: some are known directly, and of
themselves; some through the medium of other truths. The former are the
subject of intuition or consciousness; the latter, of inference. The
truths which we know by intuition are the original premisses from which
all others are deduced: for the truth of the conclusion being founded
upon the assumption that the premisses are already known to be true, we
never could arrive at any knowledge by reasoning, unless there were
something which we knew antecedently to all reasoning.

[¶3] Examples of truths which are known to us by immediate
consciousness, are our own sensations. Examples of truths which we know
only by way of inference, are, events which took place while we were
absent; the occurrences recorded in history; or the theorems of
mathematics. The two former we infer from the testimony which is
adduced, or from the traces which the events have left behind them; the
latter, from the premisses which are laid down in books of geometry,
under the title of definitions and axioms.

[¶5] Whatever is known to us by consciousness, is known beyond
possibility of question. What one sees & feels, whether bodily or
mentally, one cannot but be sure that one sees & feels. No Science is
required for the purpose of arriving at such truths; no rules of art can
render our knowledge of them more certain than it is in itself. There is
no Logic, therefore, for this class of truths.

[¶6] But we may fancy that we see & feel, what in reality we infer. A
truth, or supposed truth, which is really the result of a very rapid
inference, may seem to be apprehended intuitively. It has long since
been agreed by philosophers of all schools, that this mistake is
actually made in so familiar an instance as that of the eye-sight. There
is nothing which we appear to ourselves to be more directly conscious
of, than the distance of an object from us. Yet it has been proved to
absolute certainty, and is now admitted by all who have examined the
subject, that when we fancy that we see distance, what we really see is
only a certain diminution of apparent size, and a certain faintness of
colour; and that our estimate of the object’s distance from us is the
result of a comparison, (made with so much rapidity that we are
unconscious of making it) between the size and colour of the object as
they appear to us, and its size & colour as they appeared on former
occasions, when we knew at what distance from us it was. The perception
of distance by the eye, which seems so like intuition, is thus, in
reality, an inference, grounded on experience: an inference, too, which
we learn to make, and which we make more & more correctly as our
experience encreases; though in familiar cases it takes place so rapidly
as to appear exactly on a par with those perceptions of sight which are
really intuitive, our perceptions of colour.

Edition: current; Page: [964]
[¶7] Of the Science, therefore, which explains the operations of the
human understanding in the pursuit of truth, nothing can form a more
essential part than the inquiry, what are the truths which are the
subject of intuition or consciousness, & what are those which we merely
infer. But this inquiry has never been considered a portion of Logic. It
is the subject of another, and a perfectly distinct branch of Science:
the higher or transcendental metaphysics; as that department of Science
may be termed which attempts the solution of the question, what part of
the furniture of the mind belonged to it originally, and what part was
constructed by itself out of materials furnished to it from without. To
this Science belong the great and much agitated questions, of the
existence of matter and of spirit; of the existence of any connexion
between cause and effect, other than the constancy of their succession;
of the reality of time & space as entities per se, distinguishable from
the objects which are said to exist in them. For, in the present state
of these various questions, it is universally allowed that the existence
of matter, or of spirit, of space, or of time, cannot be proved; & if
known at all, is known by immediate intuition. To the same Science
belong the inquiries into the nature of conception, perception, memory,
and belief; all of which are operations of the understanding in the
pursuit of truth; but operations with which the Logician has no concern,
further than to assume their existence as a fact. To this Science must
also be referred the following, and all analogous questions: Whether our
emotions are innate, or the result of association: Whether God, & duty,
are realities the existence of which is manifest to us a priori by the
constitution of our rational faculty; or whether our ideas of them are
acquired notions, the origin and growth of which we can trace and
explain, and the reality of the objects themselves a question not of
consciousness or intuition, but of evidence and reasoning. To determine,
in short, what are, and what are not, the truths known per se, the
original premisses of all our knowledge; is the object of the higher, or
remoter metaphysics.

[¶8] But as soon as it is known, or assumed, that a particular truth or
a proposition into the truth of which we are inquiring, is not
intuitively obvious, but requires proof; in other words, is not to be
admitted but as an inference from some other truth; then, the operation
of the understanding in judging of the sufficiency of the evidence, or
in judging what sort of evidence ought to be required, is properly the
subject of Logic.

Another distinction requires to be made. The province of Logic is not
the evidence itself, but the operation of the understanding in judging
of the evidence. Logic does not teach us by what evidence a given fact
becomes known to us; but how we are to judge of the evidence which shall
be sufficient to prove that fact. It does not itself solve the problem,
but determines whether it has been solved satisfactorily, and if not,
what is still wanting to render the solution complete.

[§5]

[¶1] If it did more, it would embrace all human knowledge.

All human life is taken up in deducing conclusions from premisses. Every
one has daily, hourly, and momentary occasion for ascertaining numerous
particular facts; not from any general purpose of adding to his stock of
knowledge, but because the individual facts themselves are of moment to
him, or to those whose interests are under his charge. The business of
the judge, of the commander, of the navigator, of the physician, of the
husbandman, is merely to judge of evidence, Edition: current; Page:
[965] and to act accordingly: and as they do this well or ill, so they
discharge well or ill the duties of their several callings. It is the
only occupation in which the intellect never ceases to be engaged; and
is the subject not of Logic, but of knowledge in general. [¶2] Logic
does not instruct the surgeon from what symptoms he is warranted in
inferring a violent death. This he can only learn from his own
experience and observation, or that of others, recorded in the books of
his peculiar Science. But though Logic will not tell him what the
symptoms are, it will tell him how, where he already knows them, he may
determine whether they are or are not conclusive. Though it will not
supply the place of experience, it will guide his understanding in
judging whether his experience is sufficient to establish any given
proposition, and if not, what kind of additional experience he has still
to seek, in order to obtain a solution of the problem.

[¶3] It is in this sense that Logic is, what Lord Bacon most
expressively called it, Ars artium; the Science of Science itself. All
Science consists of premisses and conclusions, of the Proof, and That
which is proved: now Logic analyses the process or processes by which,
in all the Sciences, the mind proceeds from the premisses to the
conclusion, from the proof to that which is to be proved. [*]Each
particular department of Science furnishes the evidence necessary to
establish its own particular conclusions, but Logic decides whether that
evidence is sufficient; and if not, sends back the question to the
Science to which it belongs, for such further evidence as observation
and experiment can be made to yield; having first indicated the exact
nature of the deficiency to be supplied.*

[§6]

[¶2] A Science may certainly be brought to a very advanced stage of
improvement without the application of any other logic to it than what
all persons who are said to have a sound understanding acquire, acquire
empirically in the course of their studies. But this is only saying what
every one knows; that a thing may be very well done by particular
individuals, before there has been any accurate thinking respecting the
mode of doing it. This does not, however, prove that accurate thinking
is of no use. Men judged of evidence, and often very correctly, before
Logic was studied, as men talked and made themselves understood before
they thought of inventing rules of grammar. But they talk and write far
more intelligibly by means of grammar, and they judge of evidence far
more correctly after having studied Logic. No Science is completely a
Science, until Logic is Edition: current; Page: [966] superadded to it.
Whatever may be the case with the collection of the evidence, the
appreciation of it is mere empiricism, until the process of drawing
conclusions from evidence has been subjected to the same accurate
analysis, which it is already allowed must be supplied to the evidence
itself, in order to constitute a Science. In whatever degree, therefore,
Science is superior to empiricism; in whatever degree accurate and
careful analysis affords a surer ground to proceed upon, than
extemporaneous and gross apprehension; in that same degree a Science
which has been brought into subordination to the Science of Logic, is
more certain and more valuable than one which has not.

[§7]

[¶1] Logic, therefore, may be defined, the Science which treats of all
operations of the human understanding, subservient to the estimation of
evidence; both the actual operation of proceeding from premisses to a
conclusion, and all the other intellectual operations which are
auxiliary to this. It includes, therefore, naming, and predication; that
is to say, the operation of giving names, and that of applying them to
their principal use; and it also includes Definition, & Classification.
For the use of every one of these operations (putting all other minds
than one’s own out of consideration) consists in their being means, not
only of keeping our conclusions themselves, and the evidence of them,
permanent, and readily accessible, in the memory; but also of so
marshalling the evidence, as to enable the mind to judge more easily,
and with fewer chances of error, whether the evidence is sufficient or
not. Language has been called an instrument of thought; and systematic
arrangement is equally entitled to be so characterized: now the word
thought, if it means anything, means proceeding from truths which are
self-evident, to establish other truths. Language and Classification
being instruments for accomplishing this end, the analysis of the
instruments is an indispensable part of the analysis of the operation
itself. The art is not complete, unless another art, that of
constructing the tools and fitting them for the purposes of the art, is
embodied in it.

[§1, ¶2] If any of my readers has been accustomed to use the word Logic
in any other sense than that which I have attached to it; and finding
old habits the most convenient, should be disinclined to alter them at
my bidding; it is not probable that I could state in this place the
advantages of my own definition, in such a manner as to convince him.
But, if he peruse this work to the end, he will probably be enabled,
from the view which I take of the particulars comprehended in the
Science, to collect the reasons which induce me to define it as I have
done. It is useless to dispute about the definition of a Science until
we are agreed about the Science itself. Each man builds his wall
according to the shape and dimensions of his own piece of ground. If my
definition is not the right definition of Logic, it is the right
definition of the subject of this book. As much as is to be expected
from a definition placed at the commencement of a subject, is that it
should define the scope of our inquiries.

The definition we set out with, is seldom that which a thorough
knowledge of the subject shews to be the most appropriate. The
particulars, which it is the object of the definition to segregate from
all others, are not yet known to us, and till then we cannot know what
is the most natural or the most convenient mode of grouping them. The
definition with which we begin, is merely the statement of a problem:
the definition with which we end is the solution of that same problem,
Edition: current; Page: [967] or as much of the solution as can be
conveniently and usefully compressed into the compass of a single
proposition. So long, therefore, as the Science is imperfect, the
definition must partake of its imperfections: and, if the former is
progressive, the latter ought to be so too. The reader who shall have
accompanied me through the details of the subject, may turn back and
question my definition, but as against any one else I claim full liberty
of stating the problem in my own way.

[§7, ¶2] My object, then, will be to attempt the correct analysis of the
intellectual process called reasoning or inference, and of such other
mental operations as are intended to facilitate this. [¶3] I do not
undertake to analyse these operations into their ultimate elements. I
shall only endeavour that the analysis as far as it goes may be correct,
and that it may go far enough for the practical purposes of Logic,
considered as an Art. The analysis of a phenomenon is not like a
connected chain of proof. If one link of an argument breaks, the whole
drops to the ground; but one step towards an analysis holds good of
itself, and has a substantial value of its own, though we should never
be able to make a second. The analytical processes of chymistry are not
the less valuable, though it may hereafter be discovered that all which
we have called simple substances are in reality compounds. All things
have at any rate been decomposed into those elements. Whether they admit
of still further decomposition by the decomposition of the elements
themselves, is an important inquiry, but one which does not affect the
certainty of the Science up to that point.

[¶4] I shall attempt to analyse the process of inference, and the
processes subordinate to inference, so far only as may be requisite for
determining with precision what is necessary for the correct performance
of those processes, & framing rules to assist it accordingly. Any
further & minuter analysis I leave to transcendental metaphysics; which
in this, as in other parts, of our mental nature, decides what are
ultimate facts, and what are resolvable into other facts. And I believe
it will be found that the conclusions at which I arrive have no
necessary connexion with any particular views respecting the ulterior
analysis. The partizans of Hartley and those of Reid, those of Locke and
those of Kant, might concur in nearly everything that I shall have to
say, consistently with the fundamental principles of their several
systems. Particular and detached opinions of all of them will no doubt
occasionally be contested, since all of them are Logicians as well as
Metaphysicians; but the field in which their great battles have been
fought, lies beyond the boundaries of our Science.

Being thus unconnected with those questions which have divided
philosophers in the higher regions of Metaphysics, the present work if
it be unobjectionable in other respects will be adapted both to a larger
number of students, and to an earlier period of their philosophical
studies, than an analytical treatise on Mental Philosophy in general.

Edition: current; Page: [968] Edition: current; Page: [969]


[Book I:: Of Names and Propositions]


STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM[*]
 [Chapter i: Of the Necessity of Commencing with an Analysis of Language]

[§1†]

The object of the present enquiry being in the first place to analyse
the process by which the understanding proceeds from truths which are
known, to establish others which are unknown; the purport of the
question which is to be enquired into cannot be understood, unless we
understand distinctly what is meant by a truth; what is that property of
an assertion, which determines us to say that it is a true assertion;
what is the peculiarity which distinguishes the true from the false.
When this shall be cleared up, (if such fate should attend the present
attempt), the great problem of the Science may be clearly stated, which
is always a great way, and, in this case, almost half way, towards its
solution. For as logical studies in no way contribute more to give
soundness to the understanding, than by accustoming it to enunciate both
what it knows, and what it seeks to know, in definite and unambiguous
expressions; so the difficulties of Logic itself will in a great measure
vanish, when the few fundamental notions with which the Science is
principally conversant are distinctly and accurately conceived.

In receiving anything as a Truth, there are two different matters which
demand attention. One is, the act or operation of the mind when it is
said to believe; the other is, that which it believes. We must
distinguish, in short, the thing believed, & the state of the believing
mind.

With respect to the nature of the phenomenon of Belief, the Logician, as
such, has no concern with it. Every one knows what kind of feeling it
is; and for the purposes of Logic, it is not necessary to know anything
more of it than what every one knows. To analyse the act of Belief, or
to determine whether it is susceptible of analysis, must be left to the
higher metaphysics. To ascertain the nature of the immediate Object of
Belief, is all that will here be aimed at.

[§2]

[¶1] What is the immediate object of Belief, or, in other words, what
every Truth, or everything which is received as Truth, is found, when
correctly analysed, to consist in, is a question which we shall best
solve a posteriori; by examining the import of all the various Kinds of
Propositions. For our belief, when put into words, always expresses
itself in a Proposition. We believe that the thing, which we conceive in
our minds, exists or exists not; is, or is not, so and so. What, by a
convenient misapplication of an abstract term, we call a Truth, is more
properly called a True Proposition. In proceeding to enquire Edition:
current; Page: [970] what constitutes a True Proposition, it is
necessary to begin by defining, that is, analysing, the notion of a
Proposition itself.

[¶2] For the present purpose, the ordinary and simple definition will be
sufficient. By a Proposition, is meant discourse, in which something is
affirmed or denied of something. Thus, in the proposition, Gold is
yellow, the quality yellow is affirmed of the substance Gold. In the
proposition, Franklin was not born in England, the fact expressed by the
words born in England is denied of the man, Franklin.

[*]An affirmative proposition is also called a predication. To predicate
one thing of another, is to affirm one thing of another.

[¶3] Every proposition consists of three parts, which are called, the
subject, the predicate, and the copula. The predicate is the name
denoting that which is affirmed or denied. The subject is the name
denoting the person or thing, which something is affirmed or denied of.
The copula, is the sign denoting that there is an affirmation or denial;
and thereby enabling the hearer or reader to distinguish a Proposition,
from any other kind of discourse. Thus, in the proposition, The Earth is
round, the predicate is the word round, which denotes the quality
affirmed: the earth, words denoting the object of which that quality is
affirmed, are the subject of the proposition. The word is, which serves
as the connecting mark between the subject and predicate, to shew that
one of them is affirmed of the other, is called the copula.* [Bk. I,
Chap. iv, §1, ¶3] It may perhaps be thought that this is not all which
is signified by the copula; that it also denotes existence; as, for
instance, in the proposition, Socrates is just, it may be supposed to be
implied, not merely that the quality just may be affirmed of Socrates,
but moreover that Socrates is, i.e. exists. Undoubtedly this shews that
there is an ambiguity in the word is; a word, which not only performs
the functions of the copula in affirmations, but has also a meaning of
its own, in virtue of which it may itself be made the predicate of a
proposition. That the employment of it as a copula, however, does not
necessarily include any affirmation of existence, appears from such a
proposition as this, A centaur is a fiction of the poets: where it
cannot possibly be implied that a centaur exists, since the proposition
itself expressly asserts that it has no real existence.

[Ibid., ¶4] If the Greek philosophers, and their followers, the
Schoolmen, had adverted to this double meaning of the verb to be (for
the ambiguity exists equally in all languages) they would have been
saved much quibbling, many paradoxes, and the creation of several
needless abstractions, which they mistook for objective realities. Yet
it becomes us not to triumph over the gigantic intellects of Plato and
Aristotle, because we are now able to preserve ourselves from errors
into which they, perhaps inevitably, fell. The fire-teazer of a modern
steam-engine produces by his exertions far greater effects than Milo of
Crotona could, but he is not therefore a stronger man. The Greeks seldom
knew any language but their own. This rendered it far more difficult for
them than it is for us, to Edition: current; Page: [971] acquire the
habit of detecting ambiguities. Among the many inestimable advantages
derived from the systematic study of more languages than one, this is
among the greatest. By finding that a single word in the foreign
language often corresponds, on different occasions, to different words
in our own, we learn practically that the same word does not always mean
the same thing. Even the strongest understandings, when not thus
exercised, find it difficult to believe of things which have a common
name, that they have not also, in some respect or other, a common
nature; and often take infinite quantity of fruitless trouble to find it
out; as the writings of the two great philosophers whom we recently
named, abundantly exemplify.

The ambiguity of the word which has been selected to perform the office
of the copula, has misled the moderns scarcely less than the ancients;
though their mistakes do not appear equally ridiculous, precisely
because our understandings are not yet so completely emancipated from
the influence of them. The quantity of futile speculation which has been
caused by a misapprehension of the nature of the copula was first hinted
at by Hobbes; but Mr. Mill was, I believe, the first who pointed out,
how many errors in the received systems of philosophy (errors which this
is not the place for particularizing) it has partly to answer for.

A Proposition, then, being defined to be, a portion of discourse, by
which something denoted by a name called the predicate, is affirmed, or
denied, of something denoted by a name called the subject; we are next
to enquire what is meant by a True Proposition.

[*]The ordinary explanation of the nature of a true proposition, which,
though superficial, is sufficient for the common purposes of human
intercourse, is also the point from which, in any attempt towards a
deeper analysis of the truth of propositions, it is necessary to start.
This explanation cannot be more appropriately given than in the words of
the Schoolmen: Propositio vera est, quæ est conformis rei significatæ: A
true proposition is that, the assertion contained in which is in
accordance with the fact. This, however, only staves [sic] the
difficulty further back, without removing it; for what does the
definition amount to? merely to this: that a proposition is true, if the
fact asserted in it is true. The question, of course, still remains,
What is meant by a fact? Or what constitutes the truth of facts? The
answer to this question is very obvious in some cases. When, for
instance, the proposition is, that on such a day, I fell off a horse and
hurt my shoulder, every one understands what is the matter of fact
asserted; and it is not possible to give any more recondite theory of
its truth, than that if I did fall off my horse and hurt my shoulder on
the day mentioned, it is true, & false if I did not. But when the
proposition stated is such, for instance, as the following, The three
angles of any rectilineal triangle are together equal to two right
angles, The doctrine of unlimited obedience to all persons in authority
is mischievous and immoral, It is the duty of every one to practise
beneficence, temperance, and fortitude;—it is by no means so easy, as in
the simple case before supposed, to perceive clearly and precisely at
first sight, what we mean by calling this a Truth; what matter of fact
is really asserted; what is the immediate object of belief in this
proposition. Propositions, however, of this Kind, compose some of the
most important classes of truths which are the subject of human thought.
In an enquiry Edition: current; Page: [972] having for its object to
ascertain in what manner the mind proceeds in arriving at these truths,
or in satisfying itself that they are truths, it is indispensable to
know what distinct matter of fact the propositions assert, and of what
kind of truth such facts are susceptible. It is therefore necessary to
inquire what is required to constitute a matter of fact, capable of
being the subject of affirmation or denial; how many kinds of matters of
fact there are, and what each is found to resolve itself into, when
analysed into its simple elements; and how far the nature of the matter
of fact asserted, can be collected from the form of the proposition.
These are the first great problems of Logic, in its speculative branch;
of Logic considered as a Science, contradistinguished from Logic
considered as an Art. And I believe it will be found that when these
problems are solved, all the remaining difficulties of the Science are
singularly smoothed down.

There is a proposition, wherever there are a predicate & a subject:
anything which is affirmed or denied, and anything which it is affirmed
or denied of. But there may be a subject and a predicate wherever there
are two names. The field of affirmation and denial, or, to speak
technically, the field of Predication, is coextensive, therefore, with
that of naming. Any two names, are capable of being affirmed or
[*]denied of each other; and either the affirmation or the negation will
be the expression of an actual Truth. The converse moreover holds: for
every Truth, and whatever is believed as Truth, can be expressed in
words, by coupling together two names so as to form an affirmative or a
negative Proposition. It would therefore be a great step towards
ascertaining what constitutes a Truth, if we could ascertain the
signification of all Names.

There are consequently two modes of enquiring into the nature and
varieties of Matters-of-fact. We may commence our enquiry with Things,
or we may commence it with Names. We may take a survey of the field of
Thought, observe what things, or entities, it includes, and attempt an
analysis and classification of those entities; or we may examine all the
different kinds of names, and by ascertaining what they respectively
signify, ascertain what are all the Things which mankind have hitherto
found inducements to name.

Neither of these modes of proceeding has been neglected by logicians.
The classification of names is the subject of the introductory chapters
in most of their elementary works, & of the doctrine of the Predicables.
The classification of things is attempted in their doctrine of the
Predicaments. On both subjects they [have] done something, and have left
much undone. Profiting by what they have done, and doing what we can to
supply their omissions, we shall endeavour, like them, to unite both the
above methods.

Edition: current; Page: [973]
In the order of nature, things, of course, exist before their names: and
as those who first imposed names had no names to guide them in the
investigation of things, some may think that we ought to do as they did;
and without regarding names, go at once to the things themselves. It may
not be obvious to every one in what manner an analysis and
classification of names, can be necessary for distinguishing the
different Kinds of matters of fact.

The use, however, of enquiring into the signification of names, is, that
we may be the less liable to overlook any of the things. It is from the
different kinds of names which mankind have agreed in imposing, that we
learn what Kinds or varieties of things they recognized. If we analyse
the signification of all kinds of names; if by examining the cases in
which they are employed, we can discover what they respectively serve as
marks of; an enumeration and classification of nameable objects,
grounded upon this analysis, will have for its basis the whole
experience of mankind. There is another advantage which will be gained
by proceeding in this order. It will appear hereafter that there are
many more kinds of names than there are things capable of being named:
and many distinctions among names, which do not answer to any
distinctions among things, but only to distinctions in the manner of
naming them. Now unless these anomalies of language are carefully noted
and distinctly understood beforehand, they are sure to confuse and
vitiate our speculations on Things. For howsoever, in looking at Things,
we may endeavour to forget names, we cannot help letting ourselves be
led by established language, and making words, in a manner, the index
which directs us to Things. And those persons who most pique themselves
upon disregarding “mere words,” are often in greatest danger of being
misled by them, if not protected by an accurate analysis of their
meaning. Such persons, at the very moment when they most imagine
themselves to be intent exclusively upon things, are often viewing those
things solely through the fallacious medium of some familiar
phraseology.

Edition: current; Page: [974]


OF NAMES
 [Chapter ii: Of Names]

[§2]

[¶1] Before we attempt to discriminate between the different kinds of
names, we must distinguish from names of all descriptions those words
which are not names, but only parts of names. Such are all particles, as
of, to, truly, often; the inflected cases of nouns substantive, as me,
him, John’s; and even adjectives, as large, heavy. These words do not
express anything of which something can be affirmed or denied. We cannot
say, Heavy fell, or A heavy fell, Truly, or A truly, was asserted, Of,
or an Of, was in the room;—unless, indeed, we are speaking of the mere
words themselves, as when we say, Truly is an English word, or Heavy is
an adjective: in which case, they are certainly complete names, viz:
names of those particular sounds, or of those particular collections of
written characters. This employment of a word, to denote the mere
letters and syllables of which it is composed, was called by the
Schoolmen the suppositio materialis of the word. In any other sense, we
cannot make one of these words the subject of a proposition, unless by
combining it with other words: as, a heavy weight fell, A truly
important fact was asserted, a person of merit was in the room.

[¶2] Among the words which we have characterised as not names, but parts
of names, we have included adjectives. An adjective, however, is capable
of standing by itself as the predicate of a proposition. We may say,
Snow is white. But white, in this case, is a mere abbreviation of the
compound expression white-thing. The Greeks and Romans were permitted,
by the rules of their language, to employ this ellipsis in the subject
as well as in the predicate of a proposition. In English, this cannot,
generally speaking, be done. We may say, The Earth is round; but we
cannot say, A round is easily moved; we must say, A round object.

Whenever, in this work, we may appear to class an adjective among names,
we must be understood to speak of its equivalent substantive; to use
round, as a synonym of round object.

[¶3] Words which were not capable of being used as names, but only as
parts of names, were sometimes called by the Schoolmen Syncategorematic
words: from συν with, and κατηγορεω, to predicate, because it was only
with some other word that they could be predicated. A word which could
be used either as the subject or predicate of a proposition without
being accompanied by any other word, the Schoolmen termed a
Categorematic word. A combination of a Categorematic & a
Syncategorematic word, as, “A heavy weight,” they sometimes called a
mixt word; but this seems a needless multiplication of technical
expressions. A mixt term is, in the only useful sense of the word,
strictly Categorematic. It belongs to the class of what have been called
many-worded names.

[¶4] For, as one word is frequently not a name, but only part of a name,
so a number of words taken together often compose one single name, & no
more. Thus, in the opening of the Paradise Lost, these words—

-   

    the fruit
-   

    Of that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste
-   

    Brought death into the world, & all our woe,
-   

    With loss of Eden, till one greater Man
-   

    Restore us, & regain the blissful seat

Edition: current; Page: [975]
form in the estimation of the logician only one name: one Categorematic
word. A method of knowing whether any set of words makes only one name,
or more than one, is by predicating something of it, and observing
whether, by this predication, we make only one assertion or several.
Thus, when we say, John, who is the father of Thomas, came to us; we
make but one assertion; whence it appears that “John, who is the father
of Thomas” is no more than one name. It is true, that in this
proposition besides asserting that John came to us, we also assert that
John is the father of Thomas. But this last assertion was already made;
we did not make it by adding the predicate “came to us.” Suppose,
however, that the words had been “John, and the father of Thomas,” they
would have formed two names instead of one: for when we say, John and
the father of Thomas came to us, we make two assertions; one, that John
came to us; the other, that the father of Thomas came to us.

[¶5] This is as much as it seems necessary to say at present in
illustration of many-worded names. We now proceed to state the
distinctions which have been established among names, not according to
the number of words they are composed of, but according to their
signification.

[§3]

[¶3] The first grand division of names is into general, and individual
or singular. A general name is familiarly defined, a name which is
capable of being truly affirmed, in the same sense, of each of an
indefinite number of things. An individual or singular name is a name
which is only capable of being truly affirmed, in the same sense, of one
thing.

[¶4] Thus, man is capable of being truly affirmed of John, Peter,
Thomas, and other persons without any assignable limit: and it is
affirmed of all of them in the same sense: for the word man expresses
certain qualities, and when we predicate it of those persons, we make
known that they all possess those qualities. But John, is only capable
of being truly affirmed of one single person, at least in the same
sense. For although there may be many persons who bear that name, it is
not conferred upon them to indicate any qualities, or anything else
which belongs to them in common; and cannot be said to be affirmed of
them in any sense at all, consequently not in the same sense.

“The present King of England,” is also an individual name. For, that
there never can be more than one person of whom it can be truly
affirmed, is implied in the meaning of the words.

[¶5] It is not uncommon, by way of explaining what is meant by a general
name, to say that it is the name of a class. But this, though a
convenient mode of expression for some purposes, is objectionable as a
definition, since it explains the clearer by the more obscure. It would
be more proper to give as the definition of “a class,” that it means the
indefinite multitude of individuals, denoted by a general name.

[¶6] It is necessary to distinguish general from collective names. A
general name is one which can be predicated of each individual of a
multitude; a collective name cannot be predicated of each separately,
but only of all taken together. Thus, “the 76th Regiment of Foot,” which
is a collective name, is not a general, but an individual name; for
although it can be predicated of a multitude of individual soldiers,
taken jointly, it cannot be predicated of them taken severally. We may
say, Peter is a soldier, and John is a soldier, and Thomas is a soldier,
but Edition: current; Page: [976] we cannot say, Peter is the 76th
Regiment, and John is the 76th Regiment, and Thomas is the 76th
Regiment. We can only say, Peter, and John, and Thomas, and James, and
so forth, (enumerating all the soldiers) are the 76th Regiment.

[¶7] “The 76th Regiment” is a collective name, but not a general one: “A
regiment” is both a collective & general one: general, as respects all
individual regiments, of each of which separately it can be affirmed;
collective, as respects the individual soldiers, of whom each regiment
is composed.

[§4]

[¶1] The next general division of names is into concrete & abstract. A
concrete name is a name which stands for a thing, an abstract name is a
name which stands for an attribute of a thing. Thus, John, man, white
are names of things; whiteness, is the name of an attribute of a thing.
We have already observed that white, though otherwise a mere
Syncategorematic word, is properly a name when used by way of ellipsis
for the compound expression white-thing.

[¶2] I have used the words concrete and abstract in the sense attached
to them by the Schoolmen, who, notwithstanding the imperfection of their
metaphysics were unrivalled in the construction of technical language,
and whose definitions, I conceive, have seldom been altered but to be
spoiled. A practice, however, has grown up in more modern times, which,
if not introduced by Locke, has gained currency chiefly by his example,
of applying the expression “abstract name” to all names which are the
result of abstraction or generalization, consequently to all general
names, instead of confining it to the names of attributes. The
philosophers of the Condillac School, whose admiration of Locke, passing
over the profoundest speculations of that truly original genius, usually
fastened with peculiar eagerness upon his weakest points, have gone on
imitating him in this abuse of language until there is now some
difficulty in restoring the word to its original signification. A more
wanton alteration in the meaning of a word is rarely to be met with; for
the expression general name, the exact equivalent to which exists in all
languages with which I am acquainted, was already available for the
purpose to which abstract has been misappropriated, while the
misappropriation has left that important class of words, the names of
attributes, without any compact distinctive appellation. The old
acceptation however, has not gone so completely out of use, as to
deprive those who now adopt it of all chance of being understood. By
abstract, then, I shall always mean, the opposite of concrete; by an
abstract name, the name of an attribute; by a concrete name, the name of
an object.

[¶3] [*]Do abstract names belong to the class of general, or to that of
singular, names? Those which are names of single attributes, belong
properly to neither one nor the other: for instance, visibleness;
tangibleness; equality; squareness; milkwhiteness. These cannot in
strictness be called general names, for none of them is the name of a
class, comprising individuals in it: we cannot call the squareness of
the square ABCD, the squareness of the square EFGH, & so forth,
individuals. Yet neither can any abstract name be called singular; for
if it be not a name of many individuals, as little is it the name of one
individual. They must Edition: current; Page: [977] be placed in a class
apart. There is, however, a kind of abstract names which are
indisputably general; they are those which are names not of one
attribute but of a class of attributes. Such is the word colour, which
is a name of whiteness, redness, &c. Such is the word whiteness, in
virtue of the various shades of whiteness to which it is applied in
common; the words magnitude, weight, & the like, in virtue of the
various degrees of magnitude & weight. Such also is the word attribute
itself, the common name of all particular attributes.

[*]We must be careful not to confound names of attributes with one
important class of concrete names, names of sensations. Our sensations
seldom receive separate names. We have a name for the object which gives
us a certain sensation: the name white. We have also a name for the
quality in the object, to which we ascribe that sensation; the name
whiteness. But when we wish to speak of the sensation itself, we must
use a circumlocution, & say, the sensation of white, or the sensation of
whiteness. We have no name which expresses the sensation itself, simply;
existing, as it might easily be conceived to exist, without any object
to excite it. In the case of our sensations of hearing, we are more
fortunate: we have the word sound, & a whole vocabulary of words to
denote the various kinds of sound. For, as we oftener have these
sensations in the absence of any perceptible object, we can more easily
conceive having them in the absence of any object whatever. But in most
instances, we have no name peculiarly appropriated to the sensation: and
in that case the same name denotes indiscriminately the attribute, & the
sensation. Thus colour stands for sensations of sight, as well as for
the quality in the coloured object. Virtue denotes not only the quality
of being a virtuous person, but also the virtuous acts themselves: as
when we speak of living in the practice of virtue. We must bear in mind
therefore, that whenever the word commonly denoting an attribute, is
taken to express the sensation or sensible phenomenon which is called
the effect or manifestation of the attribute, it then ceases to be an
abstract name, & becomes concrete. Attention to this remark will save
much confusion.

[¶4] It may be objected, that not only abstract names, but adjectives,
which I have placed in the concrete class, are names of attributes: that
white, for example, is as much the name of the colour, as whiteness is.
To this the answer is, that white is not the name of the colour, but of
the thing having the colour. The word white may be predicated of snow,
or milk or linen; we may say, Snow is white, Milk is white, Linen is
white: but we cannot say, Whiteness is white. White, therefore, is not a
name of the quality whiteness, but of every white object. It is true
this name was given to the objects on account of that colour; and we may
therefore say, without impropriety, that the quality forms part of its
signification; but not, that white is the name of the quality. A name
can only be correctly said to stand for, or to be a name of, those
things of which it can be predicated. All names, except those which are
mere unmeaning marks, put upon individuals for the purpose of
distinguishing them when they occur in discourse; all names which can be
said to have any signification; all names by applying which to an
individual we communicate any information respecting that
individual,—may be said to imply an attribute of some sort; but they are
not names of the attribute; and the attribute has its own proper name
besides. This leads us to the consideration of

Edition: current; Page: [978]
[§5]

[¶1] The third great division of names, that into connotative and
non-connotative, sometimes, but improperly, called absolute. [¶2*] A
non-connotative term is one which signifies a subject only, or an
attribute only. A connotative term is one which denotes a subject, and
implies an attribute. By a subject is here meant anything which
possesses attributes; in contradistinction to attributes themselves.
Thus John, or London, or England, are names which signify a subject
only. Whiteness, Length, Virtue, are names which signify an attribute
only. None of these names, therefore, are connotative. But white, long,
virtuous, are connotative. The word white, denotes the subjects, snow,
paper, &c. and implies, or as it was termed by the Schoolmen, connotes,
the attribute whiteness. It is of the snow or the paper, (and not of the
colour) that the word white is predicated: but when we predicate it of
them, we imply, or connote, that the attribute whiteness belongs to
them. The same may be said of all the other words above cited. Virtuous,
for example, is strictly the name of a class, which includes Socrates,
Howard, the Man of Ross, and an undefined number of other individuals,
past, present, and to come: and it is these individuals, collectively
and severally, who can alone be said with propriety to be denoted by it;
of whom, alone, it can be properly said to be the name. But it is a name
imposed upon them all in consequence of a certain attribute which they
possess in common, namely, that of virtue. It is imposed upon all beings
that are believed to possess this attribute; and it is not imposed on
any which are not believed to possess it.

[¶3] All concrete general names which are names of substances, are
connotative. The word man, for example, denotes John, Thomas, and an
indefinite number of other individuals, of whom, taken as a class, it is
the name. But it is applied to them because they possess, & to signify
that they possess, certain attributes. These seem to be, corporeity,
animal life, rationality, and a certain external form, which, for
distinction, we call the human. Every existing thing, which possessed
all these attributes, would be called a man; and anything which
possessed none of them, or only one, or two, or even three of them
without the fourth, would not be so called. For example, if in the
interior of Africa were to be discovered a race of animals, possessing
reason equal to that of man, but with the form of an elephant, they
would not be called men. Swift’s Houyhnhms [sic] were not so called. Or
if such newly discovered beings possessed the form of man without his
reason, it is probable that some other name than that of man would be
found for them. The word man, therefore, signifies all these attributes,
and all subjects which possess those attributes. But it can be
predicated only of the subjects. It is said, therefore, to signify the
subjects directly, and the attributes indirectly; it denotes the
subjects, and implies, or involves, or indicates, or connotes (as the
Schoolmen most aptly termed it) the attributes. It is a connotative
name.*

Edition: current; Page: [none]
[lf0223-08_figure_001.jpg]
Folio from the Early Draft in Scribe A’s hand, with Mill’s emendations
Pierpont Morgan Library

Edition: current; Page: [979]
[¶6] Those names of substances which are names of individuals, require
separate consideration.

[¶7] Proper names are not connotative. They denote the individuals who
bear them; but they do not indicate or imply any attributes belonging to
these individuals. When a man Christens his child by the name Thomas, or
names his dog by the name Cæsar, those names are simply marks used to
enable those individuals to be made subjects of discourse. It may be
said that he had some reason for giving them those names rather than any
others. It may be so; but the name gives no intimation of that reason. A
man may be called [*]John, because that was the name of his father; a
town may be called Dartmouth, because it is situated at the mouth of the
Dart. But it is no part of the signification of the word John, that the
father of the person in question bore the same name; nor even of the
word Dartmouth, to be situated at the mouth of the Dart. For if sand
should choke up the mouth of that river, or an earth quake change its
course, so that the town should no longer be situate upon it, there is
no reason to suppose that the name of the town should be changed. That
fact, therefore, can form no part of the signification of the word; for,
otherwise, when the fact ceased to be true, the name would cease to be
applied. Proper names are attached to the objects themselves, and not to
the continuence of any attribute of the object.

[¶8] But there is another class of names, which, although they are
individual names, that is, predicable only of one object, are really
connotative. Such is the name which we have already once used as an
example, “The present King of England.”

For, although we may give to an individual a name utterly unmeaning,
which we call a proper name; a word which answers the purpose of shewing
what thing it is we are talking about, but not of telling anything about
it; yet a name peculiar to an individual is not necessarily of this
description. It may be significant of some attribute, or some union of
attributes, which, not being possessed by any but one object, determines
the name exclusively to that individual. “The sun” is a name of this
description. “God” is another. These, however, are scarcely examples of
what it is our present object to illustrate, being, in strictness of
language, general and not individual names: for although they are, in
fact, predicable only of one object, there is nothing in the meaning of
the words themselves which implies this: and accordingly when we are
imagining and not affirming, we may speak of many suns, and the majority
of mankind have believed and still believe that there are many gods. But
it is easy to produce words which are real instances of connotative
individual names. It may be part of the signification of the connotative
name itself, that there exists but one individual possessing the
attribute which it connotes: as for instance, “the only Edition:
current; Page: [980] son of John Stiles:” “the first Emperor of Rome.”
Or the attribute connoted may be a connexion with some individual event,
(by which I mean not an event of a particular kind, but one actual
determinate event, which is past and over): and the connexion with that
event may be of such a kind as only one individual could have; or
without being this, it may be such as only one individual actually had,
and this may be implied in the form of the expression. “The father of
Socrates” is an example of the one kind, (since Socrates could not have
had two fathers); “The author of the Iliad;” “The murderer of Henri
Quatre,” of the second. For although it is conceivable that more persons
than one might have participated in the authorship of the Iliad or in
the murder of Henri Quatre, the employment of the article the implies
that this was not the case. What is here done by the word the, is done
in other cases by the context: thus, “Cæsar’s army” is an individual
name, if it appears from the context that the army meant is that which
Cæsar commanded in a particular battle. The name, being a many-worded
name, may consist, in the first place, of a general name, capable,
therefore, in itself, of being affirmed of more than one thing, but so
limited by other words joined with it, that the entire expression can
only be predicated of one object, consistently with the meaning of the
general term. This is exemplified in the instance so often cited, “The
present King of England.” King of England is a general term: the
attributes which it connotes may be possessed by an indefinite number of
persons: in succession, however, not simultaneously, since the meaning
of the word imports (among other things) that there can be only one King
of England at a time. This being the case, and the application of the
name being afterwards limited by the word present, to such individuals
as possess the attributes at one indivisible point of time, it becomes
applicable only to one individual. And this appearing from the meaning
of the word, without any extrinsic proof, it is strictly an individual
name.

[¶9] From the above particulars it will be easily perceived, that
whenever names of substances have properly any meaning, the meaning
resides not in what they denote but in what they connote. The only names
of substances which connote nothing are proper names; and these have in
reality no signification.

[¶10] If, like the robber in the Arabian Nights, we make a mark with
chalk upon a house to enable us to know it again, the mark has a
purpose, but it has not properly any meaning. The chalk does not say,
This is my house, or This is the house which I mean to rob. The object
of making the mark is merely distinction. I say to myself, All these
houses are so exactly alike, that if I once lose sight of them I shall
not again be able to distinguish that which I am now looking at, from
any of the others. I must therefore contrive to make the appearance of
this one house unlike that of the others, that I may hereafter know,
when I see the mark,—not, indeed, any attribute of the house—but simply
that it is the same house which I am now looking at, and wish to be able
to recognize again. Morgiana chalked all the other houses in a similar
manner, & defeated the scheme: how? Simply by obliterating the
difference of appearance between that house & the others. The chalk was
then no longer of any use for the purpose of distinction, & not serving
that purpose, it served no other.

[¶11] When we impose a proper name, we perform an operation in some
degree analogous to what the robber intended in chalking the house. A
proper name, so far as respects ourselves (for of its uses in
communicating with others we have not here to speak), is merely an
unmeaning mark, which we do not, indeed, inscribe upon the object
itself, but which we endeavour to connect with Edition: current; Page:
[981] the idea of the object in our minds, in order that whenever the
mark meets our eyes or occurs to our thoughts, we may think of that
individual object. Not being attached to the thing itself, it does not
enable us as the chalk does, to distinguish the object when we see it;
but it enables us to distinguish it when it is spoken of, either in the
records of our own experience or in the discourse of others: to know
that what we find asserted in any proposition of which it is the
subject, is asserted of that individual object with which we are already
acquainted.

[¶12] Objects thus ticketed with proper names, resemble, until we know
something else about them, men & women in masks. We can distinguish them
from one another, but can conjecture nothing with respect to their real
features. It is otherwise with objects which are spoken of by
connotative names. Such names are not signs of the mere objects,
invented because we have occasion to think and speak of these objects
individually; but signs which accompany an attribute, a kind of livery
in which the attribute clothes all objects which are discovered to be
endowed with it. They are not mere marks, but more, that is to say,
significant marks: and it is the connotation which constitutes their
signification.

[¶13] A proper name, which connotes nothing, but which denotes an
individual, is called the name of that individual. The importance of
adhering to analogy in the employment of words, requires us in like
manner to say that a connotative word is the name of what it denotes,
not of what it connotes. But by knowing what thing it is the name of, we
do not know the meaning of the name: for to the same thing we may often
with propriety apply many names; which are not on that occasion
equivalent in meaning. Thus, I call a certain man by the name
Sophroniscus: I call him by another name, “the father of Socrates.” Both
these names are names of the same object, the same individual human
being; but their meaning is altogether different, because they are
applied to that individual for two different purposes; the one, merely
to distinguish him from other persons who are spoken of; the other to
indicate a particular fact relating to him, viz: the fact that Socrates
was his son. I also apply to him these other expressions: a man, a
Greek, an Athenian, a stone-cutter, an old man, an honest man, a brave
man. All these are names of Sophroniscus, not indeed of him alone, but
of him and each of an indefinite number of other human beings. Each of
these names is applied to Sophroniscus for a different reason, and each,
if I understand its meaning, informs me of a distinct fact or number of
facts concerning him. I might be informed that each of these names was
applicable to Sophroniscus, and might yet not know what they
respectively signified with regard to him. It is even conceivable that I
might know every single individual of whom the name could be with truth
affirmed, and yet could not be said to know the meaning of the name. A
child knows who are its brothers & sisters, long before it has any
definite conception of the nature of the fact which is involved in the
signification of those terms.

[¶14*] In some cases it is not easy to decide with certainty, how much a
particular word does or does not connote; that is, we do not exactly
know (the case not having arisen) what degree of difference in the
object would occasion a difference in the name. Thus, it is clear that
the word man, besides animal life and rationality, connotes also a
certain form; but it would be impossible to say precisely what form;
that is, to decide how great a deviation from the form ordinarily found
in the beings whom we are accustomed to call men, would Edition:
current; Page: [982] suffice in a newly discovered race to make us
refuse them the name of man. In all such cases, the meaning of the
general name is so far unsettled and vague. In the particular case in
question, the vagueness is of no practical moment, because it does not
occasion any variableness or doubt as to the applicability of the name
to any objects which actually exist, nor any material uncertainty as to
what we mean to predicate when we apply it to such. But there are
innumerable cases in which a vague connotation is a most serious evil.

[¶15] One of the chief sources indeed, of lax habits of thought, is the
custom of resting satisfied without any more precise notion of the
meaning of connotative terms, than can be loosely collected from
observing what objects they are used to denote. It is in this manner
that all of us acquire and inevitably so, our first knowledge of our
vernacular language. A child learns the meaning of the words man or
white, by hearing them applied to a variety of individual objects, and
finding out by a process of generalization and analysis of which he is
but imperfectly conscious, what these different objects have in common.
In the case of these two words the process is so easy as to require no
assistance from culture; the objects called men, and the objects called
white, differing from all others by qualities of a peculiarly definite
and obvious character. But in many other cases, objects bear a general
resemblance to one another, which leads to their being familiarly
classed together under a common name, while, without more analytic
habits than the generality of mankind possess, it is not immediately
apparent what are the particular attributes, upon the possession of
which in common by them all, this general resemblance depends. When this
is the case men use the name without any recognized connotation, that
is, without any precise meaning: they talk, and consequently think,
vaguely: and remain contented to attach only the same degree of
significance to their own words, which a child of three years old
attaches to the words, brother and sister. The child at least is seldom
puzzled by the starting up of new individuals having pretensions to be
his brothers and sisters, and whom he knows not whether so to
denominate; because there is usually an authority at hand to solve all
doubts, whose infallibility on such points is unquestionable. But a
similar resource does not exist in other cases, and new objects are
constantly presenting themselves to men, women, and children, which they
are called upon to class proprio motu. They accordingly do this on no
other principle than that of superficial similarity, giving to each new
object the name of that familiar object the idea of which it most
readily recals, or which, on a cursory inspection, it appears to them
most to resemble. In this manner, a name which was originally
appropriated to A, becomes communicated to B, then extended to C, then
to D, each time, by reason of a gross and general resemblance to some
only of the things which it previously denoted, until all traces of a
common meaning sometimes disappear, and the word comes to denote a
number of things not only independently of any common attribute, but
which have actually no attribute in common, or none but what is shared
by other things to which the name is capriciously refused. Even
philosophers have frequently aided in this perversion of general
language from its purpose, sometimes because, like the vulgar, they knew
no better; and sometimes in deference to that aversion to admit new
words, which induces mankind, on certain subjects, to attempt to make
the original small stock of names serve with but few additions to
express a constantly encreasing number of objects and distinctions, and
consequently to express them in a manner progressively more and more
imperfect.

Edition: current; Page: [983]
[¶16] The manifold evils consequent upon this loose mode of classing and
denominating objects will be further particularized and illustrated in
that portion of the present work which will treat of Classification. To
what a degree it has rendered almost the whole vocabulary of the mental
and moral sciences, unfit for the purposes of accurate thinking is best
known to him who has most reflected on the present condition of those
Sciences. In the meanwhile it may here be observed that since the
introduction of a new technical language as the vehicle of speculations
on moral subjects would not be tolerated, and if tolerated would deprive
those subjects of the benefit of the habitual feelings which have grown
round the established terms and the established groups, and which would
not for a long time take an equally strong hold of new ones; the problem
for the philosopher, & one of the most difficult ones which he has to
resolve, is, in retaining the existing nomenclature, how best to
alleviate its vices. This can only be accomplished by giving to every
general concrete name a definite and fixed connotation; in order that it
may be known what attributes, when we call an object by that name, we
really mean to predicate of the object. And the question of most nicety
is, how to give this fixed connotation to a name, with the least
possible change in the objects which the name is habitually employed to
denote; with the least possible disarrangement (either by addition or
subtraction) of that group of objects which it names, in however
imperfect a manner, the circumscribe and hold together [sic]: and with
the least possible vitiation of the truth of any propositions, which are
commonly received as true.

[¶17] This desirable purpose of giving a fixed connotation where it is
wanting, is the end aimed at whenever any person attempts to give a
definition of a general name already in use. And the fact that no
questions which have arisen in the moral sciences, have been subjects of
keener controversy than the definitions of almost all the leading
expressions, is a proof to how great a length the evil above adverted to
has proceeded: every definition of a connotative name being an attempt
either merely to declare, or to declare & analyse, the connotation of
that name. What are the conditions which such an attempt ought to
conform to, in order to be most useful, is a question that has not yet
received from logicians all the attention which it seems to merit, and
which will be bestowed on it in a subsequent part of the present work.

[¶18] When it is found in attempting to define any word, that no
definition can be framed which will be true of all the objects which the
word is used to denote; that therefore no one connotation which can be
given to it, will allow of its continuing to denote all those objects;
it may perhaps be found that the word is ambiguous, or, in other words,
that by giving it two, or more than two separate and distinct
connotations, the objects may all be brought within it. The word will
then have several meanings, but all of them fixed and recognized ones;
and the paucity of existing names, in comparison with the demand for
them, may often render it advisable to retain the name in this
multiplicity of acceptations, distinguishing these so clearly as to
prevent their being confounded in future. But it will be found almost as
frequently, that neither in one nor in any moderate number of fixed
meanings, can the word be made truly predicable of all the objects of
which it is customarily predicated. In such a case there remains no
alternative, except either to do without the word altogether, or to
define it in such a manner as to leave out some of the things of which
it is commonly used as a name: under the disadvantage that in forbidding
it to be henceforth predicated Edition: current; Page: [984] of those
objects, and asserting such predications to be false, you appear to
persons of illogical habits as if you asserted a paradox, when you are
only mending a tool.

[*]Thus far, in considering connotative terms, we have confined our
attention to names of substances. There are two classes of names which
still remain to be considered, the names of sensations, and other
feelings; & the names of attributes.

All names of feelings are connotative. If, indeed, we ever gave a
distinguishing name to one single feeling, to the passing sensation of
an instant, the name would, like a proper name, connote nothing: there
would be nothing for it to connote. But all names of sensations are
names of classes of sensations; mostly indeed of classes very
heterogeneous in their composition; as sound; taste; sweet taste; bitter
taste; hope; fear; pleasure; pain. Even if all the sensations which
enter into the class were exactly alike; if for instance we had a name
to denote the exact colour of newfallen snow, & no other colour at all;
still being a name common to all the sensations we have during our whole
life, of that exact kind, it would be connotative; it would denote the
particular sensations, & connote the kind; that is, would connote their
resemblance to each other: When predicated of a present sensation, it
would denote that sensation, & connote its resemblance to all the
sensations we had ever had before, which were called by that name.

We have arrived, therefore, at the conclusion, that all concrete general
names are connotative: whether they be names of classes of substances,
or names of classes of feelings.

Abstract names for the most part are not connotative. It may be said,
indeed, that they are connotative in the same manner in which names of
classes of feelings are so: that whiteness, for instance, denotes the
whiteness of the snow of today, the whiteness of the snow of yesterday,
&c. and connotes their resemblance. I answer, no: The two whitenesses
may indeed without impropriety be said to resemble: but when we use the
word whiteness, we are not thinking of the resemblance of the
attributes, but of the resemblance of the sensations. When I say,
“Whiteness is a quality of this snow,” I am not thinking of former snow
& its quality of whiteness, but of former sensations of white: The
whiteness which I affirm to be an attribute of this snow, may be
defined, the quality of giving me sensations similar to those former
ones. What is involved, then, in the signification of the word
whiteness, is not the resemblance of one whiteness to another whiteness,
but of one sensation of white to another sensation of white: & it is
involved not as a connotation, but as part of the denotation. The
abstract name whiteness does not denote the attribute & connote the
resemblance, as the concrete word white denotes the object & connotes
the quality. The quality is something distinct from the object; but the
resemblance is not something distinct from the attribute; it is the very
meaning of the attribute; & when we have said that the abstract name
signifies the attribute, we have said all that it signifies.

[¶5] Nevertheless, there are abstract names which are strictly
connotative; names which denote attributes, & connote an attribute of
those attributes. Such, for instance, is the word fault; equivalent to
bad or hurtful quality. This word is a name common to many attributes, &
connotes hurtfulness, which is an attribute not of the mere fact or
phenomenon, but strictly of the attributes themselves. When for example
we say that slowness, in a horse, is a fault, we do not Edition:
current; Page: [985] mean that the slow movement is in itself hurtful;
we mean that the property or peculiarity in a horse, of being a slow
mover, is so.

[¶18,n] We may now quit the subject of connotative names. Before doing
so, however, it is proper to observe, that the only modern writer, who,
to my knowledge, has adopted from the Schoolmen the word to connote, has
employed it in a signification different from that which is here given
to it. The writer to whom I allude is Mr. Mill, in his Analysis of the
Phenomena of the Human Mind. He seems to use the word in a sense
coextensive with its etymology, applying it to any case in which a name,
while it seems to point most directly to one thing, which is
consequently termed its signification, includes at the same time a tacit
reference to some other thing. In the case which we have had under
consideration, that of the signification of concrete general names, Mr.
Mill’s language is the direct converse of mine. Agreeing with me in
considering the signification of the word to lie in the attribute, he
speaks of the word as connoting not the attribute, but the thing
possessing the attribute. And he describes abstract names as being
properly concrete names with their connotation dropt; whereas in my view
it is the denotation which should be said to be dropped, that which was
previously connoted becoming now the whole signification.

My reason for preferring my own phraseology was the urgent necessity of
a term to be appropriated exclusively to express the peculiar manner in
which a concrete general name serves to mark the attributes which are
involved in its signification. This necessity can scarcely be felt in
its full force by any one, who has not gone through the whole labour of
thought which has been necessary for writing this work. I think it is
scarcely an exaggeration to say that some of the most prevalent of the
errors which have been committed in the Philosophy of Logic, would in
all probability have been avoided if a term had been in common use to
express exactly what I have signified by the word to connote. And the
Schoolmen, to whom we are indebted for all the rest of our logical
language, gave us this also, and in this very sense. For although some
of their general expressions afford a colour for using this word in the
more extensive and vaguer acceptation in which it is taken by Mr. Mill,
yet when they came to define it specifically, and to fix its meaning
with that admirable precision which always characterised their
definitions, they clearly explained, that nothing was said to be
connoted except forms, which word may generally, in their writings, be
understood as synonymous with attributes.

Now, if the word to connote, so well suited to the purpose to which they
applied it, be diverted from that purpose by being taken to fulfil
another for which it does not seem to me to be at all required; I am
unable to find any expression to replace it but such as are commonly
employed in a sense so much more general, that it would be useless
attempting to associate them peculiarly with this precise idea. Such are
the words, to involve, to imply, &c. By employing these I should fail of
attaining the object, for which alone there is occasion for the name at
all, namely to distinguish this particular kind of involving or implying
from all other kinds, & to assure to it the degree of habitual attention
which its importance demands.

[§6]

[¶1] The fourth great division of names is into positive and negative.
Positive, as man, stone, good; negative, as not-man, not-stone,
not-good. For every positive Edition: current; Page: [986] concrete
name, a corresponding negative one might be framed. After giving a name
to any one thing or to any plurality of things, we might create a second
name which should be a name of all other things except that particular
thing or things. These negative names might be usefully employed
whenever we had occasion to speak collectively of all things other than
some thing or class of things. When the positive name is connotative,
the corresponding negative name is connotative likewise, but in a
peculiar way, connoting not the presence but the absence of an
attribute. Thus, not-white, denotes all things whatever except white
things; and it connotes that they do not possess the attribute
whiteness.

The non-possession of any given attribute, may itself without
impropriety be called an attribute: that attribute may receive a name;
and thus negative concrete names will obtain negative abstract names to
correspond to them.

[¶2] Names which are positive in form, are often negative in reality,
and others are really positive though their form is negative. The word
inconvenient, for example, does not express the mere absence of
convenience; it expresses a positive attribute, which consists in being
the cause of actual pain or mischief. The same may be said of the word
unpleasant, which, notwithstanding its negative form, does not connote
the mere absence of pleasantness, but a less degree of what is signified
by the word painful, which will be admitted to be as positive in its
signification as any other. The word idle, on the other hand, though
positive in its form, expresses nothing but what would be signified
either by the word not-working, or by the word not disposed to work; and
sober, either not-drunk or not-drunken.

[¶3] There is a class of names called privative. A privative name is
equivalent in its signification to a positive and a negative name taken
together; being the name of something which has once had a particular
attribute, or for some other reason might have been expected to have it,
but which has it not. Such is the word blind, which is not equivalent to
not-seeing; for it would not, except by a poetical or rhetorical figure,
be applied to a stone or to a tree. A thing is not said to be blind,
unless the class to which it is most familiarly referred, be chiefly
composed of things which can see; as in the case of a blind man, or a
blind horse; or unless it is supposed for any reason that it ought to
see; as when we say of a man, that he rushed blindly into an abyss, or
of philosophers or the clergy that the greater part of them are blind
guides. The names called privative, therefore, connote two things: the
presence of certain attributes, and the absence of others.

[§7]

[¶1] The fifth great division of names is into relative and absolute,
or, to speak more precisely, relative and non-relative. [¶2] Relative
names are such as father, son; like; unlike; longer, shorter; cause,
effect. Their characteristic property is that they are always given in
pairs. Every relative name which is predicated of an object, supposes
another object of which we may predicate either that same name or
another relative name which is said to be the correlative of the former.
Thus, when we call any man, a son, we suppose another man who must be
called a father. When we call any event a cause, we suppose another
event, which is an effect. When we say of any distance that it is
longer, we suppose another distance which is shorter. When we say of any
object that it is like, we mean that it is like another object, and this
other may also be said to be like the first. In this last case Edition:
current; Page: [987] the relative name is its own correlative. The pair
of objects both receive the same name.

[¶3] It is evident that relative names, when concrete are, like other
concrete names, connotative. They all denote a subject, and connote an
attribute. It is to be observed, moreover, that although the objects
denoted by two correlative names are different; both names connote the
same attribute; or, to express the truth more accurately, what both
names connote is some fact or circumstance in which both objects are
alike concerned, & which, according as it is considered an attribute of
the one object or of the other, gives rise to the one or to the other
name.

[¶5] Thus, when we predicate of A that he is the father of B, and of B
that he is the son of A, we assert the very same fact in different
words. The two propositions are precisely equivalent. Neither of them
asserts one tittle more or one tittle less than the other. The paternity
of A and the filiation of B are not two facts, but two names for the
same fact. What that fact is, every one who understands the meaning of
the words, is aware. The only difference is, that the abstract term
paternity is a name of the fact, considered as an attribute of A: the
abstract term filiation is a name of the same fact, considered as an
attribute of B.

[¶6] I said at first that both the correlative names connoted the same
attribute: but, in saying this, I permitted myself a verbal inaccuracy
for the advantage of a compact expression. We cannot with propriety say
that paternity and filiation are one and the same attribute, otherwise
to call a man father and to call him son would mean the same thing. The
fact which both words, when predicated not of the same person but of two
different persons, express, is, however, one and the same. And all that
appears necessary, to account for the existence of relative names, is
merely this, that a fact, in which two individuals are equally
concerned, may be viewed & spoken of as an attribute either of one or
the other, as we think fit.

[¶4] This kind of attribute is commonly called a relation; and has
usually been regarded as something unusually recondite and mysterious.
Why it should be more so than any other attribute, I am unable to
conceive, seeing no greater difficulty to be encountered in a fact which
respects two objects, than in a fact which respects only one. But this
question, of the nature of Relation, will partly fall under our
consideration in a subsequent chapter, & partly belongs to the higher
metaphysics.

[¶7] For the present, and without prejudice to whatever conclusion may
be come to hereafter on the subject of Relation, Relative names may be
provisionally defined as follows. A name is called relative, when, in
addition to the object which it denotes, it implies in its signification
the existence also of another object, also deriving a denomination from
the same fact which is connoted by the first name. Or, (to express the
same thing in other words), a name is said to be relative, when, being
the name of one thing, its signification cannot be explained but by
mentioning another. Or we may state it thus: when the name cannot be
employed in discourse so as to express a meaning, unless the name of
some other thing than what it is itself the name of, be either expressed
or understood. We may take our choice among these definitions. They are
all, at bottom, equivalent; being modes of variously expressing this one
distinctive circumstance, that all the other attributes of an object
might be conceived, without a contradiction, still to exist, if all
objects besides itself (or at any rate all except itself and the
Edition: current; Page: [988] percipient mind), were at once
annihilated: But those of its attributes which are expressed by relative
names, would, on that supposition, be swept away.

[§8]

[¶1] Names have been further distinguished into univocal and æquivocal:
these, however, are not two kinds of names, but two different modes of
employing names. A name is univocal, or applied univocally, with respect
to all those things of which it can be predicated in the same sense: but
it is æquivocal, or applied æquivocally, as respects those things of
which it is predicated in different senses. It is scarcely necessary to
give instances of a fact so familiar as the double meaning of a word. In
reality, an æquivocal or ambiguous word, is not one name, but two names,
accidentally coinciding in sound. File standing for an iron instrument,
and file standing for a row of soldiers, have no more title to be
considered one word, than grease and Greece have, merely because they
are pronounced alike. They are one sound, appropriated to form two
different words.

[¶2] An intermediate case is that of a name used analogically or
metaphorically; that is, a name which is predicated of two things, not
univocally or in exactly the same signification, but in significations
somewhat similar, and derived one from the other; as when we speak of a
brilliant jewel, and a brilliant achievement. The word is not applied in
the same sense to the jewel and to the achievement; but, having been
applied to the jewel in its original sense, that of brightness to the
eye, it is transferred to the achievement in a derivative signification
supposed to be somewhat like the primitive one. The word, however, is
just as properly two names instead of one, in this case, as in that of
the most complete ambiguity.

The different kinds of ambiguity or æquivocalness in names, the various
disguises under which those ambiguities escape from detection, and the
incorrect reasoning, incorrect generalization, and incorrect
classification, of which they are the fruitful source, will be
considered and illustrated in that part of the present work which treats
of Fallacies.

Edition: current; Page: [989]


CLASSIFICATION OF THINGS
 [Chapter iii: Of the Things denoted by Names]

[§1]

[¶1*] We have now made sufficient progress in the analysis of the
meaning of names for the purpose of that portion of our enquiry in which
we are at present engaged. Much more indeed is required to complete such
a theory of names as may suffice to form the Scientific basis of an Art
of Nomenclature. This, however, will belong to a subsequent part of the
work. Our object at present is merely to analyse the import of
Propositions. In the pursuit of that object, since everything which is
capable of receiving a name may be made the subject or the predicate of
a Proposition, we found it necessary to enter into the question, What
things are there, capable of receiving names? To facilitate the enquiry,
we examined what are the things signified by the existing names. And we
have carried this examination sufficiently far, to enable us to turn to
the contemplation of the things themselves, without incurring the danger
of overlooking any class of entities, recognized by the existing
nomenclature and thence making such an enumeration of things as shall
leave any class of Names destitute of an appropriate meaning.

[¶2] The necessity of an enumeration of Entities as the Basis of Logic
did not escape the attention of the schoolmen, nor of their master,
Aristotle, the most comprehensive, though not the most penetrating, of
the ancient philosophers. The categories, or predicaments, the former a
Greek word, the latter its literal translation in the Latin language,
were intended by him & his followers as an enumeration of all things
capable of being named; an enumeration by the Summa genera, i.e. the
most extensive classes into which Things could be distributed, there
being no other mode of enumerating individuals of indefinite number. The
following are the classes into which, according to these philosophers,
all things nameable might be reduced:

  ---------- -------------
  Ουσια.     Substantia.
  Ποσον,     Quantitas.
  Ποιον,     Qualitas.
  Προς τι,   Relatio.
  Ποιει̑ν,    Actio.
  Πασχειν,   Passio.
  Που̑,       Ubi.
  Ποτε,      Quando.
  Κει̑σθαι,   Situs.
  Εχειν,     Habitus.
  ---------- -------------

[¶3] The imperfections of this classification are too obvious to
require, and its merits are not sufficient to reward, a minute
examination. It is a mere catalogue of the distinctions rudely marked
out by common language, with little or no attempt to penetrate, by
philosophic analysis, to the rationale even of those distinctions. Such
an analysis, even though imperfect, would have shewn that the Edition:
current; Page: [990] enumeration is both redundant & defective, some
objects being omitted, & others repeated over and over under different
heads. It is not unlike a division of animals into men, beasts, horses,
asses, and ponies. That, for instance, could not be a very comprehensive
view of the nature of Relation, which could exclude Action, Passion, &
Local Situation, from that category. The same observation will apply to
the categories Ubi and Quando; though not so obviously. On the other
hand, Sensations, & Feelings in general, are excluded from the
enumeration. The impropriety of erecting into a Summum genus the class
which forms the tenth category, is manifest.

In so far as the ten categories of Aristotle contain any distinctions
which appear worthy to be preserved in the present more advanced state
of analytical psychology, they will be included, by implication at
least, in the attempt which we are about to make towards a better
enumeration of summa genera, or classed Catalogue of Nameable Things.

[§2]

[¶1] It is indispensable, before we commence, to take notice of a very
unfortunate ambiguity in all concrete names which correspond to the most
general of all the abstract names, the word Existence. When we have
occasion for a name which shall be capable of denoting whatever
exists,—or in other words, (for the expressions are convertible)
whatever is capable of being made a separate object of thought, and of
receiving a separate name—there is hardly a word applicable to this
purpose, which is not also, and even more familiarly, taken in a sense
in which it denotes only substances. But substances are not all that
exists; sensations also exist; and according to all systems of
philosophy, however opposite, attributes may be asserted to have a real
existence, with as much propriety as substances. Yet when we speak of an
object, of a thing, we are almost always supposed to mean a substance.
There would seem to be a kind of absurdity in using such an expression
as this, that a thing may be merely an attribute of another thing: and
at first sight of the heading of this chapter, “Classification of
Things,” there are, I believe, few persons who would not be led to
expect a classification like that of naturalists, starting with the
three great divisions of Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral, and subdividing
these into classes and orders. If, rejecting the word Thing, we
endeavour to find another of a more general signification, or at least
more exclusively appropriated to that general signification; a word,
denoting all that exists, and connoting nothing but simple Existence, no
word might be presumed fitter for our purpose than Being; originally the
present participle of a verb which in one of its meanings is exactly
equivalent to the word exist; and therefore suited, even by its
grammatical construction, to be the concrete of the abstract Existence.
But this word, strange as it may appear, is even more completely spoiled
for the purpose which it seems expressly made for, than the word Thing.
Being is, by custom, exactly synonymous with Substance; except that it
is free from a slight taint of ambiguity, being applied impartially to
Matter & to Mind; while Substance, though originally in strictness
applicable equally to both, is apt to suggest preferably the idea of
matter. A Sensation is never called a Being; nor is an attribute ever
called a Being. A Being is that which causes Sensations, that which
possesses attributes. The soul may be called a Being; God, and Angels
may be called Beings; but if we were to say, Extension, Colour, Wisdom,
Virtue are Beings, we should perhaps Edition: current; Page: [991] be
suspected of thinking with some of the ancients, that the cardinal
virtues are animals; or at least, of holding, with the Platonic School,
the doctrine of self-existent ideas, or with the followers of Epicurus,
that of Sensible Forms, which detach themselves in all directions from
bodies, and, coming casually in contact with the human organs, are the
causes of our sensations. We should be supposed, in short, to believe,
that Attributes are Substances.

[¶2] In consequence of this perversion of the word Being, philosophers,
looking about for something to supply its place, laid their hands upon
the word Entity, a piece of barbarous Latin, invented by the Schoolmen
to be used as an abstract name, in which class, by its form, it would
seem to place itself, but being seized by logicians in distress, to stop
a leak in their terminology, has ever since been used as a concrete
name. The Kindred word Essence, born at the same time [*]and of the same
parents, scarcely underwent a more complete transformation, when, from
being the abstract of the verb to be, it came to denote something
sufficiently concrete to be contained in a glass bottle. The word
Entity, since it settled down into a concrete name, has retained its
universality of signification somewhat less unimpaired than any of the
names before mentioned. Yet the same gradual decay, which seems to
affect all the language of psychology after a certain age, has been at
work even here. If you call virtue an entity, you are indeed somewhat
less strongly suspected of believing it to be a substance, than if you
called it a being; but even then you are not quite sure that no more
meaning will be taken than you intended to give. Every word which
originally was intended to connote mere existence, seems after a time to
enlarge its connotation to separate existence, or existence freed from
the condition of belonging to a substance; which condition being
precisely what constitutes an attribute, attributes in this manner are
gradually shut out. Strange that when the greatest embarrassment of all
who have many thoughts to express, is to find a sufficient number of
words wherewith to express them, there should be no practice which
philosophers are more addicted to, than that of taking valuable words to
express ideas which are sufficiently expressed by other words already
appropriated to them.

[¶3] When it is impossible to get good tools, the next best thing is to
know accurately the defects of those we have. I have therefore warned
the reader of the ambiguity of the very names which, for want of better,
I am necessitated to employ. It must now be the writer’s endeavour so to
employ them, as in no case to leave his meaning doubtful or obscure. No
one of the above words being altogether unambiguous, I shall not confine
myself to any one, but shall employ on each occasion that word, the
associations connected with which will least conflict with those which
must be excited in order that what I have to say may be understood. The
word Thing, being the least spoilt of any which are equally familiar, is
that which I shall most frequently make use of. [¶4] The difficulty
under which, in spite of all I can do, I must expect that both myself
and my reader will labour in the attempt to use vague words with a
precise meaning, is not wholly a matter of regret to me. Philosophical
language will for a long time, and popular language, perhaps, forever,
retain so much vagueness and ambiguity, that Logic would be of little
use, if it did not, among its other advantages, exercise the
understanding in performing its work neatly and correctly with imperfect
tools.

Edition: current; Page: [992]
[§6]

[¶1] All Things, then, are either Feelings, substances or attributes:
or, to state the same proposition in other words, every name except the
names of feelings, is either the name of a Substance or the name of an
Attribute. These words, Substance and Attribute, are of so much
importance in the Philosophy of Logic, that it is highly desirable to
fix their meaning with precision. But it is scarcely possible to define
strictly the distinction between them, without trespassing into the
higher metaphysics. Nor is this absolutely indispensable for most of the
purposes of this work; it would perhaps be sufficient to take the
distinction for granted, & to suppose that the reader can tell a
substance from an attribute, whether he be capable of metaphysically
analysing the two notions or not. Nevertheless not to omit an enquiry so
intimately connected with my subject, I shall attempt as much of the
analysis of each as seems necessary for an accurate conception of the
difference between them.

[¶2] Logicians have endeavoured to define Substance and Attribute: but
their definitions are not so much attempts to point out the distinction
between the two ideas, as instructions what difference it is customary
to make in the grammatical construction, according as you are speaking
of substances or of attributes. Such definitions are rather lessons of
English, or of Latin or Greek, than of mental philosophy. An attribute,
say the Schoolmen, must be the attribute of something: whiteness, for
example, must be the whiteness of something; goodness must be the
goodness of something. And if this something should cease to exist, or
should cease to be connected with the attribute, the existence of the
attribute would be at an end. A substance, on the contrary, is
self-existent; when we are speaking about it, we need not put of after
its name: a stone is not the stone of anything; the moon is not the moon
of anything, but simply the moon. Unless, indeed, the name which we
choose to give to the substance be a relative name: if so, it must be
followed either by of, or by some other particle, implying, like that
preposition, a reference to something else: but then the other
characteristic peculiarity of an attribute would fail: the something
might be destroyed, and our substance might still subsist. Thus, a
father must be the father of a child, and so far resembles an attribute,
in being referred to something besides himself: if there be no child,
there can be no father: but this, when we look into the matter, only
means that we should not call him father, as he would no longer come
within the meaning of that term. The man called father might still
exist, though not only the child, but all the universe, himself
excepted, were destroyed; that is, the supposition would involve no
contradiction. But destroy all white substances, and where would be the
attribute whiteness? To suppose that it still continued to exist, would
be a contradiction in terms.

[¶3] This is as near an approach towards a solution of the difficulty as
will be found in the treatises on Logic; metaphysicians, however, have
probed the question deeper. And in truth the above explanation was
anything but satisfactory. If an attribute is distinguished from a
substance by being the attribute of something, it seems highly necessary
to explain what is meant by of: that pregnant particle, which, on this
shewing, carries the whole of Intellectual Philosophy in its womb. And
as for the self-existence of Substances, it is very true that a
Substance may be conceived to exist without any other substance, but so
also may an attribute without any other attribute; and we can as little
imagine a substance without attributes as we can an attribute without a
substance.

Edition: current; Page: [993]
[¶4] Since, however, every attribute is an attribute of a substance, let
us consider, in the first place, Substances. These are commonly divided
into Bodies & Minds.

[§7]

[¶¶1,2] It would be remote from our purpose to embark in the controversy
on which so much ink has been expended, that of the Existence of Matter
as a Being in itself, distinguishable from the sensations or states of
consciousness which it generates in sentient beings. This question
belongs to the higher metaphysics; and I may add, that I am aware of no
inquiry more utterly fruitless and barren, saving always the advantage
of learning to think justly on any subject on which we are compelled to
think. For the tyro, at least, in logic, nothing is more to be desired
than that he should never even hear that such a question had been
raised. In an Enquiry into the Philosophy of Logic, it is, however,
indispensable to state the question, though but for the purpose of
putting it aside.

[¶3] It is certain, then, that part of our notion of a body consists of
the notion of a number of sensations of our own, or of other sentient
beings, habitually occurring simultaneously. Our conception of a block
of granite, for instance, is compounded of its visible form and size,
which are complex sensations of sight; its tangible form and size, which
are complex sensations of our organ of touch and of our muscles, its
weight which is a sensation of touch and of the muscles, its colour
which is a sensation of sight, its hardness which is a sensation of the
muscles, its chemical properties which are said to be perceived by our
various senses, and which are in reality nothing but sensations received
through those senses. All these various sensations frequently are, and,
as we learn by experience, always might be, experienced simultaneously:
whence the thought of any one of them comes to excite the ideas of the
others, and the whole become mentally amalgamated into one mixed state
of consciousness, which, in the Language of Locke & Hartley, is called a
complex idea, and which, though a compound of so many heterogeneous
elements, has the appearance of being instantaneous and indivisible.
With these feelings called sensations, other states of feeling
frequently intermix themselves, of the kinds called thoughts, and
emotions; for many objects, besides the impression they produce on our
senses, excite in our minds other states of consciousness to which we
give these other names.

[¶4] Now, there are philosophers who have argued thus: If we take an
orange, and conceive it to be divested of its natural colour, without
acquiring any new one; to lose its softness without becoming hard, its
roundness without becoming square or polygonal or of any other figure
whatever; to be deprived of its size, of its weight, of its taste, of
its smell, to lose all its mechanical and all its chemical properties
and acquire no new ones; to become, in short, invisible, intangible,
inaudible, & without taste or odour; nothing would remain. Of what
nature, in fact, could be the residuum? and by what tokens could it
manifest its existence? And if there do really exist such a residuum,
let us imagine it to be this instant annihilated by the fiat of
omnipotence, by what signs should we be able to discover that it had
ceased to exist? Should we not have as much reason to believe [in] its
existence, after its annihilation had been accomplished, as we have now?
But if its removal would make no change in our consciousness, we are not
now conscious of its existence. Hence these metaphysicians were led to
conclude, that Edition: current; Page: [994] what we call a Body is
nothing distinguishable from the sensations which it is said to produce
in us. They characterised an object as merely a bundle, group, or
cluster of sensations. The philosophers who took this view of the nature
of bodies, were said to deny the existence of Matter.

[¶5] Other philosophers, on the contrary (and this is the prevalent
opinion) contend that an object is not a group of sensations only, but
the sensations & something else; or rather, that the object is not the
sensations, but something which we regard as the immediate cause of the
sensations. The schoolmen used to call it a substratum, and supposed
that its attributes inhered in it, as they expressed themselves;
literally stuck in it. This language is now exploded; but the idea which
it was intended to express still remains. To this substratum, the name
Matter is usually given in philosophical discussions. It was soon,
however, acknowledged by all who reflected on the subject, that it was
impossible to prove, by extrinsic evidence, the existence of Matter.
Being asked, therefore, how they knew it, they answered, by direct
intuition. And here, according to the definition formerly given, the
inquiry enters into the field of Transcendental Metaphysics; where we
intend to leave it.

[¶6] While, however, philosophers have been thus divided on the question
whether objects are anything besides our sensations, the only point
which is of much real importance, is one on which there has at length
been brought about a very general agreement: viz: that all we know of
objects is merely the sensations which they give us. Kant himself, on
this point, is as explicit as Berkeley or Locke. There are few
Ontologists among modern metaphysicians. However strongly they may be
convinced that there exists a universe of “things in themselves,”
totally distinct from the universe of Phenomena, or things as they
appear to our senses; and even though they may invent, like Kant, a
technical expression as Noumenon, to denote what the thing is in itself,
as contrasted with the representation of it in our minds; they
nevertheless allow that this representation, which is a mere compound of
our own sensations, is all we know of the object, and that the real
nature of the thing itself, is, and by the constitution of our faculties
must ever remain, an impenetrable mystery to us. [¶7] There is not the
slightest reason for believing that what we call the sensible qualities
of an object bear any affinity to the nature of the object itself. The
object is merely the cause of them: and a cause does not always resemble
its effects; a north wind is not at all like the feeling of cold, nor a
coal fire like the steam of boiling water: why then should matter, the
cause of our sensations, resemble the sensations themselves? [¶6,n] An
attempt has indeed been made by Dr. Reid to establish that although some
of the properties which we ascribe to objects exist only in our
sensations, others really exist in the things themselves, being such as
cannot possibly be copies of any impression on the senses; and he asked,
with a triumphant air, from what sensation our notions of extension and
figure can have been arrived [sic]? These, according to him, must be
qualities of things in themselves, known to us like the existence of
those things, intuitively. The gauntlet thrown down by Dr. Reid was
taken up by Dr. Brown: who, applying greater powers of analysis than any
of his predecessors had done to the notions of extension & figure,
shewed clearly what were the sensations from which those notions were
derived, and of the ideas of which, they were compounded: viz:
sensations of touch, combined with sensations of a class previously too
little adverted to by metaphysicians, those which have their seat in our
muscular frame. Whoever wishes to be more particularly acquainted with
this admirable specimen of metaphysical Edition: current; Page: [995]
analysis, may consult the first volume of Brown’s Lectures, or Mill’s
Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind. To introduce the discussion
here, would swell an inquiry essentially subordinate and parenthetical,
into such a bulk as to detain the mind longer than is desirable on its
passage from what precedes to what follows.

[§9]

[¶¶1,2] Since, then, we know nothing of bodies, except the sensations
and other states of feeling or consciousness which we are said to derive
from them; and these being either permanent or changeable; it evidently
follows, that the sensations or states of consciousness excited by an
object, and the changes in those sensations or states of consciousness,
constitute its attributes.

Sensations, or rather states of feeling, excited by objects taken one by
one, form that kind of attributes commonly called the qualities of
objects. Sensations or other states of feeling excited by two or more
objects jointly, and which could not be produced by the same objects
taken separately, form that kind of attribute called a relation: a
relation among these objects; a relation between each one of them and
all the rest.

Those propositions require some elucidation.

[¶3] Let us take, for the purpose of illustration, any one of what are
termed the sensible qualities of objects. Say, for example, whiteness.
When we ascribe whiteness to any substance, as for instance, to snow;
when we say that snow has the quality of whiteness, what is it we really
assert? Simply, that when snow is present to my organs, I have a
particular sensation, which I am accustomed to term the sensation of
white. But how do I know that Snow is present? Obviously by the
sensations which I derive from it, and not otherwise. According to one
theory my consciousness of these sensations is all I really mean by the
presence of the object; according to another theory it only proves the
presence of the object. We shall not inquire into this. The object,
however, is neither more nor less than a cluster of sensations, or an
unknown something which gives me a cluster of sensations. And when I
ascribe to the object the attribute whiteness, my meaning is only that
of this group, or series of sensations, whether simultaneous of
successive, that which I call the sensation of white forms a part.

[¶4] An objection may here be made. It may be admitted that we know
nothing of sensible objects, except the sensations which they excite in
us: that the fact of our receiving from Snow that particular sensation,
which we call the sensation of white, is the only ground we have for
ascribing to that substance the quality whiteness; the only proof that
Snow possesses that quality. But because one thing may be the sole
evidence of the existence of another thing, it does not follow that the
two things are one and the same. The attribute whiteness, it may be
said, is not the sensation, nor the fact of our receiving the sensation,
but something in the object itself; a power inherent in it; something
which produces the sensation; which is the real cause of its being
excited when the object is presented to our organs. And when we affirm
that Snow possesses the attribute of whiteness, we assert not merely
that the presence of snow produces in us that sensation; but that it
does so by virtue of this mystical entity, called a quality.

[¶5] For this doctrine of the existence of a distinct and peculiar
species of entities termed qualities, I can see no foundation except in
a tendency of the human mind, which is the cause of many delusions. I
mean the disposition, Edition: current; Page: [996] wherever we meet
with any two names which are not precisely synonymous, to suppose that
they must be the names of two different things,—whereas in reality, both
are often names of the same thing, viewed (to use a popular expression)
in different lights. Thus, in the present case, because quality and
sensation cannot be put indiscriminately one for the other, it is
supposed that they cannot both of them signify the same thing, viz: the
impression or feeling with which we are affected when we see any white
object: although there is at least no absurdity in supposing that this
identical impression or feeling may be called a sensation when
considered merely in itself, & a quality when regarded as accompanying
or as emanating from any one of the numerous objects, the presence of
which to our organs, excites in our minds that among various other
sensations or feelings.

If this be not a sufficient account of the meaning of the word quality,
it rests with the believers in an entity per se bearing that name, to
produce some proof of its existence. Until they do so, their opinion can
only be held to be a lingering remnant of the Scholastic doctrine of
occult causes; the very absurdity, in fact, which is so happily
ridiculed by Moliere, when he makes one of his pedantic physicians
account for the fact that “l’opium endormit” by the maxim “parcequ’il a
une vertu soporifique.”

[¶6] It is evident that when the physician stated that opium had “une
vertu soporifique,” he did not account for, but merely asserted over
again, the fact that it “endormit.” In like manner, when we assert that
snow has the quality of whiteness, we are only affirming over again in
more technical language, that it excites in us the sensation of white.
The other expression conveys no explanation, because it informs us of no
new fact, or, if of any, of one which is not conceivable by our
faculties, and cannot be proved to be true. If it be said that the
sensation must have some cause, I answer, undoubtedly; the presence of
the object is that cause. When I have asserted, that whenever the object
is present and my organs in their natural state, the sensation takes
place, I have stated all that I know or can know about the matter. I
have stated the effect, and assigned its cause. I have no occasion, in
addition to this certain and intelligible cause, to suppose an occult
cause besides. If I am asked, why does the presence of the object cause
this sensation in me, I cannot tell; I can but say, because such is the
law of my nature, & of the nature of the object: the Author of the
universe, or the constitution of things, will have it so. And this,
after all, is what we must come to at last, even when we have
interpolated the imaginary entity. Whatever number of links the chain of
causes and effects may consist of, how any one link produces that which
is next to it remains still equally inexplicable to us. It is as easy to
comprehend that the object should produce the sensation directly and at
once, as that it should produce the same sensation by the aid of a third
entity called the power of producing it.

[¶7] If, however, any reader considers these arguments insufficient, and
still holds to the belief that a sensible quality is something different
both from the sensation in our minds, and from the object which produces
that sensation, I shall not argue further with him in this place, but
refer him to the higher metaphysics, to which Science this, as part of
the great question of Causation or Power, properly appertains. It rests
with that Science to determine whether we have an intuitive perception
of Qualities or Attributes in the sense which persons of these views
attach to the words. For, all persons having any pretension to the
character of philosophers, who believe that such entities exist, have
been reduced to the necessity of admitting that we cannot prove their
existence, so that they are Edition: current; Page: [997] either known
to us intuitively or not at all. Should the conclusion be that they
really exist, it will not vitiate the subsequent part of this work, the
deductions of which do not in any material degree depend upon the view
which I have taken of the nature of Attributes. For my purpose it is
sufficient that some names are names of objects, and some of attributes,
and some are names of objects, connoting attributes. All this is true,
in whatever way we may analyse Attributes, or though we should not
analyse them at all.

[§10]

[¶1] We have thus far attended only to those attributes which are
commonly called qualities: being those which respect only the object
itself, and us, the sentient mind; & which would remain, if we were to
suppose all other objects annihilated. These attributes we have found to
consist of the various sensations, or groups or trains of sensations,
which the object causes us; or of the other feelings of all sorts, the
purely mental, as they are called, which the contemplation of it excites
in our minds.

But there is another class of attributes, the conception of which
necessarily includes the ideas of other substances besides the object
itself to which the attribute is ascribed. These attributes of an object
are called its relations to other objects. The observations in the
preceeding chapter on relative names, united with what has just been
said on the nature of the first class of attributes, render it easy for
the reader to anticipate the view which will be taken of the nature of
the attributes to be now adverted to.

[¶2] It is certain that there may, with propriety, be said to be a
relation between any two things, to which two correlative names are or
may be given. This is only inverting the tritest and least disputable
(though least significant) definition of a relative name: viz: that it
is a name which signifies a relation. By enumerating, therefore, the
principal cases in which mankind have imposed correlative names, &
observing what all those cases have in common, we may expect to
discover, if it be discoverable, what is that which constitutes a
relation.

[¶3] What then is the character, which is possessed in common by states
of circumstances so heterogeneous & discordant as these:—one thing like
another, one thing unlike another; one thing near another, one thing far
from another; one thing before another, one thing after another, one
thing along with another; one thing greater, equal, less than another;
one thing the cause of another, one thing the effect of another; one
person the father, child, master, servant, husband, wife, sovereign,
subject, attorney, client, of another; & so on?

[¶4] There seems to be nothing whatever that is common to all these
cases, except only this; that in each of them there exists or occurs, or
has existed or occurred, some fact or phenomenon, into which both the
things which are said to be related to each other, enter as parties
concerned. This fact or phenomenon, the Aristotelian philosophers called
the fundamentum relationis. Thus, in the relation of greater and less
between two lines or surfaces, the fundamentum relationis is the fact
that when one of the two magnitudes is applied to the other, it does not
entirely cover it. In the relation of husband and wife, the fundamentum
relationis is, that the parties are a man and a woman, that they have
promised certain things with certain formalities, and are in consequence
invested by the law with certain rights and subjected to certain duties.
It would be easy to multiply examples. It is obvious that when we
examine the signification of a Edition: current; Page: [998] relative
name, and find out correctly and completely what it connotes, that forms
the fundamentum of the relation which that relative name is said to
express.

[¶5] Now, examination will shew that this kind of attributes, like that
which we previously enquired into, consists of nothing whatever but
states of human consciousness. In the highly complicated case last
cited, for example, the relation of husband & wife, the fact or
phenomenon which is the fundamentum relationis, and which is of an
extremely complex nature, is wholly composed of the following elements,
viz: 1. Sensations, thoughts, emotions, and volitions of the parties
themselves. 2. Sensations, thoughts, emotions, and volitions of other
people, excited by acts of the parties themselves, or which would be
excited were they to act in a particular way: the intentions, for
instance, which would be formed by a Judge, in case a complaint of the
violation of the conjugal engagement were brought before his tribunal;
and the acts which the Judge would perform in consequence. If it be
asked what an act is, it is nothing whatever but one of the states of
consciousness called volitions, causing in the mind either of the
individual himself, or of some other individual, one of the states of
consciousness called sensations. The whole, therefore, resolves itself
into states of consciousness; human feelings, either bodily (as they are
called) or mental: feelings, however, which are not excited by one of
the two related objects, but by both of them taken together. In the case
of the complicated matter of fact, connoted by the words husband & wife,
all the simpler matters of fact which make it up are states of things
which concern one of the two persons in precisely the same degree as the
other; and no other object except those two, is concerned in all of
them.

[¶6*] All cases of relation are not so complicated as that to which we
last alluded. In the case of nearness for instance, or remoteness in
place, the fundamentum relationis is the two objects themselves, with
the space intervening between them. In the case of likeness, it is 1.
the two objects in juxtaposition, or the ideas of the two objects
succeeding one another in our minds, and 2. that state of consciousness
called the feeling of resemblance (in whatever way we may analyse this
feeling) immediately succeeding the contemplation of them. In the case
of antecedent & consequent, as between two events, the fundamentum of
the relation is the events themselves, succeeding one another in order
of time. But an event is merely a change; one thing ending or another
beginning; an object ceasing to exist, or ceasing to cause certain
sensations; or another object beginning to exist, or beginning to cause
certain sensations. Whatever relation we examine, we still find nothing
except the related objects, and the sensations or other states of
consciousness which they excite. And we may consequently consider it as
proved, that the attributes commonly called relations as well as those
commonly called qualities, are but names for states of the consciousness
of sentient beings, considered as excited by objects.

[§14]

[¶1†] We have hitherto spoken only of the attributes of bodies. Minds
also have attributes: but the analysis of these, after what has
preceded, presents little difficulty. The attributes of minds, like
those of bodies, are merely states of feeling or consciousness. But in
the case of a mind we have to consider its own states of feeling or
consciousness, as well as those which it excites in other minds. Every
Edition: current; Page: [999] attribute of a mind consists either in
being affected in a certain way, or affecting other minds in a certain
way. In the former case, nothing is implied, external to the mind
itself, not even the existence of another percipient mind.

The only attributes which can with truth be ascribed to a mind, without
reference to any other substance, either mental or corporeal, are its
own various states; that is to say, the actually being in one of those
states, or the liability to be in one of them. Now, all in the mind
which even the mind itself is aware of, is a certain thread of
consciousness; a certain series of feelings, that is, thoughts,
volitions, sensations, & emotions, more or less numerous and
complicated. Respecting mind as respecting body, there are two systems
of philosophy. The one holds that the mind itself is this thread of
consciousness, & nothing more; the other, that there is the thread of
consciousness, and likewise a something which is conscious, a thinking
principle, as it has been called, a peculiar kind of being, called a
mind. To decide between these two theories belongs not to Logic, but to
the more abstruse Science so often alluded to. But whichever of these
two theories may be true; whether what I call myself, be only the series
of feelings which I experience, and which constitute my sentient
existence, or whether there be these feelings and something besides
these feelings called myself; it must in either case be admitted that of
any self, other than the series of my feelings, I do not & cannot know
anything except its bare existence. As bodies only manifest themselves
to me through the sensations which I feel when they are present, so the
thinking principle, or mind, in myself, makes itself known to me only by
the feelings of which it is conscious. We can predicate no quality of
it, considered in itself, but the series of its own feelings. When we
say of any mind that it is devout, or superstitious, or meditative, or
cheerful, we mean that the ideas, emotions, and volitions implied in
those words, form a frequently recurring part of the series of feelings
or states of consciousness, which fill up the existence of that mind.

[¶2] Besides those attributes of a mind which consist of its own states
of feeling, we may also ascribe attributes to a mind as well as to a
body, considered as an object of contemplation to other minds. The most
important instance of this is, the employment of terms expressing
approbation or blame. When, for example, we say of any mind, that it is
admirable, we mean, that the idea of it excites the sentiment of
admiration in us, together with the feeling of moral approbation, for
the word implies that we not only feel admiration, but approve that
feeling in ourselves. Just as when we say of snow that it is white, we
mean that the perception of it excites in us the sensation of white.

In some cases, under the semblance of one single attribute, two are
really attributed, one of them a state of the mind itself, the other a
state with which other minds are affected by the contemplation of it. As
when we say of any man that he is generous. The word generosity
expresses a certain state of mind; but it also expresses that this state
of mind excites in us another mental state called approbation. The
assertion, therefore, really made is double; and of the following
purport: Certain feelings form a frequent part of this person’s thread
of consciousness, and moreover the idea of those feelings of his,
excites in us the sentiment of approbation.

[*]Minds as well as bodies may be related in a variety of ways, to other
minds, & to bodies. A mind may be like, or unlike, another mind; it may
be prior or posterior in order of time, to another mind, or to a body: a
mind may perceive, Edition: current; Page: [1000] & a body may be
perceived; a body may act upon a mind, that is, may cause it to be
conscious of certain feelings: a body may be acted upon by the mind
which animates it, that is, the mind may cause the body to act in a
particular way on its own or other minds. These relations between minds,
and between body & mind, require no other explanation from us, than that
already given of the relations between bodies.

[§3, ¶3*] So much for the attributes of bodies and of minds. It is now
necessary to recal the reader’s attention to a remark already made; that
the division of all things into substances & attributes, and of
substances into bodies & minds, and consequently of all things whatever
into bodies, minds, and attributes, is not exhaustive[†]. A sound, for
example, cannot be said to be either a body or a mind; yet it is not an
attribute. Sonorousness is the name of an attribute, but sound is a
concrete name. It is a name for a certain sensation considered in
itself, not implying that it emanates from any object. We know in point
of fact that sounds always are produced by objects; but we can conceive
that the case might be otherwise. We may conceive everything annihilated
in the universe, except sounds, and ourselves hearing them. If we shut
our eyes and listen to music, we may form to ourselves a conception of
such a universe.

In like manner, hope, joy, fear, are names of other states of
consciousness, considered independently of the mind which is conscious
of them. If we considered them as states of any particular mind, or even
thought of them as modifications of a substance called a mind at all,
the words we should use would be hopingness, or hopefulness, or a state
of hope, but not hope simply. Hope is a concrete name. Hopingness and
hopefulness are abstract ones.

In this class of nameable objects, we must rank names themselves, and
other portions of discourse; these being either sounds, or written
characters. Thus, noun, verb, &c. are names of names.

We have thus three classes of names. Names of substances; i.e. of the
bodies which excite and the minds which experience feelings; Names of
attributes, i.e. of feelings, considered as excited or experienced by
substances; and names of the feelings considered in themselves.

Substances may have attributes; feelings or states of consciousness may
have attributes; and attributes themselves may have attributes.

Of the attributes of substances enough has been said. The attributes of
feelings and the attributes of attributes themselves, present scarcely
any additional difficulties.

The qualities of which a feeling, or a combination of feelings or a
series of feelings, is susceptible, seem to consist only in being
composed of certain parts, and in exciting certain ideas and emotions in
our own mind when it thinks of them. All the other attributes of a
feeling are relations. Such is, for instance, the attribute of belonging
to a certain mind: for this supposes something other than the feeling
itself and its parts and our mind contemplating the feeling: it supposes
a mind to which the feeling belongs.

It is not necessary to enumerate all the possible relations of a
feeling, or series Edition: current; Page: [1001] of feelings. A feeling
may be like, or unlike, another feeling, and so related to the feeling:
it may be like or unlike a feeling of another mind; and so related to
that mind. A feeling may be excited or caused by a body, or by a mind,
or by a feeling; and in its turn it may cause another feeling. All these
relations of feelings, correspond to relations of precisely the same
nature between bodies; and whatever explanation suffices for the latter,
will serve equally for the former.

Remains only the attributes of attributes. But neither in the analysis
of these is there any peculiar difficulty.

An attribute is never said to be composed of parts. The sensation or
other state of consciousness which constitutes the attribute, may be
composed of parts; but however complex the matter of fact may be, the
attribute itself is considered to be one and indivisible.

An attribute, however, as well as a subject, may be an object of thought
or contemplation to a percipient mind; and being contemplated, may
excite in that mind any thought or emotion. To excite any state of
consciousness is itself an attribute; one of those which we have named
qualities. An attribute, therefore, may have qualities, when considered
as an object of contemplation to a mind.

An attribute may also have relations. We may say that one attribute
resembles another; that one attribute is the cause, or effect, of
another. The meaning of this is obvious. What constitutes an attribute
being always some phenomenon, that is, some state of consciousness,—some
feeling, or combination or series of feelings; when we say that one
attribute resembles another, the resemblance which really exists is
between the feelings, or combinations of feelings, which constitute
those attributes respectively: and when we say that an attribute is the
cause, or the effect of anything, the real cause or effect is either the
feeling constituting the attribute, or the object to which the attribute
belongs.

[*]A relation may exist even between relations. One relation may
resemble another; one relation may coexist with another; one relation
may succeed to another; one relation may cause another. In all these
cases, what really resemble, or coexist with, or succeed, or cause each
other are the facts or phenomena, the complicated states of
consciousness, which, when considered as proceeding from the conjunction
of two or more objects, are called relations. [§11, ¶3] The case of
resemblance between relations is one of the commonest of all the cases
in which an attribute is ascribed to attributes. Thus, the relation in
which Priam stood to Hector, namely that of father and son, resembles
the relation in which Philip stood to Alexander: resembles it so closely
that they are called the same relation. This means that in the
complicated set of phenomena which constitutes the fundamentum of the
relation between Priam and Hector, and that other set of phenomena
equally complicated which constitutes the fundamentum of the relation
between Philip & Alexander; as much of each of these two histories (for
they are nothing less) as is signified by the words father and son, is
exactly the same, or (to speak with stricter propriety),
undistinguishably alike, in the two cases.

When two attributes are united, or coexist, there is a resemblance of
relations. The two attributes stand in the same relation to the same
substance; they both of them are attributes of it: the same substance
excites both sets of sensations or feelings.

Edition: current; Page: [1002]
[§11, ¶4] There are other cases in which relations resemble, yet not so
closely as to be called the same relation. Thus, we may say, that a
thought suggested to the mind of a person of genius is like a seed cast
into the ground, because the former produces a multitude of other
thoughts, and the latter a multitude of other seeds. This is saying that
between the relation of an inventive mind to a thought contained in it,
and the relation of a fertile soil to a seed contained in it, there
exists a resemblance: but no one would think of saying that there
existed an identity. It is indeed evident that when two pairs of objects
are concerned respectively, in two sets of phenomena, the slightest
resemblance between these sets of phenomena will admit of its being said
that the relation between the first pair and the relation between the
second resemble one another.

[§11, ¶5] Whether we say that two objects resemble, or two qualities of
objects, or two relations of objects, we always mean the same thing:
that the sensations which we receive from the two objects,—or such part
only of those sensations as constitute the two qualities,—or such
complicated sets of sensations, (including those excited by the two
objects) as constitute the two relations,—that these two sets of
sensations in short, whether they are experienced together or only
thought of together, are followed in our minds by a certain feeling,
which, for want of any more appropriate name to express it by, we call
the perception of resemblance. This feeling, the task of analysing which
does not belong to Logic, may exist, like almost all other feelings, in
different degrees. When it exists in the highest degree of all, i.e.
when the two things, if perceived separately, could not be distinguished
from one another, the resemblance is often called identity, and the two
things are said to be the same: as when we say that the sight of any
object, gives me the same sensation or emotion to-day that it did
yesterday. This is an evident though often an inevitable, misapplication
of the words “the same:” for the feeling which I had yesterday is gone,
and never can return; that which I have to-day is another feeling,
different from the preceeding, though so exactly like it, that no trace
of any dissimilarity can be perceived. I think it will be found that
great confusion of ideas is often produced, and many fallacies
engendered in otherwise enlightened understandings, by the habit of
always confounding under one name ideas so different as those of perfect
likeness & identity. The Schoolmen had appropriate names to express this
as well as many other distinctions, which philosophers have lost the
habit of attending to since they began to look with disdain upon the
Aristotelian Logic. Two things which were so perfectly alike as to be
undistinguishable, were said to differ numero tantum; i.e. to differ
only in being two instead of one, in being different numbers in a
catalogue. But things which are in any the slightest degree unlike, may
be said to differ not only numero but specie. This expression, as well
as the former, is borrowed from the Schoolmen, but with a slight
extension of its meaning.

[§15]

[¶¶1, 10] The analytical view which has been taken in the preceeding
pages of the nature of Attributes, has brought under our notice all
those leading distinctions which seem most suitable to be taken in the
basis of a Classification of Entities, or enumeration of Summa genera,
such as was attempted in the categories of Aristotle.

Attributes have been found to differ from one another in the following
particulars, Edition: current; Page: [1003] which may be taken as
principles of so many mutually intersecting divisions:

1. Attributes are either Attributes of Substances, attributes of
feelings or attributes of other attributes.

Substances are either Bodies or Minds; and accordingly Attributes of
Substances are either Attributes of Bodies or Attributes of Minds.

[*]2. The fact or phenomenon constituting an Attribute, may either be a
fact which concerns only the subject itself, with or without a
percipient mind; or it may be a fact which concerns jointly that subject
and other subjects. A fact of the first kind can only be considered as
an attribute of that one subject; but in the second case, the same
individual fact may constitute an attribute of every one of the subjects
concerned in it. In the former case, the attribute is called a Quality;
in the latter, a Relation.

To render the classification complete, a further consideration remains
to be introduced. A thing may be considered either as it exists in any
one given instant of time, or as it exists in successive instants. In
other words, we may consider its mere state, or its changes of state:
its attributes at any given moment, or the changes which it undergoes in
its attributes, losing some and acquiring others. Hence attributes may
be divided into states of the subject, and changes of state: into
properties and changes of properties: into properties & events.

Such are the different kinds of attributes which may be possessed by one
object. When we suppose two or more objects, we introduce an additional
kind of attribute which cannot be possessed by one object only, viz: the
attribute of number.

[¶5] The following, then, appears to be a complete enumeration of all
nameable things:—

-   

    1. Substances.
-   

    2. Feelings.
-   

    3. Qualities.
-   

    4. Relations.
-   

    5. Events; or changes of feelings, qualities, and relations.
-   

    6. Numbers.

[†]But if the analysis which we have attempted of quality & relation be
correct, the distinction between these and feelings is not a distinction
between things, but only a difference in the light in which they are
viewed for the purpose of naming them.

The above classification of nameable objects could not be dispensed with
in attempting an exposition of the Philosophy of Logic. As the nature of
the subject renders it somewhat more abstruse than any other portion of
the work, I would willingly have placed it at a greater distance from
the commencement, had there been any other place suitable to it; but I
could find none so suitable as this. I have aimed at including in the
chapter itself, everything that is necessary to render it intelligible;
but if I should have failed in making my arguments understood, or if,
being understood, they should fail to convince, the reader will not, I
believe, find this any considerable hindrance to the intelligibleness of
the succeeding chapters.

Edition: current; Page: [1004]
[lf0223-08_figure_002.jpg]
LINEA PRÆDICAMENTALIS.[*]

Edition: current; Page: [1005]


OF PREDICATION
 [Chapter iv: Of Propositions]

[§1]

[¶¶1, 2*] All enquiries into the nature of Predication must have one of
two objects: To analyse the state of the human mind, called Belief; or
to analyse that which is believed. The former problem belongs to the
higher metaphysics, the latter to Logic. All language recognises a
difference between a doctrine or an opinion, and the act of a man’s mind
in entertaining the opinion; between assent, and that which we assent
to. Logic, as I conceive the limits of that Science, has no concern with
the nature of the act of judging, but only with the nature of the
judgment which is the fruit of that mental operation. To use the
language which the German metaphysicians have borrowed from the
schoolmen, the Logician considers the phenomenon [of] Belief objectively
only, and not subjectively.

[†]Into the analysis of Predication, so far as it belongs to our
subject, we are now prepared to enter. For inasmuch as whatever we
believe, if we express it at all, expresses itself in the form of a
proposition; & might, in all cases, be so expressed, if we thought fit;
an enquiry into the nature of the immediate object of belief, is an
enquiry into the meaning of propositions. But every proposition consists
of two names connected by a copula. An enquiry therefore into the
meaning of names, such as that which we have now concluded, is the
proper foundation for an inquiry into the meaning of propositions, or
into the nature of what is termed a judgment, an opinion, a doctrine, or
(when we ourselves assent to it) a truth.

[‡]By examining on the one hand names, on the other hand, nameable
things, we have arrived at the following results. That names are either
concrete or abstract. That concrete names are either proper or
connotative. That proper names are merely unmeaning marks attached to
single objects in order that we may be able to talk or write about them:
but that all other words, whether connotative or abstract, express
attributes: and that the meaning of all words whatever which have a
meaning, consists in attributes. We have next analysed the notion of an
attribute, & of each of the principal kinds of attributes. And we have
found that they are all of them states of human consciousness; either
excited by objects, or originating in the mind itself:—including in the
idea of a state of consciousness, any series or succession of such
states.

[§]If the above be a correct analysis of the meaning of names, & if
propositions consist of names, it cannot now be a very long process to
analyse the meaning of Propositions.

[Chap. iv, §1, ¶5] But before we attempt this analysis we must premise
an explanation of the technical terms commonly in use to express the
principal distinctions which exist among propositions.

Edition: current; Page: [1006]
[§2]

[¶1] A Proposition is a form of discourse in which something is affirmed
or denied of something.

The first division, therefore, of Propositions, is into Affirmative &
Negative. An affirmative Proposition is that in which the predicate is
affirmed of the subject; as, Cæsar is dead. A negative proposition is
that in which the predicate is denied of the subject; as Cæsar is not
dead.

[§3]

[¶1] The second division of Propositions is into simple and complex. A
simple proposition is a proposition in which one predicate is affirmed
of one subject. A complex proposition is a proposition in which there is
more than one predicate, or more than one subject, or both.

[¶2] At first sight, this division has very much the air of an
absurdity: a grand distinction of things into one and more than one: as
if we were to divide horses into simple horses and complex horses,
meaning by a complex horse, a horse which is several horses at once. And
in truth, what is called a complex proposition is often not a
proposition at all, but a plurality of propositions, held together by a
copulative conjunction. Such, for example, as this: Cæsar is dead, &
Brutus is alive: or even this; Cæsar is dead, but Brutus is alive. There
are here two distinct propositions; and we might as well call a street a
complex house, because all the houses in it are joined to one another,
as call these two propositions a complex proposition because they are
joined together by a particle. It is true that the Syncategorematic
words and and but have a meaning; but that meaning is so far from making
the two propositions one, that it adds a third proposition to the former
two. All particles are abbreviations, generally abbreviations of
propositions; a kind of short-hand, whereby that, which to express it
fully would have required a proposition or a series of propositions, is
suggested to the mind at once. Thus the words, Cæsar is dead and Brutus
is alive, are equivalent to these:—Cæsar is dead; Brutus is alive; it is
my wish that the two preceeding propositions should be thought of
together. If the words were, Cæsar is dead, but Brutus is alive, the
sense would be equivalent to the same three propositions, together with
a fourth; viz: the following:—“Between the two preceeding propositions
there exists a contrast:” i.e. either between the two facts themselves,
or between their probable consequences.

[¶3] In the instances which we have given, the two propositions are kept
visibly distinct: each subject having its separate predicate, and each
predicate its separate subject. But it frequently happens, that for
brevity, & to avoid repetition, the different propositions are jumbled
together. Thus, John & William are good men, signifies John is a good
man; and William is a good man. John is a good and a brave man,
signifies, John is a good man, and John is a brave man. John & William
are good and brave men, signifies, John is a good man, and John is a
brave man, and William is a good man, and William is a brave man.

[¶4] We have seen that when the two or more simple propositions which
compose what is called a complex proposition, are stated categorically,
and not under any condition or proviso, the pretended complex
proposition is not a proposition at all, but a plurality of
propositions; since what it expresses is not a single assertion, but
several assertions, which, if true when joined, are true also when
separated.

Edition: current; Page: [1007]
But there is a kind of proposition, which, although it contains a
plurality of subjects and of predicates, and may be said, in one sense
of the word, to consist of several propositions, contains nevertheless
only one assertion; and its truth does not at all imply that of the
simple propositions which compose it. An example of this is, when the
simple propositions are connected by the particle or; as, Either A is B,
or C is D: or by the particle if; as, If A is B, then C is D. In the
former case, the proposition is called disjunctive; in the latter,
conditional: the name hypothetical is common to both. As Dr. Whately has
well observed, the disjunctive form is resolvable into the conditional:
every disjunctive proposition being equivalent to two or more
conditional ones. Either A is B, or C is D means, If A is not B, C is D,
& if C is not D, A is B. All hypothetical propositions, therefore, are
conditional ones, and the two words are synonymous. Propositions which
are not hypothetical, are said, in the language of logicians, to be
categorical.

[¶5] A hypothetical proposition is not, like the pretended complex
propositions which we previously considered, a mere aggregation of
simple propositions. Though simple propositions form part of the words
in which it is couched, they form no part of the assertion which it is
intended to convey. When we say, If the Koran comes from God, Mahomet is
the prophet of God, we do not mean to affirm either that the Koran
really comes from God, or that Mahomet is really his prophet. Neither of
these simple propositions may be true, and yet the truth of the complex
proposition may be indisputable. What is asserted is not the truth of
either of the two propositions, but the dependence of the one upon the
other.

What, then, is the subject, and what the predicate, of the hypothetical
proposition? for a subject and a predicate it must have, like every
other proposition. “The Koran” is not the subject of it, nor is
“Mahomet:” for nothing is affirmed, either of the Koran or of Mahomet.
The real subject of the hypothetical predication is the entire
proposition, “Mahomet is the prophet of God;” for it is of this that the
affirmation is made: & the affirmation is that this proposition is a
legitimate inference from the proposition “The Koran comes from God.”
The subject and predicate, therefore, of a hypothetical proposition, are
two many-worded names, both of them names of propositions. One of them,
the subject, is the name of an individual proposition. The other, the
predicate, is a general name, of this form, “an inference from so and
so:” denoting a proposition, and connoting that its truth is apparent to
any person, who, being capable of reasoning, believes a certain other
proposition.

I have already observed that all particles are abbreviations; this
observation is now exemplified in the particle if. If A is B, C is D, is
an abbreviation of the following, The proposition C is D, is correctly
inferrible from the proposition A is B.

[¶6] There is, therefore, no fundamental difference between hypothetical
propositions and categorical ones. In a conditional as truly as in a
categorical proposition, one predicate is affirmed of one subject, & no
more. We may call it a complex proposition, but its real characteristic
is, that it is a proposition concerning a proposition: that the subject
of the assertion is itself an assertion. This, however, is not peculiar
to hypothetical propositions. There are many other propositions relating
to propositions; or, in other words, having propositions for their
subjects. A proposition, like anything else, may have attributes; and
those attributes may be predicated of it. One attribute which may be
affirmed of a proposition, is that of being an inference from another
proposition. But this is Edition: current; Page: [1008] only one among
many attributes of propositions: a conditional proposition, therefore,
is only one of many kinds of propositions, having a proposition for
their subject.

We may say, That the whole is greater than its part, is an axiom in
mathematics: That the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father alone, is a
tenet of the Greek church: The doctrine of the divine right of Kings was
renounced by the British Parliament at the Revolution: The infallibility
of the Pope has no countenance from Scripture. Not one of these can
possibly be mistaken for a conditional proposition. In all these,
however, the subject is an entire proposition. That which these
different predicates are affirmed of, is the proposition “The whole is
greater than its part;” the proposition “The Holy Ghost proceeds from
the Father alone;” the proposition “Kings have a divine right;” the
proposition “The Pope is infallible.”

[¶7] There is nothing about this class of propositions which seems
particularly difficult of comprehension. There is no difficulty in
understanding that as we may make an assertion respecting anything else,
so we may make an assertion respecting an assertion. A hypothetical
proposition is one particular kind of assertion respecting an assertion;
and there does not seem to be so generic a difference between it and any
other kind, as to account for its having been selected to fill so
conspicuous a place in Treatises on Logic, while the others have
remained blended in the general mass of Categorical Propositions.
Hypothetical propositions, indeed, have so far a peculiar claim to the
attention of the Logician, that what they assert of an assertion, is its
being a logical inference from another assertion.

[§4]

[¶1] The third division of Propositions is into universal, particular,
indefinite and singular. This distinction is founded on the degree of
generality of the subject of the proposition. The following are examples
of the four classes:—

  -------------------------- -------------
  _All men_ are Mortal       Universal.
  _Some men_ are mortal      Particular.
  _Man_ is mortal            Indefinite.
  _Julius Cæsar_ is mortal   Singular.
  -------------------------- -------------

[¶2] The proposition is singular, when the subject is an individual
name. It is not necessary that the individual name should be a proper
name: “The founder of Christianity was crucified,” is as much entitled
to the name of a singular proposition as “Christ was crucified.”

[¶3] When the subject of the proposition is a general name, it may
either stand for all that it denotes or only for a part. Thus, man may
either stand for all men, or only for some men. When the predicate is
affirmed or denied of all and each of the things denoted by the subject,
the proposition is universal. When of some non-assignable number of them
only, the proposition is particular. Thus, All men are mortal, Every man
is mortal, are universal propositions, because the predicate mortal is
affirmed of each and every individual denoted by the term man. No man is
immortal, is also a universal proposition, since the predicate immortal
is denied of each and every individual denoted by the term man: the
negative proposition, being exactly equivalent to the following, “Every
man is not-mortal.” But “Some men are wise,” “Some men are not wise,”
are particular propositions: Edition: current; Page: [1009] the
predicate wise being in the one case affirmed and in the other denied,
not of each and every individual denoted by the term man, but only of
each and every one of an unspecified portion of those individuals.

[¶4] When it is not clear from the form of the expression whether the
general name which is the subject of the proposition stands for all the
individuals denoted by it, or only for some of them, the proposition is
called indefinite: but this, as Dr. Whately has observed, is an
absurdity of the same kind as that committed by some grammarians, when,
in their list of genders, they enumerate the doubtful gender. The whole
truth in respect to an indefinite proposition is, that the form of the
expression does not shew whether its author means to assert a universal
proposition or a particular one: but we know that he must mean to assert
either the one or the other. And very often, though the words themselves
do not shew which he intends, the context or the usage of the language
supplies the deficiency. Thus, when it is affirmed that “Man is mortal:”
nobody ever doubts that the assertion is intended of all men, and the
word indicative of universality is commonly omitted, only because the
meaning is evident without it.

[¶5] When a general name thus stands for each & every individual which
it is a name of, or in other words denotes, it is said by Logicians to
be distributed, or employed distributively. [¶6] These terms enable us
to express very concisely the definitions already given of a universal
and of a particular proposition. A universal proposition is that of
which the subject is distributed; a particular proposition is that of
which the subject is undistributed. The words distributed and
undistributed are of great service in stating and demonstrating the
rules of the Syllogism, as those rules have been commonly conceived. The
view which will be taken in this work of the nature of the Syllogism
renders these technical expressions less indispensable; but they are
still very convenient for a variety of purposes.

[¶7] There are many other distinctions among propositions; but for
explaining and illustrating these, in so far as their importance may
render it desirable, more suitable opportunities will occur.

Edition: current; Page: [1011]


[Chapter v: Of the Import of Propositions*]

[§1]

[¶6] We are now prepared to analyse the meaning of Propositions: to
inquire into the nature of the immediate object of belief; into the
nature of an assertion or judgment; or of the matter of fact signified
by a proposition. In other words, we are about to inquire, What is that
which is expressed by the form of discourse called a proposition, and
the conformity of which to fact, constitutes the truth of the
proposition.

[§2]

[¶1] One of the closest and most consecutive thinkers whom this country,
or the world itself, has produced, I mean Hobbes, has given the
following answer to this question. In every proposition, he says, what
is really asserted is, that the predicate is the name of the same thing
of which the subject is the name; and if it really be so, the
proposition is true. Thus, the proposition, All men are living beings,
is true (he would say) because living being is a name of everything of
which man is a name. All men are six feet high, is not true, because six
feet high is not a name of everything (though it is of some things) of
which man is a name.

[¶2] That what is here given as the definition of a true proposition, is
a property really belonging to all true propositions, must be admitted:
but not that it is any explanation of what we mean when we call a
proposition true.

That all true propositions have the property ascribed to them by Hobbes
is evident, since the subject and predicate being both names of things,
if these things were wholly different, the one name could not,
consistently with its signification, be predicated of the other. It
could not be true, that Some men are black, unless among the individuals
denoted by the name man, there were some who are also included among the
individuals denoted by the name black. It would not be true that All
oxen ruminate, unless all the individuals denoted by the name ox, were
included among the individuals denoted by the name ruminating.

[¶3] Hobbes’s definition, therefore, of a true proposition, contains
nothing erroneous. But it fails in this; that it gives altogether an
inadequate notion of what the truth of the proposition depends upon—of
what the proposition really asserts.

[¶4] The only propositions of which Hobbes’s definition can be admitted
as a sufficient explanation, are that very limited and unimportant
class, in which both the subject and the predicate are proper names.
For, as has already been remarked, proper names have strictly no
meaning; they are merely marks for individual objects: and when a proper
name is predicated of another proper name, all the meaning conveyed is
that both the names are marks for the same object. But this is precisely
what Hobbes produces as a theory of predication in general. This
doctrine is a full and satisfactory explanation of such predications as
these, Hyde was Clarendon, or Tully is Cicero. It exhausts the whole
meaning Edition: current; Page: [1011] of these propositions. But it is
a sadly inadequate theory of any others. That it should ever have been
thought of as such, can be accounted for only by the fact, that Hobbes,
in common with the other Nominalists, entirely overlooked the
connotation of words; and sought for their meaning exclusively in what
they denote: fancying that all names were (what none but proper names
really are), marks put upon individuals; and seeing no difference
between a proper name and a general name, except that the first denotes
only one individual, and the last a greater number. It was the natural
consequence of such views that a theory of predication which only suits
the case in which both terms of the proposition are proper names, should
be brought forward to explain predication in all cases whatever.

[¶5] We, however, have shewn, that the meaning of all names, except
proper and abstract names, resides in the connotation. When, therefore,
we are analysing the meaning of any proposition, of which the predicate
and subject are neither proper nor abstract names, it is to the
connotation of those terms that we must exclusively look, and not to
what they denote, or, in Hobbes’s language, to what they are names of.

[¶7] A man, or a bird, or a stone, means simply an object having such
and such attributes. The real meaning of the word man, is those
attributes, and not John, Peter, Thomas, &c. The word mortal, in like
manner, connotes certain attributes: and when we say, All men are
mortal, the meaning of the proposition is, that all beings which possess
the one set of attributes, possess also the other. If, in our
experience, the attributes connoted by man are found to be always
accompanied by the attributes connoted by mortal, it will follow, as a
necessary consequence, that the class man will be wholly included in the
class mortal, or that mortal will be a name of all things of which man
is a name: for why? those objects are brought under the name, by our
having discovered that they possess the attributes connoted by it: but
their possession of the attributes is the fundamental fact on which the
truth of the proposition depends; not their being called by the name.
Connotative names always follow the attributes which they connote. If
any two attributes happen to be conjoined, whether it be in one instance
only or in all instances, the concrete names answering to those
attributes will of course be predicable of the same subject, and may be
said in Hobbes’s language (in the propriety of which I fully concur) to
be two names for the same thing. But the coincidence in the application
of the two names is a mere consequence of the conjunction between the
attributes; and was, very likely, never thought of, when the names were
invented, and their signification fixed. That the diamond is combustible
was a proposition certainly not dreamt of when the words diamond and
combustible received their present meaning; and could not have been
discovered by the most ingenious and refined analysis of those words. It
was found out by a very different process, viz: by exerting the five
senses, and learning from them, that the attribute of combustibility
existed in all those diamonds upon which the experiment was tried; these
being so numerous, and the circumstances of the experiment being such,
that what was true of those individuals might be concluded to be true of
all substances coming within the name, that is, of all substances
possessing the attributes which it connotes. The assertion, therefore,
when analysed, is, that wheresoever we find certain attributes, we shall
find a certain other attribute. And this is not a question of the
signification of names, but of the laws of nature; the order which
exists among phenomena.

Edition: current; Page: [1012]
[§3]

[¶1] Although Hobbes’s theory of Predication has not, in the words in
which he stated it, met with a very favourable reception from
philosophers; a theory precisely identical with it, and not by any means
so perspicaciously expressed, may almost be said to have taken its place
among established opinions. The most generally received notion of what
Predication is, among those who have attempted to consider it
metaphysically, is decidedly this—that it consists in placing something
in a class; i.e. either placing one class under another class, or
placing an individual under a class. Thus, the proposition Man is
mortal, asserts according to this view of it, that the class man is
included in the class mortal. “Plato was a philosopher,” asserts that
the individual Plato was one of those who compose the class philosopher.
If the proposition is negative, then, instead of placing something in a
class, it excludes something from a class. Thus, if the following be the
proposition, The Elephant is not carnivorous; what this proposition
asserts is, that the elephant is excluded from the class carnivorous, or
is not numbered among the things which compose that class.

When we consider that a class is absolutely nothing but an indefinite
number of individuals denoted by a general name, the identity of this
theory with that of Hobbes is too manifest to require elucidation. [¶2]
How widely these views have prevailed, is evident from the fact, that
they are the basis of the celebrated dictum de omni et nullo. When the
syllogism is resolved by all those who treat of it, into an inference
that what is true of a whole class, is true of all things whatever
belonging to that class; and when this is almost universally laid down
by logicians as the principle upon which all reasoning ultimately rests;
it is clear that in the general estimation of logicians, the
propositions, of which reasonings are composed, can be the expression of
nothing but the process of dividing things into classes, and referring
every object to its proper class.

[¶3] I cannot but consider this theory to be both unsatisfactory and
illogical. Unsatisfactory, because we have already seen that by digging
deeper for a solution, a more complete one may be found. Illogical,
because instead of explaining the effect by the cause, it explains the
cause by the effect. It is I conceive founded upon a latent
misconception of the nature of classification.

[¶4] It seems to be supposed that classification is an arrangement and
grouping of definite and known individuals: That when names were
imposed, an inventory was made of all the objects in the universe, and
these being divided into parcels or lists, a name was given to each list
to be common to all the objects in it; in the same manner, (allowance
being made for the difference between a name of one individual & a name
of more than one) in which a man gives a name to each of his children,
to distinguish them from one another: That the objects were then brought
again into a common stock, & rearranged on some other principle, each of
the new lists having also a name given to it; and so on; until all the
general names in our language had been arrived at. This having been
done; if a question subsequently arises whether a certain general name
can be truly predicated of any particular object, we have only to
consult our former proceedings, and see whether that object is to be
found in the list corresponding to that name. It has been predetermined
by the inventors of language what individual objects each class shall
consist of; and all we have to do is to refer to the record of an
antecedent decision.

[¶5] When broadly stated, this seems ridiculous enough. But it is
curious to Edition: current; Page: [1013] observe how closely the
received explanations of classification and naming are related to this
absurd theory: and how well calculated they are to introduce into the
mind, though indistinctly yet so much the more effectually, this very
idea.

[¶6] General names are not marks put upon definite objects. Classes are
not made by drawing a line round a certain number of given individuals.
The objects which compose any given class are perpetually fluctuating.
We may frame a class, without knowing even one of the individuals
composing it; we may do so, believing that no such individuals exist. If
by the meaning of a general name are to be understood the things which
it is the name of, or which it denotes, no general name, except by
accident, has any fixed meaning at all. The meaning of a general name
resides exclusively in what it connotes. The only mode in which any
general name has a definite meaning, is in being a name of all things,
known and unknown, past, present, or future, which possess certain
definite attributes. When, by studying not the meaning of words, but the
phenomena of nature, we discover that the attributes in question are
possessed by some objects not previously known to possess them,—as was
the case when chemists found out that the diamond was combustible,—we
then include the object in the class: but it did not already belong to
the class. We place the individual in the class, because the proposition
is true: the proposition is not true because the object falls within the
class.

[¶7] It is of some importance to enter thus fully into the analysis of
these theories of Predication, as the logical habit in which they
originate is very widely diffused; and it is to the influence of this
habit I must ascribe the fact that notwithstanding the great advances
which have been made in the analytical study of the mind since the days
of the Schoolmen, the theory of logic has, in my opinion, actually
retrograded since that time. The habit which I allude to, is that of
assimilating all the operations of the human understanding which have
Truth for their object, namely, the assent to it, & the demonstration of
it, [*]to processes of mere classification and naming.

When we come to treat of Reasoning, we shall, I think, be convinced how
much the theory of that intellectual process has been vitiated by the
influence of the views which I have just been combating. [¶8] I have
only further to remark in this place, that, although Hobbes’s theory of
predication, as Leibnitz pointed out, renders truth and falsity
perfectly arbitrary, without any standard but the will of man, it must
not be concluded that either Hobbes, or any of the other philosophers
who have in the main agreed with him, did in fact consider the
distinction between truth and error as less real, or attached one jot
less importance to it, than other people. To suppose that they did so,
would argue total unacquaintance with their other speculations. But this
shews how little hold their doctrine possessed even over their own
minds. No person, at bottom, ever imagined that there was nothing more
in truth than mere propriety of expression; than using language in
conformity to a previous convention. With whatever illusions even
profound thinkers may have contrived to satisfy themselves when
endeavouring to find a general solution for a great metaphysical
problem,—when they came to the practical application of their doctrines,
they were always prepared with some means of explaining the solution
away. When the inquiry was brought down from generals to a particular
case, every one has always acknowledged a distinction between verbal
questions & real questions; has freely admitted that some Edition:
current; Page: [1014] false propositions are uttered from ignorance of
the meaning of words, but in others the source of the error is in
things: that in the former case, there is no impropriety in saying, that
the assertion intended is true, and the falsity lies in the words only:
That a person who has not the use of language may form true propositions
mentally, that is, he may believe matters of fact. [*]No doubt, indeed,
when the matter of fact is correctly conceived in my mind, and my
opinion or judgment is strictly true, if I attempt to put that opinion
into words, I may, from ignorance of their conventional meaning, convey
a false proposition instead of a true one. The question whether I have
correctly expressed a given matter of fact, or what are the words I must
use for the correct expression of it, is a question of naming, entirely.
But this is no philosophical discovery. Every child knows that the mode
of putting a truth into words depends upon the meaning of words; and
Hobbes’s definition must shrink into the dimensions of this barren
truism, in order to be true at all.

The ease with which what would satisfy nobody if brought to explain what
constitutes the truth of any one fact, is accepted as a perfectly
satisfactory solution of the nature of Truth in general, merits
particular attention; & adds one more to the numerous examples which
shew that the chances of error in our speculations are nearly in direct
proportion to their generality.

The countenance which this particular error derives from an imperfect
conception of the distinction between essential and accidental
propositions, & from a misapprehension of the nature of mathematical
reasoning, and in particular of the algebraic calculus, will fall under
our notice, in another place. Hereafter, also, in treating of
classification and naming, it will still more clearly appear that these
operations are completely arbitrary; that their sole object is
convenience; and that instead of determining the truth of propositions,
they bend to it, and, in all cases, shape and mould themselves according
to those judgments, of which propositions are the expression. That, in
short, we name & classify things according to their attributes; & do not
ascribe attributes to them in obedience to a previous meaning and
classification.

In combating the superficial views of some philosophers on the nature of
Predication, we have already done nearly everything which is necessary
for shewing what Predication really is.

The Predicate of a Proposition must be either a proper name, or a
connotative name, or an abstract name.

A proper name being merely an unmeaning mark used to speak of an object
by; in predicating of any object a proper name, we convey no meaning, we
express belief in nothing, except only that this is the object which it
is a mark of. If the proposition is negative instead of being
affirmative, the assertion conveyed is, that this is not the object
which the proper name is a mark for. It is of no consequence what kind
of name forms the subject of the proposition. It must, indeed, be an
individual name, otherwise the proposition would be neither true nor
false, but simply unmeaning. “The father of Socrates was Sophroniscus,”
is a true proposition: “Pericles was Sophroniscus,” is a false
proposition; but “All men were Sophroniscus,” can hardly be called a
false proposition, nor “Some men were not Sophroniscus” a true one; both
are simple nonsense: they are a kind of solecisms in language. For
nothing of which the human mind can frame Edition: current; Page: [1015]
a conception, is affirmed in the one case, or denied in the other. The
propositions are equivalent to these: “many men are one man:” “many men
are not one man:” now what image do these sentences raise in the mind,
more than if the words were read backwards? No more than Abracadabra. We
cannot predicate a proper name of a general name, either truely or
falsely; such a predication is mere gibberish. But the subject of the
proposition, so long as it is only the name of one individual, may be
either proper or connotative. In both cases, equally, the subject of the
proposition is simply this, that the individual, in whatever manner
designated, who is denoted by the subject, bears or does not bear the
name which is the predicate.

The case is very different when the predicate is a connotative name.
When that is predicated of any object individually designated, there is
always asserted a matter of fact, distinct from the mere meaning of a
name. This matter of fact is, that the object thus individually pointed
out, possesses the particular attributes connoted by the connotative
names.

[§4, ¶1] When, therefore, the subject is a proper name, and the
predicate a connotative one, the proposition, if affirmative, asserts
that an individual, to be known by a particular mark which has been put
upon it, possesses the attributes connoted by the predicate. From the
analysis of attributes, it will be remembered that this means that the
said individual excites in our minds & those of others, certain
sensations or other states of consciousness; or, if itself a sentient
being, experiences certain sensations or other states of consciousness.

The subject as well as the predicate may be a connotative name. And this
is the most important of all the cases; as it comprehends all general
propositions, except those in which the subject is an abstract name.

[§4, ¶2] In this case, as in the last, what the proposition asserts or
expresses a belief in, is, of course, that the objects denoted by the
subject possess the attributes connoted by the predicate. But the
characteristic of this case is that the objects are not individually
designated. They are pointed out only by some of their attributes: and
the only thing known of them may be those attributes: in the case of a
general proposition, the objects denoted by the subject being indefinite
in number, some of them are not known individually at all. The
assertion, therefore, is not that the attributes connoted by the
predicate are possessed by any individual or any number of individuals
known previously as John, Thomas, Richard, &c. but that those attributes
are possessed by each & every individual possessing certain other
attributes; in other words, that one set of attributes is constantly
conjoined with another set.

It is easy to accommodate this explanation to the diversities of
universal, particular, and singular, of affirmative and negative
propositions: thus:

All men are mortal, signifies that the attribute connoted by mortal,
constantly accompanies the attributes connoted by man. In other words,
that all objects which have the attributes connoted by man have likewise
the attributes connoted by mortal. Or, again changing the expression;
that all objects which excite and experience the sensations connoted by
man, excite and experience the sensations connoted by mortal. (I use the
word sensations merely for shortness; the entire phrase would be,
sensations, thoughts, emotions, and volitions.)

Some men have black hair, means, that the attribute connoted by “having
black hair,” sometimes accompanies the attributes connoted by man. Or
that some objects which have the attributes connoted by man, have also
the attribute connoted by having black hair. Or that some objects which
excite and experience Edition: current; Page: [1016] the sensations
connoted by man, excite also the sensations connoted by having black
hair.

The Archbishop of Canterbury has black hair, means, that the attribute
connoted by having black hair, accompanies the attributes connoted by
Archbishop of Canterbury, in the single instance of the individual at
present possessing those attributes, to whom the assertion is limited,
by the particle the, which also marks that there is but one such
individual.

The same analysis will hold, with the necessary variations, in the case
of negative propositions.

No birds are four-footed, signifies that the attribute connoted by
four-footed, never accompanies the attributes connoted by bird. In other
words, that none of the objects which have the attribute connoted by
bird, have the attributes connoted by four-footed. Or finally, that of
the objects that excite and experience the sensations which the name
bird connotes as being experienced & excited, there is not one which
excites, in addition, the sensations connoted by the name four-footed.

Some men are not mathematicians, signifies, that the attribute connoted
by mathematician, does not always accompany the attributes connoted by
man. Or that some of the objects which have the attributes connoted by
man, have not that which is connoted by mathematician: Or that some of
the objects which excite and experience the sensations connoted by man,
do not excite and experience the sensations connoted by mathematician.

The first navigator was not a mathematician, means that the attribute
connoted by mathematician, did not accompany the attributes connoted by
navigator, in the first instance in which those attributes ever existed;
or, to put the same meaning into another form, do not accompany the
attributes connoted by first navigator, one of which attributes is that
of being the only individual of its class.

In all these cases I repeat that the word sensation is used as the
representative of all states of consciousness whatever; though it is a
name properly belonging only to what are commonly but incorrectly called
bodily feelings, meaning such as can be proved to be organic. The exact
import of this word, it is not necessary to discuss, except in a work,
treating either of physiology, or of metaphysics. The word sensation has
been adopted in the above analysis merely to avoid complicating the
sentence with four words instead of one.

The truth, then, of a general proposition of which the subject and
predicate are connotative names, depends upon a fact ascertainable by
experience, viz: whether certain phenomena, of the external senses or of
external consciousness, do or do not constantly accompany certain other
phenomena, either in all or in some of their combinations. The word
attribute, when so understood as not to suggest the notion of an occult
cause, affords the most compact and concise phraseology for expressing
the conclusion at which we have arrived. We may, therefore, state as the
final result of this portion of our inquiry into the nature of
predication, the following maxims:

Every general proposition of which the subject and predicate are
connotative names, either affirms or denies, that either all or some of
the objects possessing the attributes connoted by the subject, possess
also the attributes connoted by the predicate.

If the two sets of attributes are thus conjoined in all or some of those
objects, the affirmative proposition is true and the negative false; if
they are not so conjoined, the negative proposition is true and the
affirmative false.

Edition: current; Page: [1017]


[Chapter vi: Of Propositions Merely Verbal*]

[§1]

[¶3] This leads us to a distinction of very great practical importance;
the distinction between essential and accidental propositions, and
between essential and accidental properties or attributes.

[§2]

[¶1] The Schoolmen, and most other philosophers prior to Locke, as well
as many since his time, have made a great mystery of what they called
essential predication, being that in which the predicate was of the
essence of the subject: meaning, as they said, by its essence, that
without which it could neither be, nor be conceived to be. Thus,
rationality, they said, was of the essence of man, because, without
rationality, man could not be conceived to exist. It is not necessary
here to state particularly the connexion which this distinction had with
the doctrines of substantiæ secundæ, or universal substances, and
substantial forms, doctrines which under varieties of phraseology,
pervaded alike the Aristotelian and the Platonic Schools. I allude to
these dogmas of the Realists, which were the technical expression of the
erroneous notion that genera and species are made by nature, and cannot
be altered for man’s convenience, merely because these false views of
the nature of classification & generalization, satisfactorily account
for what would otherwise be inexplicable, viz: that the Schoolmen should
not have seen what is so extremely obvious, as the real nature of those
essences which held so conspicuous a place in their philosophy. They
said truly, that man cannot be conceived without rationality. But we can
conceive an animal exactly like a man, in all except that one quality,
and those others which are the consequences of it. All, therefore, which
is really true in the assertion, that man could not be conceived without
rationality, is only, that if he had not rationality, he would not be
reputed a man. There is no impossibility in conceiving the thing: nor,
for aught we know, is there any impossibility in its existing: the
impossibility is only in the conventions of language, which will not
allow the thing, even if it exist, to be called by the name which is
reserved for rational beings. Rationality, in short, is involved in the
meaning of the word man: it is one of the attributes connoted by that
name. The essence, therefore, of man, simply meant the whole of the
attributes connoted by the word. And any one of these attributes, taken
singly, may be called an essential property of man.*

Edition: current; Page: [1018]
[¶3] Now, as the most familiar of the general names predicable of an
object, in most cases connote not one only, but several of the
attributes of object [sic]; each of which attributes may also be taken
separately to form the bond of union of some class, and the meaning of
some general name; it is obvious that we may predicate of a name
connoting a variety of attributes, another name which connotes only one
of those attributes, or some smaller number of them than all. In such
cases, the universal affirmative proposition will be true; it being
self-evident, that every object which possesses the whole of any set of
attributes, must possess a part of that same set. In such cases,
however, the proposition conveys no information, to any person who
previously understood the whole meaning of the terms. The propositions,
Every man is a corporeal being, Every man is an animal, Every man is
rational, convey no knowledge to any one, who was already perfectly
aware of the entire meaning of the word man; for the meaning of the word
man includes all this: and, that every man has the attributes connoted
by these different predicates, is already asserted when he is called a
man. Now, of this nature are all the propositions which have been called
essential propositions. They are accordingly, in fact, identical
propositions.

[¶4] Every proposition, indeed, which ascribes any attribute to the
thing denoted by a name, involves, it is true, a tacit assertion that
there really exists a thing corresponding to the name, and possessing
the attributes which it connotes; and this, no doubt, may convey
information, even to those who perfectly understood the meaning of the
name. But all the information of this sort which is conveyed by all the
essential propositions of which man can be made the subject, are
included in the single assertion, Men exist. And this assumption of real
existence is only the result of an imperfection of language. It arises
from the ambiguity of the copula, which in addition to its proper
function of a mark to shew that there is a predication, is also, as we
have already remarked, a concrete word, connoting existence. The actual
existence of the subject of the proposition is only apparently, not
really, implied in the predication, if an essential one; for we may say,
A ghost is a disembodied spirit, without believing in ghosts. But every
proposition not essential does imply the real existence of the subject,
or else the proposition is mere non-sense. Thus, the proposition, The
ghost of a murdered person haunts the couch of the murderer, can only
have a meaning, if understood as signifying a belief in ghosts; since
the attribute predicated is clearly not implied in the signification of
the word ghost: unless, therefore, the speaker intends to express a fact
or phenomenon, which really takes place, he expresses nothing more than
if he uttered inarticulate sounds.

[¶5] It will be shewn, in a subsequent place, that whenever any
important Edition: current; Page: [1019] consequences appear to flow, as
in mathematics, from an essential proposition, or a proposition
deduceable from the meaning of a name, it is from this tacit assumption
of the real existence of the object so named, that these consequences
really flow. Apart from this assumption of real existence, propositions
in which the predicate is of the essence of the subject, that is, in
which the predicate connotes the whole or part of what the subject
connotes, but nothing besides, answer no purpose except that of
unfolding the whole or some part of the meaning of the name which is the
subject, to those who did not previously know it. Accordingly, the most
useful class of essential propositions are Definitions, which, to be
complete, should unfold the whole of what is involved in the meaning of
the word defined, i.e. the whole of what it connotes. But it is usual,
in defining a name, not to indicate all the attributes which it
connoted, but only so many of them as are sufficient to segregate all
the known objects denoted by it, from all other known objects. And
sometimes some merely accidental property, not involved in the meaning
of the name at all, answers this purpose equally well. The various kinds
of Definition which these distinctions give rise to, and the purposes to
which they are respectively subservient, will be minutely considered in
the proper place.

[§3]

[¶1] According to the above view of essential propositions, no
proposition is essential which relates to an individual by name, i.e. to
a proper name. This is a deviation from the language of the Schoolmen.
They regarded everything as of the essence of an individual, which was
of the essence of the species to which they were accustomed to refer
that individual; that is of the class to which it was most familiarly
referred, & to which, therefore, they conceived, that it by nature
belonged. Thus, because the proposition Man is a rational being, was an
essential proposition, they held this to be the case likewise with the
proposition, Julius Cæsar is a rational being. This naturally followed
if genera and species were to be considered as entities distinct from
the individuals composing them. If man was a substance inhering in every
individual man, it was natural to conclude that the essence of man was
something inherent in man, and by necessary consequence inherent in all
individual men and forming their common essence. It might then be said
that rationality was not only of the essence of man, but of the essence
of Julius Cæsar. But this expression has no meaning when severed from
the metaphysical theory out of which it grew.

[¶2] A fundamental error, however, is seldom expelled from philosophy by
a single victory. It retreats slowly, defends obstinately every inch of
ground, and often retains a firm footing in some difficult fastness,
after the whole of the open country has been wrested from it. The
essences of individuals were an absurd figment arising entirely out of a
misapprehension of the essences of classes, yet so profound a
philosopher as Locke, when he discarded the parent error, still held
fast to that which was its offspring. He divided essences into two
classes, real and nominal essences. Real essences were the essences of
individual objects: these, he says, are the causes of the sensible
properties of objects. What they are we do not know, but if we did, from
them alone, we could demonstrate the sensible properties of the object,
just as we demonstrate the properties of the triangle from the
definition of the triangle. The nominal essences of Locke were the
essences of classes, explained nearly as we have explained them; in
short, the Edition: current; Page: [1020] connotation of general names.
Nor is anything wanting to render the third book of Locke’s Essay a
nearly perfect treatise on the connotation of names, except to disengage
it from the assumption of abstract ideas, which unfortunately is
inextricably mixed up in all his language, but not in the thoughts of
which that language is in every other respect the appropriate
expression. Because a name may be given to an object to signify some
only of the properties of the object; Locke concluded that we may have
an idea of those properties by themselves, independently of any others:
and he always spoke of the name as expressing that idea of the
properties, & not the properties themselves. This extremely vicious
phraseology has had a most unfortunate influence upon the fate of his
speculations; for when Berkeley afterwards pointed out that these
pretended abstract ideas do not exist; and that all our ideas are
“clothed in circumstances” and are in fact ideas of individuals more or
less completely conceived, philosophers ceased to attend to those
observations of Locke on the meaning of words, which appeared to involve
a theory subsequently recognized as erroneous, and went off into pure
Nominalism, from which the speculations of Locke, if properly
understood, would have preserved them. And what is still more
remarkable, the blindest admirers of Locke, whose doctrines on many
subjects are a mere caricature of his, the school of Condillac and
Helvetius,[*] although they retained the exploded part of Locke’s
system, the doctrine of abstract ideas, benefitted no more than other
people by any of the other doctrines of that immortal third Book, in
which the only flaw of importance, unless I am mistaken, is that
erroneous theory.

[§4]

[¶1] Propositions not essential are called accidental. An accidental
attribute of a class, is any attribute not involved in the signification
of the general name appropriated to that class,—or in the precise and
convenient language to which we have hitherto adhered, any attribute not
connoted by the name. All general propositions, in which the predicate
connotes any attribute not connoted by the subject, are accidental
propositions. All such propositions, if true, add to our knowledge; they
convey other information than that which is involved in the names
employed. When I am told that all objects (or even some objects) which
have certain qualities, or which stand in certain relations, have also
certain other qualities or stand in certain other relations, not the
same with any of those first mentioned, I learn from this proposition a
new fact; a fact not included in, nor deducible from, my knowledge of
the meaning of the words, nor even of the existence of things answering
to the signification of those words. It is this class of propositions
only, which are in themselves instructive, or from which any instructive
propositions can be inferred.

[¶2] There is nothing which seems likely so greatly to have contributed
to the general opinion so commonly prevalent, of the futility of the
school logic, as the circumstance that almost all the examples used in
the common school books to illustrate the doctrines of Predication & of
the Syllogism, consist of essential propositions. They are usually taken
either from the branches or from the main trunk of the Predicamental
tree, which included nothing but what was of the essence of the species.
Such were, Omne corpus est substantia, Omne animal est Edition: current;
Page: [1021] corpus, Omnis homo est corpus, Omnis homo est animal, Omnis
homo est rationalis, & so forth. It is scarcely to be wondered at, that
the rules of the syllogistic process should have been thought to be of
no use in assisting correct reasoning, when the only propositions,
which, in the hands of its professed teachers, it seemed to be employed
to prove, were such as every one assented to without proof the moment he
comprehended the meaning of the words. I have therefore throughout this
work, studiously avoided the employment of essential propositions as
examples, except where the nature of the principle to be illustrated
particularly required them.

[*]We have now concluded our analysis of those kinds of Predication, in
which the subject and predicate are concrete names. The only remaining
kind of names are abstract names, or those which instead of denoting an
object and connoting an attribute, denote the attribute itself directly:
in other words, denote a certain combination or succession of states of
consciousness, implying at the same time that these are excited by some
object which is not specified.[†]

Edition: current; Page: [1022]
[*]These are of two kinds; those in which both the subject & predicate
are abstract names; and those in which the subject is an abstract and
the predicate a concrete name. There is no class of propositions in
which the subject is a concrete & the predicate an abstract name. An
abstract name cannot be predicated of a concrete. A concrete name is the
name of an object; a body or mind; or else, the name of a feeling,
considered merely in itself, & without being referred to any object, as
its source. It would be absurd to predicate of any of these things, the
name of an attribute. It would be absurd to say that an object is a
quality, or that an object is a relation; that a sensation is a quality,
or that a sensation is a relation. It would not conduce to the ends of
language to couple words together in Edition: current; Page: [1023] such
a mode. A predication of this sort would not be true, nor even false.
For when we say that a proposition is false, we mean that it contains
some assertion; that it expresses a belief in something, although that
something does not appear to be conformable to fact: as, that three
angles of a triangle are equal to ten right angles. But a predication
such as those we have supposed, would not convey the notion of anything
intelligible; not even an intelligible error or falsehood.

Though an abstract name cannot be predicated of a concrete one, a
concrete name may in certain cases be predicated of an abstract one. It
would be as absurd, certainly, to say of an attribute, that it is an
object, as to say of an object that it is an attribute. But when we
predicate of any thing a concrete connotative name, we do not thereby
affirm that the thing of which the name is predicated is Edition:
current; Page: [1024] an object; we merely affirm, that it is something
which possesses attributes, (namely, those attributes which the
predicate connotes). Now an attribute as well as an object may possess
attributes. Every name, therefore, which connotes attributes capable of
being possessed by attributes, may be predicated of an abstract name.
Thus we may predicate of an attribute, the relation in which it stands
to any object of which it is an attribute, as when we say, whiteness is
the colour of snow; Dissimulation is the quality of a coward. We may
predicate of it names connotative of various other relations. An
attribute, for instance, may be the cause of an object, of an attribute,
of an event,* or of a feeling; as is expressed in the proposition,
Philosophical instruction strengthens the intellect; wherein it is
affirmed, that the attribute of being instructed in philosophy, causes
or produces the attribute of intellectual strength. In like manner an
attribute may be an effect; as in the last example, intellectual
strength is asserted to be an effect of philosophical insruction.

[*]An attribute may precede, follow, or accompany, an object, an
attribute, an event or a feeling. But the largest class of relations of
attributes, are their mutual Edition: current; Page: [1025]
resemblances, or unlikenesses. As attributes are merely states of human
feeling or consciousness, considered with reference to the objects which
cause them, or to the minds which experience them; whenever two
sensations or states of feeling are alike, the corresponding attributes
may be said to be alike: and when unlike, unlike.*

Besides the class of the attributes of attributes, which we have now
examined, namely, their relations; Attributes may also have qualities.
The contemplation of an attribute may, like the contemplation of an
object, excite certain feelings in the mind. But to excite in the mind a
certain feeling, is that sort of attribute which we have termed a
quality. We may, therefore, predicate of the abstract name which
expresses an attribute, the concrete name which connotes a quality. Thus
we may say with acknowledged propriety—Her beauty is delightful, just as
we may say, Her person is delightful. In this case the predicate
connotes a quality.[*] In the following proposition, His thoughtlessness
is dangerous, the predicate connotes a relation; for dangerous means
that which is a probable cause of evil or inconvenience to some sentient
being.

In all these cases any one who has followed carefully the preceding part
of this exposition, will easily perceive what is the matter of fact
asserted.

[†]For the ordinary purposes of the elementary parts of Logic it is
sufficient to say, that in these propositions, as in all others in which
the predicate is a connotative term, the assertion is that the subject
(which in this case is an attribute) possesses the attributes connoted
by the predicate. If we wish to probe the matter deeper, we shall find
that in these, as in the propositions, which we have previously
examined, the import of the proposition always is, that some phenominon
or state of consciousness, does or does not resemble, is or is not
accompanied by, some other phenomonon or state of consciousness. The
fact affirmed is therefore exactly the same kind of fact which we
assert, when one concrete name is predicated of another. In many cases,
it is not the same kind of fact only, but the very same fact. Thus, when
we say that one sensible quality is like another, what is it but to say,
that one sensation is like another? When we say of any attribute, that
it is an attribute of some particular object, what is it but merely
inverting the proposition that the object in question possesses that
particular attribute? When we say of an attribute (as of
thoughtlessness) that it is a cause of something (as of danger) what is
[it] but to affirm, that the actions done by a thoughtless person (that
is, states of his volition followed by visible outward phenomena) are
causes of probable evil or inconvenience?

[‡]There are various modes in which a proposition, of which the subject
is an abstract name, may be translated into a proposition composed of
concrete names. There is one mode in particular, of very extensive
application, by which a proposition relating to an attribute, is changed
into a proposition relating to the objects possessing the attribute. The
latter proposition is, in this case, of a peculiar form, which is best
displayed by means of examples. Thus, Courage is deserving of honor, is
a proposition equivalent to this “All courageous persons are deserving
Edition: current; Page: [1026] of honour, so far forth as they are
courageous,” which is manifestly equivalent to this: “All persons who
are courageous deserve an addition to the honor, or a diminution of the
disgrace, which may attach to them from other causes.” Again, Virtue is
beneficial to society, is equivalent to “All virtuous persons are
beneficial to society, so far forth as they are virtuous:” i.e. to this,
All virtuous persons produce more beneficial effects to society, than
persons similarly situated & similar in their other qualities, who are
not virtuous.

There still remains for our consideration, the case in which both the
subject and the predicate are abstract names. And we have now to enquire
what is the nature of the matter of fact asserted in such a proposition.

It is here necessary to call to mind a distinction which we early made
between two kinds of abstract names. We found that some were connotative
and others not. There are names given to attributes which connote
nothing, involve nothing in their signification except those attributes;
there are other names given to attributes, which connote attributes of
those attributes. Many of these last, indeed, are, as we have seen
concrete names; for they connote an attribute which, though it may
belong to an attribute, may also belong to a substance or a feeling.
Such are all the connotative names which we used as predicates in our
last set of examples. These denote either objects, or feelings, or
attributes, as it may happen. But there are names which denote only
attributes, & connote attributes of those attributes; or as we may
express it, there are names, part of whose connotation is, that the
thing they denote is an attribute, & nothing but an attribute. Thus
there is on the one hand, the word hurtful, which denotes either objects
or attributes, & connotes, what may be an attribute of either, namely,
the production of evil or inconvenience; & on the other hand, we have
the word fault, which connotes the very same thing, but denotes only
attributes; & may be said without impropriety to connote, (in addition
to the connotation already mentioned) that the thing it is predicated
of, is an attribute. There might be an unlimited number of such words;
there are a considerable number. In these cases the import of the
proposition is clear. It is a proposition exactly similar to those which
we last examined; the matter of fact affirmed is, that the attribute
which is the subject of the proposition, possesses, or does not possess,
the attribute which the predicate connotes; or (if we analize it
further) that the phenomenon, or state of consciousness, which
constitutes the former attribute is or is not accompanied by, does or
does not resemble, some other phenomenon or state of consciousness.

Remains the case in which (the subject being still an abstract name) the
predicate is one of those abstract names which are not connotative.

If an abstract name be not connotative, that is, do not involve in its
signification any attribute of an attribute, & yet can be truly
predicated of some other abstract name, that is, of some other name
denoting an attribute; it must either be another name of the very same
attribute, or it must be a name of a class of attributes, in which that
particular one is included. The proposition “Cohesion is a tendency in
objects to adhere together” is a specimen of the first kind. The subject
& predicate are both names of the same attribute. The proposition
“whiteness is a colour” is a specimen of the same class. Colour is the
name of a class of attributes, and whiteness is the name of one of the
attributes falling under that class.

As in names of objects, so in names of attributes, when the subject &
predicate denote each the very same thing or things, neither more nor
less, the proposition is either merely frivolous, or it expresses the
meaning of a word. It either asserts that two words are synonymous, or
it defines a word. We have already remarked, Edition: current; Page:
[1027] that the definition of a connotative name consists in the
enumeration of the attributes which it connotes. The definition of one
of those abstract names, which are not connotative, is necessarily
somewhat different: & is of two kinds.

If the attribute to be defined, be itself a union of several attributes;
we have only to join together the names of those attributes taken
separately, & we have the definition of the name which belongs to them
all taken together. This definition of the attribute will correspond
exactly to the definition of the concrete name connoting the attribute.
For as we define a concrete name by enumerating the attributes which it
connotes, & as the attributes connoted by a concrete name constitute the
entire signification of the corresponding abstract one, the same
enumeration will serve for the definition of both. Thus, if the
definition of a human being, be thus “a being, corporeal, animated,
rational & of such and such a form”; the definition of humanity will be,
corporeity & animal life combined with rationality & with the same form.

When the abstract name does not express a complication of attributes but
one single attribute, the phenomenon constituting that attribute may yet
be of a complex nature, consisting of several parts either coexistent or
in succession. We may then join together the names of the separate
parts, & predicate them of the name of the whole. And this also will be
a definition. Thus, eloquence might be defined, the power of influencing
the affections of human beings by means of speech or writing.

In all these propositions the import is clear. They belong to the class
of essential propositions; & the information which they communicate is
simply the meaning of a term; with or without an implied assumption,
that there exists an attribute corresponding to the definition, & by
consequence objects possessing that attribute.

When the abstract name, which is the predicate of a proposition, is not
convertible with the subject, it must be the name of a class of
attributes, which includes the attribute denoted by the subject. The
proposition therefore affirms that an attribute belongs to a certain
class. But why does it belong to that class? why was it placed there?
what does its belonging to that class import? In other words, why do we
arrange attributes in classes, when the classification is not founded on
any attribute of those attributes? The answer is clear. When we arrange
attributes in classes, not according to the impression made on our minds
by the contemplation of the attributes, nor according to the relation in
which they stand to some other things; not, in short according to any
attribute of those attributes; we can have but one other principle of
classification, the resemblance of the sensations or other states of
consciousness which constitute the attributes. Thus, paper-colour,
milk-colour, snow-colour, & many others, are ranged in the class
whiteness, on account of the resemblance of the sensations. To assert,
therefore, that any of these attributes belongs to that class, is merely
to assert, that the sensations resemble. To say, paper-colour is a
whiteness, or is a white colour, is merely to say, The sensation we
receive from the sight of paper, resembles to a certain degree, the
sensations we receive from the sight of milk, of silver, of snow &c.

“Whiteness is a colour,” is a proposition of the same class. If we
conceive our sensations of colour to be classed together on account of
their resemblance to each other, the proposition, Whiteness is a colour,
will evidently express that resemblance only, & will therefore belong to
the class we are now examining. Perhaps, however, in the very meaning of
the word colour, is involved the notion Edition: current; Page: [1028]
of being received. Still, however, it is the sensation, not the
attribute which is received through the eye; what the word expresses is
an attribute of the sensation; & this attribute of the sensation, is not
an attribute of the attribute. Colour, therefore, is one of the abstract
names which are not connotative; & the proposition Whiteness is a
colour, merely asserts that the sensations we receive from the things we
call white, resemble the sensations we receive from other coloured
things: the resemblance being in this case partly a resemblance of
relations, viz. both bearing an exactly similar relation to the object
called the eye.

The same may be said of the propositions, Colour is a quality, & A
quality is an attribute. Neither the word colour nor the word attribute
are connotative. Denoting attributes, they do not imply an attribute of
those attributes. Quality implies, not that the attribute (as Colour)
but that the sensation, is received from the coloured object itself,
without the aid of any other object. Attribute implies, not that the
particular attributes denoted, but that the sensations, which constitute
them, emanate from a subject. In predicating these names therefore, we
are, as in the preceding instance, affirming a resemblance between
sensations; & that resemblance is in these as in the preceding instance,
a resemblance of relations.

But resemblance, as we have before remarked, between two simple
feelings, means simply this, that when the two feelings are experienced
together, or in immediate succession, a peculiar feeling, called the
feeling of resemblance, succeeds. Resemblance between things more
complex than simple feelings, means that into those complex wholes,
particular parts enter, which resemble each other; that is, which excite
the feeling of resemblance, perhaps of exact similarity. All
propositions, therefore, which assert resemblance, merely assert, that
certain human feelings are followed by certain others.

We have now examined all the possible cases of Predication. What may be
deficient or obscure in our analysis of them, will be rendered more
intelligible by the sequel of this work. We have, however, unless I am
mistaken, established clearly, what, in all propositions whatever, is
the assertion made; the matter of fact which is the object of belief.

Propositions, we have found, do not, agreeably to the doctrine of
Hobbes, assert in all cases whatever, only one kind of fact, namely an
agreement between the significations of two names. Propositions may, on
the contrary, be divided into two species; of which one only answers to
Hobbes’s definition:

1st. Propositions containing assertions respecting the meaning of names:
these are, propositions of which the predicate is a proper name;
definitions, & other essential, or in other words identical,
propositions.

And 2dly. Propositions which either affirm or deny a fact of the
following description. That two phenomina, cognizable by the external
senses or by internal consciousness, occur in conjunction; i.e. that
when a certain phenomenon takes place, a certain other phenomenon takes
place likewise; either simultaneously or in succession; with or without
an interval of time.

If it be now asked, what constitutes a true proposition; we can give no
other answer, than the apparently superficial one with which we
commenced. The proposition is true, if the assertion contained in it, be
conformable to the fact; or in other words, if there exist any real
fact, of which the assertion contained in the proposition, is an exact
representation.

Having now, however, analysed the assertion contained in every
proposition, and found that the fact asserted is either the identity of
the meaning of two names, or the coexistence of the phenomina; we may,
in consequence, add to the Edition: current; Page: [1029] general
definition of a true proposition, a more particular description of what
constitutes the truth of each of the two species into which propositions
have just been divided.

[*]A proposition, then, which asserts that one name denotes or connotes
all that is denoted or connoted by another, is true, if, according to
the signification which usage or express appointment has attached to the
two names, this identity in their connotation or denotation really
exists. The standard of truth, therefore, in respect to this class of
propositions, is usage or convention.

A proposition which asserts that in whatever subjects one attribute or
set of attributes are found, in those same, or in a part of those same
subjects another attribute or set of attributes also exist:

Or that a particular attribute or set of attributes exist in a given
subject, individually designated;

Or that two objects or attributes resemble, either in themselves or in
their relations;

All these propositions affirm in other words, that one phenominon or
state of our consciousness, is always or sometimes accompanied
(simultaneously or successively) by another phenominon or state of
consciousness. The proposition, therefore, is true, if these two
phenomina really are conjoined in the manner asserted & false if they
are not. And the standard of truth, in respect to this class of
propositions is human consciousness or experience.

Edition: current; Page: [1030]


OF THE PREDICABLES OR UNIVERSALS
 [Chapter vii: Of the Nature of Classification, and the Five Predicables]

[§2]

[¶1] Having considered the nature of Predication in general, & its
various sorts, we may, not without advantage, touch upon the doctrine of
the Predicables; a set of distinctions handed down to us by Aristotle
and his follower Porphyry, & some of which are well worthy of a place in
modern philosophy, in which indeed several of them have taken firm root.

The Predicables are a classification of general names, arising out of
Predication; and founded, not (like the numerous divisions &
distinctions among general names of which we have hitherto treated) upon
diversities in the meanings & functions of the words themselves, but
upon diversities in the relation which they bear to some particular
subject of which they happen to be predicated. Logicians reckon five
different Predicables. We may predicate of the name of any thing, five
different kinds of general names.

  ------------------------ --------------
  A _genus_ of the thing   (γένος)
  A _species_              (εἰ̑δὸς)
  A _differentia_          (διαϕορὰ)
  A _proprium_             (ἴδιόν)
  An _accidens_            (συμβεβηκος)
  ------------------------ --------------

[¶2] But, as we have already intimated, general names are not parcelled
out among these five classes, in such a manner that each inherently &
for ever belongs to only one of the classes. The same name is in one
class or another, according to the subject of which we conceive it to
be, on the particular occasion, predicated. Animal is a genus with
respect to man, or John; a species with respect to substance, or
creature. Rectangular is one of the differentiæ of a geometrical square;
it is merely one of the accidentia of the table on which I am writing.

We proceed briefly to characterize, & distinguish from one another, the
five Predicables; in other words, the five different relations in which
a general name, predicated of a given subject, may stand to that
subject.

[§3]

[¶1] Genus, species, & differentia, are used in two different
acceptations; their popular acceptation, in so far as such a term is
applicable to any of the technical expressions of Logic; & the narrower
sense in which they are used by the Aristotelian Logicians.

In their more popular acceptation, the mutual relations of these three
terms are easily stated. As the power of framing classes is unlimited,
we may frame two, one of which shall include the whole of the other and
more. Such, for instance, are animal and man: man & mathematician. The
larger of the two classes, which includes the smaller, is called the
Genus. The smaller of the two, which is included in the larger, is
called the Species. The distinction holds, whether the classes be
classes of substances, of feelings, or of attributes. Animal, for
instance, is a Genus; man & brute, its two Species; or we may divide it
into a greater number of species, as man, horse, dog, &c. Biped or
two-footed animal may also be considered a genus of which man & bird are
two species. Taste is a genus, of Edition: current; Page: [1031] which,
sweet taste, sour taste, salt taste, &c. are species. Virtue is a genus;
justice, generosity, courage, fortitude, prudence &c. are its species.

[¶2] The same class, which is a genus with reference to the subclasses
or species included in it, may be itself a species with reference to a
superior genus. Thus, man is a species with reference to animal, but a
genus with reference to the species mathematician. Animal is a genus
divided into two species, man & brute; but animal, also, is a species,
which with another species vegetable, makes up the genus “Organized
Being.” Biped is a genus with reference to man & bird, but a species
with reference to the superior genus animal. Taste is a genus divided
into species, but it is also a species under the genus Sensation.
Virtue, a genus with reference to justice, temperance &c. is one of the
species of the genus Mental Quality.

[¶3] In this popular sense the words Genus & Species have passed into
common discourse. The word Differentia, or Specific Difference, is
hardly used except by professed metaphysicians; by them, however, it is
generally employed in a sense sufficiently extended, to correspond with
the popular extension of the words Genus & Species. In this sense, the
Differentia of a Species is any attribute, common to every individual of
that species, & serving to distinguish it from all other species of the
same genus. Thus, rationality may be considered the Differentia of the
species man, with reference to the genus animal; being an attribute
possessed by all the individuals of that species, & by them alone among
all the individuals belonging to the genus; serving, therefore, to
distinguish the species man from the coordinate species, brute. If
instead of referring man to the genus animal, we placed him under the
genus biped, his differentia according to the old jest, would be
featherless; or featherlessness, for in this loose employment of
language,[*] it is not material whether the concrete, or the abstract
name be employed.

[¶4] By the Aristotelian logicians, the terms are used in a more
confined sense. Animal would by them be considered a genus & man &
brute, coordinate species under that genus; but biped would not be
admitted to be a genus, with reference to man, nor featherless one of
the differentiæ of that species. It was necessary, according to their
theory, that genus, species & differentia, should be of the essence of
the subject. Whatever was not of its essence, belonged not to these
three predicables, but to proprium & accidens. Biped was not of the
essence of man, & therefore did not stand in the relation of genus to
that species, but of proprium or accidens only.

[¶5] In the previous chapter, we entered at large into the distinction
between essential & accidental predication, & between essential and
accidental attributes or properties. We found that this distinction,
which has been the occasion of so much abstruse speculation, & to which
so mysterious a character was formerly, & by many writers is still,
attached, amounts to nothing but the difference between those attributes
of a class which are involved in the signification of the name of the
class, & those attributes which are not so involved. We found that there
are no essences of individuals; that, as applied to individuals, the
word essence has no meaning, except as connected with the exploded
tenets of the Realists: but that when we predicate of the name of a
class, the name which connotes any one or more of the attributes
constitutive of the class, we produce an Essential Predication.

Edition: current; Page: [1032]
[§4*] The schoolmen, however, did not recognize this doctrine. The class
to which any individual was most familiarly referred, (as John, Peter,
&c to the class man) they considered as properly & inherently the
species to which that individual belonged. Any further subdivisions into
which that same class might be capable of being broken down (as man into
black, white, & red man, or into priest & layman) they did not admit to
be species. Having thus made over every individual in the universe to
the indefeasible paramountcy of some one particular species, they next
held that whatever was of the essence of the species, (by which they
meant, though they knew it not, whatever was involved in the
signification of its name) was of the essence of the individual also.
Animality, therefore, & rationality, being of the essence of the species
man (i.e. connoted by the name) were, according to them, of the essence
likewise of John & William: but bipedity having nothing to do with the
essence of man (for the word man involves not that quality in its
signification) is not of the essence of John either; & consequently
two-footed is neither a genus of John nor one of his Differentiæ; but is
merely predicable of him accidentally, & belongs not to one of the first
three, but to one of the two latter, Predicables.

The Aristotelians being the original authors of these important terms &
distinctions, it is reasonable that before we attach a meaning of our
own to them, we should ascertain how far that which was given to them by
their inventors is capable of being reconciled to the true theory of the
subject. Dropping therefore, the essences of individuals, a figment of
which nothing rational can be made, but adhering to the assumption that
the Genus & the Differentia must be of the essence of the Species, let
us enquire what mutual relations of the three terms are consequent upon
that supposition. And first, when the classes in question are classes of
substances or of feelings, & the names, consequently, connotative.

[§5]

[¶4] From the very fact that the Genus includes the Species, in other
words, denotes more than the Species, or is predicable of a greater
number of individuals, it follows that the Species must connote more
than the Genus. It must connote all the attributes which the Genus
connotes; otherwise there would be nothing to hinder it from denoting
individuals not included in the Genus. And it must connote something
besides, otherwise it would include the whole Genus. Man denotes all the
individuals denoted by mathematician & many more: Mathematician,
consequently, must connote all that man connotes, otherwise there might
be mathematicians who were not men; & it must connote something more
than man connotes; otherwise all men would be mathematicians. The
Species, therefore, connotes all that the Genus connotes, & something
more.

Take from the Species all that it connotes more than the Genus, & let
there be another word which connotes this surplus taken by itself; that
word is the Differentia, or Specific Difference. Or it may be stated
thus: The Differentia is the word which connotes what must be added to
the connotation of the Genus, to make up the connotation of the Species.
[¶5] The Differentia is said properly enough to constitute the Species.
The Differentia of the class mathematician considered as a species of
the genus man, is, “knowing mathematics;” for that Edition: current;
Page: [1033] is the word which connotes what mathematician connotes more
than man. The differentia of the class man, considered as a species of
the genus animal, is two-fold, “rational & of a certain [*]particular
form” (the form which we all know). Both these attributes are connoted
by man, exclusively of what it connotes in common with animal: & there
is no single word which connotes these attributes without connoting any
others. The compound word, rational & of the human form is therefore the
Differentia or Specific Difference of the species man, considered as
referred to the genus Animal. This same Differentia, which is said to be
the Specific Difference of man, is called a Generic Differentia with
reference to any sub-class, with regard to which man is itself a Genus.
With regard to man, it is the Specific Difference, or the Difference
which constitutes the Species itself: with regard to mathematician, it
is the Difference which constitutes a prior class, a class which, with
reference to mathematician is but a Genus, not the Species.

[†]Thus we have a very clear view of the relation between Genus,
Species, & Differentia, when the things classified are either
Substances, or Feelings. But how when they are neither Feelings nor
Substances, but Attributes? for these also are classified; are formed
into classes & subclasses, which are not only popularly called Genera &
Species, but are reckoned such by the schoolmen themselves. Thus,
quality is a genus, of which colour is one of the species; colour is a
genus, whiteness one of its species. These genera, equally with any of
the others, are said by the Aristotelians to be of the essence of their
species. “Colour is a quality” they would call an Essential Predication;
“whiteness is a colour” the like. In what sense? for the terms, as we
have formerly shown, not being connotative, the explanation which we
have already given of essences & essential predication, will not serve.

I apprehend that the word essence, in this case, has no meaning; no more
than in the case of the pretended essences of individuals. In the case
of connotative names, we found that essence, & essential predication had
a meaning; though one which the inventors of those phrases did not see
to the bottom of. They said, that is of the essence of any thing,
without which it could neither be, nor be conceived to be; now that
without which a man could not be nor be conceived to be, is that, in the
absence of which we should not call him man; that is, the attributes
which the name man connotes. Such attributes, therefore, are really of
the essence of man, in the scholastic sense; & the propositions in which
words which connote any of those attributes, are predicated of man, form
a class apart, distinguished from other predications by the fact that
they communicate no information to any one who previously knew the
meaning of the word which is the subject of the proposition. Now, if,
taking for the subject of our proposition an abstract name which is not
connotative, we can frame any predications which shall possess this same
property of affirming nothing but what is already implied in the meaning
of that abstract non-connotative name, we may with great propriety call
these predications, essential ones. But in our last chapter we found but
one such predication; the definition of the abstract name, & not even
that always; as we shall see hereafter. The proposition “Whiteness is a
colour,” tried by this criterion, certainly is not an essential
proposition. The idea of colour is certainly not implied in the meaning
of the word whiteness. Any one knows the meaning of the word whiteness,
who knows the sensation of white. But when we Edition: current; Page:
[1034] place whiteness in the class colour, we imply much more than the
sensation of white; we place it there on account of a distant
resemblance to the numerous other sensations which we call colours; or
else, on account of a wholly extrinsic circumstance, that of being
perceived through the eye. Colour, therefore, is not of the essence of
whiteness, in the sense in which animality & rationality are of the
essence of man, viz. as being implied in the meaning of the name. But we
found that this was the only rational sense, in which the term essence
could be understood. In no rational sense, therefore, is colour of the
essence of whiteness,[*] and the doctrine, that the genus must be of the
essence of the species, will not, in this case, hold.

What then, did the Aristotelians mean, or what reason had they for
maintaining that in the case of attributes as well as of substances, the
genus must be of the essence of the species? Merely this: that the genus
is, as they expressed it, predicated in quid: that is, in answer to the
question, What the thing is. Thus if you ask, what is John? the first
answer is, A man; if you ask, what is a man? the answer is, An animal,
or A rational animal: If, What is whiteness? the answer is, A colour.
But the reason of this is very simple. When we are asked, What a thing
is? we naturally answer by naming the class to which the thing is most
familiarly referred. If we are pressed still harder, then, besides
naming the class to which the thing is most familiarly referred, we
mention the circumstance which distinguishes it from the other things
belonging to the class. This explains why the Genus & Differentia were
held to be of the essence of the subject. But if this explanation be
correct, then the distinction set up by the schoolmen between the Genus
to which anything belonged, & any other class which could be formed
including that thing was a mere difference of custom & convenience: &
(as we have already seen in the case of what they called their lowest
Species, which they did not allow to be divisible into other species)
all they did was, to take the classification which had become most
habitual, & ascribe to it a prerogative of supremacy, imposing on every
individual an indefeasible allegiance to a particular series of classes
(rising one above another like the middleman & the head landlord of an
Irish estate) because the custom which had associated it with those
particular groups was so strong that it was mistaken (as custom so often
is) for a law of nature.

The definition which I shall endeavour to give of Genus & Differentia,
will retain as much of the spirit of the Aristotelian employment of the
terms as is compatible with the rejection of this notion of jure divino
classifications. Those terms on the one hand, & proprium & accidens on
the other, may, I conceive, with little variation from their original
meaning, be employed to mark distinctions which really exist, & are well
worth preserving, and dwelling upon.

In all classifications, that is, in all parcelling out of a mixed
multitude of objects into classes & subclasses, we may distinguish one
main division & a number of cross divisions. We may make as many
divisions as we can conceive attributes; we in fact, do so whenever we
give a name which connotes any attribute; for by the fact of giving the
name, we establish a division of things in general, into those which
possess the given attribute & those which do not. But notwithstanding
this, there is in all cases some one particular system of divisions and
subdivisions, Edition: current; Page: [1035] which forms as it were the
ground-work of all other divisions which are made of the same complex
whole. There is some one particular way of grouping the objects, to
which the general course of our ideas seems to adapt itself, & upon
which all other arrangements of the same objects are as it were
engrafted. Thus, for instance the division of substances into organized
& inorganic; that of organized substances, into animal & vegetable; of
animals into man, beasts, birds, fishes, insects, reptiles, &c.
constitute a system of divisions, (or, as we commonly say, a
classification) founded upon the most obvious resemblances & upon the
most obvious differences, of the things which are thus classed: an
arrangement, in which those which are manifestly & at the first view
alike, are placed together; those which are manifestly & at the first
view unlike, are placed separate: an arrangement, therefore, into which
the mind so naturally falls (that is, falls so readily, & as it were of
itself) that the schoolmen may be excused for having thought that this
classification, was the work of nature, while all other arrangements of
the same objects were arbitrary, & the work of men.

This, therefore, is an example of a main division; we shall come to the
cross divisions presently. All the classes, which are constituted by a
main division, are genera & species: each class being a genus with
reference to its own subdivisions, & a species with regard to those
superior classes of which it is itself a subdivision.

[§6]

[¶1] Besides the main divisions, which are such because they accord with
the arrangement & grouping into which our ideas naturally fall without
any express intention, we may also artificially make other main
divisions, for reasons of special convenience. For example, a naturalist
considers the various kinds of animals, & looks out for the
classification of them which may most accord with the order in which,
for the purposes of his science, it is desirable that his ideas should
present themselves; with this view he finds it advisable that one of his
fundamental divisions should be that into warm-blooded & cold-blooded
animals; or into the animals which breathe with lungs, & those which
breathe with gills; or into carnivorous, & frugivorous or graminivorous;
or into those which walk on the flat part and those which walk on the
extremity of the foot, a distinction on which some of Cuvier’s families
are founded. These classes, not being those to which the individual
animal is familiarly & spontaneously referred, or in which we should
ever think of arranging the animal kingdom unless for a preconcerted
purpose, or in pursuance of a previous convention; the schoolmen would
not have allowed to them the character of genera or species. For, the
schoolmen would allow no classification, as the fundamental one, except
that which being most familiar they deemed to be the work of nature. But
we, who know that classification is arbitrary, and exists for the sake
of human convenience, must allow that the groups into which objects
first class themselves, according to their obvious & superficial
resemblances, may not be the most convenient ones for the purposes of a
particular art or science. For that special purpose, the objects, which
are most conveniently placed together, are those which agree in the
properties which that art or science takes special cognizance of. And
even for the general purposes of human knowledge, when pursued
scientifically, objects should be classed not according to the
resemblances & differences which are the most obvious, but according to
those which are either in themselves the most interesting, or are an
indication of others which are so. These considerations Edition:
current; Page: [1036] often suggest the expediency of adopting, as
fundamental divisions, on which to ground an author’s main
classification, distinctions very remote from the obvious ones which the
mind forms as it were spontaneously. But the classes which are the
result of these divisions, are as much entitled to be considered genera
& species, as any other classes, so soon as the speaker or writer has
adopted them into his main division.

[*]But let us now take any attribute of objects, which has not been
adopted as the basis of their classification; for instance, (in speaking
of plants, or animals) their colour. On this attribute is actually
founded as real a classification of plants or animals as on any other
attribute which we have named.

The word white, of itself divides all objects, & plants or animals among
the rest, into two classes; white objects, & objects which are not
white. If we were to enumerate all the names which connote colours, they
would provide us with a general arrangement & classification of all
substances. We have white substances, black substances, red substances
&c.: We have even classes & subclasses: red substances, for instance,
are either scarlet, crimson, or of various other shades & varieties of
red colour. Why are these classes not genera & species? Merely because
nobody has ever thought of making the division of objects according to
their colour, his main & fundamental classification of them, &
presenting all other divisions as engrafted upon & growing out of that.
It was open to any person to do so; this, like any other division, might
have been made the fundamental division, if anyone had chosen. But
nobody’s purposes were answered by it. The colours of objects are
neither in themselves the most interesting, or important of their
attributes; nor do they point to any considerable number of attributes
besides themselves. Plants & animals which agree in colour, differ in
almost every other attribute; & others, again differ in colour, which
agree in almost every thing else. There would have been no convenience,
therefore, in making the division of objects according to colours the
main division; it accordingly continues in the state of a cross
division; objects are grouped according to quite other attributes, & the
divisions constituted by colour are as it were lines drawn across the
other classification & cutting off a segment from each of the groups,
founded on some other attribute; from the group flowers the segment
white flowers; from the group animals the segment white animals, & so
on. These segments are classes, but are not genera & species. They
belong to the predicables proprium & accidens.

[†]Having now settled, with as much precision as the case seems to
admit, the notions of Genus & Species, we shall easily frame a
correspondent notion of Differentia. Every Differentia is called such,
in relation to a particular Genus & to a particular Species; & is the
name (whether abstract or concrete) signifying the attribute which
constitutes the Species; in other words, the attribute which we had in
view when we cut that Species out of the Genus; & which we intended to
constitute the distinction between that Species & all other Species of
the same Genus.

[¶2] Now if we cut a species out of a genus, the species man, for
instance, out of the genus animal with the intention on our part that
the distinction between man & all other species of animal should be
rationality, then rationality is involved in the signification of the
word man; in other words connoted by it; for it is obvious that what we
have expressly in view when we impose a name, forms Edition: current;
Page: [1037] part of the meaning of that name. If again, being
naturalists, we for the purpose of our particular study, cut out of the
genus animal the same species man, but with an intention on our part
that the distinction between man & all other species of animal should
be, not rationality, but the possession of thirty two teeth, so many
cutting teeth & so many grinders; it is evident that the name man, when
used by us as naturalists, no longer connotes rationality, but connotes
the possession of thirty two teeth. We may therefore, lay it down as a
maxim, that whereever there is a Genus, & a Species marked out from that
Genus, by an assignable Differentia, the name of the Species must be
connotative, & must connote the Differentia; but it may be a special
connotation, not involved in the signification of the term as ordinarily
used, but given to it when employed as a term of art or science. The
word man, in common use, connotes rationality & a certain form, but does
not connote the number of teeth; in the Linnean system it connotes the
number of teeth, but does not connote rationality or any particular
form. The word man, therefore has two different meanings; but it is not
commonly considered ambiguous, because it happens in both senses, to
denote the same individuals. But we may easily conceive a case in which
the ambiguity would be obvious; we have only to imagine that some new
species of animal were discovered, possessing thirty two teeth, but not
rational nor of the human form. In ordinary parlance these animals would
not be called men; but in natural history, they must be called so, if
the Linnean classification were adhered to; which, however, in all
probability it would not be.

[¶3] Words not otherwise connotative may in this manner acquire a
special or technical connotation. Thus, the word whiteness, as we have
so often remarked, connotes nothing; it merely denotes the attribute
corresponding to a certain sensation; but if we are making a
classification of colours, & desire to mark out, or to justify, the
particular place which we have assigned to whiteness in an arrangement,
we may define it, “the colour produced by the mixture of all the simple
rays;” & this fact, though by no means implied in the meaning of the
word whiteness as ordinarily used, becomes part of its meaning in the
particular essay or treatise, & becomes the Differentia of the Species.

[¶4] The Differentia, therefore, of any Species, may be defined to be,
that part of its connotation (whether ordinary, or special & technical)
which distinguishes it from all other Species of the Genus to which on
the particular occasion we are referring it.

[§7]

[¶1] Having now disposed of Genus, Species, and Differentia we shall
find no difficulty in attaining a clear conception of the distinction
between the other two Predicables.

[¶2] According to the schoolmen, Genus & Differentia are of the essence
of the subject, (that is, form part of the ordinary connotation of the
name of the Species): Proprium & Accidens on the other hand form no part
of the Essence, but are predicated of the Species accidentally. Of these
two, Proprium, they continue, is predicated accidentally, indeed, but
necessarily; that is, signifies an attribute which is not, indeed, part
of the essence, but flows from, or is a consequence of, the essence, &
therefore is inseparably attached to the Species: as the properties of a
triangle, though no part of its definition, yet must necessarily be
possessed by whatever comes under the definition. Accidens, on the
contrary, has Edition: current; Page: [1038] no connection at all with
the essence; & whether separable or inseparable from the Species in
reality, its removal would not alter our conception of the Species.

[*]As we have found it necessary to include under the head of Genus &
Differentia, much which is not of the essence of the species, that is,
which forms no part of its ordinary connotation, we must alter the other
definitions accordingly. We shall then define the five Predicables as
follows:

Species is any class.

Genus is any class which stands above & includes, that class, in our
main or fundamental classification: whether that be the classification
most familiarly used in ordinary life, or one made for the specific
purpose of some Art or Science.

By placing a Species under a Genus, it acquires a special Connotation,
even if it had not already an ordinary one. Differentia is that
attribute, or (if there be several) any one of those attributes, which,
being either ordinarily or specially connoted by the name of the
Species, serve to distinguish it from the other species of the same
Genus.

[¶3] A Proprium of the Species, is any attribute belonging to all the
individuals included in it; not, however, connoted by its name, either
ordinarily (if the classification be for ordinary purposes) or specially
(if it be for a special purpose) but following from some attribute which
is either ordinarily, or (as it may happen) specially, connoted by it.

[¶4] One attribute may follow from another in two ways, & there are
consequently two kinds of Proprium. It may follow as a conclusion
follows premisses, or it may follow as an effect follows a cause. Thus,
the attribute of having the opposite sides equal, (which is not one of
those connoted by the word parallelogram) nevertheless follows from
those connoted by it, viz. from those of having the opposite sides
straight lines & parallel. The attribute of having the opposite sides
equal, is therefore, a Proprium of the species Parallelogram; & a
Proprium of the first kind, which follows from the connoted attributes
by way of demonstration. The attribute of being capable of understanding
language is also a Proprium of the species man, since, while not
connoted by the word, it follows from an attribute which the word does
connote, viz. from the attribute of rationality. But this is a Proprium
of the second kind, which follows by way of causation. Whether a
Proprium follows by demonstration or causation, it follows necessarily;
that is to say, it cannot but follow, consistently with the known laws
of the universe.

[§8]

[¶1] Remains the fifth Predicable, Accidens. Under this name are
comprehended all the attributes which are neither involved in the
signification of the name, (whether ordinarily or as a term of art) nor
have, as far as we know, any necessary connexion with attributes which
are so involved. They are commonly divided into Separable & Inseparable
Accidents. Inseparable Accidents are such as are universal, but not
necessary. Thus blackness is an attribute of a crow: & as far as we
know, a universal one. But, if we were to discover a race of brown
birds, in other respects resembling crows, we should call them crows;
crow, therefore does not connote blackness; nor, from any of the
attributes which it does connote, whether as a word in vulgar use or as
a term of art, could blackness Edition: current; Page: [1039] be
inferred. Not only, therefore, can we conceive a brown or red crow, but
we know of no reason why such an animal should not exist.

[¶2] Separable Accidents are such as do not belong to every individual
of the species, but only to some; or if to all not at all times. Thus,
the colour of a European is one of the separable accidents of the
species man, because it is not an attribute of all human beings: Being
born is also a separable accident of the species man, because though it
is an attribute of all human beings, it is so only at one particular
time.

Edition: current; Page: [1040]


OF DEFINITION
 [Chapter viii: Of Definition]

[§1]

[¶1] The object & nature of Definition will not require much
elucidation, as the greater part of what is necessary to make them
apparent, has been already stated, incidentally to other topics.

[¶2] The simplest and most correct idea of a Definition, is a
proposition which declares the meaning of a word: namely, either the
meaning it bears in common acceptation, or that which the speaker or
writer, for the particular purposes of his discourse, intends to annex
to it.

[¶3] The Definition of a word being the proposition which enunciates its
meaning, it follows that words which have no meaning, are unsusceptible
of definition. Proper names, therefore, cannot be defined. A proper name
being a mere unmeaning mark put upon an individual, we cannot declare
its meaning; though we may indicate by language, as we might indicate
still more conveniently by pointing with the finger, what is the
individual upon which that particular mark has been or is intended to be
put. It is no definition of “John Thomson” to say, he is “the son of
General Thomson,” for the name “John Thomson” does not express this. It
is no definition of “John Thomson” to say he is “the man who is now
crossing the street.” These propositions may serve to make known who is
the particular man to whom the name belongs, but that may be done still
more unambiguously by pointing to him, which however has never been
esteemed one of the modes of Definition.

[¶4] In the case of Connotative names, the meaning, as we have so often
observed, is the connotation: & the definition of a connotative name, is
a proposition which declares its connotation. Now this may be done
either directly or indirectly. The direct way would be by a proposition
in this form: “Man” (or whatever the word may be) “is a name connoting
such & such attributes” or “is a name which signifies the possession of
such & such attributes, by all the things whereof it is predicated.”
This would be the most precise form. The definition of Man, in this
form, would be, man is a name connoting corporeity, organization, life,
rationality & a certain well known external form.

[¶5] This, however, is not sufficiently brief, & is moreover too
technical & apparently pedantic for common discourse. The more usual
mode of declaring the connotation of a name, is to predicate of it
another name or names, of known signification, which connote the same
aggregation of attributes. This is done either by predicating, of the
name intended to be defined, another connotative name, exactly
synonymous; as, “Man is a human being;” this is not commonly reckoned a
definition at all; or a plurality of connotative names, which among
them, make up the whole of the connotation of the name which is to be
defined. In this last case, again, we may either take the several
attributes singly, & join together the whole of the names which connote
those attributes separately; as, Man is a corporeal, organized,
animated, rational being, of a certain form; or we may employ names
which connote several of the attributes at once; as, Man is a rational
animal of a certain form.

[¶6] The definition of a name, therefore, according to the notion of it
which we have been endeavouring to inculcate, is the sum total of all
the essential Edition: current; Page: [1041] propositions which can be
formed concerning the name. All the propositions, the truth of which is
self-evident; all those which we are made aware of by merely hearing the
name, are included in the Definition if complete, and are included
indirectly & expressly, not by way of inference; whether the definition
comprehends them in a few words, or in a larger number.

When Condillac & other writers have said that a definition is an
analysis, what they have really meant seems to be merely what we have
now stated. To resolve any complete whole into the elements of which it
is compounded, may properly be called an operation of analysis: & this
we in some measure do, when we replace one word which connotes a whole
set of attributes by two or more words, which connote the same set of
attributes singly, or in smaller groups.

[§2]

[¶1] From this however the question naturally arises, in what manner we
are to define a name which connotes only a single attribute? for
instance, the name white which connotes nothing but whiteness, rational,
which connotes nothing but the possession of reason. It would seem that
such names could only be defined in two ways; by a synonymous term, if
any can be found; or in the direct way already alluded to, “White is a
name connoting the attribute of whiteness.” Let us see, however, whether
the analysis of the meaning of the name, that is, the breaking down of
that meaning into separate parts, admits of being carried farther. In
the case of the word white, it would seem not; but in the case of
rational, it is obvious that some further explanation may be given of
the meaning of that term, than is contained in the proposition “Rational
is a name connoting the possession of reason,” since the attribute,
reason, itself admits of being defined. And here we are obliged to turn
our attention to the definitions of attributes, or rather of the names
of attributes, that is, of abstract names, having hitherto confined
ourselves to the first two classes of names, proper & connotative.

[¶2] What the definition of the name of an attribute consists in, has
been very clearly shown in the preceeding chapter. Some names of
attributes are connotative. These, like other connotative names, must be
defined by declaring their connotation. In other cases, we found that
the attribute denoted by the abstract name, is itself a union of several
attributes; in this case the analysis must be carried on, by enumerating
those attributes; as when we defined humanity to be, corporeity & animal
life combined with rationality & a certain form. [¶3] We found still
another class of cases, in which though the attribute denoted by the
abstract name, is not a complication of attributes, still the phenominon
constituting that attribute, is a complication of phenomina. We must
then carry on the analysis, by defining those more simple and elementary
phenomina. Under this class comes our former example, rationality, which
in whatever way we may resolve to define it, expresses a series of very
complicated phenomina. We have already employed an apter example, the
word eloquence, which we defined “the power of influencing the
affections of human beings by means of speech or writing.”

[¶4] Thus, then, we define a name, whether concrete or abstract,
whenever we are able to analyse, that is, to distinguish into parts, the
attribute or set of attributes, which constitute their meaning: if a set
of attributes, by enumerating them; if a single attribute, by dissecting
& exhibiting in its separate elements, the fact or phenominon, that is
the cluster or series of human feelings, or states of Edition: current;
Page: [1042] consciousness, which constitute that attribute, or rather
which when considered as excited or as experienced by any object, are
that attribute. Even when the fact which constitutes the attribute, is
unsusceptible of analysis, that is to say, is a simple sensation or
other simple feeling, the name of the object & the name of the
attribute, still admit of definition. Whiteness, we may say, is the
property of giving the sensation of white; a white object is an object
which gives the sensation of white. The only names which are wholly
unsusceptible of definition are the names of the simple feelings
themselves. These are in the same predicament as proper names. They are
not indeed, like those names, unmeaning; for the words sensation of
white signify that the individual sensation which we call by that name,
resembles the sensations formerly experienced by us, to which the same
name was given: but as we have no words by which [*]to recall those
former sensations, except the very word which we want to define, or some
other exactly synonymous with it, words cannot unfold the signification
of this class of names; and we are obliged to make a direct appeal to
the party’s own ocular experience.

[§3]

[¶1] Having stated what we conceive to be the philosophical idea of a
Definition, we proceed to examine some popular conceptions of it, which
conflict more or less with the above.

[¶2] The only Definition of a name, which will satisfy a philosopher, is
one which declares the facts, and the whole of the facts, which are
involved in the signification of the name. But in most cases, & with
most persons, the object of a definition does not embrace so much. They
look for nothing more in a Definition, than a guide to the proper use of
the term; a protection to them against applying it in a manner
inconsistent with custom & convention. Anything, therefore, is to them a
sufficient definition of a term, which will serve as a correct index to
what it denotes; although not embracing the whole, & sometimes perhaps
not even a part, of what it connotes. This gives rise to two kinds of
imperfect or unscientific definitions; namely, Essential but incomplete
Definitions, & Accidental Definitions, or Descriptions. In the former, a
connotative name is defined by a part only of its connotation; in the
latter, by something which forms no part of its connotation at all.

[¶3] An example of the first kind of imperfect definitions, is the
following: Man is a rational animal. It is impossible to consider this
as a complete definition of the word man, since if we adhered to it we
should be obliged to call the Houyhnhms men: but as there happen to be
no Houyhnhms, this imperfect definition is sufficient to mark out, &
distinguish from all other things, the objects at present denoted by
man; all the beings actually in existence, of whom the word is
predicable. Though the word is defined by an enumeration of some only
among the attributes which it connotes, not of all, yet it so happens
that all things which possess the attributes enumerated, possess also
those which are omitted, so that the field of denotation which the word
covers, & that employment of it in predication, which is conformable to
usage, are quite as well indicated by the incomplete definition, as by a
complete one. Such a definition, however, is always liable to be overset
by the discovery of new objects in nature.

[¶4] Definitions of this kind are what philosophers have had in view
when they Edition: current; Page: [1043] laid it down as a rule that the
definition of a species should be per genus et differentiam. A complete
definition according to the philosophical idea of it should be per genus
et differentias rather than differentiam: it should include, with the
name of the superior genus, not merely some attribute which
distinguishes the species intended to be defined, from all other species
of the same genus, but all the attributes implied in the name of the
species, which the name of the superior genus does not by connotation
include.

The assertion, however, that a definition must of necessity consist of a
genus & differentiæ at all, is not tenable: for, as was early remarked,
the summum genus in any classification, having no superior genus, cannot
be defined in this manner: yet we have seen that all names, (even summa
genera) except the names of simple sensations or other elementary
feelings, may be defined, and in the very strictest sense, by setting
forth in words the sensations or other facts of consciousness, of which
the connotation of all words is ultimately composed.

[*]The notion that a Definition should consist of the superior Genus &
some one specific Difference, a notion which we first find distinctly
enunciated by Aristotle & his followers, seems to have arisen from a
peculiar connection which existed in the minds of those philosophers
between the idea of Definition and that of Division or Classification; &
is closely allied to the erroneous notion which they entertained of the
latter process. In laying down a Definition, they did not consider
themselves as setting forth the meaning of a name, but as declaring a
classification; drawing as it were a line round a particular class, to
point out its limits, designate the objects which fall under it, &
indicate its place in the network of genera & species, which they had
spread over all nature. In my view of classification, the connection
between that operation and nomenclature is as close as it was deemed to
be by Aristotle; but I regard names as being oftener the instruments,
the sources, or the occasions of classification, than its results:
whenever we give a name to any thing, intending by that name to express
any of its properties, we by that very fact accomplish a classification;
we divide all things into two kinds, those which possess the properties
in question, & those which do not. Classification therefore, is in
general not the cause but the result of nomenclature; by every
significant name which it suits our convenience to construct we create a
new classification. The ancients however viewed classification in a
totally different light. They thought that Nature herself had marked
things out into classes; & they consequently regarded general names, &
the Definitions which declared the import of those names, not as
operations from which there resulted classifications of man’s making,
but as the exponents of a classification already made. It naturally,
therefore, appeared to them, that a definition had attained its purpose,
if it was such as would enable them to discriminate, & segregate from
all others, the individuals composing the class thus framed by the hand
of nature.

[§4]

[¶1] These considerations explain why the ancients, and philosophers in
general, have considered the first kind of incomplete definition (viz.
that which defines a connotative name by a part only of its connotation,
but a part sufficient to mark out correctly the boundaries of its
denotation) as a complete definition. But, in order thus to satisfy
them, it was necessary that all the attributes employed Edition:
current; Page: [1044] should really form part of the connotation of the
term: because any attribute not connoted by the term would not in their
estimation have been part of the essence of the class, & would not
therefore have answered their purpose of discriminating the real nature
of that particular class from that of other classes. Our second kind of
incomplete definition, therefore, that which defines a connotative name
by means of its accidents, i.e. those of its attributes which are not
included in its connotation, has been rejected from the rank of genuine
Definition by all philosophers, & has been termed Description.

[¶2] This kind of imperfect definition, however, takes its rise from the
same cause as the other, namely, the disposition to be satisfied with a
definition which whether it expounds the meaning of the name or not,
enables us to discriminate the things denoted by it, from all other
things, and consequently to employ the term in predication, without
deviating from established usage. This purpose is duly answered by
enumerating any whatever of the attributes which happen to be common to
all the things composing a class, though perhaps having no connexion
with the motives which led to their being formed into a class, & called
by a common name. It is only necessary that the definition or
description thus formed, should be convertible with the name it happens
to define; that is, should be exactly coextensive with it, each being
predicable of every thing of which the other is predicable. The
following are correct definitions of ‘man’ according to this test: Man
is an animal having (by nature) two hands (for all human beings answer
to this description, & no other animal does): Man is an animal who cooks
his food: Man is a featherless biped.

[¶3] What would otherwise be a mere Description, may be raised to the
rank of a true Definition by the peculiar purpose, which the speaker or
writer has in view. As has been seen in the preceding chapter, it may
for the purposes of a particular branch of science, or for the statement
of an author’s particular views on some branch of science, be convenient
to give to some general name, a special connotation different from its
ordinary one. When this is the case, a Definition of the name by means
of the attributes which make up this special connotation, becomes on the
particular occasion & for the particular purpose a genuine & complete
Definition, although in general it would be a mere Accidental
Definition, or Description. This actually happens in regard to one of
our last examples, “Man is an animal having two hands;” which is a
complete and scientific Definition of the word Man, considered as the
name of one of the species in Cuvier’s classification of animated
beings.

[*]In cases of this description, the notion which the ancients had of
Definition really applies, & the object of Definition is not to state
the meaning of a word, but to expound a classification. The special
meaning which Cuvier assigned to the word man (quite foreign to its
ordinary meaning, though involving no change in the denotation of the
word,) was incidental to a previously conceived plan of arranging all
animals into classes on a certain principle, that is according to a
certain kind of distinctions. And since the definition of Man according
to its ordinary connotation, though it would have answered all the other
purposes of a definition, would not have pointed out the place of the
species Man in that particular classification, he gave the word a
special connotation, that he might be able to define it by attributes of
that kind on which he, for reasons of scientific convenience, had
determined to found his division of the animal kingdom.

Edition: current; Page: [1045]
[§5]

[¶1] We have now said enough on the subject of the two incomplete or
unscientific kinds of Definition, & the distinction between them & the
complete or scientific kind. We shall now proceed to examine an ancient,
& at one time generally prevalent doctrine, which we consider as
entirely erroneous, & the source not only while it was universally
entertained but even since it has been generally rejected, not only of
important errors, but of a great part of the obscurity which still hangs
over the real nature of some of the most important processes of the
understanding in the pursuit of truth.

The notion to which I allude, is, that definitions of names are not the
only, or the most important class of definitions; that Definitions may
be divided into two classes, Definitions of Names, & Definitions of
Things. The former, it is affirmed, are intended to explain the meaning
of a term, the latter, the nature of a thing.

[¶2] This opinion was held by all the ancient philosophers & their
followers, except the Nominalists; but as the most widespread schools of
modern philosophy have generally been Nominalists, the notion of
Definitions of Things has not been in modern times the received notion,
& has contributed rather by its consequences than by itself to introduce
confusion into the philosophy of logic. It has, however, (along with
several other of the errors & misleading modes of expression of the
schoolmen, which the author’s intellectual indolence prevented him from
casting off) recently reappeared in a deservedly popular work, Dr.
Whateley’s Logic. In a superficial & in some points, erroneous article
on that work, published by me in the Westminster Review for January
1828, I made the following observations, which still appear to express
sufficiently what I have to say on the question now in issue.

[¶3] “The distinction between nominal & real definitions, between
definitions of words & what are called definitions of things, though
conformable to the ideas of most of the Aristotelian Logicians, cannot,
as it appears to us, be maintained. We apprehend that no definition is
ever intended to ‘explain & unfold the nature of the thing.’ It is some
confirmation of our opinion, that none of those writers who have thought
that there were definitions of things, have ever succeeded in
discovering any criterion by which the definition of a thing can be
distinguished from any other proposition relating to the thing. The
definition, they say, unfolds the nature of the thing: but no definition
can unfold its whole nature; & every proposition in which any quality
whatever is predicated of the thing, unfolds some part of its nature.
The true state of the case we take to be this. All definitions are of
names, and of names only: but, in some definitions, it is clearly
apparent, that nothing is intended except to explain the meaning of the
word; while in others, besides explaining the meaning of the word, it is
intended to be implied that there exists a thing, corresponding to the
word. Whether this be or be not implied in any given case, cannot be
collected from the mere form of the expression. ‘A centaur is an animal
with the upper parts of a man & the lower parts of a horse;’ & ‘A
triangle is a rectilinear figure with three sides,’ are, in form,
expressions precisely similar; although in the former it is not implied
that any thing conformable to the term, really exists, while in the
latter it is; as may be seen by substituting, in both definitions, the
word means for is. In the first expression, ‘A centaur means an animal’
&c., the sense would remain unchanged; in the second, ‘a triangle
means,’ &c. the meaning would be altered, since it would be obviously
impossible to deduce any of the truths of geometry from a proposition
Edition: current; Page: [1046] expressive only of the manner in which we
intend to employ a particular sign.

[¶4] “There are, therefore, expressions, commonly passing for
definitions, which include in themselves more than the mere explanation
of the meaning of a term. But it is not correct to call an expression of
this sort a peculiar kind of definition. Its difference from the other
kind consists in this, that it is not a definition, but a definition &
something more. The definition above given of a triangle, obviously
comprises, not one, but two propositions, perfectly distinguishable. The
one is, ‘There may exist a figure bounded by three straight lines,’ the
other, ‘& this figure may be termed a triangle.’ The former of these
propositions is not a definition at all; the latter is a mere Nominal
Definition, or explanation of the use & application of a term. The first
is susceptible of truth or falsehood, & may therefore be made the
foundation of a train of reasoning: the latter can neither be true nor
false; the only character it is susceptible of is that of conformity or
disconformity to the ordinary usage of language.”

[¶5] The distinction, then, between Definitions of Names, and what are
erroneously called Definitions of Things, is that the latter, along with
the definition of a name, covertly asserts a matter of fact. This covert
assertion is not a definition, but a postulate. It is not an essential,
but an accidental proposition. It is an assumption, which is not like a
definition, a mere identical proposition, from which no conclusions on
matters of fact can possibly be drawn; but, on the contrary, may be made
the foundation on which to build a whole fabric of scientific truth.

[¶6] We have on a former occasion remarked, that those philosophers, who
overthrew Realism, have very generally retained in their philosophy
numerous propositions which could only have a rational meaning as part
of a realistic system. It had been handed down from Aristotle & perhaps
from still earlier times as an obvious truth, that the science of
Geometry is deduced from definitions. This, so long as a Definition was
supposed to be a proposition “unfolding the nature of the thing,” did
well enough. But Hobbes came, and after scattering to the winds the
notion that a Definition is any thing but an explanation of the meaning
of a name, continued nevertheless to affirm as broadly as any of his
predecessors, that the αρχαὶ, principia, or original premisses of
mathematics, & not only of mathematics, but of science in general, are
Definitions: Thus producing the monstrous paradox (which for years
confused the intellect of him who is now expressing his sense of its
absurdity) that a whole system of scientific truth, nay, all truth at
which we arrive by reasoning, is deduced from the mere arbitrary
conventions of mankind concerning the signification of words.

[¶7] I know it will be said that in order that any scientific truths may
be deducible from our definitions, those definitions must be framed
conformably to the phenomina of nature, that is, things must actually
exist, conformable to the definition, i.e. possessing the collection of
attributes which it enumerates. This correction being applied to the
doctrine, it will stand thus: No truths can be deduced from a
definition, unless it tacitly involves a proposition affirming the real
existence of a thing answering to the definition, & unless this
proposition thus tacitly assumed be true: But if this other proposition,
covertly involved in the definition, be true, then we may deduce other
truths—not from this tacit proposition, but from the definition. Surely
we need not refute this. The other truths, if they follow at all, follow
from the tacit assumption, not from the definition.

[¶8] Take, for instance, the definition of a circle, as laid down in
Euclid’s Edition: current; Page: [1047] Elements: & which, when analysed
resolves itself into two propositions, one an assumption with respect to
a matter of fact, the other a genuine definition. “A figure may exist,
having all the points in the line which bounds it, equally distant from
a single point within it.” “Any figure possessing this property is
called a circle.” Now let us see which of these propositions it is, on
which Euclid’s demonstrations depend. “About the centre A describe the
circle BCD.” Is there not here a manifest assumption that a figure such
as the definition expresses may be described? which is no other than the
postulate, or covert assumption, involved in the so called definition.
But whether that figure be called a circle or not, is quite immaterial
to the conclusion. Again, the circle being described, “the radius BA is
equal to the radius CA;” from what does this follow? from the arbitrary
meaning of the word? or from the tacit assumption of the possibility of
a figure of which all the radii are equal? We need not carry the
analysis further.

[¶9] It seems hardly necessary to dwell at so much length upon what is
so obvious; but when a distinction, however self-evident, has been long
confounded, by persons of indisputable intellect, it must not be quitted
until it is familiar. We will therefore point out one of the most
glaring of the many absurdities which follow from the supposition that
Definitions, as such, are ever premisses in any of our reasonings,
except those which relate to words only. This is, that we may by an
argumentation strictly correct according to logical rules, deduce from
true premisses a false conclusion. Let us begin by laying down the
following definition:

“A centaur is an animal having the fore parts of a man & the hinder
parts of a horse.”

[¶10] No one can deny the correctness of this proposition, considered as
a definition. The tacit assumption, indeed, (if there were any such
assumption in this case) of the existence of an object with properties
corresponding to the definition, would be false. Now then we frame the
following syllogism:

-   

    A centaur is an animal having the hinder parts of a horse:
-   

    But a centaur is an animal having the fore parts of a man;
-   

    Therefore
-   

    Some animal or animals having the fore parts of a man,
-   

    have the hinder parts of a horse.

[¶11] A syllogism strictly correct in the first mode of the third
figure, & in which both the premisses are true, & yet the conclusion
false. This is as every Logician knows, absurd. The conclusion being
false & the syllogism correct, the premisses cannot be true. But the
premisses considered as parts of a definition are perfectly
uncontrovertible. It is clear, therefore, that the real premisses in
this syllogism are not the definitions, but the tacit assumptions
involved in them, of the existence of objects conformable to them; thus:
A centaur is a really existing animal with the hinder parts of a horse;
& so forth. Now these implied premisses being false, the falsity of the
conclusion presents no absurdity. [¶12] If we would determine what
conclusion follows from the same ostensible premisses when the tacit
assumption is left out, let us, according to the recommendation in the
Westminster Review, substitute means for is. We then have

-   

    A centaur is a word meaning an animal with the hinder parts of a
    horse:
-   

    A centaur is a word meaning an animal with the fore parts of a man:
-   

    Therefore
-   

    Some word or words which mean an animal with the fore parts of a
    man, also
-   

    mean an animal with the hinder parts of a horse:

Edition: current; Page: [1048]
where the conclusion as well as the premisses is true & is the only kind
of conclusion which can ever follow from a definition, namely a
conclusion relating to the meaning of words.

[¶13] We need not illustrate any further the difference between a
Definition, & the tacit assumption of a matter of fact, which is
sometimes involved in it. We shall only further remark, to show in what
cases that assumption is to be understood as being made, & in what cases
not—that unless we declare the contrary, we always convey the impression
that we intend to make the assumption, when we profess to define any
name which is already known to be a name of really existing objects.
This is the reason why it was doubtful whether such an assumption was
included in the definition of a centaur, & not doubtful that it was
included in the definition of a circle.

[§7]

[¶1] Although Definitions are of names only, & not of Things, it is
nevertheless true, that how to define a name may be not only an enquiry
of considerable difficulty & intricacy, but one which turns upon
considerations going deep into the nature of the things which are
denoted by the name. Such, for instance, are the great enquiries which
form the subjects of the most important of Plato’s Dialogues, as, “What
is rhetoric” the subject of the Gorgias, or “What is justice,” that of
the Republic. Such also is the question scornfully asked by Pilate,
“What is truth?” and the great question with speculative moralists in
all ages, “What is virtue.”

[¶2] It would be a complete mistake to represent these difficult & noble
enquiries as having nothing in view, but to ascertain the conventional
meaning of a name. They are enquiries not so much to determine what is,
as what shall be, the meaning of a name: which like all practical
questions of nomenclature, requires for its solution that we should
enter very deeply into the properties not only of names but of the
things named.

[*]The principles of philosophical nomenclature will form the subject of
one of the last chapters of this work, as the whole field of Logic must
be surveyed before all the considerations on which the goodness or
badness of a nomenclature depends, can be properly estimated. In that
chapter, the apparent paradox which we have just noticed, would
naturally be cleared up; but it appears desirable to give an anticipated
solution here, as without it the theory of Definition, considered as a
mere theory, would remain both obscure & imperfect.

[¶3] Although the meaning of every concrete general name, resides as we
have seen, in the attributes which it connotes; yet the objects received
names before the attributes, as appears from the fact that almost all
abstract names in all languages are compounds or derivatives of the
corresponding concrete names. Connotative names, therefore, were after
proper names, the first which were used. The meaning of a connotative
term lies as we have so often observed, in the connotation; & in the
simpler cases, no doubt, a distinct connotation was present to the minds
of those who first used the name, & was distinctly intended by them to
be conveyed by it. Thus, the first person who used the word white, in
speaking of snow or any other object, had, no doubt, in his mind a
perfectly distinct idea of whiteness, & knew that to be the quality, &
the only quality, which he meant to predicate of snow in calling it
white.

Edition: current; Page: [1049]
[¶4] But when the qualities by which objects are discriminated from one
another, are not of so palpable & easily ascertainable a kind; & in
particular where the resemblances & differences of objects arise not
from any one quality but from a number of qualities, the effects of
which are so mixed up together as not to be easily distinguished from
one another; it often happens that names are applied to objects, with no
distinct connotation present to the minds of those who apply them: In
naming a new object by an old name, all that their minds are conscious
of is a general resemblance between the new object & all or some of the
old & familiar objects which they have been accustomed to call by that
name. This, as we have seen, is the law which even the mind of the
philosopher must follow, in giving names to the simple elementary
feelings of our nature: but where the things to be named are complex
wholes, which, if they resemble, resemble not in all points alike, but
in some of their parts, qualities or features only, or in some more than
others, a philosopher is not satisfied when he merely finds himself
struck by a general resemblance; he examines & discovers what
particulars the resemblance consists in; & he will only give the same
name, to things which resemble one another in the same definite
particulars. The philosopher, therefore, uses all his general names with
a definite connotation. But language was not made, & can only in a small
degree be mended, by philosophers.[*] In the minds of those by whom
language is made, general names (& especially the names of large &
complex classes which embrace numerous individuals not at all, or not
accurately known to mankind in general) connote nothing but a vague
gross resemblance to the objects which they were earliest or have been
most accustomed to call by those names. When, for instance, ordinary
persons predicate the words just or unjust of any action, refined or
vulgar of any expression, attitude or gesture, statesman or charlatan of
any personage figuring in politics, they do not mean to affirm of those
various subjects, any distinct attributes of whatever kind; they merely
recognize, as they think, some general resemblance, more or less vague &
loose, between them & some other things, which they have been accustomed
to denominate or to hear denominated by those appelations.

[¶5] Language, as Sir James Mackintosh used to say of governments, “is
not made, but grows:” a name is imposed not at once & by premeditation
upon a class of objects, but is first applied to one object, & then
passes by successive transitions to another & another. By this process
(as has been remarked by several writers, among others by Dugald Stewart
in his Philosophical Essays) a name sometimes passes from one object to
another, & from that to a third & so on, each time by reason of a
resemblance between the new object, & the last link in the previous
chain, until at last it becomes extended to things which have nothing
whatever in common with the first things to which the name was given:
these, on the other hand, do not drop the name, which, consequently now
denotes a confused huddle of objects having nothing whatever in common;
& connotes nothing at all, not even a vague & general resemblance.

When a name has got into this state, in which by predicating it of any
object we assert positively nothing at all about the object, it has
become utterly unfit for the purposes of philosophy or thought, & can
only be made serviceable by stripping it of some part of its
multifarious denotation, & confining it to objects possessed of some
attributes in common, which it may be made to connote. Such Edition:
current; Page: [1050] are the inconveniences of a language which “is not
made but grows.” It requires, like the roads which are not made, but
make themselves, to be continually remade in order to be passable. [¶7]
At the same time it is necessary to remark, that the study of the
spontaneous growth of languages is of the utmost importance to the
philosopher who would logically remake them, & is indeed often his best
guide to that classification of objects which is even philosophically
the best. We do not allude merely to the inconveniences & difficulties
of altering the established classifications, & disturbing the
correctness of received propositions by altering the meaning of the
names in which they are expressed. The classifications rudely made by
established language, are very generally, when retouched as they almost
always require to be, by the hands of the philosopher, in themselves the
classifications best suited to many of his purposes. These
classifications, when compared with those of a philosopher, are like the
customary law of a country, which grows up as it were spontaneously,
compared with laws methodized & digested into a code: the former are far
inferior in practical utility to the latter, but being the result of a
long though unscientific course of experience, they contain the greater
part of the materials out of which the systematic body of written law
may & ought to be formed. In like manner the established grouping of
objects under a common name, though usually founded on a gross & general
resemblance, is evidence, in the first place, that the resemblance is
obvious, & therefore considerable, & in the next place that it is a
resemblance which has struck great multitudes of persons during a long
series of years or ages. Even when a name, by successive extensions of
its application, comes to be applied to things among all of which there
does not exist even a general resemblance, still at every step in its
progress we shall find such a resemblance; & these transitions of the
meaning of words are often an index to real connexions between the
things denoted by them, which might otherwise escape the notice even of
philosophers who, from using a different language, or from any other
difference in their habitual associations, have had their attentions
fixed in preference upon some other aspect of those things. The history
of philosophy abounds in striking instances of oversights of this
nature, which would not have been committed, if the philosopher had seen
the hidden link which connected together the seemingly disparate
meanings of some ambiguous word.*

[¶8*] Words, then, being often used by the vulgar, without any distinct
connotation, except that of a general & gross resemblance among the
things which Edition: current; Page: [1051] they denote; it becomes
necessary for the philosopher, to take precautions against the
deceptious consequences likely to be produced by thus classing objects
together on account of a mere general likeness, without analysing it &
ascertaining what it depends upon. For we usually find that as soon as
two things become habitually classed together, & called by the same
name, a disposition arises to believe that any thing which is true of
the one, is true of the other also. It is hence of the utmost importance
in philosophy, that whenever objects are to be classed together & named
alike, it shall be distinctly known how far the resemblance which gives
occasion to their being so classed, extends, & what it consists in; that
it may be known how far the inferences which are sure to be drawn
respecting ulterior resemblance, are well-founded; and for this among
[other] reasons, it is also of importance, that objects should be
classed together on account of those resemblances by preference, which
lead to the greatest number of interesting consequences, (this as we
shall see hereafter is the principal feature in the idea of what is
called a Natural Classification) & which are an index, therefore, to the
greatest number of other resemblances, & those of a kind most likely to
excite attention. But, whatever the resemblances may be, it is of the
first importance, that they should be distinctly ascertained & defined;
& that the name, which is given to the resembling objects, may acquire a
distinct instead of a vague connotation; & by acquiring a distinct
connotation may become susceptible of Definition.

And thus it is that the Definitions of names become subjects of enquiry
& controversy. But in so far as that enquiry or controversy relates to
the properties of things, & not to the mere usage of language, it will
be found to affect not the definition itself, but the suppressed
proposition, which we have already stated to be tacitly included in
every Definition of a name which is known to be the name of any real
object.

When we enquire into the meaning of such a name, & our enquiry consists
of any thing else than a mere comparison of verbal authorities, we
tacitly assume that a meaning must be found for it, compatible with its
continuing to denote all or the greater part of the things of which it
is commonly predicated. The enquiry, therefore, must have for its object
to ascertain, first whether there really exists among all the things
usually denoted by the name, any general resemblance; & next, supposing
that there does, what that resemblance consists in. In other words, to
enquire into the Definition of a name, is to enquire what attributes may
be predicated in common, of all the various things denoted by the name:
&, among those common attributes, what are those, the possession of
which gives to all those things the character of resemblance, which has
led to their being classed together. Of these two enquiries, the first
is a case of comparison among a variety of objects, to ascertain their
resemblances, and differences; the latter is a question of causation.

[¶9] In giving, therefore, a distinct connotation to the general name,
the philosopher will endeavour to fix upon such attributes as, while
they are common to all the things usually denoted by the name, are at
the same time those which are in themselves of most importance, either
from the number, the obviousness, or the interesting character of the
consequences to which they lead. He will endeavour to select such
differentiæ as lead to the greatest number of interesting propria. For
it is these rather than the more obscure and recondite qualities on
which they usually depend, which give that general character & aspect to
a set of objects, which determine the groups into which they naturally
fall. But to mount Edition: current; Page: [1052] up to the more hidden
agreement on which these obvious & superficial agreements depend, is
often one of the most difficult of scientific problems. As it is among
the most difficult, so it seldom fails to be among the most important.
And since upon the result of this enquiry respecting the causes of the
properties of a class of things, there incidentally depends the question
what shall be the connotation of a name; some of the most profound and
most valuable investigations which philosophy presents to us, have been
introduced by, & have offered themselves under the guise of, enquiries
into the Definition of a Name.

Edition: current; Page: [1053]


[Book II:: Of Reasoning]


OF INFERENCE, OR REASONING[*]
 [Chapter i: Of Inference, or Reasoning, in General]

[§1]

[¶4] In the most extended acceptation of the term, we may be said to
reason, whenever we draw a conclusion; whenever we infer one proposition
from another. In the narrower sense, reasoning is confined to that
particular kind of inference which is called ratiocination, and which
admits of being put into the form of a syllogism.

To the particular character of that kind of inference which is termed
reasoning in the limited sense, we shall presently advert. We shall
first take a general view of the various cases in which inferences may
be legitimately drawn.

[§2]

[¶1] The first class of cases which we shall mention, is a class in
which the inference is rather apparent than real, and which requires
notice chiefly in order that it may be distinguished from cases of
inferences properly so called. This is where from one proposition we
seem to infer another, which, however, when analysed appears to be
merely a repetition of the same, or part of the same, assertion, put
into other words. All the cases mentioned in books of Logic as examples
of the Æquipollency, or equivalence, of propositions, are cases of this
sort. [¶2] Another case is where, from a universal proposition, we
affect to infer another which differs from it only in being particular:
as All A is B, therefore some A is B: No A is B, therefore Some A is not
B. This is plainly not to deduce one proposition from another, but to
repeat the same proposition a second time; not, indeed the whole of it,
but as great a portion of it as we have occasion for.

[¶4] The most complex case of this kind of inference or rather apparent
inference, is what is called the Conversion of Propositions; that is,
turning the predicate into a subject, and the subject into a predicate,
and framing out of the same terms thus reversed, another proposition,
which must be true if the former is true. Thus, from the proposition,
Some A is B, we may infer that Some B is A. From this, No A is B, we may
infer that No B is A. From the proposition All A is B, it cannot be
inferred that All B is A; though all water is liquid, it does not follow
that all liquids are water, but it follows that some are so. The
proposition All A is B is therefore legitimately convertible into Some B
is A. This is called convertion per accidens. From this, Some A is not
B, we cannot even infer that Some B is not A: for though some men are
not cobblers, it does not follow that some cobblers are not men. The
only legitimate conversion, if such it can be called, of a particular
negative proposition, is thus; Some A is not B, therefore some things
which are not B are A; which is called conversion by contraposition.
Edition: current; Page: [1054] But here the predicate and subject are
not merely reversed but changed; instead of [A] and [B] the terms of the
new proposition are [things which are not B] and [A]. The proposition
Some A is not B, is first changed into the æquipollent proposition, Some
A is a thing which is not B; the proposition is now no longer a
particular negative, but a particular affirmative, and therefore admits
of being converted in the first mode, or that which is called simple
conversion.

[¶5] In all these cases it is evident that there is not really any
inference, that is to say, any new truth in the conclusion, not already
asserted in the premises. The fact asserted in the conclusion is either
the very same fact, or part of the same fact, which was asserted in the
original proposition. This is plain from our analysis of Predication.
Thus, when we say that Some A is B, we mean that the attributes connoted
by A and those connoted by B, are sometimes found to coexist in the same
subject: now this is also precisely what we mean, when we say that some
B is A; which, therefore, is not another proposition inferred from the
first, any more than the English translation of Euclid’s Elements can be
considered as a set of ulterior truths deduced from those contained in
the Greek original. Again, when we say that No A is B, we mean that the
attributes connoted by A & those connoted by B never coexist in the same
subject; which is also the meaning, & the whole meaning, of the
proposition, No B is A. When we assert that, All A is B, we assert not
only that the attributes connoted by A and those connoted by B sometimes
coexist, but that the former never exist without having the latter
joined with them. Now the proposition, Some B is A, merely expresses the
first half of this truth, without the other half, and therefore has been
asserted by implication when we affirmed both halfs together in the
proposition, All A is B. But, That all B is A, in other words that the
attributes connoted by B never exist but in conjunction with those
connoted by A, has not been asserted, nor can it be inferred. In order
to reassert, in an inverted form, the whole of what was involved in the
proposition All A is B, we must convert it by contraposition, thus,
Nothing which is not B is A. These two propositions are exactly
equivalent, & may be mutually substituted for one another: for to say
that when the attributes of A are present those of B are present, is to
say that when the latter are absent the former are absent.

[¶6] In a manual of logic for young students, it would be proper to
insist at greater length upon the conversion & æquipollency of
propositions. For, although that cannot be called reasoning or inference
which is merely a reassertion in other words of what has been asserted
before, yet there is no more important habit, nor any one the
cultivation of which falls more strictly under the province of the art
of logic, than that of readily & at once discerning the identity of an
assertion, when disguised in language that is dissimilar. That important
chapter in logical treatises, which relates to the Opposition of
Propositions, and the excellent technical language which logic provides
for distinguishing the different kinds or modes of opposition, are
chiefly of use for this purpose. Such considerations as these, that
contrary propositions may be both false, but cannot both be true, that
Sub-contrary propositions may both be true, but cannot both be false,
that of two Contradictory propositions one must be true & the other
false, that of two subalternate propositions the truth of the universal
proves the truth of the particular, and the falsity of the particular
proves the falsity of the universal, but not vice versâ; all this
appears very technical and mysterious at first sight, but when the
meaning of the words is explained, the whole is so obvious, that it is
apt to be thought little more than solemn trifling to lay it down with
the imposing air Edition: current; Page: [1055] of Science: since the
same degree of explanation which is necessary to make the principle
itself intelligible, would enable the truth which it conveys to be
apprehended, in any particular case which can occur, without the aid of
the principle. To which I answer, that in this respect, these principles
are precisely on the level of geometrical axioms. That things which are
equal to the same are equal to one another, is fully as obvious in any
particular case, as it is in the general maxim; and if it had never been
laid down as a maxim, none of the demonstrations of Euclid would ever
have halted for any difficulty in stepping across the gap, which this
axiom serves at present to bridge over. Yet no one has ever censured
Euclid for giving a list of these self-evident propositions at the head
of his treatise: for the best introduction to a Science consists in
beginning with those of its truths which can be comprehended with least
effort. And the student of logic, in the manipulation even of such
truths as those which we have cited above, acquires habits of
circumspect interpretation of words; and of taking an exact measure of
the length and breadth of every assertion which he utters or which is
tendered for his assent, which habits, when raised by culture to
adequate constancy & strength, are among the most valuable acquisitions
for which the understanding is indebted to logical discipline.

[§3]

[¶1] Having noticed, for the purpose of excluding from the province of
Reasoning or Inference properly so called, the cases in which there is
only an apparent process from one truth to another, the logical
consequent being a mere repetition in other words, of the logical
antecedent, we are now prepared to consider the various cases of
inference in the correct acceptation of the term, that is, the deducing
of one distinct, independent truth, from another.

[¶2] Reasoning, in the widest sense of the term, is popularly said to be
of two kinds; reasoning from particulars to generals, and reasoning from
generals to particulars. The former is Induction, the latter
Ratiocination, or Syllogism. Before interpreting these brief
expressions, by others which are longer but more precise, I must
observe, that to these two cases of inference a third must be added;
reasoning from particulars to particulars. Some will deny that we can
legitimately reason in this last mode; and if the word reasoning be
understood in its most confined sense, in which it is synonymous with
ratiocination or syllogism, the objection must be allowed; but if by
reasoning be meant every kind of inference, or every case of concluding
one proposition from another, it will presently be shewn that reasoning
from particulars to particulars is the foundation of all other
reasoning, & that no reasoning whatever is legitimate if this is not.
The grounds of which assertion, although they cannot as yet be fully
stated, may be indicated by observing that every general proposition
ultimately rests upon, or rather resolves itself into, particulars, so
that particulars are the original premises of every argumentation.

[¶3] To say nothing further at present on this topic, which will be
amply discussed hereafter, it is necessary to observe that the
expressions, to reason from particulars to generals, & to reason from
generals to particulars, do not adequately mark out, without the aid of
a commentary, the boundaries between Induction and Ratiocination. The
correct expressions would be, to infer any proposition from propositions
less general than itself, and to infer it from propositions equally or
more general. When, from the observation of a number of individual
instances, Edition: current; Page: [1056] we infer a general
proposition, or when, from a number of general propositions we conclude
another more general still, this is Induction. When, from a general
proposition, by combining it with other propositions (for else [sic] we
cannot) we infer a proposition equally general, or less general, or not
general but individual, this is Ratiocination. In short, when the
conclusion is more general than any of the premises, the argument (if it
be a legitimate argument at all) is Induction. When the conclusion is
less general or equally general with the largest of the premises, but
not more so; the argument is Ratiocination.

[¶4] As all experience begins with particulars, and proceeds from thence
to generals, it would be more conformable to what seems the natural
order to treat of Induction before touching upon Ratiocination. There
are, however, advantages which will gradually manifest themselves as we
proceed, in making the analysis of Ratiocination preceed that of
Induction. And, in general, it will be found advantageous, in treating
of a Science which has for its chief object to trace all our knowledge
to its source, to commence with the later rather than with the earlier
stages of the process of acquiring knowledge, and to trace derivative
truths backward to those prior truths from which they are deduced and on
which they depend for their evidence, before attempting to point out the
original spring from which they all equally take their rise.

[¶5] With respect to Induction, then, we shall only for the present
observe, that it is a process of real, genuine inference; that the
conclusion embraces more than is contained in the premisses. The general
principle or law which we are said to discover—the general proposition
in which we embody the result of our experience,—covers a much larger
extent of ground than the individual experiments which form its basis. A
principle ascertained by experience is not the mere summing up of what
we have observed in the cases we have examined; it is a conclusion,
founded on those cases, and expressive of our belief, that what we there
found to be true, is true in an indefinite number of other cases which
we have not examined.—The nature and grounds of this inference, and the
conditions required to render it legitimate, we shall attempt to analyse
hereafter, in the chapter on Induction. We shall now merely remark by
way of suggestion, that the inference is drawn in conformity to the
received principle, that the course of nature is uniform, or (as it is
sometimes very inadequately expressed) that the future will resemble the
past.

In Induction, then, we proceed from truths which we know, to truths
which we did not before know: from facts certified by observation, to
facts which we have not observed, and perhaps could not have
observed—future facts, for example; but which we believe, with the
fullest conviction, upon the sole evidence of the Induction itself.

[¶6] Having noticed this, which is the only truth with respect to
Induction to which it will be necessary to advert in the exposition of
Syllogism, we proceed at once to that other branch of the subject.

Edition: current; Page: [1057]


OF RATIOCINATION, OR SYLLOGISM
 [Chapter ii: Of Ratiocination, or Syllogism]

[§1]

[¶1] The analysis of the Syllogism has been so fully and admirably given
in most of the common manuals of logic, that in the present work, which
is not designed as a manual, it is sufficient to recapitulate the
leading particulars of the analysis, memoria causâ, to serve as a
foundation for the subsequent reflections.

[¶2] To a legitimate syllogism it is essential that there should be
three & not more than three, propositions; namely, the proposition to be
proved, called the conclusion, and the two propositions which prove it,
called the premisses. It is essential that there shall be three, and no
more than three terms, viz: the subject & predicate of the conclusion,
and another term called the middle term which must be found in both
premisses. The predicate of the conclusion is called the major term of
the syllogism. As there can be but three terms, the major & minor terms
must each be found in one, and only one, of the premisses, along with
the middle term, which is in them both. That premiss which contains the
middle term and major term, is called the major premiss; that which
contains the middle term and the minor term is called the minor premiss.

[¶3] Syllogisms are divided by some logicians into three figures, by
others into four, according to the position of the middle term; which
may be the subject of both premises, the predicate of both, or the
subject of one, and the predicate of the other. The commonest case is
that in which the middle term is the subject of the major premiss and
the predicate of the minor. This is called the first figure. When the
middle term is the predicate of both premisses, the syllogism is said to
be in the second figure; when the subject of both, in the third. In the
fourth figure the middle term is the subject of the minor premiss and
the predicate of the major: those who do not reckon more than three
figures, include this in the first.

[¶4] These figures are again subdivided into modes, according to what
are called the quantity and quality of the propositions, that is to say,
according as the propositions are universal or particular, affirmative
or negative. The following are examples of all the legitimate modes,
that is, all those in which the conclusion legitimately follows from the
premisses: C is the major term, A the minor, B the middle term.

  ------------ ------------ ------------- -----------------
  All B is C   No B is C    All B is C    No B is C
  All A is B   All A is B   Some A is B   Some A is B
  ergo         ergo         ergo          ergo
  All A is C   No A is C    Some A is C   Some A is not C
  ------------ ------------ ------------- -----------------

  : FIRST FIGURE

  ------------ ------------ ----------------- -----------------
  No C is B    All C is B   No C is B         All C is B
  All A is B   No A is B    Some A is B       Some A is not B
  ergo         ergo         ergo              ergo
  No A is C    No A is C    Some A is not C   Some A is not C
  ------------ ------------ ----------------- -----------------

  : SECOND FIGURE

Edition: current; Page: [1058]
  ------------- ----------------- ------------- ------------- ----------------- -----------------
  All B is C    No B is C         Some B is C   All B is C
  All B is A    All B is A        All B is A    Some B is A
  ergo          ergo              ergo          ergo
  Some A is C   Some A is not C   Some A is C   Some A is C
  ------------- ----------------- ------------- ------------- ----------------- -----------------

  : THIRD FIGURE

  ------------- ------------ ------------- ----------------- -----------------
  All C is B    All C is B   Some C is B   No C is B
  All B is A    No B is A    All B is A    All B is A
  ergo          ergo         ergo          ergo
  Some A is C   No A is C    Some A is C   Some A is not C
  ------------- ------------ ------------- ----------------- -----------------

  : FOURTH FIGURE

[¶6] The reasons why these premises are legitimate, that is, why if the
premisses be true, the conclusions must necessarily be so, and why this
is not the case in any other possible Mode except these alone, any
person taking interest in the present speculations, may be presumed to
have either learned from the common books of logic, or to be capable of
divining by himself. The reader may however be referred to Dr. Whately’s
logic, where he will find stated with uncommon perspicuity, almost
everything which it is necessary to know on this part of the subject.

[¶7] All valid ratiocination; all reasoning by which from general
propositions we infer propositions equally or less general, may be
transformed into a series of syllogisms according to some of the above
formulæ. The whole of Euclid, for instance, might easily be thrown into
a series of syllogisms regular in mode and figure.

[¶8] Although a syllogism according to any of the above formulæ is a
valid argument, that is, conclusive from the mere form of the
expression; it has been shewn by logicians that all valid ratiocinations
may be stated in syllogisms of the first figure alone. The rules for
throwing an argument in the other figures into the first figure are
called the rules for the reduction of syllogisms. It is done by the
conversion of one or other, or both, of the premisses. Thus an argument
in the first mode of the second figure, as

No C is B

All A is B

ergo

No A is C

is reduced as follows: The proposition No C is B, being converted,
stands thus, No B is C, which, as we have shewn in treating of
conversion, is merely the same assertion put into other words—the same
fact, differently expressed. The argument will then stand thus

No B is C

All A is B

ergo

No A is C,

which is a good syllogism, in the second mode of the first figure.
Again, an argument in the first mode of the third figure would be

Edition: current; Page: [1059]
All B is C

All B is A

ergo

Some A is C.

Now the minor premiss, All B is A, being converted per accidens, gives
this proposition, Some B is A [sic]: which, though it does not express
the whole of the fact previously asserted, expresses part of it, and
must therefore be true, if the former proposition be true: we have,
therefore, the following syllogism in the third mode of the first
figure:

All B is C

Some A is B

from which it obviously follows that

Some A is C.

[¶9] In the same manner, or in a manner which is easily suggested by the
above exemplification, every mode of the second, third, and fourth
figures may be reduced to some one mode of the first. Every valid
ratiocination therefore may be stated in one of the following forms.

Every B is C
No B is C
All A }
is B
All A }
is B
Some A }
Some A }
ergo
ergo
All A }
is C
No A is }
C.
Some A }
Some A is not }

Or dropping the signs A, B & C, and replacing them by more significant
expressions;

[¶10] To prove an affirmative, the argument must admit of being stated
in this form:

All animals are Mortal
But
All men }
are animals
Some men }
Socrates }
ergo
All men }
are mortal.
Some men }
Socrates }

[¶11] To prove a negative the argument must be capable of being thrown
into this form

No persons capable of reflection are incapable of Moral excellence

But
All negroes }
are persons capable of reflection
Some negroes }
Mr. A’s negro }
ergo
No negroes are }
incapable of moral excellence.
Some negroes are not }
Mr. A’s negro is not }

Edition: current; Page: [1060]
[¶13] Not only does all ratiocination admit of being thrown into one or
other of these two forms, but when stated in these forms its
conclusiveness is more obvious at the very first glance than when it is
stated in any other form though equally legitimate. These forms,
moreover, strike every understanding as being those in which the ideas
involved in a ratiocination would most naturally and spontaneously
arrange themselves. We may therefore consider the two forms cited above
as the universal types of all correct ratiocination: the first, when the
conclusion arrived at is affirmative, the last, when it is negative.

[§2]

[¶1] On examining these formulæ, we find that in both of them, one of
the premisses, that which is called the major, is a universal
proposition; & according as this is affirmative or negative, the
conclusion is so too. All ratiocination starts from a general
proposition, principle, or assumption: a proposition in which a
predicate is affirmed or denied of an entire class, that is, in which
some attribute, or the absence of some attribute, is ascribed to an
indefinite number of objects possessing a common name.

[¶2] The other premiss is always affirmative, and asserts that some
other class of objects, or some part of some class, or only some
individual, belongs to the class, of the whole of which something had
been affirmed or denied in the major premiss. And the conclusion, of
course, necessarily follows; to this effect, that the attribute which
was asserted to be possessed by the entire class, must, if that be true,
be possessed by the objects which have been affirmed to be included in
the class; or that the attribute which was asserted not to be possessed
by any part of the class, cannot, if that be true, be possessed by the
objects which have been affirmed to belong to the class.

[¶3] This, which is a correct statement of what takes place in all cases
of ratiocination, has been generalised and erected into a logical maxim.
It is laid down in most treatises on Logic, that all Ratiocination rests
upon one principle; or, in other words, that every argument consists in
affirming in some particular case, a truth which expressed generally
forms the following maxim: That whatever can be truly affirmed or denied
of a class, can be truly affirmed or denied of everything belonging to
that class. This fundamental axiom has been termed by the schoolmen, the
dictum de omni et nullo.

[¶4] Now, of this maxim, considered as the principle of all reasoning,
we may venture to affirm, that it naturally belongs to a system of
metaphysics extremely remote from that which is at present received by
any philosopher in this country, & perhaps even in the world. At the
time when universals, as they were termed, were supposed to have a
separate objective existence, distinct from the individual objects which
were classed under them, the dictum de omni not only expressed a
definite meaning, but contained something which, assuming the above
theory, was very important to be known, namely this, that the
attributes, which we somehow contrived to discover in the universal, the
genus or species, the substantia secunda, as it was termed, are likewise
attributes of all the individual objects, of which that universal can be
truly predicated. The maxim, in short, asserted that particular
substances, & the supposed universal substances, were mysteriously
connected in such a manner, that the entire nature and properties of the
universal substance formed part of the nature & properties of each of
the particular substances called by its name. On the scholastic system,
this, as I have just observed, Edition: current; Page: [1061] was a
substantive fact or truth; by the knowledge of which we were made wiser.
But now, when it seems to be generally admitted, that a universal, a
class, a genus or species, is not an entity per se, but neither more nor
less than the particular substances themselves which are placed in the
class, and that there is nothing real in the whole matter except the
individual objects, a common name given to them, and common attributes
indicated by the name; what, I should be glad to know, do we learn by
being told, that whatever can be affirmed of a class, may be affirmed of
every object contained in the class? The class is nothing but the
objects contained in it; and the dictum de omni is nothing better than
the identical proposition, that whatever is true of all of a certain
number of objects, is true of each of these objects. If all
ratiocination were merely the application of this general maxim to some
particular case, the syllogism would indeed be, what it has so often
been asserted to be, solemn trifling. The dictum de omni is an axiom
precisely on a par with the celebrated truth, Whatever is, is; &
decidedly less instructive than the equally renowned aphorism, It is
impossible for the same thing to be and not to be. It can only be
considered as having a meaning, by being complaisantly understood as a
paraphrastic & circuitous definition of the word class.

[¶5] An error which seemed completely refuted and expelled from science,
often has only to put on a new suit of phrases, in order to be cordially
welcomed back to its old quarters, and there repose unquestioned for
another cycle of ages. Thus it has been with the scholastic dogma that
genera and species are a peculiar sort of substances, and that all
knowledge is only the knowledge of these universal substances, and not
of the infinite number of individual substances which are classed under
them. Whether disguised under the abstract ideas of Locke, (whose
speculations, however, have been, I conceive, less vitiated by it than
those of any other writer who has been infected with it before or since)
the ontology of Cousin & the later Kantesians [sic], or the
ultra-nominalism of Hobbes, this same doctrine has ever continued to
poison philosophy. Having been accustomed to consider philosophical
investigation as essentially consisting in the study of universals, men
did not drop this habit when they ceased to regard universals as
possessing an independent existence; and even those who came to consider
them as mere names, still could not free themselves from the notion that
the investigation of truth consisted entirely or partly, in some kind of
conjuration or juggle with those names. Few philosophical opinions have
ever been more widely spread than this, that the process of arriving at
new truths by reasoning, in all sciences, or at any rate in all those to
which Algebra is applied, consists in the mere substitution of one set
of arbitrary signs for another. If there is any process in sorcery or
necromancy more preternatural than this, I shall be much surprised. The
culminating point of this philosophy in modern times is the well known
aphorism of Condillac, that a Science is nothing, or scarcely anything,
but une langue bien faite. A paradox, which, if divested of its
epigrammatic dress, amounts to this, that we know the whole nature and
properties of objects, or as much of them as is within the reach of our
faculties, if we know what names they are called by. Can it be necessary
to do more than simply affirm that none, not even the smallest and most
trifling knowledge with respect to things, ever was, or ever can be
originally got by any conceivable manipulation of mere names; that
whatever can be learnt from names, is only what somebody, who used the
names, knew before us; that the function of names is exclusively
confined to being a contrivance for remembering & for communicating our
thoughts; and that their Edition: current; Page: [1062] use in acquiring
knowledge, immense as it is, amounts only to the advantage, in so
difficult an operation, of any contrivance which aids the memory, and
assists communication with others? Doubtless, it is necessary to do
something more than simply affirm this: it is necessary to explain the
real process by which those things are done, which so many have imagined
to be done by a mere arrangement of words. But when this shall be
effected, the proposition just stated will not be rendered at all more
obvious, than it is in its own nakedness the first moment it is uttered.

[§3]

[¶1] If truths cannot be discovered or proved by a process of naming,
neither can they by a process of classification. It has been observed in
a preceeding chapter, that classification does not precede, but follows
our knowledge; and that we do not affirm a predicate of a subject
because we have placed that subject in a class, but, on the contrary, we
place it in the class, because we find that the predicate in question
may be truly affirmed of it.

What is the real nature of a process of ratiocination, and what the
principle or maxim of which every syllogism is one of the applications,
will best be understood by remembering what it was which we found to be
the real nature and import of every proposition or predication.

We found that the matter-of-fact asserted in every proposition, not
identical, and which constitutes the real and only immediate object of
belief when we assent to the proposition, is always the conjunction or
non-conjunction of two phenomena: or, to express the same idea in other
words, the coexistence or non-coexistence of two attributes or sets of
attributes, in one and the same subject. I have already observed, that
every phenomenon, when analysed, resolves itself into a sensation,
thought, emotion, or volition, or a series of such, with or without a
substance or object which excites them: and that an attribute is nothing
but a name for the sensation, thought, emotion, or volition, considered
as excited by that substance or object. But to this more recondite
analysis, we need not do more than advert, since it is not necessary to
the proof of what we have to advance; and indeed, one of the objects
which I propose to myself in this work is to shew, that Logic is common
ground to the partisans of different metaphysical sects; and that all
its most valuable truths may be apprehended and assented to by persons
adopting the most opposite views of the higher or transcendental
metaphysics. If therefore I continue to use the received language
respecting the distinction between attribute and subject, I again repeat
that I intend to prejudge nothing respecting the real nature or ultimate
analysis of that distinction, but to assume its existence, as what must
be allowed in all systems, either as a distinction in entities
themselves or in our modes of viewing them.

[¶2] Since, then, every proposition, if affirmative, asserts, or if
negative, denies, the coexistence of two attributes, or sets of
attributes; this must be equally the case with propositions arranged in
a syllogism. The major premiss, which, as I have already observed, is
always universal, asserts that all things which have one particular
attribute, have in addition to it a certain other attribute; or else,
that they have not. The minor premiss asserts that a given object,* or a
given class of objects,† or part of a given class of objects,‡ has the
first mentioned attribute; and Edition: current; Page: [1063] the
conclusion infers in the one case that it has, in the other that it has
not, the second. Thus in the syllogism

All men are mortal

Socrates is a man

therefore

Socrates is mortal

the subject and predicate of the major premiss are concrete connotative
terms, denoting objects and connoting attributes. What the major premiss
asserts, is the constant union of those two sets of attributes. Its
purport is, that all objects which have the attributes connoted by the
word man, have also the attributes connoted by the word mortal. In other
words, that the phenomenon which is composed of corporeity, animal life,
rationality, and the form called human, never exists without being, at
some time or other, terminated by the phenomenon called death.

Now, while the major premiss asserts this, with regard to all objects
which have certain attributes, the minor premiss asserts that the
individual object called Socrates possesses these attributes, or, in
other words, is a phenomenon answering to this description. We therefore
conclude that this individual object also possesses the attribute of
mortality; in other words, that this phenomenon will also be, at some
time or other, cut short by the phenomenon death.

In this example, the minor premiss is a singular proposition. Suppose
now that both the premises are general propositions: thus

All B is C

All A is B

therefore

All A is C.

A, B, & C, being connotative terms. The minor premiss asserts that along
with the attributes connoted by A are always found the attributes
connoted by B. The major premiss asserts, that along with the attributes
connoted by B are always found the attributes connoted by C. The
conclusion, therefore, follows, that wherever we find the attributes
connoted by A, there also will be found the attributes connoted by C.

[¶3] If the major premiss is negative, thus,

No B is C

All A is B

therefore

No A is C

the argumentation is, that the attributes connoted by C never coexist
with the attributes connoted by B: but the attributes connoted by B
always coexist with those connoted by A: therefore the attributes
connoted by C never coexist with those connoted by A.*

Edition: current; Page: [1064]
In the same manner, we might analyse all the other cases of the
syllogism.

[*]According to this view of ratiocination, the propositions which are
concerned in it, whether as premisses or conclusion, are conversant not
with the propriety of the application of names, nor with the arranging
of objects in classes, both of which are matters of arbitrary
convention; but with the conjunction or non-conjunction of attributes,
in other words of phenomena, in other words of objects, and the feelings
which those objects exite in us.†

[¶4] We have thus arrived at a preliminary axiom, a first and
fundamental principle of all reasoning, different from the unmeaning
dictum de omni et nullo. This axiom is analogous to those of
mathematics, and consists of two propositions. The first is, that things
which are constantly conjoined with the same thing, are constantly
conjoined with one another. The second is, that a thing which is
constantly conjoined with something, from which another thing is
constantly disjoined, is constantly disjoined from that other thing. Or
thus; Two things, one of which is always, and the other never, conjoined
with a third thing, are never conjoined with one another.

Edition: current; Page: [1065]


[Chapter iii: Of the Functions and Logical Value of the Syllogism*]

[§1]

[¶1] It has now been shewn what is the nature of the truths with which
the syllogism is conversant, and what the principle on which its
probative force or conclusiveness depends. But the question still
remains whether the syllogistic process, or, in other words, reasoning
from generals to particulars, is or is not a process of inference: a
process from the known to the unknown, a means by which we come to a
knowledge of something which we did not know before.

[¶2] Of this question, the solution is obvious; and no one has ever
treated [?] upon the subject without hitting upon it. All logicians
allow that a syllogism is vicious if there be anything more in the
conclusion than is assumed in the premisses. But this is as much as to
say that nothing ever was or can be proved by syllogism, which was not
known before. Ratiocination, therefore, is not a process of inference.
Syllogism, to which the word reasoning has so often been deemed to be
exclusively appropriate, is not even a process of reasoning at all.

But although the principle that a syllogism never proves more than is
involved in the premisses, has, as before observed, been admitted by all
writers on the subject, the admission has, for the [†]most part, either
remained barren of consequences, or has produced none but positively
erroneous ones. The acknowledgment thus explicitly made has not
prevented one set of writers from continuing to present the syllogism as
the correct analysis of the actual process which the mind pursues in
establishing that large class of truths which are currently said to be
got at by reasoning, as distinguished from induction; while it has
induced another set to make the petitio principii which they affirm is
inherent in every syllogism, a ground for imputing uselessness,
futility, and frivolity, to the syllogistic theory itself.

That both these opinions are equally remote from the truth, may I think
be conclusively demonstrated: and the real character of the syllogistic
process, and of the purposes which it fulfils in philosophy, more
clearly shewn than has ever yet been done.

[§2]

[¶1] It must be conceded that in every syllogism, considered as an
argument to prove the truth of the conclusion, there is a petitio
principii. The proposition to be proved is assumed in the major premiss.
When we say,

All men are mortal

But

Socrates is a man

Therefore

Socrates is mortal

it is unanswerably urged by the assailants of the syllogistic theory,
that the proposition, Socrates is mortal, is presupposed in the more
general proposition, All men are mortal: that we cannot be assured of
the mortality of all men, unless Edition: current; Page: [1066] we are
previously assured of the mortality of every individual man; that if the
mortality of Socrates was doubtful before, the same degree of
uncertainty must hang over the proposition that all men are mortal, and
the general principle, instead of being given as evidence of the
particular case, cannot itself be taken for true without exception,
until every shadow of doubt which could affect any of the particular
cases included in it previously, is dispelled by evidence aliundè: and
then, what is left for the syllogism to prove? That, in short, no
reasoning from generals to particulars can prove anything: since from a
general principle you cannot infer any particulars, but those which the
principle itself assumes as preknown.

[*]The justness of these strictures is by no means obviated by the
analysis which we have given of the ultimate meaning of import of the
syllogism, and the propositions composing it. For, let the argumentation
be as follows

-   

    Wherever attribute a exists, attribute b is joined with it:
-   

    But a is one of the attributes of the object X:
-   

    therefore
-   

    b is also an attribute of the object X.

The major premiss begs the conclusion, just as much in this mode of
stating the argument as in the other. For what does the major premiss
assert? That attribute b enters into all the combinations of attribute
a. But X, by supposition, is one of those combinations. Unless,
therefore, it was already certain beyond a doubt, that a enters into the
combination X, the major premiss was prematurely assumed; there were
still doubts of its universality; and it could not be legitimately
called in to prove that, on the previous establishment of which its own
evidence was dependent. The pretended conclusion is a mere reassertion,
in other words, of part of the premisses. All A is B, therefore Some A
is B, we observed in a former place, is no inferring of a new truth, but
a mere reassertion of the old. But the truth is, every syllogism which
it is possible to put into words, is precisely analogous, if considered
as an argument, to such reasoning as All A is B therefore Some A is B.

[¶2] All this is sufficiently obvious: and if logicians have usually,
though unable to dispute it, shewn a strong disposition to explain it
away, and to forget it as much as they could, this seems to have arisen
from a difficulty which they found in reconciling it with other parts of
their knowledge. They knew that the syllogism is a petitio principii;
but they also knew that truths previously unknown, facts which have not
been directly observed, are continually got at by way of inference; that
subsequent experiment, whenever an opportunity occurs, corroborates
their truth; and that the process by which these inferences are drawn,
seems, at least, to be a process of reasoning from generals to
particulars. We believe that William the Fourth is mortal. We do not
know this by direct observation, seeing that he is not yet dead. If we
were asked how, when this is the case, we know William the Fourth to be
mortal, we should probably answer, because all men are so. Here,
therefore, it may be said, we arrive at the knowledge of an unobserved
truth, by a reasoning which is correctly resolved into the following
syllogism:

-   

    All men are mortal
-   

    But
-   

    William the Fourth is a man
-   

    Therefore
-   

    William the Fourth is mortal,

Edition: current; Page: [1067]
which, consequently, is an instance of an argument from generals to
particulars, proving a fact which we did not know before. [¶3] And on
the evidence of such cases, which are infinitely numerous, logicians
have persevered in affirming that the syllogism is a process of
inference, or proof, although none of them has hitherto succeeded in
giving any sufficient solution of the apparent inconsistency between
that assertion, and the principle expressly laid down by all of them,
that if there be anything in the conclusion which was not already
included in the premisses, the argument is vicious. One cannot help
fancying that if they had suffered themselves to follow out this last
proposition to what would have appeared, even to themselves, its
necessary consequence, they would have been led to the conclusion that
no new truths could be come at by ratiocination; and that this would
have seemed to them a priori to be evident, had not they been stopped by
thinking that the contrary was equally evident à posteriori. If they had
been perfectly candid in stating to themselves what really passed in
their own minds, they would have confessed that they believed a mystery;
giving credit to two propositions, each of which, separately taken,
seemed to them to be perfectly certain, but which they were completely
unable to reconcile with one another.

[§3]

[¶2] This difficulty, and apparent paradox, arises, I conceive, from not
distinguishing with sufficient clearness between the two parts of the
process of philosophizing, the inferring part and the registering part;
and from attending too exclusively to the latter. The mistake committed
is like referring a man back to his own notes, for the origin of his
knowledge. If a person is asked a question, and is at the moment unable
to answer it, he may naturally enough turn to a memorandum which he
carries about with him, to refresh his memory. But if he were asked how
the fact came to his knowledge, he would scarcely answer, because it was
written in his pocket book. Good, if the memorandum was made for him by
an angel, or an enchanter; but not if he made it himself.

[¶3] Assuming that the proposition, William the Fourth is mortal, is an
inference from the general proposition, All men are mortal, whence do we
derive the knowledge of this more comprehensive truth? If it came to us
by experience, and not by revelation, the evidence which convinces us of
it consists of particular cases. It is because John, and Thomas, and
every other person we know of in whose case the experiment has been
fully tried, has turned out to be mortal, that we conclude all other men
to be so.

All which man can observe, are individual cases. From these all general
truths must be deduced; and into these they may be again resolved; for
every general truth is but an aggragate of particular truths; a
comprehensive expression by which a large and commonly indefinite number
of particular facts are denied or affirmed at once.

But a general proposition is not merely a compendious form for recording
& preserving in the memory a number of particular facts, all of which
have been previously observed. Generalization is not a process of naming
merely; it is also a process of inference. From a certain number of
instances which we have been able to observe, we conclude that what
holds in those instances, holds in all similar instances, past, present,
and future, however numerous they may be: and then, by employing one of
the contrivances of language, which enables us to speak of many as if
they were one, we record all that we have observed and all that we have
inferred, in one concise expression. The immediate and obvious Edition:
current; Page: [1068] advantages of this process, consist in the greater
facility of remembering one proposition instead of a great number, and
the great saving of time and trouble in the communication of knowledge
from one person to another, where the results of many observations and
inferences, and instructions for making innumerable inferences in
unforeseen cases, can be all compressed into one short sentence.

[¶4] When, therefore, we conclude from the deaths which we have
heretofore observed, that William the Fourth, like so many of his
fellow-men, is mortal; though we may, not improbably, pass through the
intermediate generalization, All men are mortal; it is not in the latter
half of the process, the descent from All men to William the Fourth,
that the inference resides. All the inference that there is in the
matter is already made, the moment we have asserted that All men are
mortal. All that remains to be performed afterwards, is merely
decyphering our own notes.

[¶5] Logicians, and in particular Dr. Whately, have with an uncommon
degree of earnestness, set themselves about to establish, that
syllogizing, or reasoning from generals to particulars, is not, agreably
to the vulgar idea, a particular mode of reasoning, but the analysis of
the mode in which all mankind reason, and must reason, otherwise they
can conclude nothing. This doctrine appears to me to be metaphysically
incorrect. If, from our experience that John, Thomas, and so many other
human beings were mortal, we are intitled to conclude, that all men are
so, surely we might, without any logical inconsequence, have concluded
at once that William the Fourth is mortal. The mortality of John &
Thomas, is, after all, the sole evidence we have for the mortality of
William the Fourth. Not one iota is added to the proof by interpolating
a general proposition. Seeing, therefore, that the particular cases are
all the evidence we can procure, evidence which all the logical modes of
dressing it up which were ever hit upon, cannot make greater than it is;
since that evidence is sufficient, without generalization, or else is
not sufficient, even with generalization; I cannot see why we should be
forbidden to take the shortest cut from these sufficient premisses to
the conclusion; and constrained to travel the “high priori road” because
logicians tell us that it is the King’s highway. I cannot perceive why
it should be impossible to journey from one place to another, unless we
“march up a hill, and then march down again.” It may be the safest road,
and the most convenient, and there may be a good resting place on the
top of the hill from whence we can see far around us: but supposing we
wish only to arrive at our journey’s end, our taking that particular
road is perfectly optional. It is altogether a question of time,
troubles, and danger. The syllogistic logic, in short, is, precisely
what Dr. Whately says it is not. It is an art of reasoning, and, as we
shall presently shew, very frequently the best. But it is not the art of
reasoning.

[¶6] Not only may we reason at once, from particulars to particulars,
without passing through generals, but we very frequently do so reason.
All our earliest inferences are from particulars to particulars. From
the very first dawn of intelligence we draw inferences; but we live long
before we learn the use of signs, particularly those which compose
general language.

The child, who, having once burnt his fingers, avoids to thrust them
again into the fire, has reasoned or inferred, though he has not thought
of the general maxim, that fire burns. He knows from memory that he has
formerly been burnt, and on this evidence he fully believes, that if he
put his finger into the flame of the candle on the table near him, he
will be burnt again. He believes this in each particular case as it
occurs; but he is never thinking of any other case than the Edition:
current; Page: [1069] one before him. He is not generalizing; he is
inferring a particular from particulars.

It is in this way that brutes reason. There is little, if any, ground,
for ascribing to any of the lower animals the use of conventional signs.
But an animal profits by experience, and avoids what he has observed to
cause him pain, in the same manner, though not always with the same
skill, as a human creature. Not only the burnt child, but the burnt dog,
dreads the fire.

[¶10] Even the philosopher, who is accustomed to state the result of his
experience in the form of general propositions, needs not always revert
to those generalizations in order to apply his experience to a new case.
Dugald Stewart is the author of this remark, though he most
unnecessarily restricted its application to the narrow case of
mathematical axioms. He observes, that when in Euclid’s Elements it is
inferred that AB is equal to CD because both of them are equal to EF,
the most uncultivated understanding, would, without hesitation, assent
to the inference as soon as the propositions were understood, without
having ever heard of the axiom, “Things which are equal to the same
thing are equal to one another.” But here, as in many other instances
which might be pointed out, this thoughtful and elegant writer has
perceived an important truth only by halves, and his speculations
suggest far more than he himself saw. The use which he makes of the
above observation is to establish that axioms are not the foundations or
first principles of geometry; are not analogous to the laws of motion
and of the composition of forces in mechanics, the equal mobility of
fluids in hydrostatics, the laws of the reflection and refraction of
light in optics, and similar propositions, from which all the other
truths of those and other Sciences may be synthetically deduced; but are
merely necessary assumptions, self-evident indeed, and the denial of
which would annihilate all demonstration, but which are themselves
barren, and bring forth no corollaries or derivative truths, either in
the way of demonstration or in any other way whatever. That this attempt
to distinguish axioms from any other general truths is ineffectual, &
indeed, in its own nature self-contradictory I shall hereafter give my
reasons for maintaining. I mention it here only as an indication how
little guidance Stewart derived from a light, which, if he had continued
to keep it in view, would have afforded him a clearer insight than had
been possessed by any philosopher before him, into the theory of
ratiocination. Finding, in the case of geometrical axioms, that general
names had not in them any mysterious virtue, whereby a philosopher is
enabled, with them as his talisman, to conjure new truths out of the
abyss of darkness; and not seeing that this was equally true of any
other generalization, he contended that axioms were in their nature
barren of consequences, and that the really pregnant truths, the genuine
first principles of geometry, were the definitions. That the definition
of a circle, for instance, is to the properties of the circle, what the
laws of equilibrium and of the pressure of the atmosphere are to the
rise of the mercury in the Torricellian tube. Yet all that he had
asserted respecting the function which the axioms perform in the
demonstrations of geometry, holds equally true of the definitions. Every
demonstration in Euclid might be carried on without them. That this is
the case must be obvious to every one, who reflects on the process of
proving a proposition by means of a diagram. What, in fact, is the
assumption from which Euclid starts to demonstrate by the aid of a
diagram any of the properties of the circle? Not, that in all circles
the radii are equal; but only, that they are so in the circle ABC. From
this, which is not a general but an individual or singular proposition,
combining it with other propositions of a Edition: current; Page: [1070]
similar kind, some of which, when generalised, are called definitions, &
others axioms, we prove, that a certain conclusion is true, not of all
circles, but of the particular circle ABC; or at least would be so, if
the facts precisely accorded with our assumption. The enunciation, as it
is called, i.e. the general theorem which stands at the head of one of
Euclid’s demonstrations, is not the proposition which he in fact
demonstrates; nor does he demonstrate any general proposition whatever.
He merely demonstrates one individual instance, by a process of
reasoning, which, when we duly consider its nature, we perceive might be
exactly copied in any other instance among an indefinite number: and we
then, by the contrivance of general terms, assert all this indefinite
number of truths at once. By dropping the use of diagrams, and
substituting in the demonstrations, general phrases for the large
letters of the alphabet, we might demonstrate all the cases by one
operation. To do this, we must of course express our premises, be they
called definitions or axioms, in language equally extensive. But this is
merely saying, that if we can prove an individual conclusion by assuming
an individual fact, in whatever case we are entitled to make an exactly
similar assumption, we may draw an exactly similar conclusion. The
definition is a sort of notice to ourselves and others, what assumptions
we think we are entitled to make. The general propositions, (whether
definitions, axioms, or laws of nature) which we lay down at the
beginning of our reasonings, are merely abridged statements, in a
species of short hand, of the particular facts, which as occasion
arises, we either think we may proceed upon as proved, or intend to
assume. In any one demonstration, it is enough if we make, for one
particular case, the assumption which in the statement of the definition
or law, we announce that we intend to make in all cases which may arise.
The definition of the circle, therefore, is, to one of Euclid’s
demonstrations, exactly what, according to Stewart, the axioms are: that
is to say, the demonstration does not depend upon it, but yet, if we
deny it, the demonstration fails. The reason of which is obvious. The
demonstration rests, not upon the general assumption, but upon an
assumption confined to the particular case. But, if once we deny the
general proposition, we have no right to assume the particular one which
is included in it, for it is not pretended that there is more ground for
the assertion in that case than in any other: if there were, it could
not have been without a logical impropriety selected as a specimen of
the whole class of cases included in the enunciation of the theorem.

[¶11] Both the definitions and axioms, and the enunciations of the
theorems, are stated in general terms, memoriæ causâ, because they can
be more easily carried in our recollection than diagrams and
demonstrations, and for other reasons which we shall hereafter state.
But that an unpractised learner, even in making use of one theorem to
demonstrate another, reasons rather from particular to particular, than
from the general theorem, is manifest from the difficulty he finds in
applying a theorem to a case in which the configuration of the diagram
is extremely unlike that of the original one by which the theorem was
demonstrated:—a difficulty which long practise can alone remove, and
that chiefly by rendering him familiar with all possible configurations
compatible with the conditions of the hypothesis.

[§4]

[¶1] From the considerations which we have now educed, it may be
considered as fully made out that all inference is from particulars to
particulars: that general Edition: current; Page: [1071] propositions
are merely registers of such inferences already made, or short formulæ
for making more; and that Syllogism, which necessarily proceeds from
general propositions, is not a process of inference; the inference being
made in laying down the major premiss, and being, therefore, already
completed before the syllogism begins. It remains to be shewn, since the
syllogism is not a process of inference, or reasoning, what it really
is.

[¶2] There is no difficulty in solving this question. I have mentioned
that the syllogism, in the ordinary course of our reasoning, is only the
latter half of the process of travelling from premisses to a conclusion.
There are, however, two peculiar cases in which it is the whole process,
and by examining what is its character in those cases, we shall discern
that which really belongs to it in all others.

In the ordinary course of acquiring knowledge, it begins as already
mentioned, in particulars, because particulars only are capable of being
subjected to observation. But our knowledge may, in certain cases, be
conceived to come to us from other sources than observation. It may be
revealed to us by a superior being; and thus communicated, may as easily
be conceived to come to us in the form of general propositions as of
individual ones: indeed, much more easily. Or the generalization may not
be, in the ordinary sense, an assertion, but a command: a law, not in
the philosophical, but the moral and political sense of the term: an
expression of the desire of a superior that we, or any number of other
persons, shall conform our conduct to certain general instructions. So
far as this asserts a fact, namely, a volition of the legislator, it is
not a general proposition at all; the fact asserted in it is an
individual fact. But the description contained in it, of the conduct
which it is the will of the legislator that his subjects should observe,
is general. The proposition asserts, not that all men are anything, but
that all men shall do something.

[¶3] In both these cases, that of a truth revealed to us in general
terms, and that of a command intimated to us in the like manner, we
arrive at the generalities first, and the particulars have the
appearance of being deduced from them; by a process which correctly
resolves itself into a series of syllogisms. The real nature, however,
of this process of deduction, is sufficiently evident. It is a search
for truth, no doubt, but through the medium of an inquiry into the
meaning of a form of words. The problem is, whether the Being, who
revealed to us the general principle, intended to include this case in
it; or whether the legislator intended his command to apply to the
present case among others, or not. This is a question only of language
and classification. It relates entirely to the meaning of a certain form
of discourse. The whole operation is not a process of inference, but a
process of interpretation.

[¶4] This last expression appears to me very aptly to characterise the
functions of the syllogism. It is a process of interpretation, simply.
When we argue thus

-   

    All men are Mortal
-   

    But
-   

    William the Fourth is a man
-   

    Therefore
-   

    William the Fourth is mortal

there is no inference in the case, but merely a more explicit statement,
of part of what was asserted in the major premiss. “All men are mortal”
was equivalent to, William the Fourth, and Julius Cæsar, and George
Washington, & Tom, Dick, & Edition: current; Page: [1072] Harry, &c. &c.
are mortal. Of this voluminous predication, or rather series of
predications, we take as much as we want, and leave the rest; and that
is called syllogizing. The major premiss is like an algebraical formula
with a, b, c, m, and n; in the conclusion we substitute particular
numbers, as 16, 20, 50, 2 and 3, for those letters: but this is not
inferring a new truth, for we had the same truth before, wrapped up,
along with a great number of others, in a set of hieroglyphics. We
decypher these as we find occasion, & put such of the truths they
contain, as we happen to want, into more familiar language, so as to be
more readily available for our purposes. Syllogizing, therefore, is
decyphering: it is, once more, a process, not of inference, but
interpretation.

[§5]

[¶1] Having, as it seems to me, sufficiently convicted of error, those
who imagine that the syllogism is a correct analysis of any process of
reasoning or inference; and, having established that there is but one
legitimate process of reasoning or inference, namely, reasoning from
particulars to particulars, properly called induction; I yet must enter
a protest, quite as strong as that of any logician, against the doctrine
that the syllogistic art is of no use in reasoning. Syllogizing is not
reasoning: induction only is reasoning; but the syllogism is useful in
reasoning, as a test of induction itself.

[*]Hereafter, in treating of induction, it will behove us to inquire, in
what cases it is allowable to infer particulars from particulars, by
what tokens we are able to judge whether an induction is legitimate. For
the present, we are only prepared to say, that the problem is very
difficult; that the sufficiency of the proof is matter of very nice and
delicate discrimination; and that there is scarcely any person whose
conclusions do not very frequently outstrip the evidence, or fall short
of it. Here is situated the great stumbling-block of philosophy; and any
contrivance which can contribute in any the slightest degree to help us
over it, is proportionally precious. Now, the syllogism is a contrivance
of this sort.

[¶2] Whenever, from an induction of particular cases, we can
legitimately draw any inference, our inference may legitimately be a
general one. If, from observation and experiment, we can conclude to one
new case, we may to an indefinite number. If that which has held in our
past experience must therefore hold in time to come, it will not hold in
one individual case only, but in all cases of a given discription. Every
induction, therefore, which suffices to prove one fact, proves a
multitude of facts: the experience which justifies a single prediction,
must be sufficient to bear out a general rule. Now this general rule it
is extremely advantageous to state fully out, in its broadest
generality, and so to place before our minds in its entire extent the
whole of what our evidence must prove if it proves anything.

[¶3] The advantage of this as respects the correctness of the induction,
is twofold. First, the general principle presents a larger object to the
imagination. A process of thought which leads to a comprehensive truth,
is felt as more important than one which terminates only in an insulated
fact, and the mind is unconsciously led to bestow greater attention upon
the process, & to weigh more carefully the sufficiency of the
experience. The other advantage is still more important. In reasoning to
a particular case, which by the very supposition we Edition: current;
Page: [1073] are imperfectly acquainted with (or else it would not be a
subject of investigation)—and in which, very probably, either our
imagination or our wishes may be biassed one way, there is the most
serious danger of our admitting insufficient evidence as sufficient. But
if we place before ourselves an entire class of facts—the whole contents
of a general proposition,—the whole of which are legitimate deductions
from our premises, if that one particular conclusion is so,—there is a
probability that if the premises are insufficient, this general
inference will comprise within it some fact or facts, the opposite of
which we already know to be true. We thus multiply to the utmost the
chances that if there is an error in our reasoning, we shall discover it
by a reductio ad impossibile.

[¶4] Thus, if during the reign of Marcus Aurelius, a subject of the
Roman Empire, under the bias naturally given to the imagination and
expectations by the lives and characters of the Antonines, had been
disposed to conclude that Commodus also would be a virtuous man; if he
stopped there, it is possible that he might only have been undeceived by
experience. But if he reflected that he could not be justified in
drawing this inference, unless, from the same premisses, he was also
warranted in reasoning upwards, to the general proposition that All
despots are virtuous men; (or some other generalization more or less
extensive); he would immediately have thought of Nero, Domitian, and
many other instances, which, by proving the falsity of the proposition
as a general maxim, proved that it could not legitimately follow from
true premisses; and that consequently those premisses would no better
support the particular conclusion in favour of the virtue of Commodus,
since the conclusion rests on no better foundation in that case than in
any other.

[¶5] The advantage, in judging of any controverted inference, of
referring to a parallel case, is universally acknowledged. Now, by
ascending to the general proposition, we call in to our assistance not
one parallel case merely, but all possible parallel cases at once.

[¶6] Now, therefore, if we are arguing from a certain number of known
cases, to another case supposed to be analogous; we may transmute our
argument into the form of an induction from those known cases up to a
general proposition, and a subsequent reasoning downwards from the
general proposition to the known case. The latter part of the process
will thus be resolved into a series of syllogisms, the majors of which
are broad general propositions, every one of which must be true, if our
argument is conclusive. If any one fact therefore, fairly coming within
one of these general propositions, is known or suspected to be other
than the proposition makes it, this mode of stating the argument causes
us either to know or to suspect that our reasoning will not hold. And in
proportion to the greater chance of our detecting its fallacy, will be
the encreased reliance we are entitled to place in it if no fallacy
appear.

[¶7] The principles and rules of the syllogism are therefore highly
useful. Not because they are the principles and rules according to which
our reasonings are necessarily, or even usually, made: but because they
furnish us with a form into which those reasonings may always be thrown,
and in which, if they are incorrect, their incorrectness will more
readily appear. The syllogism is not a form in which we must reason, but
it is one in which we may reason, and into which it is advantageous to
throw our reasoning, when there is any doubt of its validity. Not indeed
the whole of the process of reasoning (except in those cases already
noticed, where the entire process resolves itself into interpretation);
but the latter part of it. An induction from particulars to generals,
followed by a syllogistic Edition: current; Page: [1074] process from
those generals to other particulars, is a form in which we may always
state our reasoning, if we please; though when the case is familiar and
little complicated, and where no doubt exists, we safely may, and do
reason at once from the known particular cases to unknown ones.

[¶8] As respects one single argument, the above are the uses of the
syllogism. As respects the general course of our intellectual
operations, this mode of stating an argument has the further advantage,
that the induction may be made once for all: one single careful
examination of the particular cases may suffice, and the result may be
registered in the form of a general proposition, which is committed to
memory, and from which, afterwards, we have only to syllogize. The
particulars of our experiments may then be dismissed from the memory, in
which it would be impossible to retain so great a number of details;
while all the knowledge which those details were capable of affording,
and which would otherwise be lost as soon as the experiments themselves
were forgotten, is retained in a commodious and immediately available
shape by means of general language.

[¶9] Against this immense advantage is to be set the countervailing
disadvantage, [*]that inferences originally made on insufficient
evidence, became consecrated & as it were hardened into the form of
general maxims, and the mind cleaves to them from habit, long after it
has outgrown any liability to be misled by such fallacious appearances
if they were now for the first time presented to it. This strengthening
of its powers does not avail for correcting the original inductions,
because the mind has no longer present to it the particulars of the
experiments from which that induction was made.

[¶10†] Upon the above great advantage of general propositions, and this
its inevitable alloy, many opportunities will present themselves for
further discussion.[‡] I have only now to remark that so far as the
syllogism is concerned in this function of general language, it is as a
process of interpretation, merely. The knowledge is already acquired,
and recorded in a general expression, of which it only remains to
decypher the sense.

We have now shown, that the distinction between Induction & Reasoning,
as commonly understood, has no real foundation. There are not two modes
of arriving at truth, one proceeding upwards from particulars to
generals, another downwards from generals to particulars. All knowledge
is knowledge of particulars; all inference is from particulars to
particulars. General propositions are mere signs for registering
indefinite multitudes of particulars; and what is called ratiocination,
or reasoning from generals to particulars, is merely decyphering those
signs.

But, although all argumentation is from particulars to particulars, all
argumentation may be thrown into the circuitous form of a double
process, from particulars to generals, & from those generals to other
particulars. And it is highly advisable, it is even indispensable to
correct reasoning, when the subject is obscure or complicated, thus to
interpolate a general proposition between the real premises and the real
conclusion. For all particulars which will prove any Edition: current;
Page: [1075] conclusion at all, will prove a general conclusion.
Whatever we have ground to believe of any one individual, on mere
inference, without specific experience, we have equal ground to believe
of all individuals whatever, which agree with that individual in the
circumstances upon which the inference is founded. We are enabled
therefore to judge more correctly whether we can conclude to the
individual case, by trying [?] whether in concluding to the entire class
of cases, we are led into anything which is in contradiction to our
previous knowledge.

Generalization, in short, is not a necessary part of reasoning, but it
is a highly useful operation for verifying the correctness of reasoning.

[§6]

[¶1] As much has now been said as seems necessary, not only for proving
but for duly illustrating the above propositions. The theory, however,
of ratiocination is not yet complete. The syllogism consists of a
conclusion and two premisses, the major & the minor. We have analysed
the major, and have shewn that it is no part of the process of reasoning
at all. We have also shewn what it really is, and what are its offices
and uses in philosophy. But there is also the minor. What is its office?
Is it as unnecessary a part of the process as the major? Should we be
able to reason without it? And is it only useful in as much as it is a
part of that syllogistic dress into which it is advantageous to put an
argument, in order to be more certain of its validity?

[¶2] A philosopher, to whom mental science owes much, Dr. Thomas Brown,
has answered this question in a manner which demands our notice. The
minor premiss, according to him, is not merely a part of the process of
argumentation, but the whole. A is B therefore A is C is a formula which
he considers to represent the whole operation of the human intellect in
reasoning. The major premiss he rejects as we do, because it assumes by
implication the truth of the conclusion which it affects to prove: but
the error of the Aristotelian logicians he conceives to lie in not
resting satisfied with the minor premiss & the conclusion, as a full and
satisfactory analysis of the reasoning process. “All men are animals,
Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is an animal,” is, according to
him mere trifling. “Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is an animal,”
is all that really passes through the mind.

[*]There is no doubt that in the particular case which we have selected
as an example, Dr. Brown’s observation would be just. “Socrates is a
man, therefore Socrates is an animal,” requires no third proposition to
render the inference legitimate. If Socrates is a man, we may know
without further inquiry that he is an animal: but why? Because we know
it already. We have asserted it in the very words we used. The meaning
of the word “animal” is involved in the meaning of the word “man.” Man
connotes all that animal connotes, & more. There is, therefore, no
inference in this case at all, but a mere reassertion of part of the
antecedent. The proposition, which must be supplied if the argument is
to be stated syllogistically, viz: “All men are animals,” is an
essential proposition, and all essential propositions are, as we have
long since shewn, merely identical. Dr. Brown’s theory of reasoning,
though given by him as a substitute for the syllogistic doctrine, is
liable to precisely the same objection which lies against that doctrine
itself, considered as an analysis of reasoning; i.e. it is quite a
correct Edition: current; Page: [1076] analysis of the operation of the
intellect in certain cases, but these unhappily are precisely the cases
in which there is no reasoning. Such indeed are the cases usually
selected by the scholastic logicians, as examples of reasoning. We have
formerly commented on the injury which the reputation of the syllogistic
art has suffered from this habit of exemplifying its rules by specimens
which have only the form of reasoning without the substance; syllogisms
in which the major premiss being an essential proposition conveys no
information whatever. Were there not evidence to the contrary in his own
choice of examples, we might almost have suspected that Dr. Brown, who,
though a very penetrating, was a very hasty thinker, and seldom
proceeded with due circumspection, had, when he turned his attention to
the syllogism, unluckily fallen upon one of these ill-chosen specimens;
in which the major premiss really is utterly futile, and the conclusion
wholly involved in the minor premiss; and that, overlooking the very
peculiar character of the example, he had inferred at once, that what
was true of such a syllogism was true of all others. This would only
have been one instance among many of that precipitation, which has
rendered Dr. Brown fully as remarkable for what he did not see, as for
what he saw. In reading his speculations, your wonder is alternately
excited at the acuteness which discerns a truth not easily discoverable,
and the oscitancy which misses another, lying close to the former, and
far more obvious.

If, instead of a syllogism in which the main premiss is an essential
proposition, we choose one in which that premiss conveys information of
a matter of fact; if, for instance, instead of “All men are animal,” the
major premiss is this, “All men are mortal,” and the remainder of the
syllogism, “Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal” we arrive
at far other notions of the reasoning process. For although we may
dispense with the major premiss, “All men are mortal,” we can only do so
by putting in its place, the particular truths from which that
generalization was made. The arrangement, when stated fully will stand
not thus:—

-   

    Socrates is a man
-   

    therefore
-   

    Socrates is mortal;

but thus;

My father, and his father, and his father’s father, and Tom, and Dick
and Harry, and so on (to the end of the series of all persons of whose
deaths I have direct evidence) were mortal:

(We cannot add, But Socrates is a man, for there would be nothing to
connect this with the other premiss, and the two together would not
prove anything. The minor premiss must therefore undergo a
transformation, and stand as follows:)

But Socrates resembles my father, and his father, and his father’s
father, and Tom and Dick and Harry (to the end of the enumeration as
before):

-   

    Therefore
-   

    Socrates is mortal.

Here, we have at length a correct statement of the nature of the
argumentation, which the syllogistic doctrine rudely expresses thus:
“All men are mortal, but Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is
mortal.”

The major premiss, “All men are mortal,” when divested of the petitio
principii, and cut down to as much as is really known when the
argumentation begins, is reduced to an assertion of the mortality of
certain definite individuals.

The minor premiss, “Socrates is a man,” is equivalent to an assertion,
that Edition: current; Page: [1077] Socrates resembles those definite
individuals; namely, in possessing certain attributes, which are
involved in the signification of the word man. It is true, the
proposition, “Socrates is a man,” in itself only asserts that Socrates
possesses those attributes; his resemblance to those other individuals
is only asserted by implication; and for anything that appears on the
face of the proposition, they may never have existed. But from the mere
possession of those attributes by Socrates, we cannot conclude anything
as to his mortality. The ground on which we infer his mortality is his
resemblance to other individuals, whose mortality is known to us by
experience. This resemblance happens to consist in those particular
attributes which we predicate of him when we call him a man. But the
attributes themselves would not bear us out in any conclusion, if no
other being possessed them, or possessed attributes in any way
resembling them. All reasoning is from a parallel case, or from cases
more or less analogous, never from the very case itself.* We may learn
any number of properties of a thing, by intuition or consciousness, but
we never can infer one property from another, except so far as that
other constitutes a resemblance to some other thing, which possesses
both the properties united. All reasoning, all inference, is founded
upon resemblance.

Dr. Brown must have know all which we have now stated: but it probably
never presented itself to his mind in this precise shape; other wise he
could not have committed the mistake of resolving an argument into
nothing but the minor premiss and the conclusion. For he would have seen
that what is directly asserted in the minor premiss, not only does not
prove the conclusion, but does not go any part of the way towards
proving it. What really contributes to the proof is a proposition, which
is not the minor premiss itself, but which must be true if that premiss
is true; viz: that the individual which is the subject of the minor
premiss resembles certain other definite individuals, of whom that which
we are attempting to prove, is already known to be true.

[§7*]

[¶1] Whether the resemblance is such, in kind & in degree, as is
necessary to warrant us in concluding that an object which resembles the
others thus far, must resemble them further, is a question the
difficulties of which remain untouched by anything we have yet said.
This is the great problem of Induction; and it is in the chapter on
Induction, that we shall enquire what can be done to facilitate its
solution. What is necessary at present is, that it should be distinctly
seen, that all reasoning may be reduced to the following formula:
Certain individuals have certain attributes, A particular individual
resembles those individuals in some other attributes, Therefore it
possesses these also. And these three propositions, which are
necessarily found in every argument, whether it be called Induction or
Demonstration, correspond, the first to the major, the second to the
minor, and the third to the conclusion of the Syllogism.

Edition: current; Page: [1078]
If it be said, that in the Syllogism, the correctness or incorrectness
of the process, appears from the form of the expression, and that the
mode of stating it which we propose to substitute, affords no such test
of its having been properly performed, I answer, it affords it just as
much as the Syllogism. Neither affords any test of the sufficiency of
the induction, because that is complete before the syllogism begins. To
imagine that any form or expression can help us to that, would be like
relying on magic. But when the induction has been performed, and the
result recorded in general terms, the rules of the syllogism are of
great use in the interpretation of the general proposition; for if they
are strictly observed, they ensure that what is inferred in any
particular case shall be the same thing which it has previously been
concluded that there was ground for inferring in a whole class of cases
of which that is one.

In decyphering, therefore, the records of a previous induction, the
rules of the syllogism are of the greatest value. And it will be seen in
a subsequent place, how many of our most insidious errors have their
seat in this part of the intellectual process.[*]

Edition: current; Page: [1079]


OF TRAINS OF REASONING[*]
 [Chapter iv: Of Trains of Reasoning, and Deductive Sciences]

[§1]

[¶1] From our analysis of the syllogism it has appeared that the minor
premiss always affirms a resemblance between a new case and some cases
previously known: while the major premiss states something which has
been found to be true of those old cases, and which by induction we
consider ourselves at liberty to infer to be true of any other case
resembling them in certain given particulars.

[¶2] If all ratiocinations resembled, as to the minor premiss, the
example which we chiefly employed in the last chapter; if the
resemblance which the minor premiss asserts, were obvious to the sense,
as in the proposition “Socrates is a man,” or were at once ascertainable
by direct observation; there would be no necessity for trains of
reasoning, and Deductive or Ratiocinative Sciences would not exist.
Trains of reasoning exist only for the sake of applying an induction
founded (as all inductions must be,) upon observed cases, to other cases
which are not only unobserved but are not even directly observable.

[§2]

[¶1] Thus, suppose the syllogism to be, All cows ruminate, This which is
before us is a cow, therefore This which is before us ruminates; the
minor is obvious; the only one of the premisses which requires for its
establishment any anterior process of enquiry is the major, and provided
the induction of which that premiss is the expression, was correctly
performed, the conclusion respecting the animal now present was already
drawn before the animal appeared: we have only, as it were, to identify
her—to ascertain by reference, that she was included in the inductive
inference of which the general proposition “All cows ruminate,” is a
record. But let the syllogism be the following, “All Arsenic is
poisonous,” This which is before us is arsenic, therefore This which is
before us is poisonous; the minor in this case, may not be obvious at
first sight; may be itself known by inference, and not by direct
intuition: it may be the conclusion of another syllogism, such as this:
All things which produce a precipitate of a certain colour, with a
certain chemical test, are arsenic; This which is before us produces
such a precipitate, therefore it is arsenic. The ultimate conclusion,
This which is before us is poisonous, requires therefore to establish
it, a process which to be syllogistically expressed will require two
syllogisms; and we have a Train of Reasoning.

[¶2] It is however obvious that in thus adding syllogism to syllogism,
we are really adding Induction to Induction. Two inductions must have
taken place to render this chain of inference possible: two inductions,
founded probably on two distinct sets of individual instances, but which
converge in their results so that the instance supposed to be the
subject of speculation, comes within the scope of them both. The
register of these two inductions is contained in the majors of the two
syllogisms. We examined several substances yielding to the supposed test
the supposed precipitate, & we found that they possessed the properties
connoted by Edition: current; Page: [1080] the word arsenic; they were
metallic, volatile, their vapour had a smell of garlic &c. We have
examined several (though probably not the same) substances of this
metallic, and volatile nature, with vapour smelling of garlic, and we
have found them poisonous. The first observation we think we may extend
to all substances which yield the precipitate; the second, to all such
metallic and volatile substances, and consequently not only to what are
seen to be such, but to what are concluded to be such by the prior
induction. The substance before us is brought within the one induction
by being seen to come within the other: We are still concluding from
particulars to particulars; but in this case we conclude from
particulars observed to other particulars which are not seen to resemble
them in the material points, but inferred to do so because resembling
them in some other points, from which resemblance, it has been concluded
from a quite different set of instances, that resemblance in the former
points is inferrible.

[¶3] The process necessary for the establishment of the minor premiss is
often far more complex than in the foregoing example. Take for a fresh
example the following syllogism: The foolish do not prosper long,
Napoleon is foolish, therefore he will not prosper long. The major
premiss is the record of an induction which may be correct or erroneous,
but which can only have been founded upon observation of persons
concerning whose foolishness there was no doubt. It has been found or
supposed to be found, that they did not prosper long, and it has been
deemed that the induction which those instances warrant, is an extension
of the same predicate to any and every person who resembles those
persons in the one attribute of being foolish. But does Napoleon
resemble them in that attribute? This may be debated pro and con by
countless arguments; and must in any case, be proved by another
induction; for we cannot observe his foolishness directly; we never saw
him: and every argument to prove it must be in this form, Whoever does
so and so is foolish, Napoleon has done so and so, therefore he is
foolish. But has he done so and so? This minor may require proof: still
another induction; as thus: What is asserted by many disinterested
witnesses, must be believed to be true, That Napoleon committed this
action is asserted by many disinterested witnesses, therefore it must be
believed to be true. Here Napoleon being seen to resemble the particular
instances which experience presents to us, of persons concerning whom
something is asserted by many disinterested witnesses, we infer, first,
that he is a person concerning whom that “something” is true. The
“something” being in this case, his having done a particular act, he is
thus brought into resemblance with those persons before observed, who
were foolish, and thereupon by a second induction, we infer him to be
foolish. This brings him into resemblance with the foolish persons, who
were observed not to prosper, and thence by a third induction, we
predict that his prosperity will not continue. In this way we are
enabled to reason from the particular foolish people whom we had
observed not to prosper, to people whom we did not even know to be
foolish when we made the induction; yet if the induction was good, and
therefore applicable to all persons whose fortunes we have not observed,
but whom we see to be foolish, it must be no less applicable to all whom
we do not see but infer to be such, provided the induction by which we
so infer them be correct. It is still reasoning from particulars to
particulars, but we now reason to the new instance from several distinct
sets of former instances: to one only of these sets of instances do we
directly see it to be similar; but from that similarity we inductively
infer that it has the attribute, which constitutes its similarity to the
next set, and renders the induction founded upon them, applicable to it
likewise.

Edition: current; Page: [1081]
[§3]

[¶1] It may appear a forced use of language to say that the syllogistic,
or ratiocinative process, when carried out to this length of applying an
induction to cases which not only were not dreamed of when the induction
was made, but if known of at the time, would not necessarily have been
known to come within it, is still a process of interpretation merely.
The induction that Napoleon will not prosper, from the general
proposition No foolish persons prosper, when the fact of his being a
foolish person itself needs proof, cannot, it may be said, be justly
characterized as a mere decyphering of what is written in the general
proposition. But a metaphorical expression ought not to be strained
beyond its intended meaning. When we said that reasoning from generals
to particulars is mere interpretation of the general propositions, what
we meant to affirm was this: That the general proposition is not a step
in the reasoning, an intermediate link in the chain of inference between
the particulars observed, and the particulars to which we apply the
observation: the reasoning (if we had sufficiently capacious memories)
could go on without any general propositions; they are mere formulæ for
inferring particulars from particulars. The essence of all reasoning is,
that from observation of certain known particulars, we may draw a
similar conclusion with respect to others which are unknown: but if we
may with respect to any others, we may with respect to all others of a
certain general description; and in order that we may never fail to draw
this conclusion in a new case, whenever it can be drawn correctly, we
determine with ourselves once for all, what are the distinguishing marks
by which such cases may be recognized. The subsequent process of
identifying an object, and seeing whether it has those marks, cannot be
called an inference; even when we identify it not by those very marks,
but by others which we have ascertained (by another and a similar
process) to be marks of those marks. The only inference involved in the
case, is an inference from the observed particular instances, to the new
and unobserved one. In drawing this inference, we conform to a formula
which we have prescribed to ourselves expressly for our guidance in
drawing such inferences, and which formula is an exact record of the
judgment we previously formed, as to how we were to know when the
inference could be drawn or not. In this sense, what we do when we
actually draw it, may be called an interpretation of the record. Often
too the formula is all that is left to us of the evidence from which we
infer; having forgotten the experiments or observations from which we
originally generalized (when our first illustration, that of referring
to our own notes, most obviously holds): or perhaps, they were the
observations of other people and not ours at all. Still it is those
observations that are the original premisses of our argumentation: we
have them not before us, but we have before us evidence that we or
others once thought them sufficient grounds for an induction, and we
have marks to show whether any new case is one of those to which if then
known the induction would have been deemed to extend. Those marks we
either recognize at once, or by the aid of other marks, which by another
former induction we collected to be marks of them. These marks of the
marks, may, again, be known only through other marks; and thus we may
have a train of reasoning of any length, bringing a new case within the
scope of the induction warranted by particulars its resemblance to which
is only known from its resemblance to other particulars that resemble
them.

[¶2] Thus in the speculation concerning Napoleon, the inductive
inference Edition: current; Page: [1082] ultimately arrived at was, that
he would not prosper: this inference was drawn according to a formula
which made foolishness a mark of not prospering; a mark of this mark
was, having done a particular action; & a mark of having done that
action was, being asserted by many disinterested witnesses to have done
it: this mark, Napoleon was seen to possess. Hence he fell within the
last induction, and that brought him within all the others—His
resemblance to one set of observed particular cases brought him into
resemblance with another group, & that with another.

Edition: current; Page: [1083]


OF DEDUCTIVE SCIENCES[*]

[§4]

[¶1] The considerations which have just been stated, furnish the means
of reconciling our doctrine, that all reasoning is induction, with the
fact that there are Deductive or Ratiocinative Sciences. It might at
first seem that if all reasoning be induction, all the difficulties of
reasoning, that is of science, must lie in making the inductions, and in
determining whether they be duly made: and that therefore where all the
inductions were easy and certain, there could be no science, or no
difficulties in science. But it has been seen from the preceding
chapter, that even when the inductions are of the simplest and most
obvious nature, there may be much difficulty in finding whether the
particular case, which forms the subject of enquiry, comes within them;
and ample room for ingenuity in so combining various inductions, as by
means of one, within which the case obviously falls, to bring it within
others, its inclusion in which is not obvious.

[¶2] Suppose that all the inductions, which are possible in a given
science, have been made, or rather formulized into general propositions,
by the aid of which we judge to what new cases they are applicable: when
a new case arises, which can be at once seen to come within the formula,
the induction is applied to that new case, and the business is ended:
But new cases are continually arising, which cannot be at once perceived
to come within any formula, which would answer the questions we want
answered in respect to them. Take an instance from Geometry, the fifth
proposition of the first book of Euclid. The enquiry is “Are the angles
at the base of an isosceles triangle, equal or unequal?” For inferring
equality we have the following formulæ: Things which being applied to
one another coincide, are equal. Things which are equal to the same
thing, are equal. The sums of equal things are equal. The difference of
equal things are equal. For inferring inequality we have the following
formulæ: A whole and its part are unequal. The sums of equal things and
unequal things are unequal. The differences of unequal things and
unequal things are unequal. These are the only formulæ we have. The
angles at the base of an isosceles triangle do not obviously come within
any of these formulæ. They cannot be seen to have any of the marks
either of equality or inequality which the formulæ specify. We are to
consider whether they have any properties which in any other formulæ are
set down as being marks of these marks. We examine, and find that they
have. The formula within which we ultimately succeed in bringing them,
is this, “The remainders of equal things are equal.” We find that they
are remainders of equal things. The difficulty in finding this, arises
from the circumstance, that out of the innumerable pairs of angles of
which they may be the remainders, we have to imagine and select two,
which can either be seen to be equal, or possess some of the marks of
equality, specified by the various formulæ. By an exercise of ingenuity,
which on the part of the first inventor, deserves to be regarded as
considerable, two pairs of angles were hit upon, which, while it could
be seen that their differences were the two angles at the base,
possessed one of the marks of equality, namely, coincidence when applied
to one another. Even this coincidence was only proved by a fresh
induction: it appeared that unless they coincided, two straight lines
would enclose a space: thus though they were not seen to coincide, they
were Edition: current; Page: [1084] brought under a formula for
coincidence. This again is done by two steps, and requires two formulæ:
Angles coincide when the straight lines which form them coincide:
Straight lines coincide whose extreme points coincide. (See the
demonstration of the fourth proposition on which the demonstration of
the fifth is founded.)

[¶10*] The ingenuity which is here exercised is that of figuring in our
imagination the two angles at the base of the triangle, as remainders
made by cutting out of one pair of angles, another pair of angles, which
pairs are severally the corresponding angles of triangles having two
sides and the intervening angle equal. It is by this happy contrivance
that so many different inductions are brought to bear upon the same
particular case. For, this being done, and the figure constructed, the
induction, Two straight lines cannot enclose a space (aliis verbis Two
straight lines of which the extremes can be applied to each other, will
coincide) is seen to be applicable to the bases of the two pairs of
triangles; this brings the angles at those bases within a second
induction, Angles whose sides coincide, coincide; and consequently
within a third induction, Things which coincide, are equal; and the
equality of these angles, brings their remainders within a fourth
induction, The remainders of equals are equal. Another induction is
involved, The sums of equals are equals: it is by this we prove the
equality of the sides of the triangles: There are in all six formulæ.

[¶3] We may state it thus. AB, AC, the sides of the triangle, being
prolonged to equal distances and the extremities joined, we have

[lf0223-08_figure_003.jpg]

[¶4]
1st
Formula. The sums of equals are equal. }
AD and AE by the supposition come within this.
[¶5]
2nd
Formula. Equal straight lines if applied to one another will coincide. }
AE, AD, have been brought within this formula by the last induction: AC
and AB, are within it by the supposition. AE, therefore will coincide
with AD, and AB with AC; of which assertion it is but a part to say that
E will coincide with D, and B with C.
[¶6]
3rd
Formula. Straight lines between the same extreme points will coincide. }
BE and DC, have been brought within this formula by the last induction.
They will therefore coincide.
[¶7]
4th
Formula. Angles whose sides coincide, coincide. }
The angles ABE and ACD are brought within this formula by the two
previous inductions, which shewed that BE, DC, and that AE, AD,
coincide.
[¶8]
5th
Formula. Things which coincide, are equal. }
The angles ABE, ACD, were brought within this formula by the last
induction.

Half the proof is therefore accomplished.

It is easy by similar means to accomplish the other half; that is, to
bring the angles EBC, DCB also within the fourth formula: we have then

  ------ ----- ------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  [¶9]   6th   Formula. The differences of equals are equal. }   The angles ABC, ACB, being the differences of ABE, ACD, and EBC, DCB, are brought within this formula by the whole of the previous process.
  ------ ----- ------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[¶10] There is ample scope for scientific dexterity and ingenuity in so
combining a few simple inductions, as to bring within each of them,
great numbers of cases, which are not obviously included in it: and the
processes necessary for bringing the inductions together, may be very
long, numerous and complicated, when the inductions themselves are very
easy and simple. This is the case in mathematics. All the inductions
involved in all Geometry are those simple ones the formulæ of which are
the Axioms and a few of the so-called Definitions. All the rest of
Geometry is made up of the processes employed for bringing unforeseen
cases within the inductions—or (in syllogistic language) for proving the
minors necessary to complete the syllogisms. But all these processes are
Inductions; at each step, the case under examination is taken into the
formula of some one or other of the Inductions which the Axioms and
Definitions are the record of. The Inductions being of the most familiar
kind and so few in number, and the connecting of several of them
together which constitutes Deductions, or Trains of Reasoning, forming
the bulk of the science, and its only difficult or intricate part;
Geometry is a Deductive Science.

[§5]

[¶1] When we treat of Induction, it will be seen that there are strong
reasons for giving to every science as much of the character of a
Deductive Science as possible; that is, for endeavouring to construct
the science from as few and as simple Inductions as possible, and (by
even the most complex combinations) to make these suffice for proving
even those truths with respect to complex cases, which could have been
ascertained by specific observation of, and Induction from, cases
obviously similar. This, for instance, is done when an experimental
science is rendered mathematical. It was done when astronomy was brought
by Newton within the laws of mechanics. To do this is the great triumph
of the Investigation of Nature: as will be fully shewn and illustrated
hereafter. In proportion as this is done, Sciences tend to become more
and more Deductive. But they are not the less Inductive; every step in
the Deduction is an Induction and nothing else. The opposition is not
between Deductive and Inductive, but between Deductive and Experimental.
A science is experimental in proportion as every new case, presenting
any peculiar features, requires a new set of observations, or
experiments, a fresh Induction: it is Deductive, in proportion as it is
Edition: current; Page: [1086] able to draw conclusions as to cases of a
new kind, by processes for bringing those cases under old Inductions: by
finding that cases not having the requisite marks, have, however, marks
of those marks.

[¶2] We can now, therefore, see what is the generic difference between
sciences which can be made Deductive, and sciences which must as yet
remain Experimental. The difference consists in our having been able, or
not yet able, to discover marks of marks. If, by our various Inductions,
we have found that a quality which we will term a, is a mark which
indicates and from which we may infer, a quality b, but have not found
that b is a mark of anything, except, perhaps reciprocally of a; and our
next induction is perfectly distinct, and gives us c as a mark of d, but
we have no induction which establishes that c or d accompany and may be
inferred from a or b; we have two scientific generalizations, perfectly
distinct and independent of one another, as for instance that acids
redden vegetable blues, and that alkalies turn them green: from neither
of which propositions could we infer the other, and a science so far as
it is composed of such propositions is purely experimental. Chemistry in
the present state of our knowledge is principally of this character: its
propositions are of this sort, a is a mark of b, c is a mark of d, e is
a mark of f and so on.* There are other sciences again of which the
propositions are of this kind, a is a mark of b, b is a mark of c, c is
a mark of d, d is a mark of e, &c. In these sciences we can mount the
ladder from a to e by a process of ratiocination, and conclude that a is
a mark of e, although apparently quite unlike anything which was visible
in the instances upon which the first of the inductions in which e
figures in the predicate was founded: those being instances in which d
was perceptible, while it is not perceptible but only inferrible in the
case to which that induction is now extended. Or varying the metaphor,
we may say that we get from a to e underground; the marks b, c, d which
indicate the route must all of them be possessed somewhere by the object
concerning which we are enquiring, but they are all of them below the
surface: a is the only mark that is visible.

[*]Such as now described has always been the character of the processes
of science in Mathematics: it has now become so in Mechanics and
Astronomy, and is becoming more and more so in politics and the
philosophy of the mind. Even in chemistry the great generalization of
Dalton, called the atomic theory, (or the doctrine of chemical
equivalents), is a commencement of a similar transformation.[†]

[§6]

[¶1] We can now understand how an experimental science may transform
itself into a Deductive by the mere progress of experiment. In an
experimental science the inductions lie detached; a a mark of b, c a
mark of d, e a mark of f, and so on: a new set of instances and a
consequent new induction, may at any time bridge over the gap between
two of these unconnected arches: b may be Edition: current; Page: [1087]
discovered to be a mark of c, or of e. Or what is more frequently the
case, some grand comprehensive induction raises an arch high in the air
which bridges over hosts of them at once: b, d, f and the rest are all
discovered to be marks of some one thing, or of things between which a
connexion has already been traced. As when Newton discovered that all
the motions, regular or seemingly irregular, of the bodies of the solar
system (each of which motions had been discovered by a separate act of
generalization and from its own separate marks) were all of them marks
of moving round a common centre, with a centripetal force varying
inversely as the square of the distance from that centre. This is the
greatest instance which has yet happened of the transformation, at one
stroke, of a science which was still to a great degree experimental,
into a deductive science.

[¶2] A transformation of the same sort, on a small scale, would be
operated in chemistry so far as regards the two propositions cited
above, viz. Acids redden vegetable blues, Alkalies make them green; if
we should conceive it to be discovered (which may easily be imagined
possible) that the blue colour in vegetable substances, is a mark of
some hitherto undetected elementary substance; and that this substance
makes with all acids a red compound, with all alkalies a green one. Here
we require a great number of new sets of instances, and consequent new
sets of inductions, and when we have got them, instead of connecting all
the truths of a science, we only connect the two solitary
generalizations mentioned above. This however is so much gain; but has
little tendency to convert an experimental into a deductive science,
because the new courses of observation and experiment which thus enable
us to connect a few general truths together, generally call into
existence a still greater number of unconnected new ones. Hence
chemistry, although such extensions and simplications of its
generalizations are continually taking place, still remains essentially
an experimental science; and is likely so to remain, unless some
comprehensive Induction shall be hereafter arrived at, which like
Newton’s shall connect a vast number of the smaller known Inductions
together, and change at once the whole method of the Science.

Edition: current; Page: [1088]


OF DEMONSTRATION; AND NECESSARY TRUTHS[*]
 [Chapter v: Of Demonstration, and Necessary Truths]

[§1]

[¶1] If, as has been laid down in the preceding chapters, the foundation
of all Sciences, even Deductive or Demonstrative Sciences, is Induction;
if every step in the ratiocinations of Geometry is a process of
Induction, and a train of reasoning is but bringing many Inductions to
bear on the same subject of enquiry, and drawing the case within one
Induction by means of another; wherein lies the peculiar certainty
always ascribed to the Sciences which are entirely or almost entirely
Deductive? Why are they called the Exact Sciences? Why are mathematical
certainty, and the evidence of demonstration, common phrases to express
the very highest degree of assurance attainable by reason? Why is
mathematics, by most philosophers, set down as independent of experience
and observation, and characterized as a System of Necessary Truth?

[¶2] The answer is, that this superior certainty in the truths of
mathematics, this character of necessity which is ascribed to them, is
an illusion; in order to sustain which it is necessary to suppose, that
those truths relate to and express the properties of purely imaginary
objects. It is acknowledged that the conclusions of Geometry are deduced
from the so-called Definitions. In our chapter on Definition we showed
(what seems obvious as soon as stated) that from a Definition as such,
no proposition, unless it be a proposition concerning the meaning of a
word, can ever follow: and that what apparently follows from a
Definition, really follows from an implied assumption, that there exists
a real thing, conformable to the Definition. This assumption, in the
case of the definitions of Geometry, is false: there exist no real
things, exactly conformable to the Definitions. There exist no points
without magnitude, no lines without breadth, or perfectly straight, no
circles with all their radii exactly equal, nor squares with all their
angles perfectly right. This being obvious, and acknowledged, it is
customary to say, by way of saving the credit of the supposed Systems of
Necessary Truth, that the points, lines, circles, and squares which are
the subject of Geometry, exist in our conceptions merely, and are a part
of our minds: which minds by working on their own materials, construct
an a priori science, having nothing whatever to do with outward
experience. But this is just as far from the truth. The points, lines,
circles, and squares, which anyone has in his mind, are simply copies of
the points, lines, circles and squares which he has known in his
experience; and it is astonishing that this should be questioned after
Bishop Berkeley’s triumphant refutation of the theory of abstract ideas.
All our ideas of objects, are of individual objects: We can reason about
a line as if it had no breadth, but we cannot conceive a line without
breadth; we can form no picture in our imagination of such a line: all
the lines which we have in our minds are lines possessing breadth. If
any one doubts this we may safely refer him to his own experience. No
one, probably, who ever fancied that he could conceive what is called a
mathematical line, fancied it from the evidence of his own
consciousness, but solely because he could not reconcile the contrary
supposition with the Edition: current; Page: [1089] reality of
mathematics as a science. How it may be reconciled therewith, I think
the sequel will shew.

[¶3] Since then neither in nature nor in the human mind do there exist
any objects exactly corresponding to the definitions of Geometry; while
yet, Geometry cannot be supposed to be conversant about objects purely
imaginary; nothing remains but to consider geometry as conversant with
such lines, angles, and figures as really exist; and the definitions as
they are called, must be regarded as our first and most obvious
generalizations concerning those natural objects. These generalizations
are correct, as generalizations; that is, each of the general
propositions is true of the whole class referred to in it, as far as it
is true of any one individual in the class; but it is not exactly true
of any individual; it is only nearly true: so nearly that no error of
any importance in practice will be incurred by feigning it to be exactly
true. When we have occasion to extend these inductions or their
consequences to objects varying in any appreciable degree from those
which furnished the materials of our generalization—to lines of
appreciable breadth or thickness, parallels which are not exactly
parallel, and the like, we correct our conclusions by combining with
them a fresh set of propositions relating to the property which was
overlooked. [¶4] The difference however, in exactness between these
elementary generalizations in geometry, and the elementary
generalizations of any other physical science, is fictitious. The
assertions on which the reasonings of the science are founded, do not,
any more than in other sciences, exactly correspond with the fact; but
we suppose that they do, for the sake of seeing what consequences will
follow from the supposition. The science is built upon, its conclusions
are deduced from, hypotheses.

[¶5] When, therefore, it is affirmed that the conclusions of geometry
are necessary truths; it appears, that all the necessity which can be
ascribed to them, is only that they necessarily follow from the
suppositions from which they are deduced. These suppositions not being
necessary, nor even true, the conclusions deduced from them are only
necessary in the sense of necessarily following from the suppositions;
which is only saying that for the suppositions to be true and the
conclusions false would involve a contradiction. I conceive that this is
the only correct use of the word necessity in science; that nothing
ought to be called necessary, the denial of which would not be a
contradiction in terms. To say that the conclusions of a deductive
science are not true, although the inductions, or assumptions, are,
involves a contradiction; & therefore the conclusions of all deductive
sciences were called, by the ancients, necessary propositions. Whatever
property of a thing could be deduced from its essence, that is, from the
properties included in its definition, was a proprium, and was said to
be predicated necessarily.

[§3]

[¶2] There is another set of the elementary generalizations of
mathematics, the axioms, which are not hypotheses; in which there is no
fiction, but which really are exactly and literally true. That things
which are equal to the same thing are equal to one another, is as true
of the lines and figures in nature as it would be of the imaginary ones
assumed in the definitions. In this respect however, Mathematics are
only on a par with most other sciences. In almost all sciences there are
some general propositions which are exactly true, while the greater part
are but very close approximations to the truth. Thus in mechanics, the
first law of Edition: current; Page: [1090] motion, that of the inertia
of matter, is true without qualification and without the slightest
particle of error; it is not affected by the frictions and rigidities,
and miscellaneous resistances which qualify, for example, the theories
of the lever and the pulley. In optics, the rectilineal propagation of
light through the same medium, the equality of the angles of incidence
and of reflection, are inductions of the same sort; nay, even in
chemistry many of the propositions which express the properties of
simple bodies are true without qualification; not being at all affected
by those slight impurities which may be supposed to remain in the most
carefully made chemical preparations. The rotation of the earth in
twenty four hours of the same length as in our time, has gone on since
the first recorded observations without the increase or diminution of
one second in all that period. These are inductions which require no
fiction to make them be received as accurately true: but along with them
there are others, as for instance the propositions respecting the figure
of the earth, which are but approximations to the truth, and to make the
science deductive we must feign that these are exactly true although
they really want something of being so.

[*]It will doubtless be said, that the axioms of mathematics differ from
our inductions respecting the rotation of the earth, the laws of motion,
&c. in this, that although the latter are universally true, it is
possible to conceive that they might not be so: the earth might stand
still, and matter might have spontaneous motion: but the axioms of
mathematics cannot be conceived not to be true; that things which are
equal to the same thing should be unequal to one another, is
unconceivable by the human mind: these, therefore, are entitled to be
called necessary truths; for though the denial of them is not a
contradiction in terms—it is a supposition which is inconceivable.

To this there is, as it appears to me, a completely satisfactory answer,
but as it belongs to the region of transcendental metaphysics, I will
merely indicate it and pass on. That the falsity of any proposition is
inconceivable to us, is no proof that our belief in the proposition was
not originally the result of experience. It is a consequence of the
general laws of the human mind that when anything whatever is true of
all objects of which we have ever had experience—when we have never had
perception of any object which had not, or even which seemed not to
have, the property in question, we are unable to conceive any object
without it.

The acknowledged laws of association obviously account for this. We can
for example, conceive the sun or moon falling, because though we never
saw them fall, we have seen other things fall: but we never saw any
object without something beyond it, nor had any sensation without
something following it; therefore, we cannot conceive an object without
having the idea irresistibly raised of some other object beyond it; nor
a sensation, without having the idea irresistibly raised of some other
sensation following it; we cannot conceive any end to space or time; the
one irresistibly appears to us infinite and the other eternal. In like
manner, the proposition, The sums of equal things are equal, being true
(and seen to be true at the first glance) of all objects whatsoever, it
is no more than natural that so strong an association should be formed,
between the conception of equal objects, and that of equal sums, that we
are utterly incapable of imagining the former without the latter.

For these reasons, which are to my mind conclusive, I cannot admit that
what Edition: current; Page: [1091] is not conceivable by the human
understanding, cannot be; nor that propositions, the contradictories of
which are unconceivable, stand upon at all higher or stronger grounds of
evidence than any other propositions which sufficient experience has
shewn to be universally true. The propositions whose contradictories are
inconceivable are not truer, or more necessarily true than the others,
but are only wider generalizations; inductions coextensive with the
whole universe; propositions which are true of all things known to our
experience.

If, however, the reader, adopting a different view of the origin of our
knowledge, connected with a different system of transcendental
metaphysics, should reject the opinion, that the axioms of mathematics
rest upon the evidence of experience; he will still admit all that is
necessary for the purposes of this work, if he acknowledges that these
truths, whatever be their evidence, first became known to us in
particular cases. That this is the fact, was pointed out to us by Mr.
Dugald Stewart, who was most adverse to the doctrine that they are
truths resting on experience. But though he held that the proposition,
Things equal to the same thing are equal to one another, is intuitively
and not experimentally evident, he held, that it is intuitively evident
in each particular case, and that the axiom is but a statement in
general terms of what we perceive to be true when we examine any
particular case. Even if we admit the axioms to be necessary truths, it
does not affect the account we have given of the reasoning process.
Inference is still only from particulars to particulars; but at every
step at which the major of a syllogism is an axiom, then according to
our theory there is an inference from particulars to particulars, but on
the theory of necessary truths there is (instead of any inference) a
direct perception of a fresh set of particulars.*

Whichever theory we adopt on the subject of axioms, whether we consider
them as very comprehensive inductions, or as necessary truths; Geometry
is not deduced from the axioms alone, but from the axioms together with
those assumptions which are called the Definitions; and those
assumptions not being exactly true, the conclusions of Geometry are so
far from being necessary truths, that they are not so much as truths at
all; but only very close approximations to truths; and necessary, only
in the sense of necessarily following from the assumptions; being
propositions which we are obliged to assume if we make those Edition:
current; Page: [1092] first assumptions; and to deny which, affirming
the assumptions, would be a contradiction in terms.

If there be any Deductive Science which has the appearance of being a
system of necessary truth, it must be one which is deduced wholly from
propositions exactly true, and not at all from hypotheses or assumptions
which are only approximations to truth. If any Science has this
character, it must be the science of Numbers; the theory of the
Calculus; Arithmetic and Algebra. This, therefore, is a case which seems
to merit examination apart.

Edition: current; Page: [1093]


[Chapter vi: The Same Subject Continued*]

[§2]

[¶1] There are many philosophers who would solve the difficulty
apparently inherent in this case, by representing the propositions of
the science of Numbers as merely verbal, and its processes as mere
transformations of language, substitutions of one expression for
another. The proposition, Two and One are equal to Three, is not,
according to these philosophers, a truth, is not the statement of any
fact in nature, but a mere Definition of the word Three; a statement
that mankind have agreed to give the name of Three to the same thing
which they already called by the name Two and One. According to this
doctrine, the longest process in algebra is but a repetition of such
operations as the foregoing, a series of translations of the same fact
out of one language into another: though how, after such a series of
translations, it comes out a very different fact, (as when we
demonstrate a new geometrical theorem by Algebra) they have not
explained; and it is a difficulty which is fatal to their theory.

[¶3] It must be acknowledged, that there are two peculiarities in the
processes of arithmetic and algebra which render the above theory very
plausible, and have not unnaturally rendered those sciences the
stronghold of Nominalism. The doctrine that we can ascertain facts,
detect the hidden processes of nature, by an artful manipulation of
language, is so contrary to common sense that a person must have made
some advances in philosophy to believe it; for to believe any thing so
difficult of belief, a person must see far enough to come within sight
of some great apparent difficulties on the other side. Now the
difficulty which has made many persons Nominalists is the difficulty of
believing the reasonings of Arithmetic and Algebra to be anything but
verbal processes. For we do not carry any ideas along with us when we
use the symbols of those sciences. In a geometrical demonstration we
have a diagram in our head, and AB, AC are always present to our
imagination as lines, intersecting other lines, forming an angle with
one another and the like: but not so a and b. These may represent lines
or anything else, but the lines or anything else are never thought of;
nothing is realized in our imagination but a and b. The ideas which they
represent are banished from the mind during every intermediate part of
the process between the beginning when the premisses are translated from
things into signs, and the end when the conclusion is translated back
from signs into things. Nothing, then, being in the reasoner’s mind but
the symbols, what can seem more absurd than to pretend that the
reasoning process has to do with anything but the symbols? It seems one
of Bacon’s Prerogative Instances, an experimentum crucis on the nature
of reasoning itself.

[¶4] Nevertheless it will appear on consideration, that this apparently
decisive instance is no instance at all; that there is in every step of
an arithmetical or algebraical calculation a real induction, a real
inference of facts from facts; and that what disguises the induction is
merely the extremely comprehensive nature of the induction itself, and
the consequent extreme generality of the language. All numbers must be
numbers of something: Ten, must mean ten bodies, or ten smells, or ten
sounds, &c. There are no such things as numbers in the abstract.
Edition: current; Page: [1094] But though they must be numbers of
something, they may be numbers of anything. The propositions therefore
concerning numbers, have the remarkable peculiarity that they are true
of all things; of all objects, all entities whatever, known to our
experience. All things whatever possess quantity; consist of parts which
may be numbered; and therefore all the properties of numbers are true of
them. That half of four is two, must be true whatever object the word
four represents, whether four miles, or four quarters of a mile, four
ounces, four shillings, four minutes, or four bars of a piece of music.
The properties of the number four are properties of all Things
possessing the attribute which that word connotes; that is of all things
whatever as soon as they are divided into four equal parts. But algebra
extends the generalization much farther: every number represents that
number of all Things, but every algebraical symbol represents all
Numbers; every algebraical equation is a proposition affirmed of all
numerable things into whatever parts divided or by whatever number
designated: the proposition 2(a+b) = 2a + 2b, is a truth coextensive
with the whole Creation. Since, then, in algebraical reasonings, the
truths we have to deal with are true of all Things whatever, and not,
like those of Geometry, true of lines only, or angles only; it is no
wonder that the symbols should not excite in our minds ideas of any
Things in particular: the mere letters, a, b, x, y, z, do as well for
the representatives of Things in general, as any more complex
conception. But, that we are conscious of their being signs of Things,
is evident from the fact, that our whole process of reasoning is carried
on by predicating of them the properties of Things. At each step in
solving an algebraical equation, what do we do? We apply to a, b, and x,
the propositions that equals added to equals make equals; that equals
taken from equals leave equals; and other propositions deducible from
these: which are not properties of letters, or of signs of any kind, but
of all magnitudes, that is, of all things, and are quite without meaning
unless so understood. At each step, therefore, there is an induction (or
call it, if you adopt the other theory, an intuition) but in any case,
the perception or the inference is concerning Things, not symbols:
although as any Things whatever will serve the turn, there is no
necessity for keeping the idea of the Thing at all distinct, and
consequently the process of thought may in this case be allowed without
danger to do what all processes of thought when they have been performed
often will do if permitted, namely to become entirely mechanical. Hence
the general language of algebra comes to be used familiarly without
exciting ideas, just as all other general language is prone to do from
mere habit: but when we look back, to see from whence the probative
force of the process is derived, we find that at every single step,
unless we consider ourselves to be thinking and talking of the Things,
and not of the mere symbols, the evidence fails.

[¶5] In addition to the circumstance which we have now mentioned, there
is another circumstance which gives great plausibility to the notion
that the propositions of arithmetic and algebra are merely verbal. This
is, that when they are considered as propositions respecting Things,
they have the appearance of being all of them identical propositions.
The proposition, Two and One are equal to Three, considered as an
assertion respecting objects,—for instance, “Two pebbles and one pebble
are equal to three pebbles,”—does not assert equality between two
collections of pebbles, but actual identity. It affirms that if we put
one pebble to two pebbles, those very pebbles are three. The objects,
therefore, being absolutely identical, and the mere assertion that
objects are themselves, being insignificant, it seems but natural to
consider the proposition, Two and one are Edition: current; Page: [1095]
equal to three, as asserting merely identity of signification between
the two names.

[¶6] The answer to this is short and conclusive. The expressions, “Two
pebbles and one pebble,” and the expression “Three pebbles,” do indeed
stand for the same aggregations of objects, but they do not stand for
the same sensations; they are names of the same objects, but of those
objects in two different states: although they denote the same thing,
their connotation is different. Three pebbles in two separate parcels,
and three pebbles in one parcel, do not make the same impression on our
senses; and the assertion that the very same pebbles may by an
alteration of place be made to produce either the one set of sensations
or the other, is not an identical proposition though it is a very
familiar one. It is a truth known to us by early and constant
experience; an inductive Truth; and such truths are the foundation of
the Science of Number. The fundamental truths of that science, all rest
on the evidence of sense; they are proved by shewing to our eyes and our
fingers, that any given number of objects, ten balls for example, may by
separation and rearrangement exhibit to our senses all the different
sets of numbers the sum of which is equal to ten. And all the improved
methods of teaching Arithmetic to young children, proceed upon a
knowledge of this fact. All who wish to carry the child’s mind with them
in learning Arithmetic—all who (as Dr. Biber in his remarkable Lectures
on Education expresses it) wish to teach numbers and not mere
cyphers—now teach it through the evidence of the senses in the manner we
have now described.*

[¶7] Arithmetic is indeed founded upon Definitions in the same sense as
Geometry is; the proposition, “Three is two and one,” may be called a
definition of Three, as the proposition, “A circle is a figure bounded
by a line which has all its points equally distant from a point within
it,” is called a definition of a circle. But the proposition which is
one of the fundamental principles of Geometry is, that figures exist
answering to this description; and the fundamental truth in arithmetic
is, that parcels of objects exist which may be separated into two and
one. These propositions being granted, we call the figures circles and
the parcels Three’s and thus superadd two definitions of words to two
assertions respecting matters of fact.

[¶8] It being shewn by the considerations now adduced, that the science
of Number is not any exception to the conclusion we had previously
arrived at, viz. that the processes even of Deductive Sciences are
wholly Inductive; it remains to examine whether this science resembles
Geometry in the further circumstance that some of its Inductions are not
exactly true; and that the peculiar certainty ascribed to it, on account
of which its propositions are called Necessary Truths, is fictitious,
and the result of a Hypothesis.

[§3]

[¶1] The inductions of Arithmetic are, first, those which we have just
expounded, One and one are two, Two and one are three, &c. which may be
called the Definitions of the various numbers, in the geometrical sense
of the word Definition, though not in the logical; and secondly two
Axioms, “The sums of Edition: current; Page: [1096] equals are equal,”
and “The differences of equals are equals;” two only are needed, for the
corresponding propositions respecting unequals may be demonstrated from
these by way of reductio ad absurdum. [¶2] Both the definitions and
these axioms, as already remarked, are inductive truths, true of all
objects whatever, and when true at all, exactly true: there is no
fiction involved, no assumption of unqualified truth where there is a
mere approximation to it; the conclusions also, therefore, when true at
all are exactly true, and the Science of Numbers, when its conditions
are complied with, is an exact science.

[¶3] What I mean by “when true at all” and “when its conditions are
complied with,” is this. In propositions concerning numbers there is a
condition implied, without which none of them would be true; and that
condition is an assumption, which may be false. The condition to which I
allude is, that 1 = 1; that all the numbers are numbers of the same
unit, or of equal units. Let this be doubtful, and not one of the
propositions of arithmetic will hold true. How can we know that two
pounds and two pounds make four pounds, if some of the pounds may be
troy and others avoirdupois? They may not make four pounds of either or
of any weight. How can we know that a forty-horse power is equal to
itself, unless we suppose that all horses are of equal strength? It is
certain that 1 is always equal in number to 1, and in that sense there
is no impropriety in saying that one hour is equal to one mile, or one
mile equal to one inch. Therefore, in the cases (and they are very few)
where the mere number of objects, or of the parts of an object, is all
that is material, the conclusions of arithmetic so far as they go to
that alone, are true without any mixture of hypothesis. There are a
[*]few such enquiries; as for instance, an enquiry into the number of
inhabitants in any country. It is indifferent whether they are grown
people or children, strong or weak, tall or short, all we want to
ascertain is their number. The science of arithmetic as applicable to
such enquiries is an exact science. But whenever from equality or
inequality of number, equality or inequality in any other respect is to
be inferred, arithmetic carried into such enquiries becomes a
hypothetical science like geometry; it must always be assumed that all
units are exactly equal in that other respect as well as in number; and
this is never precisely true, for one pound weight is never exactly
equal to another, nor one mile’s length to another: a nicer balance, or
more accurate measuring instruments, could always detect some
difference. [¶4] We may, therefore, correctly say that the science of
number is itself an exact science, but it is not true, as is sometimes
supposed, that other sciences become exact sciences by being rendered
Arithmetical; by being subjected to the laws of number, that is, brought
within the inductions relating to Numbers.

The science of pure Number, that is, the science which takes cognizance
of the properties of objects only as being numbered, must be called an
Exact Science. But as it appears from what has been said, to be a
science founded on Inductions, although universal and obvious ones, its
truths cannot be called Necessary Truths; unless we call everything
necessary, which results from the general laws of the universe. And the
other sciences of quantity, that is, of Things considered as divisible
into a number of equal parts—whether they be sciences of Extension, of
Weight, of Force, of Motion, of Sound, or of whatever other measurable
things—are not exact sciences, and the necessity ascribed to their
conclusions is Edition: current; Page: [1097] only the necessity of
inferring them, if we grant a certain hypothesis; a necessity which only
means, that we should otherwise incur a self-contradiction.

[§4]

[¶1] To complete the present subject, one observation still remains to
be made. This is, that the Method of all Deductive Sciences is
hypothetical. They all proceed by tracing the consequences of certain
assumptions, leaving it for separate consideration whether the
assumptions are true or not, and if not exactly true, whether they are a
sufficiently near approximation to the truth. There are obvious reasons
for this. To ascertain how far the assumptions are true, is generally a
matter of observation which has to be repeated in every fresh case: or
if it is to be settled by argument instead of observation, may require
different evidence in each different case. But the other part of the
process, to determine what else may be concluded when we have found the
assumptions to be true—may be performed once for all, and the results
held ready to be employed as the occasions turn up for their use. We
thus do all beforehand that can be so done, and leave the least possible
task to be performed when the case arises, and presses for a decision.
[¶2] It is obviously as easy to arrive at new conclusions from facts
assumed as from facts observed; from imaginary as from real inductions.
Deduction, as we have seen, is inference in this form, a is a mark of b,
b of c, c of d, therefore a is a mark of d, which last may be a fact
neither observed nor observable. In like manner it is equally allowable
to say, Suppose that a were a mark of b, b of c, & c of d, then a would
be a mark of d, which is a proposition we did not think of when we laid
down the premises. A system of propositions as complicated as Geometry
might be deduced from assumptions which were false; as was done by
Ptolemy, Descartes, and many others, in attempting to explain
synthetically the phenomena of the universe. Sometimes the same thing is
knowingly done for the purpose of shewing the falsity of the assumption;
which is called a reductio ad absurdum. The reasoning then is as
follows: a is a mark of b, and b of c; now if c were also a mark of d, a
would be a mark of d; but d is known to be a mark of the absence of a;
consequently a would be a mark of its own absence, which is a
self-contradiction: therefore c is not a mark of d.

[§5]

[¶2] In addition to the reason now stated, other reasons why the Method
of a deductive science must be hypothetical, will evolve themselves in
the progress of that deeper investigation of the nature of Induction,
which the time has now come for attempting.

Edition: current; Page: [1098] Edition: current; Page: [1099]


[Book III:: Of Induction]


OF INDUCTION IN GENERAL[*]

From the investigations in the preceeding chapter, we have been led to
the conclusion, that all Inference, or Reasoning, when it is from facts,
i.e., not from something hypothetically assumed, but from something
actually believed, is inference from particulars to particulars: except
in the solitary case of reasoning from premises supposed not to be
arrived at by derivation, but to be directly revealed from heaven; which
may as well be general as particular. But even in this case, as in all
cases in which we are commonly said to reason from generals to
particulars, the process which is called reasoning, and of which the
syllogism presents the correct analysis, is in very truth a process of
interpretation only; a decyphering of signs.

Deferring for the present all consideration of the case of reasoning
from a hypothesis, a process which as we shall see hereafter, holds a
most conspicuous place and performs most important functions in
philosophy; we proceed to take a closer view of the process to which we
are indebted for all our knowledge of the course of nature; reasoning
from particulars to particulars: an operation to which the usage of
philosophers has attached the name, Induction.

When the inference from facts observed, to facts unobserved is certain,
it is nearly indifferent, for most purposes, whether we figure to
ourselves that operation as a process of reasoning from particulars to
particulars, or from particulars to generals. We must bear in mind that
generals are merely classes of particulars; in other words collections
of particulars, definite in kind, but indefinite in number. And we
observed in the last chapter, that whenever our evidences, that is, the
various particular cases which we have examined, justify us in drawing
an inference respecting even one other particular case, we must be
justified in drawing that same inference with respect to a whole class
of cases. If from our experience of the finite duration of human life,
in all the instances which have reached our knowledge, we can infer that
ourselves or that any particular person is mortal, we may with exactly
the same strength of evidence infer the general proposition, “All human
beings are mortal;” and if there were doubt whether the general
conclusion were sufficiently borne out, a rateable [sic] proportion of
the same doubt would attach to the particular one. The inference either
does not hold in any case, or it holds in all cases of a certain kind;
in all cases which, in certain definable respects, resemble those we
have observed.

But although there can be no certain inference, and therefore in the
strict sense, no inference at all, from one particular case to another,
until the evidence is sufficient to establish a general proposition, yet
before the enquiry is ripe for a generalization, we may often with
considerable confidence anticipate some one or more of the particular
cases which will be included in the generalization when made. This
affords ground for a distinction very generally made by philosophers,
Edition: current; Page: [1100] but more familiarly used than accurately
understood: the distinction between Induction and Analogy. The term
Induction, in accordance with its original acceptation, is commonly
appropriated to inferences of which a completed and definite
Generalization is the result. Reasoning by Analogy or Analogical
Reasoning, are the phrases employed when we conclude from one or more
particular cases, to some fresh particular case directly and at
once—without framing any general proposition.

As has been already so often remarked, no conclusion from particulars
known to particulars unknown, can be certain unless the inference admits
of being generalized, and becoming a perfect Induction. But it may
easily happen, that before our knowledge and examination of particular
instances, has reached the point at which we are enabled distinctly to
define the extent of the general conclusion which those instances if
more accurately known would enable us to establish, we may yet from the
closeness of the general resemblance of some new instance to the
instances we have observed, be able to conclude, though not with
certainty yet with a high degree of probability, that the
generalization, whatever instances it does not cover, will at least be
found to cover that one instance. Here, therefore, if we are obliged to
form an immediate conclusion, we conjecturally infer at once from
particulars to particulars; without testing the sufficiency of our
evidence by passing to the particular conclusion through the medium of a
general one. A striking instance of this mode of drawing a conclusion,
(though, as we shall see hereafter, it belongs to a species which has
some peculiarities, rendering it not in all respects an apt
representative of the genus) is the inference we so confidently draw
from past experience that the sun will rise tomorrow. We cannot in the
present state of our knowledge, generalize this inference. Who will
presume to affirm, as a certain truth, that the sun will always rise? or
has always risen from eternity? No one. Nor do we understand the sun’s
nature, and the causes of his continued existence and of the permanency
of the laws of the solar system, sufficiently to know upon what his
rising or not tomorrow will ultimately depend. If we did, we might at
least ascend to the general principle, that he will continue to rise
while certain causes endure. But we cannot do even this. We cannot
venture to generalize at all. Yet tomorrow looking so like today, and
being of all days yet to come, that which looks most like it, we have no
hesitation in drawing the inference with the utmost assurance as to that
one, the proximate instance; though we should hesitate to affirm
confidently that the sun would rise this day twenty thousand years.

In the above instance we do not generalize at all: there are other cases
in which we do generalize, but are conscious that our general conclusion
does not deserve implicit reliance. For instance if after much
intercourse with Hindoos we have usually or always found them accessible
to bribes, we might with a high degree of probability presume that a
particular Hindoo, of whom personally we knew nothing, would be found to
be so. Yet the universal proposition “All Hindoos are accessible to
bribes”—could not be inferred from any one person’s individual
experience, nor would it, in all likelihood be true. Our experience, or
the degree of analysis to which we had subjected that experience, has
not, we may suppose, enabled us to give to the proposition that exact
limitation which would render it a true proposition and yet leave it a
general one. We cannot make any generalization on the subject which we
can know to be absolutely correct. Not only we cannot [sic] say “All
Hindoos are accessible to bribes,” we cannot even Edition: current;
Page: [1101] say, “All Hindoos of such and such a description are so.”
We must therefore qualify our generalization, by limiting not its
extent, but the degree of assurance with which we assert its
universality: we must consider it as a proposition not proved to be
literally true, but to be nearly so: and in concluding to fresh
particular instances we must consider our proof as a presumption only,
though a strong one; evidence amounting to probability only, not to
certainty.

There are thus three cases of inference from particulars to particulars,
characterized by three different degrees of strength in the evidence.

1st. The evidence may be sufficient to warrant the unqualified assertion
of some universal proposition: every A is B. Or, in other words, we may
conclude with absolute certainty that any particular A is B. This may be
called, Perfect Induction.

2nd. The evidence may be sufficient to warrant the assertion of some
proposition general in form and language, but with the express
qualification, that it is only known to be true in most of the cases
which its terms comprehend, not in all: Most A are B. Or in other words,
we may conclude with preponderant probability, but not with absolute
certainty, that any particular A is B. This may be termed Imperfect
Induction, and is one kind of Analogical Reasoning.

In this class of cases, though we have not certainty, we can measure
with considerable assurance, the degree of our approach to it.

3d. The third case is that in which we have not, from the evidence
before us, been able to set up any general Proposition, as proved to be
true either universally or for the most part; but since a certain case
appears to us strikingly to resemble the cases which we are acquainted
with, we dare say that what we have found to be true in those cases,
will be true in that case too, whether true or not in any others. This
mode of inference has never, so far as I know, received any other name
than that of Analogical Reasoning. The inference can never be more than
probable, & although as we have seen, the probability may reach the
highest degree of strength; it is commonly much less strong in this than
in the preceding class of cases; can very seldom be measured with any
approach to exactness & is often entirely indefinite and inappreciable.
Most reasonings from history are of this kind; and almost all the
reasonings of persons of uncultivated minds, in the ordinary affairs of
life.

Analogical Reasoning, therefore, when contradistinguished from
Induction, means inference of the same kind exactly, but of an inferior
degree of strength. Analogical Reasoning is an imperfect Induction; or a
conjectural foretaste of an Induction yet to come. Induction, again, is
merely Reasoning from perfectly conclusive Analogies, or resemblances.
Dugald Stewart, therefore, appears to have made a distinction without a
difference, or at least to have expressed the distinction which we have
now considered, in a very misleading phraseology, when he distinguishes
the evidence of Analogy from the evidence of Experience. The evidence of
Experience is nothing, can be nothing, but the evidence of Analogy: when
the analogies are conclusive, we call the process Induction; but it is
Analogy still. In our analysis of the Syllogism we saw that all
inference from experience, is inference from particulars to particulars,
and that all inference from particulars to particulars, is from the
resemblance of the one set of particulars to the other. Resemblance may
be incomplete or complete, but it is resemblance still. The proposition,
“Food nourishes”—rests Dugald Stewart could say, not upon analogy, but
upon experience; the analogy no doubt amounts Edition: current; Page:
[1102] in this case to a perfect Induction, but the experience which the
conclusion rests upon, is experience of today’s food, and yesterday’s,
not tomorrow’s; how then do I know that tomorrow’s food will nourish?
From its analogy to the food of today.

Induction, then, and Analogical Reasoning, are both of them names for
inferences of the same kind, from particulars to particulars; but when
the process of inference is certain, we call it Induction: when only
probable or conjectural, Analogical Reasoning.

We have next to enquire into the nature and grounds of Induction; the
conditions necessary to constitute a perfect, or conclusive Induction;
and the means of measuring the degree of probability of the less certain
inferences from Analogy.

Edition: current; Page: [1103]


OF THE VARIOUS GROUNDS OF INDUCTION
 [Chapter ii: Of Inductions Improperly So Called]

[§1]

[¶1] Induction is the name given to the operation of the mind, by which
we infer that what we know in a particular case or cases, will be true
in any other case or cases of a similar kind; or in stricter language,
Induction is the process by which a predicate which can be truly
affirmed or denied of one or more individuals, is thence inferred to be
truly affirmable or deniable of any or all individuals which resemble
those individuals in certain particulars.

More briefly, Induction is the process by which we conclude that what is
true of certain individuals of a class, is true of the whole class; that
is, of every other individual in it.

[¶2] But why do we conclude that what can be truly predicated of certain
individuals which we know, can be predicated of other individuals which
we know not? What is our warrant for so concluding?

In order to answer this question it is necessary to advert to some
further distinctions.

[¶3] Induction according to the definition we have given of it, is a
process of inference, a process from the known to the unknown; and any
process involving no inference, any process by which the conclusion we
seem to arrive at, is no wider than the premises from which it is drawn,
does not fall within our meaning of the word Induction. Yet in most
books of logic, we find this laid down as the most perfect, indeed the
only quite perfect case of Induction. For in most books of Logic, every
process which starts from the less general & terminates in the more
general, is called Induction, whether anything be really concluded or
not: it is enough that the process admits of being stated in the form,
This and that individual A is B, ergo every A is B. And when we affirm
to be true of a class, what we have previously ascertained to be true of
every individual in the class, this, which is no conclusion at all, but
a mere reassertion of our premises, is sagely affirmed to be the most
certain conclusion which Induction ever enables us to arrive at. Thus if
we were to say “All the planets shine by reflected light”—because we
have examined each of them separately and found this to be true; or “All
the Apostles were Jews,” because Peter, Paul, John, and each of the
other nine were so, this would be called, in the phraseology to which we
are adverting, a perfect Induction. There is no harm certainly in
calling this Induction, so long as we take care to understand what is
meant; but it is Induction in a quite different sense from what we have
designated by that name; since it is no inference from facts known to
facts unknown, but a mere short hand registration of facts known. In
truth, the two simulated argumentations cited above are not
generalizations, nor are the propositions which stand as conclusions
from them, general propositions. General propositions are those in which
the predicate is affirmed or denied of an indefinite, an unlimited
number of individuals, viz, of all individuals, few or many, existing or
which can exist, possessing the properties connoted by the subject of
the proposition. “All men are mortal” does not mean, all men now living,
but all men past, present, and to come, actual or possible. When the
signification of the subject is limited in such a manner as to denote,
not any and every individual falling within a certain general
description, but only each of a Edition: current; Page: [1104] number
(known, or if unknown, yet knowable) of individuals, marked off and
designated as individuals; the proposition, however general in its form,
is no universal proposition, but is only that very number of singular
propositions written in an abridged character. This process, like all
other forms of abridged notation, is of great use in philosophy, but it
is not a process by which truth can be arrived at. The consideration of
it however throws some light upon the case next to be examined.

[§2*] Where the Induction is real, that is, where it consists of a
generalization, or extension to an entire class, of a predicate
previously known to be true of certain individuals of the class; the
grounds which warrant the generalization, will be found to be different,
according to the manner in which our knowledge of the premisses is
acquired. Those premisses, it is almost unnecessary to repeat, are the
singular propositions from which we infer the general one—Now, our
knowledge of the truth of these singular propositions can only be
derived (unless revealed from heaven) from one of two sources;
observation, that is, experience; or demonstration.

An instance of induction from premisses proved by observation, is the
one so often cited: All human beings are mortal, for all the human
beings of whom there is any record, have, after a certain period, died.

An instance of induction from premisses proved by demonstration, is any
geometrical theorem proved by a diagram.*

When we demonstrate a theorem by means of a diagram, either visible or
only imaginary, the demonstration does not bring out a universal
proposition, but only a singular one. In the demonstration of the fifth
proposition of Euclid, what is proved? Not that the angles at the base
of every isosceles triangle are equal, but only that the angles at the
base of the triangle ABC are so. The enunciation of the proposition is
not proved by the demonstration, but by a subsequent induction; an
induction however of a peculiar kind; more resembling the simulated
induction which produced the proposition “All the Apostles were
Jews”—than the real induction by which we prove that “All men are
mortal;” and yet a real induction, because containing a real inference.
We do not indeed infer that all isosceles triangles have their angles at
the base equal, because ABC has so. But having proved that ABC has that
property, we infer that any other isosceles triangle has it, because we
perceive that in the same way by which we have proved it of ABC, we
could prove it of any other isosceles triangle. We perceive that if we
had chosen to demonstrate it of any other isosceles triangle instead of
ABC, we might have put that other triangle in the place of ABC
throughout the demonstration, and neither would any of our premisses
have ceased to be true, nor would the inference at each of the steps,
have less followed from the premisses. The result then being that we
have demonstrated our predicate to be true of one individual in the
class, and perceived that we might similarly demonstrate it of any other
Edition: current; Page: [1105] individual in the class whether actual or
even conceivable, we embody all these inferred and inferrible singular
propositions, in one universal proposition, and affirm the predicate of
the entire class.

This process of generalization, we may term Induction or not as we find
most convenient. It differs from the Induction which is founded on
experience, in this, that the general proposition is not inferred from
any of the individual cases contained in it, but from ulterior premisses
on which even those individual cases themselves rest. This illation
cannot be thrown into the form “This and that individual A is B,
therefore every A is B.” We may rather consider ourselves as
demonstrating each individual case seperately, and then gathering them
all up into a general proposition; and thus far the process resembles
that Induction improperly so called, of which “All the planets shine by
borrowed light,” was an example.

But on the other hand, the process which we are now considering is a
real generalization; it enables us to conclude with the utmost certainty
to particular cases which we have not actually examined, which have
never even been specifically in our thoughts, and which we only know to
be susceptible of the very same demonstration as the cases we examined,
because we know that demonstration to be independant of all properties
in the examined cases, except those common to them with the unexamined
ones. Thus we conclude that all triangles have the sum of their three
angles equal to two right angles, not because ABC has so, but because
the process which proves ABC to possess that property, took no account
of any attribute of ABC, except that of being a triangle.

This process therefore really concludes from the known to the unknown;
from the examination of one case only, it proves something to be true of
an indefinite multitude of unexamined cases. It agrees therefore with
Induction from experience, in the characteristics most important in
Philosophy; and may without any inconvenience or confusion be called
Induction. The better to distinguish it from the Induction of which
Experience is the basis, we shall give it the name of Induction from
parity of reasoning.

We may now return to the question which we asked ourselves at the
commencement of the chapter: Why do we conclude that what can be truly
predicated of certain individuals which we know, can be predicated of
other individuals which we know not? What is our warrant for so
concluding?

To this question different answers must be given, according as the
Induction is from parity of reasoning, or from Experience.

In the case of Induction from parity of reasoning, our warrant for
affirming the general proposition, is, that we have a warrant for
affirming every singular proposition contained in it. That warrant is
demonstration; and the nature of demonstrative evidence cannot yet be
explained.

[*]We must, therefore, at present confine ourselves to the case of
Induction from Experience. In this case, our warrant for the
generalization, is the uniformity of the course of nature. The universe,
we find, is so constituted, that whatever is found to be true in any one
case, is true in all cases which exactly resemble it.

The explanation and illustration of this principle requires a chapter to
itself.

Edition: current; Page: [1106]


OF THE UNIFORMITY IN THE COURSE OF NATURE
 [Chapter iii: Of the Ground of Induction]

[§1]

[¶3] The fact which is our warrant for all inference from experience, is
that which has been expressed by philosophers in such forms of language
as these; That the course of nature is uniform; That the universe is
governed by general laws; & the like. Our belief in this general truth,
has been classed by a well-known school of philosophers, as one of the
instincts of our nature, and termed our intuitive conviction that the
future will resemble the past. Whatever be the origin of the belief,
this is a very unphilosophical mode of describing it. Time, in its
modifications of past, present, and future, has no relation direct or
indirect either with the belief itself or with the grounds of it. We
believe that fire will burn tomorrow because it burns today, but we
believe on precisely the same grounds, that it burnt before we were
born, and that it burns this very day in Cochin China. It is not from
the past to the future, as past and future, that we infer, but from the
known to the unknown; from what we have perceived and been directly
conscious of, to what has never come within our personal experience. In
this last predicament is the whole region of the future; but also the
vastly greater part of the present & of the past.

[¶4] The principle of Induction, then, is that the course of nature is
[*]uniform. I am far, however, from giving this large generalization as
an explanation of Induction. On the contrary it is itself a case of
Induction, and one of a very complicated kind. Far from being the first
Induction we make, it is one of the very last; and the general
proposition in which it is couched has scarcely entered into the
conceptions of any but metaphysicians, nor even by them (as we shall see
presently) have its extent and limits been always very accurately
conceived. Yet, the principle in question, must be considered as the
warrant for all our inductions from experience, in this sense, that
unless it were true, those inductions would all be fallacious; and this
as we have already seen, is the sole mode in which the general
propositions, which stand as premisses in our reasonings when thrown
into syllogism, ever really contribute to the establishment of the
conclusions which stand apparently deduced from them.

Archbishop Whately remarks, that every Induction is an imperfect
Syllogism, with the major premiss omitted. The remark is just; though I
would rather express it thus, that every Induction may be thrown into
the form of a Syllogism by supplying a major premiss. When this is done,
the principle which we are now considering, that of the uniformity of
the course of nature, will come forth as the invariable major premiss,
immediately or remotely of all inductive argumentations; to which
accordingly it will stand in the same relation as the major premiss
always does; not contributing at all to prove the conclusion, but only
assisting somewhat to verify the process by which it is proved.

[¶2, n] From the above remark, that every Induction may be thrown into
the form of a Syllogism, Archbishop Whately concludes, that Induction
itself is only a peculiar case of ratiocination; & that the universal
type of all Inference, or Reasoning, is the Syllogism. This conclusion
is directly the opposite of that to Edition: current; Page: [1107] which
our enquiries have led us. Instead of resolving induction into
ratiocination, we have shown that ratiocination, on the contrary, is
resolvable into induction. Dr. Whately’s conclusion may I think be
refuted by merely following up his own argument. He justly observes that
the induction, John, Peter, Thomas &c. &c. are mortal, therefore All
mankind are mortal, is reduced into the form of a Syllogism, by
prefixing as a major premiss the implied assumption, Whatever is true of
John, Peter, Thomas &c. &c. is true of all mankind. Thus far all goes
smoothly; and Dr. Whately (who, endowed with a penetrating and active,
but not persevering intellect, seldom fails to send his sounding line to
a greater depth below the surface than his predecessors, & who when he
has done this, scarcely seems to care whether he reaches the bottom or
not) omitted to ask himself the further question, How we come by this
major premiss? It is not self-evident; nay, in all cases of precipitate
generalization, it is false. How then is it arrived at? Necessarily
either by induction or by ratiocination, and if by induction, then on
Dr. Whately’s own principles it is by ratiocination still, that is, by a
previous syllogism. Proceeding, therefore, to construct this previous
syllogism, he will arrive by more or fewer steps at a final or original
syllogism, starting from the principle which we are not yet prepared to
express in precise terms, but which we have provisionally and popularly
expressed in such phraseology as this, The course of nature is uniform.
Having reached this ultimate major premiss, we have now the whole field
of Induction spread before us, marked out in logical compartments,
syllogized through and through; and every instance of Induction is now
syllogistically accounted for, except one; but that one unhappily
comprehends all the others. All inferences from experience are now
resolved into conclusions syllogistically deduced from one general
principle; but how did we get at the principle itself? Whence came the
universal major? What proves to us that nature is governed by general
laws? Point out to us the major of the syllogism of which that is the
conclusion,—you cannot. Well, then, here at least is a case of Induction
which cannot be resolved into Syllogism. And do not take shelter under
the metaphysical doctrine, that the belief in the uniformity of the
course of nature is an instinct. Let it be by instinct, if you will,
that the child expects fire to burn him today, because it burnt him
yesterday; let the inference from particulars to particulars be the
result of instinct, as much as you please, but who ever dreamed of
arriving by instinct at a broad metaphysical generalization? It may be
instinct which makes a dog eat when he is hungry, but there is no
instinct which tells him that “Every animal who is hungry has need to
eat.” The comprehensive principle that the universe is governed by
general laws, is itself the result of Induction; it is a generalization
from the individual instances which have fallen within our personal
observation; & moreover it is a generalization founded on prior
generalizations: we never should have thought of making it, if we had
not previously arrived at a knowledge of some of the laws themselves,
which could have been no otherwise than by Induction, although Dr.
Whately’s theory supposes that we never could have made any Induction
without first assuming that general maxim.

[*]There is no impropriety however, in speaking of this general truth,
that the course of nature is uniform, as the warrant for all Induction.
If the course of nature were not uniform, inference from experience
would be impossible; Induction would convey no assurance of the truth of
its results; and no conclusion got Edition: current; Page: [1108] at by
Induction, is to be relied upon any farther than as it can be shewn that
the falsity of the conclusion would be inconsistent with that principle;
that if the conclusion were not true, the course of nature would not be
uniform.

It is therefore of the utmost importance to conceive clearly how far and
in what sense it is true that the course of nature is uniform; in order
that we may know, what are the Inductions to which the warrant of the
principle extends.

In ascertaining this, it will be unnecessary to enter into the origin
and psychological analysis of our belief in the uniformity of nature;
i.e. in the evidence of Experience. Some philosophers have professed to
resolve this mental phenomenon into a case of the Law of Association,
others regard it as an original and ultimate element of our nature. To
determine which of them is right, is a problem in the higher or
transcendental metaphysics, into which it is not our business to enter.
Either theory equally supposes that the process of concluding from
Experience, is one in which we are liable to err, and that experience
itself is the rule which ought to guide us in determining how far we can
safely infer from experience. Whichever theory we adopt, experience
itself can alone determine how far and in what sense experience is
uniform; and the tendency to generalize from observation, whether innate
or not, must be indulged within limits which it is the province of
observation itself to find out. This is sufficient for our purpose, and
we, therefore, proceed to enquire what is the real nature and what the
limits of the uniformity in the course of nature.

We have already remarked that such a proposition as this “The course of
nature is uniform,” possesses rather the brevity suitable for popular
than the precision required in philosophical language. Indeed, its terms
require to be explained, & a stricter than their ordinary meaning given
to them, before the proposition can be admitted as true. [§2, ¶1] Every
person’s consciousness assures him that he does not always expect
uniformity in the course of events; he does not always believe that the
future will resemble the past. Nobody believes that it will rain
tomorrow, because it rained today. Nobody expects to meet the same man
at the same spot every time he walks out, merely because he has once met
him. On the contrary everybody is surprised; and mentions it as
something extraordinary if the course of nature is constant, and
resembles itself, in these cases.

[¶2] The course of nature is in truth not only uniform, it is also
infinitely various. Some phenomena seem always to recur in the very same
combinations in which we met them at first; others, which we have been
accustomed to regard as equally bound down to a particular set of
combinations, we unexpectedly find detached from some of the elements
with which we had always found them conjoined, and united to others of
quite a contrary description. To an inhabitant of central Africa half a
century ago, no fact probably appeared to rest upon more uniform
experience than this, that All human beings are black. To Europeans not
many years ago, the proposition, All swans are white, appeared an
equally decided instance of uniformity in the course of nature. Further
experience has proved to both that both were wrong; but very many
centuries elapsed before this additional experience came. During all
these centuries mankind believed in a uniformity of the course of
nature, where no such uniformity existed.

[¶3] According to the notion which the ancients seem to have entertained
of Induction, these two were cases of as legitimate Induction as any
other. In these two instances, in which the ground of inference must
have been insufficient since the conclusion was false, there was yet in
their conception of Induction, as much ground for drawing the inference
as there is in any case whatever. This sort of Edition: current; Page:
[1109] Induction was that which Bacon describes as Inductio per
enumerationem simplicem, ubi non reperitur instantia contradictoria;
recording merely such instances as offered, and if all those instances
agreed, generalizing upon them. [¶5] It is chiefly by pointing out the
insufficiency of this kind of Induction, that Bacon merited the title of
Founder of the Inductive Philosophy. The notions which he introduced, of
a better kind of Induction than this, though still deficient in
definiteness and precision, have had, if not all the influence which has
occasionally been ascribed to them, yet a very large share of influence
in causing the great and rapid progress of physical science since his
time. Even to physical science however the application of just views of
induction is yet far from perfect; and the chief reason why the moral
and political sciences are so far behind the physical, is that to them
there is yet scarcely a trace of the application of the improved notion
of Induction which Bacon originated. The current and approved modes of
reasoning on those subjects are still of the very kind which Bacon
exploded: the Induction employed is the very Inductio per enumerationem
simplicem which he condemns; and the experience, which we hear so
confidently appealed to, is still in his own forcible words, “mera
palpatio.”

[*]This, in fact, is the kind of Induction, if such it can be called,
which is natural to the human mind when unenlightened by philosophy.
That tendency, which some call an instinct and others an association, to
infer ‘the future from the past,’ the known from the unknown, is simply
a tendency to expect that what has been found true once or several times
will be found true again. It matters little whether the instances are
few or many, conclusive or inconclusive. Those are considerations which
occur only on reflection; the expectation follows the past experience,
provided that be uniform,—provided no experience of a conflicting
character comes unsought: the notion of seeking it, of experimenting for
it, of interrogating nature as Lord Bacon has it, is of quite subsequent
growth. The experience of uninstructed human minds is purely passive
experience: they take such facts as present themselves, they do not ask
themselves what facts they want, to enable them to come to a sure
conclusion, and then search for these.

We are not, however, now to consider how evidence is to be sought, which
is a question for the Art of Logic; we are to look out for a test of the
sufficiency of evidence, the only question which belongs to the Science.

[§3]

[¶1] It is manifest that there are correct and incorrect Inductions; and
that some which have for centuries been thought to be correct, were
incorrect. That all swans are white, must have been an incorrect
Induction, since it terminated in a false conclusion. The evidence,
therefore, was insufficient. The experience, however, from which the
inference was drawn, was genuine. From the earliest records, the
observation of all the inhabitants of the known world, was unanimous on
the point. The uniform experience, therefore, of the inhabitants of the
known world, all agreeing in one common result, without a single known
instance of variation from that result, is not always sufficient to
establish a general conclusion.

[¶2] But let us now turn to an instance apparently very similar to this.
Mankind were wrong, it seems, in concluding that all swans are white:
are we also wrong, when we conclude that all men’s heads grow above
their shoulders, and never Edition: current; Page: [1110] beneath, in
spite of the conflicting testimony of the naturalist Pliny? As there
were black swans, although civilized man had existed on the earth nearly
three thousand years without meeting with them, may there not also be
“men whose heads do grow beneath their shoulders,” notwithstanding an
almost equal unanimity of testimony to the contrary from all observers?
Most persons will answer No: it was more credible that a bird should
vary in its colour, than that man should vary in the relative position
of his principal organs. And why more credible? Apparently because there
is less constancy in the colours of animals, than in the general
structure of their internal anatomy. But how do we know this? From
experience doubtless. Then it is experience (as we have once before
said), which must tell us, in what cases or what classes of cases
experience is uniform. We must consult experience in order to learn from
her, under what circumstances arguments from her will be valid. The
course of nature is uniform in certain cases; in certain others, it is
not uniform: & the Theory of Induction must begin by settling what these
cases are.

[¶3] It is obvious that there are cases in which we reckon with the
utmost confidence upon uniformity, & others in which we do not reckon
upon it at all. In some we feel complete assurance that the future will
resemble the past, that the unknown will be precisely similar to the
known. In others, however uniform the result obtained from all the cases
which we have observed, we draw from thence no more than a feeble
presumption that the same result will hold in other cases. That a
straight line is the shortest distance between any two points we feel
convinced is true even in the region of the fixed stars. When a chemist
announces the existence & properties of a newly discovered substance, if
we have confidence in his accuracy of observation, we feel no doubt that
the conclusions he has arrived at will hold universally, although the
induction is founded but on a single instance. We do not withhold our
assent, waiting for a repetition of the experiment; or if we do, it is
from a doubt whether the one experiment was properly made, not whether
if properly made it would be conclusive. Here then is a general law of
nature inferred without hesitation from a single instance; a universal
proposition from a singular one. Now mark another case, and contrast it
with this: Not all the instances which have been observed since the
beginning of the world, in support of the general proposition that all
crows are black, would be considered a sufficient presumption in favour
of the truth of the proposition, to outweigh the testimony of one
unexceptionable witness who should affirm that in some region not yet
explored, he had caught and examined a crow and had found it brown.

[¶4] Why is a single instance in one case sufficient for a complete
Induction, while in another myriads of concurring instances without a
single exception known or presumed, goes [sic] so slight a way towards
establishing a general proposition? Whoever can solve this question,
knows more of the Philosophy of Logic, than the wisest of the ancients,
and has solved the great problem of Induction.

Edition: current; Page: [1111]


Appendix B

Supplementary Note to Book II, Chapter iii (“Of the Functions, and
Logical Value of the Syllogism”), in the 3rd (1851) and 4th (1856)
editions

[This note, added in the 3rd edition (1851), was replaced in the 5th
edition (1862) by the note to p. 205, which in part retains the earlier
wording. The text below is that of the 4th edition (1856), with variant
notes giving the 51 readings, and those of the later editions as found
at pp. 205 ff.]


Note Supplementary to the Preceding Chapter

This theory of the syllogism, (which has received the important adhesion
of Dr. Whewell,*) has been controverted by a writer in the British
Quarterly Review.† The doctrine being new, discussion respecting it is
extremely desirable, to ensure that nothing essential to the question
escapes observation; and I shall, therefore, reply to this writer’s
aargumentsa with somewhat more minuteness than their strength may seem
to require.

The reviewer denies that there is a petitio principii in the syllogism,
or bthat the proposition, All men are mortal, asserts or assumes that
Socrates is mortal. In support of this denial, he argues that we may,
and in fact do, admit the general proposition that all men are mortal,
without having particularly examined the case of Socrates, and even
without knowing whether the individual so named is a man or csomething
elsec. But this of course was never denied. That we can and do draw
conclusions concerning cases specifically unknown to us, is the datum
from which all who discuss this subject must set Edition: current; Page:
[1112] out. The question is, in what terms the evidence, or ground, on
which we draw these conclusions, may best be designated—whether it is
most correct to say, that the unknown case is proved by known cases, or
that it is proved by a general proposition including both sets of cases,
the unknown and the known? I contend for the former mode of expression.
I hold it an abuse of language to say, that the proof that Socrates is
mortal, is that all men are mortal. Turn it in what way we will, this
seems to me to be asserting that a thing is the proof of itself. Whoever
pronounces the words, All men are mortal, has affirmed that Socrates is
mortal, though he may never have heard of Socrates; for since Socrates,
whether known to be so or not, really is a man, he is included in the
words, All men, and in every assertion of which they are the subject. If
the reviewer does not see that there is a difficulty here, I can only
advise him to reconsider the subject until he does: after which he will
be a dbetterd judge of the success or failure of an attempt to remove
the difficulty.* That he had reflected very little on the point when he
wrote his remarks, is shown by his oversight respecting the dictum de
omni et nullo. He acknowledges [p. 27] that this maxim as commonly
expressed,—“Whatever is true of a class, is true of everything included
in the class,” is a mere identical proposition, since the class is
nothing but the things included in it. But he thinks this defect would
be cured by wording the maxim thus,—“Whatever is true of a class, is
true of everything which can be shown to be a member of the class:” as
if a thing could “be shown” to be a member of the class without being
one. If a class means the sum of all the things included in the class,
the things which can “be shown” to be included in it are ea part of the
sume, and the dictum is as much an identical proposition with respect to
them as to the rest. One would almost imagine that, in the reviewer’s
opinion, Edition: current; Page: [1113] things are not members of a
class until they are called up publicly to take their place in it—that
so long, in fact, as Socrates is not known to be a man, he is not a man,
and any assertion which can be made concerning men does not at all
regard him, nor is affected as to its truth or falsity by anything in
which he is concerned.

fThe difference between the reviewer’s theory and mine may be thus
stated. Both admit that when we say, Allf men are mortal, we make an
assertion reaching beyond the sphere of our knowledge of individual
cases; and gthatg when a new individual, Socrates, is brought within the
field of our knowledge by means of the minor premise, we learn that we
have already made an assertion respecting Socrates without knowing it:
our own general formula hbeingh, to that extent, for the first time
interpreted to us. But according to the reviewer’s theory, ithe smaller
assertion is proved by the larger: while I contend, that both assertions
are proved together, by the same evidence, namely, the grounds of
experience on which the generali assertion was made, and by which it
must be justified.

jThe reviewer says [p. 22], that if the major premise included the
conclusion, “we should be able to affirm the conclusion without the
intervention of the minor premise; but every one sees that that is
impossible.” A similar argument is urged by Mr. De Morgan (Formal Logic,
p. 259): “The whole objection tacitly assumes the superfluity of the
minor: that is, tacitly assumes we know Socrates* to be a man as soon as
we know him to be Socrates.” The objection would be well grounded if the
assertion that the major premise includes the conclusion, meant that it
individually specifies all it includes. As Edition: current; Page:
[1114] however the only indication it gives is a description by marks,
we have still to compare any new individual with the marks; and to show
that this comparison has been made, is the office of the minor. But
since, by supposition, the new individual has the marks, whether we have
ascertained him to have them or not; if we have affirmed the major
premise, we have asserted him to be mortal. Now my position is that this
assertion cannot be a necessary part of the argument. It cannot be a
necessary condition of reasoning that we should begin by making an
assertion, ka part of which that assertion is to be employed in
provingk. I can conceive only one way out of this difficulty, viz. that
what really forms the proof is the other part of the assertion; the
portion of it, the truth of which has been ascertained previously: and
that the unproved part is bound up in one formula with the proved part
in mere anticipation, and as a memorandum of the nature of the
conclusions which we are prepared to prove.

With respect to the minor premise in its formal shape, the minor as it
stands in the syllogism, predicating of Socrates a definite class name,
I readily admit that it is no more a necessary part of reasoning than
the major. When there is a major, doing its work by means of a class
name, minors are needed to interpret it: but reasoning can be carried on
without either the one or the other. They are not the conditions of
reasoning, but a precaution against erroneous reasoning. The only minor
premise necessary to reasoning in the example under consideration, is,
Socrates is like A, B, C, and the other individuals who are known to
have died. And this is the only universal type of that step in the
reasoning process which is represented by the minor. Experience,
however, of the uncertainty of this loose mode of inference, teaches the
expediency of determining beforehand what kind of likeness to the cases
observed, is necessary to bring an unobserved case within the same
predicate: and the answer to this question is the major.l Thus the
syllogistic major and the syllogistic minor start into existence
together, and are called forth by the same exigency. When we conclude
from personal experience without referring to any record—to any general
theorems, either written, or traditional, or mentally registered by
ourselves as conclusions of our own drawing, we do not use, in our
thoughts, either a major or a minor, such as the syllogism puts into
words. When, however, we revise this rough inference from particulars to
particulars, and substitute a careful one, the revision consists in
selecting two syllogistic premises. But this neither alters nor adds to
the evidence we had before; it only puts us in a better position for
judging whether our inference from particulars to particulars is well
grounded.jb

Edition: current; Page: [1115]
mnThis brings me to the reviewer’s next objection;n that the formula in
which the major is left out—“A, B, C, &c. were mortal, therefore the
Duke of Wellington is mortal,” does not express all the steps of the
mental process, but omits one of the most essential, that which consists
in recognising the cases A, B, C, as sufficient evidence of what is true
of the Duke of Wellington. This recognition of the sufficiency of the
induction he calls an “inference,” and says, that its result must be
interpolated between the cases A, B, C, and the case of the Duke of
Wellington; and that “our final conclusion is from what is thus
interpolated, and not directly from the individual facts that A, B, C,
&c. were mortal.” [P. 25.] oIt is true, as the reviewer says, that the
major is an affirmation of the sufficiency of the evidence on which the
conclusion will be grounded. But to my thinking it would seem that the
conclusion is inferred from the evidence itself, and not from a
recognition of the sufficiency of the evidence. I infer the presence of
my friend because I see him, and not because I recognise that my eyes
are open, and that eyesight is a means of knowledge. In all operations
which require care, it is good to assure ourselves that the process has
been performed accurately: but the testing of the process is not the
process itself; and besides, may have been omitted altogether, and the
process be correct. Now it is precisely because that operation is
omitted in ordinary unscientific reasoning, that there is anything
gained in certainty by throwing reasoning into the syllogistic form. To
make sure, as far as possible, that it shall not be omitted, we make the
testing operation a part of the reasoning process itself. We insist that
the inference from particulars to particulars shall pass through a
general proposition. But this is a security for good reasoning, not a
condition of all reasoning; and in some cases not even a security. Our
most familiar inferences are all made before we learn the use of general
propositions; and a person of untutored sagacity will skilfully apply
his acquired experience to adjacent cases, though he would bungle
grievously in fixing the limits of the appropriate general theorem. But
though he may conclude rightly, he never, properly speaking, knows
whether he has done so or not: he has not tested his reasoning. Now this
is precisely what forms of reasoning do for us. We do not need them to
enable us to reason, but to enable us to know whether we reason
correctly.

It may be added, in further answer to the reviewer, that,—even when the
test has been applied, and the sufficiency of the evidence
recognised,—if it is sufficient to support the general proposition, it
is sufficient also to support the inference from particulars to
particulars without passing through the general proposition. The
inquirer who has logically satisfied himself that the conditions
Edition: current; Page: [1116] of legitimate induction were realized in
the cases A, B, C, would be as much justified in concluding directly to
the Duke of Wellington as in concluding to all men.o The general
conclusion is pneverp legitimate, unless the particular one would be so
too; and in no sense, intelligible to me, can the particular conclusion
be said to be drawn from the general one.q That the process of testing
the sufficiency of an inductive inference is an operation of a general
character, I readily concede to the reviewer; I had myself said as much,
by laying down as a fundamental law, that whenever there is ground for
drawing any conclusion at all from particular instances, there is ground
for a general conclusion. But that this general conclusion should be
actually drawn, however useful, cannot be an indispensable condition of
the validity of the inference in the particular case. A man gives away
sixpence by the same power by which he disposes of his whole fortune;
but it is not necessary to the lawfulness of his doing the one, that he
should formally assert, even to himself, his right to do the other.

The reviewer has recourse for an example, to syllogisms in the second
figure (though all are, by a mere verbal transformation, reducible to
the first), and asks, where is the petitio principii in this syllogism,
“Every poet is a man of genius, A B is not a man of genius, therefore A
B is not a poet?” It is true that in a syllogism of this particular
type, the petitio principii is disguised. A B is not included in the
terms, every poet. But the proposition, “Every poet is a man of genius,”
rsupposing it to be provabler, cannot have been inductively proved,
unless the negative branch of the inquiry has been attended to as well
as the positive; unless it has been fully considered whether among
persons who are not “men of genius,” there are not some who ought to be
termed poets, and unless this has been determined in the negative.
Therefore the case of A B has been decided by implication, as much as
the case of Socrates in the first example. The proposition, Every poet
is a man Edition: current; Page: [1117] of genius, is confessedly
æquipollent with “No one who is not a man of genius is a poet,” and in
this the petitio principii, as regards A B, is no longer implied, but
express, as in an ordinary syllogism of the first figure.

sThe language of ratiocination would, I think, be brought into closer
agreement with the real nature of the process, if the general
propositions employed in reasoning, instead of being in the form All men
are mortal, or Every man is mortal, were expressed in the form Any man
is mortal. This mode of expression, exhibiting as the type of all
reasoning from experience “The men A, B, C, &c. are so and so, therefore
any man is so and so,” would much better manifest the true idea—that
inductive reasoning is always, at bottom, inference from particulars to
particulars, and that the whole function of general propositions in
reasoning, is to vouch for the legitimacy of such inferences.sm

Edition: current; Page: [1118]


Appendix C

Book III, Chapter v (“Of the Law of Universal Causation”), §9, in MS,
1st (1843), and 2nd (1846) editions

[This section was replaced in the 3rd edition (1851) by the present §11
(§§5 and 10 being added in the 8th edition). The 1846 version is printed
below, with variant notes giving the readings of the 1st edition and the
MS.]

§9. [aDoctrine that volition is an efficient cause, examineda] Before
concluding this chapter, it seems desirable to take notice of an
apparentb opposition between the doctrines which I have laid down
respecting causation, and those maintained in a work which I hold to be
far the greatest yet produced on the Philosophy of the Sciences, M.
Comte’s Cours de Philosophie Positive. M. Comte asserts as his first
principle, that the causes of phenomena are beyond the reach of the
human faculties, and that all which is accessible to us is their laws,
or, as he explains the term, their constant relations of succession or
of similarity. Accordingly chec sedulously abstains, din the subsequent
part ofd his work, from the use of the word Cause: an example which I
have not followed, for reasons which I will proceed to state. I most
fully esubscribe to the doctrinee that ultimate, or, in the phraseology
of metaphysicians, efficient causes, which are conceived as not being
phenomena, fnorf perceptible by the senses at all, are radically
inaccessible to the human faculties: and that the “constant relations of
succession or of similarity” which exist among phenomena themselves,
(not forgetting, so far as any constancy can be traced, their relations
of coexistence,) are the only gsubjectsg of rational investigation. When
I speak of causation, I have nothing in view, other than those constant
relations: but I think the terms causation, and cause and effect,
important to be preserved, for the purpose of distinctively designating
one class of those relations, namely the relations of succession which
so far as we know are unconditional; as contrasted with those which,
like the succession of day and night, depend upon the existence Edition:
current; Page: [1119] or upon the coexistence of other antecedent facts.
This distinction corresponds to the great division which Mr. Whewell and
other writers have made of the field of science, into the investigation
of what they term the Laws of Phenomena, and the investigation of
causes;[*] a phraseology, as I conceive, hnot philosophically
sustainableh, inasmuch as the ascertainment of causes, such causes as
the human faculties can ascertain, namely causes which are themselves
phenomena, is, therefore, merely the ascertainment of other and more
universal Laws of Phenomena. And I cannot but look upon the revival, on
English soil, of the doctrine (not only refuted by the school of Locke
and Hume, but given up by their great rivals Reid and Stewart) that
efficient causes are within the reach of human knowledge, as a
remarkable instance of what has been aptly called “the peculiar zest
which the spirit of reaction against modern tendencies gives to ancient
absurdities.”

Yet the distinction between those constant relations of succession or
coexistence which Mr. Whewell terms Laws of Phenomena, and those which
he terms, as I do, Laws of Causation, is grounded (however incorrectly
expressed) upon a real difference. It is ionly the extreme slightness of
his acquaintance with M. Comte’s speculations, which could have led Mr.
Whewell to assume that he has overlooked this fundamental difference;
and,i that by excluding the investigation of causes, he excludes that of
all the most general truthsj, is a still more complete misapprehension.j
But it does appear to me that his disinclination to employ the word
Cause has occasionally led him to attach less importance than it
deserves to kak distinction, upon which alone, I am convinced, the
possibility rests of framing a rigorous Canon of Induction. Nor do I see
what is gained by avoiding this particular word, when M. Comte is
forced, like other people, to speak continually of the properties of
things, of agents and their action, of forces and the like; terms
equally liable to perversion, and which are partial and inadequate
expressions for what no word that we possess, except Cause, expresses in
its full generality. I believe, too, that when the ideas which a word is
commonly used to convey are overclouded with mysticism, the obscurity is
not likely to be so effectually dispelled by abstaining from its
employment, as by bringing out into full clearness the portion of real
meaning which exists in the various cases where the term is most
familiarly employed, and thereby giving a legitimate satisfaction to
that demand of the intellect which has caused the term to remain in use.

Edition: current; Page: [1120]


Appendix D

Portion of Book III, Chapter x (“Of Plurality of Causes; and of the
Intermixture of Effects”), §4, in the 4th (1856) through 7th (1868)
editions; with two papers on the Conservation of Force by Mill and
Alexander Bain and supporting correspondence

[This passage first appeared in the 4th (1856) edition, and after
considerable revisions, was deleted for the 8th edition (see 442i) and
replaced by Book III, Chapter v (“Of the Law of Universal Causation”),
§10, which should be read in conjunction with this Appendix (see also
Mill’s Preface to the 8th edition, cxvii above). The 1868 version is
printed below, with variant notes giving the readings of the 4th, 5th,
and 6th editions.

Given here as explicatory background are portions of the correspondence
between Mill and Bain bearing on the matter in issue, the Conservation
of Force, with two culminating papers that they exchanged. (Bain’s
letters and the two papers are in the Milton S. Eisenhower Library,
Johns Hopkins University; the papers were printed, with some errors, in
Hugh S. R. Elliot, ed., The Letters of John Stuart Mill, 2 vols.
[London: Longmans, Green, 1910], II, 321-8. One letter in the sequence,
Mill to Bain, 29 May, 1870, has not been located.) On the MS Mill dates
his paper as “end of 1871,” and Bain’s as “February, 1872.”]

aThe very promising generalization now commonly known as the
Conservation or Persistence of Force, bears a close resemblance to what
the conception of chemical composition would become, if divested of the
one circumstance which now distinguishes it from simple transformation.
It has long been known that heat is capable of producing electricity,
and electricity heat; that mechanical motion in numerous cases produces
and is produced by them both; and so of all other physical forces. It
has of late become the general belief of scientific inquirersa that
mechanical force, electricity, magnetism, Edition: current; Page: [1121]
heat, light, and chemical action (to which bhas subsequently been addedb
vital cactionc) are not so much causes of one another as convertible
into one another; and dthey are now generally spoken of asd forms of one
and the same force, varying only in itse manifestations. fThis doctrine
may be admitted, without by any means implying that Force is a real
entity, a Thing in itself, distinct from all its phenomenal
manifestations to our organs. Supposing the doctrine true, the several
kinds of phenomena which it identifies in respect of their origin would
nevertheless remain different facts; facts which would be causes of one
another—freciprocally causes and effects, which is the first gelementg
in the form of causation properly called transformation. hWhat the
doctrine contains more than this, is, that in each of these cases of
reciprocal causation, the causes are reproduced without alteration in
quantity. This is what takes place in the transformations of matter:
when water has been converted into hydrogen and oxygen, theseh can be
reconverted into ipreciselyi the same quantity of water from which they
were produced. To jestablish a corresponding law in regard to Force, it
has to be proved that heat isj capable of being converted into
electricity, electricity into chemical action, chemical action into
mechanical force, and mechanical force back again into the kexactk
quantity of heat which was Edition: current; Page: [1122] loriginally
expended; and so through all the interchanges. Were this provedl, it
would establish whatm constitutes transformation, as distinguished from
the simple nfactn of reciprocal causation. oThe fact in issue is simply
the quantitative equivalence of all these natural agencies; whereby a
given quantity of any one is convertible into, and interchangeable with,
a given, and always the same, quantity of any other: this, no less, but
also no more. It cannot yet be said that the law has been fully proved
of any case, except that of interchange between heat and mechanical
motion. It does seem to be ascertained, not only that these two areo
convertible into peachp other, but that after any number of conversions
the original quantities reappear withoutq addition or diminutionr, like
the original quantities of hydrogen and oxygen after passing through the
condition of water. If the same thing comes to be proved true of all the
other forces, in relation to these two and to one another, the law of
Conservation will be established; and it will be a legitimate mode of
expressing the fact, to speak of Force, as we already speak of Matter,
as indestructible. But Force will not the less remain, to the
philosopher, a mere abstraction of the mind. All that will have been
proved is, that in the phenomena of Nature, nothing actually ceases
without generating a calculable, and always the same, quantity of some
other natural phenomenon, which again, when it ceases, will in its turn
either generate a calculable, and always the same, quantity of some
third phenomenon, or reproduce the original quantity of the first.r


Mill—Bain Correspondence

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 17, 1870

Avigon

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

1.


Mill to Bain

Avignon

,
May 17, 1870

. . . Respecting the Conservation theory itself, you have given [in your
Logic] by many degrees the clearest explanation of it that I have ever
met Edition: current; Page: [1123] with, & I now seem to myself to
understand the facts of the case pretty completely. But about the mode
of expression of the facts I still boggle, & have a stronger impression
after reading your exposition than I had before that the men of science
have not yet hit upon the correct generalization though they may be at
no great distance from it. I am so anxious to understand this matter
thoroughly that I write down my difficulties in hopes that you will help
me to resolve them.

In the first place, you exclude from the theory two of the principal
forces, Gravitation & Molecular Adhesion, expressly distinguishing these
from the “correlated forces.” Of course you do so because there is at
present no proof of the convertibility of the other forces into these; &
you do not take any notice of the hypothetical explanation of
gravitation by molecular motions, given by Tait (I believe) & others,
which so strikingly resemble the argument of Descartes to shew that his
vortices might generate a tendency to a centre. But though gravity does
not take its place in the theorem of conservation, motion generated by
gravity does. Suppose, then, a weight suspended by a string over the
shaft of a mine—suppose that the string breaks, & the weight falls, with
rapidly increasing velocity, to the bottom. Here is a positive addition
to the active force at work in the universe, which, when it ceases its
mechanical motion, remains in the form of heat or in some other of the
correlated forms. Now, at the expense of what pre-existing energy has
this force been generated? The conservationists are obliged to say, out
of potential energy. A given quantity of potential energy has become
actual; & if the weight is hoisted up again the power expended in
raising it is so much taken back from the sum of actual energy &
restored to the sum of potential.

Now I want to analyse the meaning of this phrase, “potential energy.” It
seems to signify some force actually residing in the suspended weight.
But it is nothing of the kind. There is a force actually residing in the
weight; a force exactly measurable: viz. the downward pressure with
which it pulls at the string, & by which it is able to neutralise an
equal weight at the other end of a lever. But this force is limited to
that with which the body would commence falling if the string broke, &
is far short of the vastly accelerated force with which it would reach
the bottom of the mine. When we are bid to say that this augmented force
existed previously as potential energy in the weight, this potential
energy is not to common sense & logic anything which really existed, but
is a mere name for our knowledge that a force would be created if the
body began to fall.

I am discussing the expressions, not denying any of the facts. I admit
that when force is expended in placing a weight in a “more advantageous
position,” as you express it (i.e. in a place from which it has further
to fall in order to reach its centre of attraction) when it does fall to
the depth from which it has been raised it will reproduce the exact
amount of force expended in raising it (making allowance for any part
which may have been transformed Edition: current; Page: [1124] into
heat). The expression “potential energy” is no doubt adopted to enable
us to say that the total amount of force in all Nature can neither be
increased nor diminished, the sum of the actual force plus the sum of
the potential being a constant quantity. But this only means that there
is a vast reserve of force not existing in any shape now, but which
gravity could call into existence, & that this not actual but possible
quantity of force has an extreme limit, viz. the whole of the motion
that would be generated by the rushing together of all the gravitating
bodies in the universe until they could not possibly get any closer
together. From time to time a little of this possible force gets itself
created & in that case it requires that an equal force shd be expended
if the effects produced are to be counterbalanced or undone.

It seems to me a bad & misleading form of expression to ascribe the
motion which would be gradually acquired by gravitating bodies if the
obstacles which keep them apart were removed, to an energy of equivalent
amount residing in the body before it begins to move.

But if this objection could be overruled a greater remains behind. You
say (& this is a point quite new to me) that force may be, & is,
expended in merely altering the collocation of bodies, without
generating even potential energy. This I suppose is the case when force
is expended in destroying molecular adhesion. But if this be so, how can
the indestructibility of force be maintained? The sum of actual force
plus the sum of potential is, in that case diminished.

When you have time, perhaps you will kindly explain to me how the theory
of Conservation as at present expressed, can stand with this fact. . . .

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

19 July, 1870

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

2.


Bain to Mill

Inverurie, by Aberdeen,
19 July, 1870

. . . You have conceived the position of gravity, in the correlated
forces, so exactly, that I can hardly add anything to your statement of
the facts. And having the facts so clearly before you, you are as well
able as any one else is, to say how the state of the case may be best
expressed in language. If we were to exclude gravity (and cohesion) from
the Universe, force would exist purely as actual motion, mechanical and
molecular. There would be so much momentum of moving masses, and so much
of moving molecules, as Heat, &c. The law of transference would hold
strictly; and the mode of transference would always be from one moving
mass to another. This would be Correlation in its purity and simplicity.
But now the existence of gravity, and other attractive (as well as
repulsive) forces, introduces a new aspect, whereby we may have the
reality of force, without the fact of the actual movement of Edition:
current; Page: [1125] masses or molecules. The principle of equivalence
still holds; and the existence of these attractions and repulsions
neither create nor destroy the total of available force. They alter its
direction, and they embody it in a form, that we should a priori have
supposed impossible,—the form of absolute quiescence. These influences
are not a primal source of moving power; although to appearances, and on
the prevailing cosmical hypothesis, gravity is de facto the source of
all the energies of our solar system. But gravity, in this sense, must
be conceived as disgorging energy, namely, all that energy that was
expended in separating the masses to the distance at which they begin to
gravitate towards each other. Hence the force of gravity is termed
potential, and also energy of position, because it may be without actual
motion, and is inoperative until such time as the masses are separated
by the consumption of other force.

These are merely a few varieties of expression of the broad facts. What
is true of gravity applies to molecular adhesion, as in a spring, which
is an equally familiar instance of an agency that can neither create nor
destroy power, but may store up, and divert it; having the same
peculiarity of embodying the power without actual movement, of either
mass or molecule.

Your other difficulty can be resolved thus. Notwithstanding the absolute
indestructibility of force, there is one situation where it is
transmuted with remarkable facility into a form wherein it is
practically useless; that is to say, the radiation of heat into
(so-called) empty space. By a circumstance, which has often struck me as
the most frightful act of prodigal waste within the whole compass of
human knowledge, and sufficient of itself to damn any one pretending to
be the Creator, nearly the whole of the accumulated energy of the sun,
is passing off into the realms of boundless space, merely raising the
temperature of space by an infinitesimal amount, such as to be of no
value to any interest that we can conceive. Now what happens in the
great scale of the sun’s unintercepted radiation, happens in the small
scale, on many petty occasions. Suppose a block of granite dragged over
a level space. The force expended upon the act would of course, in free
space, impart a persisting momentum to the block. But all this momentum
is destroyed by the friction of the ground; that is, an equivalent
amount of heat, as rise of temperature, is generated in the surface
passed over. In certain circumstances, the heat would continue, and
would represent in all future time the momentum expended. But in actual
fact, the heat soon radiates off into free space, there to join the
waste radiation of all suns and stars, by which ultimately all the force
in the universe must be dissipated beyond recall, without being in
strict language annihilated.

It is true that my use of the word “Eliminate” passes beyond the
mathematical signification. We need a word to express the act of
separating the casual from the causal antecedents of a phenomenon. Now
the word “eliminate” Edition: current; Page: [1126] has already made one
step in chemical physiology, where it signifies the extrication or
separation of various products as carbonic acid, urea, &c by means of
the lungs, kidney, and so forth. And, although it may be a farther
stretch, to use it for the inductive problem, no better word occurred to
me. The operation being a technical one seems to want a technical word.
. . .

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 4, 1870

Blackheath Park

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

3.


Mill to Bain

Blackheath Park

,
Aug. 4, 1870

. . . I am much obliged to you for your letter which though it does not
remove my difficulties affords material which may perhaps help me
towards resolving them.

How do we know that any energy has ever been expended in “separating the
masses to the distance at which they begin to gravitate towards each
other”? The new theory of the universe in relation to Force shews the
same tendency from all past time to draw the masses nearer to one
another instead of separating them, to which it is supposed that the
present order of the universe will finally succumb. If by the masses are
meant the molecules, & if what you say refers to the separation into
different stellar bodies by cooling, of what was originally a nebula; I
would say that the molecules of the nebula must have already gravitated
towards one another. If they were ever too close together to do so, how
have they ever emerged from that state? I cannot see what preexisting
force can have been hoarded by gravitation.

“Elimination” in the chemical application which you mention, still seems
to mean only getting rid of, and not picking out & retaining. . . .

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

Aug. 16, 1970

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

4.


Bain to Mill

Inverurie, Aberdeen,
Aug. 16, 1970

. . . The only answer to your difficulty as to the separation of
gravitating bodies is that both theoretically, and in fact, a collision
between two bodies, converts mechanical force into heat, which is
expansive energy, and leads to the separation of a compact solid mass
into a diffused aenal mass, which gravitation brings together again. The
fall of another earth towards ours, under gravity, is calculated as
discharging an amount of force that would vaporise the entire mass; and
ages would be occupied in its re-consolidation. This is the only known
mode of regenerating extinct solar systems.

Edition: current; Page: [1127]
There is a volume edited by Dr. Youmans, an American, containing the
whole series of essays on the correlation of force.[*] Some of them you
have read, others are now past; but one or two would still be of use by
suggesting illustrations and points of view. There is one by Mayer, and
I think one by Helmholtz, which although out a good many years, have not
been exhausted of their interest. I can send you my copy if the book is
not in the London Library. . . .


Papers on the Conservation of Force


Mill’s Paper


1.: Potential Energy.

It appears to me that this is a misnomer, and that it produces
unnecessary obscurity in the theory of the Conservation of Force. The
theory being that all force consists in motion, either molar or
molecular, & that motion is neither created nor destroyed but only
transferred, it seems as if the force said to be laid up (for instance)
in the coal were a contradiction to the theory, unless one supposes that
an undiminished quantity of molecular motion continues to take place in
the coal during the whole interval between its first deposition & its
extrication, & in that case one does not see why it shd not produce
heat. This difficulty is cleared up by the consideration that what is
really potential is the motion. The motion, or other phenomenon
interchangeable with motion, which caused the formation of the coal, has
not been stored up, but has ceased & been annihilated: but the coal
which has been generated will, under suitable allocations, reproduce a
quantity of motion or other equivalent phenomenon, which quantity not
being indefinite, but exactly equal to the quantity previously expended,
justifies the expression that a definite quantity of force has been
stored up. Force, therefore, must be defined not as real motion, no more
than as an occult cause of motion, but as a potentiality or permanent
possibility of motion, just as matter is a permanent possibility of
sensation. Hence it is not proper to speak of potential force, or
potential energy. Potential means (vide Hamilton) that which is not, but
may be: but the energy is; that which sometimes is not, but always may
be, is the motion itself: & instead of speaking of potential energy, we
should define the energy itself as potential motion.

Edition: current; Page: [1128]


2.: Gravitation.

The interchangeability, in the case of gravitation, of force not merely
with other forms of force but with what is called a “position of
advantage,” is a great puzzle, & seems to be so far a surrender of the
theory of Conservation of Force. For the purpose of saving the theory it
is denied that gravity creates any force, & even Mr. Bain accepts this
doctrine, giving as the ground of it that “what is gained in power is
lost in position; to restore the position would require the power to be
given back.” But surely this is merely the equivalent of what is true of
all force. The force expended in chemical decomposition is restored in
recomposition; & the power must be given back to replace things as they
were before. The heat given out in freezing must be restored in melting.
It seems to me that what requires force to overcome it must be allowed
to be force. This difficulty however is removed by the change of
language I have proposed. We should then say as is usually said, that a
stationary body resting on the earth exerts a present force equal to its
weight; but besides an actual moving power equal to that of the weight
necessary to balance it, it has a latent potentiality of motion equal to
the whole of the motion which it would go through if it, with the whole
earth, were to fall into the sun. Now when this body is lifted or thrown
up to a higher position & remains there, it has added to its former
potentiality of motion, in the direction of gravity, a quantity equal to
the additional motion which it would have to perform in first falling
back to its original position; & this quantity is exactly equal to the
quantity of force which was expended in raising it. We may therefore
say, without impropriety, that this amount of energy has not perished,
but has been stored up in the body by the fact of elevating its
position.


3.: Light.

I do not see the difficulty which others appear to see in the relation
of light to the theory of Conservation. I do not see why that theory
should make us expect that when a body by heating becomes luminous the
light should be produced at the expense of heat. It ought to be so if
light were itself a force; but my solution would be that light, like the
sensation of heat, is purely subjective: what is objective, if the
theory be true, is the vibrations of the medium. Now though there are
vibrations which produce only heat, or only chemical action, there are,
if I remember right, none which produce only light; all the rays of the
spectrum are I believe also calorific, though in unequal degrees. I shd
therefore surmise that light is merely a concomitant, due to a
physiological action of those vibrations, & that the chemical influence
said to be exerted by light is really exerted by the vibrations
themselves. Any other supposition seems inconsistent with the fact that
there are rays, not luminous, which produce the chemical effect in a
still higher degree than those which are luminous. Then, when a body is
heated to luminousness, Edition: current; Page: [1129] there would be an
increased extrication of the form of force which is represented by heat,
but no transmutation of any of it into another form represented by
light; the sensation of light would be merely an incidental effect on
our optic nerve of the increased vibratory motion in the medium, & there
would be no expenditure of force except what takes place at the
transition from the ether to the optic nerve, which would be parallel
with the similar expenditure of force that there must be in putting our
nerves into the condition which gives the sensation of heat.


4.: Force expended without result.

Here seems still to lurk the only real imperfection of the theory. It
appears that force expended in altering the mere allocations of objects,
as in moving stones from the quarry to the place where they are to be
used, is wholly lost, no potentiality of reproducing equivalent motion
being stored up. If this be so, then, according to the theory, the
quantity of force in the universe must be constantly diminishing, since
every change in the position of objects consumes some of it, &, unless
when a “position of greater advantage” has been obtained, none is
reproduced. This is a more serious matter than even the dissipation of
energy by the solar radiation into space, since that is a transfer of
the force to the interstellar ether from which for aught we know it may
be capable of being again collected about points. But if the
Conservation theory be true ought not the force expended in altering
allocations to be still preserved in a similar manner to the force
radiated from the sun, viz by being transferred to the ether? As a
matter of fact is not much of it converted into heat? I shd much like to
know what scientific authorities would say to this.


5.: Attraction & Repulsion.

There still remain many questions, which may or may not have been
settled, respecting the application of the Conservation of Force to
those internal forces by which bodies are supposed to be held in their
existing state, viz. molecular attractions & repulsions balancing one
another. Here is apparently a vast store of potential motion, prevented
from being actual by opposite potentialities. Is this store of latent
force also derived from the Sun? & if so how? When air is condensed by
pressure heat is evolved. Is this heat a numerical equivalent of the
motion, real or potential, which is expended? Take off all pressure, &
the particles of the air fly apart, until they are stopped by gravity:
the expansive force I suppose is the force which was stored up in the
air; but then air, in rarifying, absorbs a great quantity of heat. What
is the explanation of this phenomenon by the Conservation of Force? It
is not that the heat is transformed into expansive motion, as when heat
applied to water converts it into elastic steam: on the contrary, the
expansion comes first, & the absorption follows as its effect just as if
a vacuum had been made Edition: current; Page: [1130] in the ocean of
force & other force rushed in to fill it; but this is not a
transformation of force. I do not know whether these questions have been
resolved, or what are the exact relations between the theorem of the
Persistence of Force & these particular kinds of molecular action.


Bain’s Paper

The phrase, Potential Energy, must not be too closely criticised. It
covers a gap that at present we know not how to fill up. The difficulty
does not occur in regard to the molecular force of chemical action,
although the phrase is used for that case. The force supposed to be
stored up in coal is not potential, but real movement existing in the
Oxygen. As compared with Carbonic Acid, Oxygen contains in the shape of
the high molecular movement all the force given out in combustion; and
the lowered condition of molecular force in Carbonic Acid expresses the
amount of change.

It is with gravity that the real difficulty occurs, in finding the
suitable expression of equivalence. When force is expended to raise a
body against gravity, we know only that the body on falling again would
acquire the force equal to what had been expended, but we are unable to
assign any molecular movement which represents the force expended, when
the body has attained its height. If gravity could be explained in the
form of some ethereal action of the intervening medium, doubtless the
agitation of such a medium might be a molecular equivalent for the force
expended in raising a body against gravity. But as this seems to be a
hopeless attempt, we must just express the fact as we find it, and allow
a break in the continuity of molecular and molar movement as respects
force.

Another case very much resembling gravity is the action of a spring,
which is the case of attraction or repulsion in the small scale of
molecules. This is equally heterogeneous with the idea of matter in
motion as representing the type of force. At the present moment we must
treat these attractions and repulsions exactly like gravity as a break
in the line of force considered as matter in motion. A distended spring
is a position to attain which force is expended, and the recovery from
which by molecular attraction restores the force into moving matter. But
we cannot say that the tension of the spring is itself moving matter.

In the case of the transference of bodies from one place to another, the
force consumed all turns to radiant heat through the medium of friction
or of collision. A heavy body set in motion would of course move for
ever, and retain the force expended on it. It would go through space,
and might be found, as it were, at all distances without any waste. That
is the very nature of motion to treat space and distance as nothing. But
now, if we wish to arrest and to localize this body, we must apply a
counter force to stop it. This Edition: current; Page: [1131] counter
force might be another body free to move, and to take on the equivalent
momentum, so that nothing would be lost. But, in point of fact, we
oppose bodies in motion by a dead obstacle, or a drag, which converts
all the movement into sensible heat, raises the temperature of bodies,
and, consequently, in cooling all the heat and force are wasted by the
usual mode of ultimate dissipation.

As to the question of light. The subjective aspect of the phenomenon
does not exhaust its bearings. We must view light as well as heat both
on the objective and on the subjective sides. Objectively, heat is
supposed to be a mode of molecular motion capable of imparting motion
molar or molecular at a definite rate of commutation. The difficulty
lies in making good the same fact regarding light. No amount of mere
light has ever yet been transformed into force in any of the other
modes: yet light plays a part in the disturbance of molecular
equilibrium. It is the occasion of combinations and of decompositions as
in the well-known facts culminating in Photography. As causing
combination it displays no molecular force in the sense of imparting a
definite quantity of its own to another body. It merely puts the
particles in a position to bring their own forces into play, and to
begin a molecular change in the bodies combined. A mechanical
disturbance and many other things would have the very same efficacy. The
testing case of the transference of power is chemical decomposition.
Heat is a decomposing agent because it can supply, or restore, the
molecular power that was given forth when the elements first combined.
Light is incapable of this. If it ever causes decomposition, it is in
the presence of some other power that supplies the needful molecular
force that was given out in the previous combination. The action of
light upon the retina is apparently of this disturbing kind, and its
great efficiency is due to the extreme instability of nervous matter.

The change of phrase from Potential Energy to Potential Motion is
certainly an improvement, in respect of exchanging the vague word
“Energy” for the definite fact “Motion”, which is the word that is
supposed to generalize, and, at the same time, embody the fact called
“Energy” and “force”. The gain of the new theory is from never losing
sight of the “moving matter” as the cardinal circumstance, and the true
meaning of what we call “force”, “Energy”, “power”, and the like.

Edition: current; Page: [1132]


Appendix E

Book III, Chapter xiii (“Miscellaneous Examples of the Explanation of
Laws of Nature”) §§1-3, in MS, and 1st (1843) through 5th (1862)
editions

[These sections were replaced in the 6th edition (1865) by the present
§§1-3. The 1862 version is printed below, with variants to the earlier
editions and the MS.]

§ 1. [Liebig’s theory of the contagiousness of chemical action] Some of
the most remarkable instances which have occurred since the great
Newtonian generalization, of the explanation of laws of causation
subsisting among complex phenomena, by resolving them into simpler and
more general laws, are to be found among thea speculations of Liebig in
organic chemistry. These speculations, though they have not yet been
sufficiently long before the world to entitle us positively to assume
that no well-grounded objection can be made to any part of them, afford,
however, so admirable an example of the spirit of the Deductive Method,
that I may be permitted to present some specimens of them here.

It has been observed in certain cases, that chemical action is, as it
were, contagious; that is to say, a substance which would not of itself
yield to a particular chemical attraction, (the force of the attraction
not being sufficient to overcome cohesion, or to destroy some chemical
combination in which the substance was already held,) will nevertheless
do so if placed in contact with some other body which is in the act of
yielding to the same force. Nitric acid, for example, does not dissolve
pure platinum, which may “be boiled with this acid without being
oxidized by it, even when in a state of such fine division that it no
longer reflects light.”[*] But the same acid easily dissolves silver.
Now if an alloy of silver and platinum be treated with nitric acid, the
acid does not, as might naturally be expected, separate the two metals,
dissolving Edition: current; Page: [1133] the silver, and leaving the
platinum; it dissolves both: the platinum as well as the silver becomes
oxidized, and in that state combines with the undecomposed portion of
the acid. In like manner, “copper does not decompose water, even when
boiled in dilute sulphuric acid; but an alloy of copper, zinc, and
nickel, dissolves easily in this acid with evolution of hydrogen
gas.”[*] These phenomena cannot be explained by the laws of what is
termed chemical affinity. They point to a peculiar law, by which the
oxidation which one body suffers, causes another, in contact with it, to
submit to the same change. And not only chemical composition, but
chemical decomposition, is capable of being similarly propagated. The
peroxide of hydrogen, a compound formed by hydrogen with a greater
bamountb of oxygen than the quantity necessary to form water, is held
together by a chemical attraction of so weak a nature, that the
slightest circumstance is sufficient to decompose it; and it even,
though very slowly, gives off oxygen and is reduced to water
spontaneously (being, I presume, decomposed by the tendency of its
oxygen to absorb heat and assume the gaseous state). Now it has been
observed, that if this decomposition of the peroxide of hydrogen takes
place in contact with some metallic oxides, as those of silver, and the
peroxides of lead and manganese, it superinduces a corresponding
chemical action upon those substances; they also give forth the whole or
a portion of their oxygen, and are reduced to the metal or to the
protoxide; though they do not undergo this change spontaneously, and
there is no chemical affinity at work to make them do so. Other similar
phenomena are mentioned byc Liebig. “dNod other explanation,” he
observes, “of these phenomena can be given, than that a body in the act
of combination or decomposition enables another body, with which it is
in contact, to enter into the same state.”[†]

Here, therefore, is a law of nature of great simplicity, but which,
owing to the extremely special and limited character of the phenomena in
which alone it can be detected experimentally (because in them alone its
results are not intermixed and blended with those of other laws), had
been very little recognised by chemists, and no one could have ventured,
on experimental evidence, to affirm it as a law common to all chemical
action; owing to the impossibility of a rigorous employment of the
Method of Difference where the properties of different kinds of
substance are involved, an impossibilitye noticed and characterized in a
previous chapter.* Now this fextremelyf special and apparently
precarious generalization has, in the hands of Liebig, Edition: current;
Page: [1134] been converted, by a masterly employment of the Deductive
Method, into a law pervading all nature, in the same way as gravitation
assumed that character in the hands of Newton; and has been found to
explain, in the most unexpected manner, numerous detached
generalizations of a more limited kind, reducing the phenomena concerned
in those generalizations into mere cases of itself.

The contagious influence of chemical action is not a powerful force, and
gisg only capable of overcoming weak affinities: we may, therefore,
expect to find it principally exemplified in the decomposition of
substances which are held together by weak chemical forces. Now the
force which holds a compound substance together is generally weaker, the
more compound the substance is; and organic products are the most
compound substances known, those which have the most complex atomic
constitution. It is, therefore, upon such substances that the
self-propagating power of chemical action is likely to exert itself in
the most marked manner. Accordingly, first, it explains the remarkable
laws of fermentation, and some of those of putrefaction. “A little
leaven,” that is, dough in a certain state of chemical action, impresses
a similar chemical action upon “the whole lump.”[*] The contact of any
decaying substance, occasions the decay of matter previously sound.
Again, yeast is a substance actually in a process of decomposition from
the action of air and water, evolving carbonic acid gas. Sugar is a
substance which, from the complexity of its composition, has no great
energy of coherence in its existing form, and is capable of being easily
converted (by combination with the elements of water) into carbonic acid
and alcohol. Now the mere presence of yeast, the mere proximity of a
substance of which the elements are separating from each other, and
combining with the elements of water, causesh sugar to undergo the same
change, giving out carbonic acid gas, and becoming alcohol. It is not
the elements contained in the yeast which do this. “An aqueous infusion
of yeast may be mixed with a solution of sugar, and preserved in vessels
from which the air is excluded, without either experiencing the
slightest change.”[†] Neither does the insoluble residue of the yeast,
after being treated with water, possess the power of exciting
fermentation. i(Here we have the Method of Difference.)i It is not the
yeast itself, therefore; it is the yeast in a state of decomposition.
The sugar, which would not decompose and oxidize by the mere presence of
oxygen and water, is induced to do so when another oxidation is at work
in the midst of it.

By the same principle Liebig is enabled to explain jmany cases ofj
malaria; Edition: current; Page: [1135] the pernicious influence of
putrid substances; a variety of poisons; contagious diseases; and other
phenomena.[*] Of all substances, those composing the animal body are the
most complex in their composition, and karek in the least stable
condition of union. The blood, in particular, is the most unstable
compound known. lIt is, therefore, not surprisingl that gaseous or other
substances, in the act of undergoing the chemical changes which
constitute, for instance, putrefaction, should, when brought into
contact with the tissues by respiration or otherwise, and still more
when introduced by inoculation into the blood itself, impress upon some
of the particles a chemical action similar to its own; which is
propagated in like manner to other particles, until the whole system is
placed in a state of chemical action more or less inconsistent with the
chemical conditions of vitality.

Of the three modes in which we observed in the last chapter that the
resolution of a special law into more general ones may take place, this
speculationm exemplifies the second. The laws explained are such as
this, that yeast puts sugar into a state of fermentation. Between the
remote cause, the presence of yeast, and the consequent fermentation of
the sugar, there has been interpolated a proximate cause, the chemical
action between the particles of the yeast and the elements of air and
water. The special law is thus resolved into two others, more general
than itself: the first, that yeast is decomposed by the presence of air
and water; the second, that matter undergoing chemical action has a
tendency to produce similar chemical action in other matter in contact
with it. But while the investigation thus aptly exhibits the second mode
of the resolution of a complex law, it no less happily exemplifies the
third; the subsumption of special laws under a more general law, by
gathering them up into one more comprehensive expression which includes
them all. For the curious fact of the contagious nature of chemical
action nisn only raised into a law of all chemical action by these very
investigations: just as the Newtonian attraction was only recognised as
a law of all matter when it was found to explain the phenomena of
terrestrial gravity. Previously to Liebig’s investigations, the property
in question had only been observed in a few special cases of chemical
action; but when his deductive reasonings ohaveo established that
innumerable effects produced upon weak compounds, by substances none of
whose known peculiarities would account for their having such a power,
might be explained by considering the supposed special property to exist
in all those cases, pthese numerous generalizations on Edition: current;
Page: [1136] separate substances qareq brought together into one law of
chemical action in generalp: the peculiarities of the various substances
being, in fact, eliminated, just as the Newtonian deduction eliminated
from the instances of terrestrial gravity the circumstance of proximity
to the earth.

§ 2. [Liebig’s theory of respiration] Another “speculation of the same
chemista, which, if it should ultimately be found to agree with all the
facts of the extremely complicated phenomenon to which it relates, will
constitute one of the finest examples of the Deductive Method on record,
is his theory of respiration.[*]

The facts of respiration, or in other words the special laws which bit
isb attempted to explain from, and resolve into, more general ones, are,
that the blood in passing through the lungs absorbs oxygen and gives out
carbonic acid gas, changing thereby its colour from a blackish purple to
a brilliant red. The absorption and exhalation are evidently chemical
phenomena; and the carbon of the carbonic acid must have been derived
from the body, that is, must have been absorbed by the blood from the
substances with which it came into contact in its passage through the
organism. cIt is requiredc to find the intermediate links—the precise
nature of the two chemical actions which take place; first, the
absorption of the carbon or of the carbonic acid by the blood, in its
circulation through the body; next, the excretion of the carbon, or the
exchange of the carbonic acid for oxygen, in its passage through the
lungs.

Dr. Liebig believes himself to have found the solution of this vexata
quæstio in a class of chemical actions in which scarcely any less acute
and dpenetratingd inquirer would have thought of looking for it.

Blood is composed of two parts, the serum and the globules. The serum
absorbs and holds in solution carbonic acid in great quantity, but has
no tendency either to part with it or to absorb oxygene. The globules,
therefore, are concluded to be the portion of the blood which is
operative in respiration. These globules contain a fcertain quantity of
iron, which fromf chemical tests is inferred to be in the state of
oxide.

Dr. Liebig recognised, in the known chemical properties of the oxides of
iron, laws which, if followed out deductively, would lead to the
prediction of the precise series of phenomena which respiration
exhibits.

Edition: current; Page: [1137]
There are two oxides of iron, a protoxide and a peroxide. gIn the
arterial blood the iron is in the form of peroxide: in the venous blood
we have no direct evidence which of the oxides is present, but the
considerations to be presently stated hlead to the conclusionh that it
is the protoxide.g As arterial and venous blood are in a perpetual state
of alternate conversion into one another, the question arises, iini what
circumstances the protoxide of iron is capable of being converted into
the peroxide, and vice versâ. Now the protoxide readily combines with
oxygen in the presence of water, forming the hydrated peroxide: these
conditions it finds in passing through the lungs; it derives oxygen from
the air, jand finds water in the blood itself. This would already
explain one portion of the phenomena of respiration.j But the arterial
blood, in quitting the lungs, is charged with hydrated peroxide: in what
manner is the peroxide brought back to its former state?

The chemical conditions for the reduction of the hydrated peroxide into
the state of protoxide, are precisely those which the blood meets with
in circulating through the body; namely, contact with organic compounds.

Hydrated peroxide of iron, when treated with organic compounds (where no
sulphur is present) gives forth oxygen and water, which oxygen,
attracting the carbon from the organic substance, becomes carbonic acid;
while the peroxide, being reduced to the state of protoxide, combines
with the carbonic acid, and becomes a carbonate. Now this carbonate
needs only come again into contact with oxygen and water to be
decomposed; the carbonic acid being given off, and the protoxide, by the
absorption of oxygen and water, becoming again the hydrated peroxide.

The mysterious chemical phenomena connected with respiration can kthusk,
by a beautiful deductive process, be completely explained. The arterial
blood, containing iron in the form of hydrated peroxide, passes into the
capillaries, where it meets with the decaying tissues, receiving also in
its course certain non-azotised but highly carbonised animal products,
in particular the bile. In these it finds the precise conditions
required for decomposing the peroxide into oxygen and the protoxide. The
oxygen combines with the carbon of the decaying tissues, and forms
carbonic acid, which, though insufficient in amount to neutralize the
whole of the protoxide, combines with a portion l(one-fourth) of it,l
and returns in the form of a carbonate, along Edition: current; Page:
[1138] with the other three-fourths of the protoxide,m through the
venous system into the lungs. There it again meets with oxygen and
water: the free protoxide becomes hydrated peroxide: the carbonate of
protoxide parts with its carbonic acid, and by absorbing oxygen and
water, enters also into the state of hydrated peroxide. The heat evolved
in the transition from protoxide to peroxide, as well as in the previous
oxidation of the carbon contained in the tissues, is considered by
Liebig as the cause which sustains the temperature of the body. But into
this portion of the speculation we need not enter.*

This example displays the second mode of resolving complex laws, by the
interpolation of intermediate links in the chain of causation; and some
of the steps of the deduction exhibit cases of the first mode, that
which infers the joint effect of two or more causes from their separate
effects; but to trace out in detail these exemplifications may be left
to the intelligence of the reader. The third mode is not employed in
this example, since the simpler laws into which those of respiration are
resolved (the laws of the chemical action of the oxides of iron) were
rlaws already known, and dor not acquire any additional generality from
their employment in the present case.

§ 3. [Other achemical speculationsa] bThe property which salt possesses
of preserving animal substances from putrefaction is cresolved by
Liebigc into two more general laws, the strong attraction of salt for
water, and the necessity of the presence of water as a condition of
putrefaction.[*] The intermediate phenomenon which is interpolated
between the remote cause and the effect, can here be not merely inferred
but seen; for it is a familiar fact, that flesh upon which salt has been
thrown is speedily found swimming in brine.

Edition: current; Page: [1139]
The second of the two factors (as they may be termed) into which the
preceding law has been resolved, the necessity of water to putrefaction,
itself affords an additional example of the Resolution of Laws. The law
itself is proved by the Method of Difference, since flesh completely
dried and kept in a dry atmosphere does not putrefy, as we see in the
case of dried provisions, and human bodies in very dry climates. A
deductive explanation of this same law results from Liebig’s
speculations. The putrefaction of animal and other azotised bodies is a
chemical process, by which they are gradually dissipated in a gaseous
form, chiefly in that of carbonic acid and ammonia; now to convert the
carbon of the animal substance into carbonic acid requires oxygen, and
to convert the azote into ammonia requires hydrogen, which are the
elements of water. The extreme rapidity of the putrefaction of azotised
substances, compared with the gradual decay of non-azotised bodies (such
as wood and the like) by the action of oxygen alone, dhe explainsd from
the general law that substances are much more easily decomposed by the
action of two different affinities upon two of their elements, than by
the action of only one.b

The purgative effect of salts with alkaline bases, when administered in
concentrated solutions, is explainede from the two following principles:
Animal tissues (such as the stomach) do not absorb concentrated
solutions of alkaline salts; and such solutions do dissolve the solids
contained in the intestines. The simpler laws into which the complex law
is here resolved, are the second of the two foregoing principles,
combined with a third, namely, that the peristaltic contraction acts
easily upon substances in a state of solution. The negative general
proposition, that animal substances do not absorb these salts,
contributes to the explanation by accounting for the absencef of a
counteracting cause, namely, absorption by the stomach; which in the
case of other substances possessed of the requisite chemical properties,
interferes to prevent them from reaching the substances which they are
destined to dissolve.

Edition: current; Page: [1140]


Appendix F

Book III, Chapter xviii (“Of the Calculation of Chances”), in the MS and
1st (1843) edition

[This chapter was so extensively revised for the 2nd (1846) edition that
JSM had it (and Book III, Chapter xxv; see Appendix G below) offprinted
from the 2nd edition as a pamphlet (see the Textual Introduction, lxxxi
above). The 1843 version is printed below, with variant notes giving the
MS readings. Passages that were substantially retained in later editions
are surrounded by square brackets, with footnoted references to the text
of the 8th edition as printed above.]

§ 1. [The foundation of the doctrine of chances, as taught by Laplace,
defective] [“Probability,” says Laplace,* “has reference partly to our
ignorance, partly to our knowledge. We know that among three or more
events, one, and only one, must happen; but there is nothing leading us
to believe that any one of them will happen rather than the others. In
this state of indecision, it is impossible for us to pronounce with
certainty on their occurrence. It is, however, probable that any one of
these events, selected at pleasure, will not take place; because we
perceive several cases, all equally possible, which exclude its
occurrence, and only one which favours it.”][1]

Such is this great mathematician’s statement of the logical foundation
upon which rests, according to him, the theory of chances: and if his
unrivalled command over the means which mathematics supply for
calculating the results of given data, necessarily implied an equally
sure judgment of what the data ought to be, I should hardly dare give
utterance to my conviction, that in this opinion he is entirely wrong;
that his foundation is altogether insufficient for the superstructure
erected upon it; and that there is implied, in all rational calculation
of the probabilities of events, an essential Edition: current; Page:
[1141] condition, which is either overlooked in Laplace’s statement, or
so vaguely indicated as neither to be suggested to the reader, nor kept
in view by the writer himself.

[To a calculation of chances,][2] [according to Laplace, two things are
necessary: we must know that of several events some one will certainly
happen, and no more than one; and we must not know, nor have any reason
to expect, that it will be one of these events rather than another.][3]
I contend [that these are not the only requisites, and that][4] another
supposition is necessary. This supposition it might be imagined that
Laplace intended to indicate, by saying that all the events must be
equally possible (également possibles). But his next sentence shows
that, by this expression, he did not mean to add anything to the two
conditions which he had already suggested. “The theory of chances
consists in reducing all events of the same kind to a certain number of
cases equally possible, that is, such that we are equally undecided as
to their existence; and to determine the number of these cases which are
favourable to the event of which the probability is sought.” By “events
equally possible,” then, he only means events “such that we are equally
undecided as to their existence;” athat wea have no reason to expect one
rather than another; which is not a third condition, but the second of
the two previously specified. I, therefore, feel warranted in affirming
that [Laplace has overlooked, in][5] this [general theoretical
statement, a necessary part of the foundation of the doctrine of
chances.][6]

§ 2. [The real foundation, what] [To be able][1] [to pronounce two
events equally probable, it is not enough that we should know that one
or the other must happen, and should have no][2] ground [for
conjecturing which. Experience must have shown that the two events are
of equally frequent occurrence. Why, in tossing up a halfpenny, do we
reckon it equally probable that we shall throw cross or pile?
Because][3] experience has shown [that in any great number of throws,
cross and pile are thrown about equally often; and that the more throws
we make, the more nearly the equality is perfect. We][4] call the
chances even, because if we stake equal sums, and play a certain large
number of times, experience proves that our gains and losses will about
balance one another; and will continue to do so, however long afterwards
we continue playing: while on the contrary, if we give the Edition:
current; Page: [1142] slightest odds, and play a great number of times,
we are sure to lose; and the longer we continue playing, the greater
losers we shall be. If experience did not prove this, [we should proceed
as much at haphazard in staking equal sums][5] [as in laying odds][6];
we should have no more reason for expecting not to be losers by the one
wager than by the other.

It would indeed require strong evidence to persuade any rational person
that by a system of operations upon numbers, our ignorance can be coined
into science; and it is doubtless this strange pretension which has
driven a profound thinker, M.a Comte, into the contrary extreme of
rejecting altogether a doctrine which, however imperfectly its
principles may sometimes have been conceived, receives daily
verification from the practice of insurance, and from a great mass of
other positive experience. The doctrine itself is, I conceive, sound,
but the manner in which its foundations have been laid by its great
teachers is most seriously objectionable. Conclusions respecting the
probability of a fact rest not upon a different, but upon the very same
basis, as conclusions respecting its certainty; namely, not our
ignorance, but our knowledge: knowledge obtained by experience, of the
proportion between the cases in which the fact occurs, and those in
which it does not occur. Every [calculation of chances is grounded on an
induction: and to render the calculation legitimate, the induction must
be a valid one. It is not less an induction, though it does not prove
that the event occurs in all cases of a given description, but only that
out of a given number of such cases, it occurs in about so many. The
fraction which mathematicians use to designate the probability of an
event, is the ratio of these two numbers; the ascertained proportion
between the number of cases in which the event occurs, and the sum of
all the cases, those in which it occurs and in which it does not occur
taken together. In playing at cross and pile, the description of cases
concerned are throws, and the probability of cross is one half,
because][7] it is found that [if we throw often enough, cross is thrown
about once in every two throws][8]; and because this induction is made
under circumstances justifying the belief that the proportion will be
the same in other cases as in the cases examined. [In the cast of a die,
the probability of ace is one-sixth; not][9], as Laplace would say,
[because there are six possible throws, of which ace is one, and because
we do not know any reason why one should turn up rather than
another;][10] [but because we do][11] [know][12] [that in a hundred, or
a million of throws, Edition: current; Page: [1143] ace][13] will be
[thrown][14] [about one-sixth of that number, or once in six times.][15]

Not only is this third condition indispensable, but if we have that, we
do not want Laplace’s two. It is not necessary that we should know how
many possibilities there are, or that we should have no more reason for
expecting one of them than another. If a north wind blows one day in
every ten, the probability of a north wind on any given day will be
one-tenth, even though of the remaining possibilities a west wind should
be greatly the most probable. If we know that half the trees in a
particular forest are oaks, though we may be quite ignorant how many
other kinds of trees it contains, the chance that a tree
indiscriminately selected will be an oak is an even chance, or, in
mathematical language, one-half. So that the condition which Laplace
omitted is not merely one of the requisites for the possibility of a
calculation of chances; it is the only requisite.

In saying that he has omitted this condition, I am far from meaning to
assert, that he does not frequently take it into consideration in
particular instances; nor indeed could he fail to do so, since whenever
any experience bearing upon the case really exists, he would naturally
consult that experience to assure himself of the fulfilment of his
second condition, that there be no reason for expecting one event rather
than another. When experience is to be had, he takes that experience as
the measure of the probability: his error is only in imagining that
there can be a measurement of probability where there is no experience.
The consequence of this error has been his adoption of conclusions not
indeed contrary to, but unsupported by, experience. He has been led to
push the theory and its applications beyond the bounds which confine all
legitimate inferences of the human mind; by extending them to subjects
on which the absence of any ground for determining between two
suppositions, does not arise from our having equal grounds for presuming
both, but from our having an equal absence of grounds for presuming
either.

According to his views, indeed, the calculation of chances should be
much more universally applicable to things of which we are completely
ignorant, than to things of which we have partial knowledge. Where we
have some experience of the occurrence of each of the conflicting
possibilities, it may often be difficult, according to the prescriptions
of the theory, to reduce those possibilities to a definite number of
cases, all equally probable; but when the case is out of the reach of
all experience, so that we have no difficulty in being “equally
undecided” respecting the possibilities, there is nothing to make us
halt or waver in applying the theory. If the question be whether the
inhabitants of Saturn have red hair, we need only know the Edition:
current; Page: [1144] number of the prismatic colours, and of their more
marked compounds, and we can at once assign the fraction corresponding
to the probability! It is evident that probability, in any sense in
which it can operate upon our belief or conduct, has nothing to do with
such chimerical evaluations, and that entire suspension of judgment,
where we have no evidence, is the only course befitting a rational
being. To entitle us to affirm anything positive about uncertain facts,
whether bit beb that one supposition is more probable than another, or
only that it is equally probable, we must have the testimony of
experience, that, taking the whole of some class of cases, the one guess
will be oftener right, or as often right as the other. The estimation,
in short, of chances, like that of certainties, is only rational when
grounded upon a complete induction by observation or experiment.*

Edition: current; Page: [1145]
§ 3. [Theorem of the doctrine of chances, which relates to the cause of
a given event] [From][1] these principles [it is easy to deduce the
demonstration of that theorem of the doctrine of probabilities, which is
the foundation of its][2] principal [application to][3] judicial or
other [inquiries for ascertaining the occurrence of a given event, or
the reality of an individual fact. The signs or evidences by which a
fact is usually proved, are some of its consequences: and the inquiry
hinges upon determining what cause isa most likely to have produced a
given effect. The theorem applicable to such investigations is the Sixth
Principle in Laplace’s Essai Philosophique sur les Probabilités, which
is described by him as][4] “the [fundamental principle of that branch of
the Analysis of Chances, which consists in ascending from events to
their causes.”*

Given an effect to be accounted for, and there being several causes
which might have produced it, but of the presence of which, in the
particular case, nothing is known; the probability that the effect was
produced by any one of these causes is as the antecedent probability of
the cause, multiplied by the probability that the cause, if it existed,
would have produced the given effect.

Let M be the effect, and A, B, two causes, by either of which it might
have been produced. To find the probability that it was produced by the
one and not by the other, ascertain which of the two is most likely to
have existed, and which of them, if it did exist, was most likely to
produce the effect M: the probability sought is a compound of these two
probabilities.

Case I. Let the causes be both alike in the second respect; either A or
B, when it exists, being supposed equally likely (or equally certain) to
produce M; but let A be in itself twice as likely as B to exist, that
is, twice as frequent a phenomenon. Then it is twice as likely to have
existed in this case, and to have been the cause which produced M.

For, since A exists in nature twice as often as B; in any 300 cases in
which one or other existed, A has existed 200 times and B 100. But
either A or B must have existed wherever M is produced: therefore in 300
times that M is produced, A was the producing cause 200 times, B only
100, that is, in the ratio of 2 to 1. Thus, then, if the causes are
alike in their capacity of producing the effect, the probability as to
which actually produced it, is in the ratio of their antecedent
probabilities.

Edition: current; Page: [1146]
Case II. Reversing the last hypothesis, let us suppose that the causes
are equally frequent, equally likely to have existed, but not equally
likely, if they did exist, to produce M: that in three times][5] that [A
occurs, it produces that effect twice, while B, in three times, produces
it only once. Since the two causes are equally frequent in their
occurrence; in every six times that either one or the other exists, A
exists three times and B three times. A, of its three times, produces M
in two; B, of its three times, produces M in one. Thus, in the whole six
times, M is only produced thrice; but of that thrice it is produced
twice by A, once only by B. Consequently, when the antecedent
probabilities of the causes are equal, the chances that the effect was
produced by them are in the ratio of the probabilities that if they did
exist they would produce the effect.

Case III. The third case, bthat in whichb the causes are unlike in both
respects, is solved by what has preceded. For, when a quantity depends
upon two other quantities, in such a manner that while either of them
remains constant it is proportional to the other, it must necessarily be
proportional to the product of the two quantities, the product being the
only function of the two which obeys that][6] particular [law of
variation. Therefore, the probability that M was produced by either
cause, is as the antecedent probability of the cause, multiplied by the
probability that if it existed it would produce M. Which was to be
demonstrated.

Or we may prove the third case as we proved the first and second. Let A
be twice as frequent as B; and let them also be unequally likely, when
they exist, to produce M: let A produce it twice in four times, B thrice
in four times. The antecedent probability of A is to that of B as 2 to
1; the probabilities of their producing M are as 2 to 3; the product of
these ratios is the ratio of 4 to 3],[7] which therefore, if the theorem
be true, [will be the ratio of the probabilities that A or B was the
producing cause in the given instance.][8] And such will that ratio
really be. For, since A is twice as frequent as B, out of twelve cases
in which one or other exists, A exists in 8 and B in 4. But of its eight
cases, A, by the supposition, produces M in only 4, while B of its four
cases produces M in 3. M, therefore, is only produced at all in seven of
the twelve cases; but in four of cthesec it is produced by A, in three
by B; hence, the probabilities of its being produced by A and by B are
as 4 to 3, and are expressed by the fractions 4/7 and 3/7. Which was to
be demonstrated.][9]

It is here necessary to point out another serious oversight in Laplace’s
Edition: current; Page: [1147] theory. When he first introduces the
foregoing theorem, he characterises it correctly, as the principle for
determining to which of several causes we are to attribute a known fact.
But after having conceived the principle thus accurately, when he comes
to its applications he no longer restricts it to the ascertainment of
causes alone, but, without any previous notice substitutes for the idea
of causes that of hypotheses, or suppositions of any kind. In this
extended sense, I do not conceive the proposition to be tenable. The
hypotheses must be either causes, or at least signs showing the
existence of causes. If we could be permitted to substitute mere
suppositions affording no ground for concluding that the effect would be
produced, in the room of causes capable of producing it, the theorem
thus extended would stand as follows. A fact, M, having happened, the
probability of the truth of any arbitrary supposition altogether
unconnected with M, is as the antecedent probability of the supposition,
multiplied by the probability that if the supposition was true M would
happen; that is, multiplied by the antecedent probability of M, since M
is neither more dnord less probable on account of a supposition which
has nothing to do with the causes of it. Now the proposition, as thus
stated, is an absurdity. The probability that when M happened A had
previously happened, is not the antecedent probability of M multiplied
by that of A, but the antecedent probability of A only. The antecedent
probability of M cannot be an element of a question into which the
occurrence of M enters not as a contingency but as a certainty. What the
product of the antecedent probabilities of A and M does give, is, not
the probability of the one when the other is a known past event, but the
antecedent probability of the two together, considered as future events.

This error of Laplace has not been harmless. We shall see hereafter, in
treating of the Grounds of Disbelief, that he has been led by it into
serious practical mistakes when attempting to pronounce upon the
circumstances which render any statement incredible.

§ 4. [In what cases the doctrine is practically applicable] aFrom the
preceding view of the foundation of the doctrine of chances, its general
principles may be seen to be applicable in a rough way to many subjects
which are by no means amenable to its precise calculations. To render
these applicable, there must be numerical data, derived from the
observation of a very large number of instances. The probabilities of
life at different ages, or in different climates; the probabilities of
recovery from a particular disease; the chances of the birth of male or
female offspring; the chances of the loss of a vessel in a particular
voyage; all these admit of estimation Edition: current; Page: [1148]
sufficiently precise to render the numerical appreciation of their
amount a thing of practical value; because there are bills of mortality,
returns from hospitals, registers of births, of shipwrecks, &c., founded
on cases sufficiently numerous to afford average proportions which do
not materially vary from year to year, or from ten years to ten years.
But where observation and experiment have not afforded a set of
instances sufficiently numerous to eliminate chance, and sufficiently
various to eliminate all non-essential specialities of circumstance, to
attempt to calculate chances is to convert mere ignorance into dangerous
error by clothing it in the garb of knowledge.a

[It remains to examine the bearing of the doctrine of chances upon the
peculiar problem][1] for the sake of which we have on this occasion
adverted to it, [namely, how to distinguish coincidences which are
casual from those which are the result of law; from those in which the
facts which accompany or follow one another are somehow connected
through causation.][2]

§ 5. [How the doctrine is applicable to the elimination of chance] [The
doctrine of chances affords means by which, if we knew the average
number of coincidences to be looked for between two phenomena connected
only casually, we could determine how often any given deviation from
that average will occur by chance. If the probability of any casual
coincidence, considered in itself, be [], the probability that the same
coincidence will be repeated n times in succession is
[lf0223-08_eq05.png]. For example, in one throw of a die the probability
of ace being ⅙; the probability of throwing ace twice in succession will
be 1 divided by the square of 6, or 1/36. For ace is thrown at the first
throw once in six, or six in thirty-six times: and of those six, the die
being cast again, ace will be thrown but once; being altogether once in
thirty-six times. The chance of the same cast three times successively
is, by a similar reasoning, [] or 1/216: that is, the event will happen,
on aaa large average, only once in two hundred and sixteen throws.

We have thus a rule bby whichb to estimate the probability that any
given series of coincidences arises from chance; provided we can measure
correctly the probability of a single coincidence. If we][1] could
[obtain an equally precise expression for the probability that the same
series of coincidences Edition: current; Page: [1149] arises from
causation, we should only have to compare the numbers. This, however,
can rarely be done. Let us see what degree of approximation can
practically be made to the necessary precision.

The question falls within Laplace’s sixth principle,][2] of which, a
short distance back, we gave the demonstration. [The given fact, that is
to say, the series of coincidences, may have originated either in a
casual conjunction of causes or in a law of nature. The probabilities,
therefore, that the fact originated in these two modes, are as their
antecedent probabilities, multiplied by the probabilities that if they
existed they would produce the effect. But the particular combination of
chances if it occurred, or the law of nature if real, would certainly
produce the series of coincidences. The probabilities, therefore, that
the coincidences are produced by the two causes in question, are as the
antecedent probabilities of the causes. One of these, the antecedent
probability of the combination of mere chances which would produce the
given result, is an appreciable quantity. The antecedent probability of
the other supposition may be susceptible of a more or less exact
estimation, according to the nature of the case.

In some cases, the coincidence, supposing it to be the result of
causation at all, must be the result of a known cause; as the succession
of aces, if not accidental, must arise from the loading of the die. In
such cases we may be able to form a conjecture as to the antecedent
probability of such a circumstance, from the characters of the parties
concerned, or other such evidence; but it would][3] clearly [be
impossible to estimate that probability with anything like numerical
precision. The counter-probability, however, that of the accidental
origin of the coincidence, dwindling so rapidly as it does at each new
trial; the stage is soon reached at which the chance of unfairness in
the die, however small in itself, must be greater than that of a casual
coincidence: and on this ground, a practical decision can generally be
come to without much hesitation, if there be the power of repeating the
experiment.

When, however, the coincidence is one which cannot be accounted for by
any known cause, and the connexion between the two phenomena, if
produced by causation, must be the result of some law of nature hitherto
unknown; which is the case we had in view in the last chapter; then,
although the probability of a casual coincidence may be capable of
appreciation, that of the counter-supposition, the existence of an
undiscovered law of nature, is clearly unsusceptible of even an
approximate][4] evaluation. [In order to have the data which such a case
would require, it would be necessary to know what proportion of all the
individual sequences or co-existences occurring in nature are the result
of law, and what proportion Edition: current; Page: [1150] are][5] the
result of chance. [It being evident that we cannot form any plausible
conjecture as to this proportion, much less appreciate it numerically,
we cannot attempt any precise estimation of the comparative
probabilities. But of this we are sure, that the detection of an unknown
law of nature—of some previously unrecognised constancy of conjunction
among phenomena—is no uncommon event. If, therefore, the number of
instances in which a coincidence is observed, over and above that which
would arise on the average from the mere concurrence of chances, be such
that so great an amount of coincidences from accident alone would be an
extremely uncommon event; we have reason to conclude that the
coincidence is the effect of causation, and may be received (subject to
correction from further experience) as an empirical law. Further than
this, in point of precision, we cannot go; nor, in most cases, is
greater precision required, for the solution of any practical doubt.][6]

Edition: current; Page: [1151]


Appendix G

Book III, Chapter xxv (“Of the Grounds of Disbelief”), § 5, in the MS
and 1st (1843) edition

[This section was rewritten as §6 for the 2nd (1846) edition, the final
§5 being added at the same time. Though JSM had the whole of Chapter xxv
offprinted from the 2nd edition, with Book III, Chapter xviii (see
headnote to Appendix F above), the major revisions were only in this
section, and therefore the variants to the rest of the chapter are given
in the normal way in the text above. The 1843 version of this section is
printed below, with variant notes giving the MS readings. Passages that
were substantially retained in later editions are surrounded by square
brackets, with footnote references to the text of the 8th edition as
printed above.]

§ 5. [An opinion of Laplace examined] While the defenders of
Christianity against Hume have thus confounded two different meanings of
the word improbability, contending that because improbability of the one
kind is not necessarily a ground of disbelief, neither therefore is the
other, and that nothing supported by credible testimony ought ever to be
disbelieved; Laplace, again, falling into the same confusion between the
two meanings, contends on the contrary, that because improbability of
the one kind is a sufficient ground for disbelief, the other is so too;
and that what is improbable before the fact, is therefore (not indeed in
all cases, but in a peculiar class of cases which I am about to
specify), incredible after it.

[If, says Laplace, there][1] are [one thousand tickets in a box, and one
only has been drawn out; then if an eye-witness affirms that the number
drawn was 79, this, though the chances were 999 in 1000 against it, is
not][2] incredible, because the chances were equally great against every
other number. But (he continues) if there are [in the box 999 black
balls and only one white, and the witness affirms that the white ball
was drawn,][3] this is incredible; Edition: current; Page: [1152]
because there was but one chance in favour of white, and 999 in favour
of some black ball.

This appears to me entirely fallacious. It is evident, both from general
reasoning and specific experience, that the white ball will be drawn out
exactly as often, in any large number of trials, as the ticket No. 79
will; the two assertions, therefore, are precisely on the same level in
point of credibility. There is one way of putting the case which, I
think, must carry conviction to every one. Suppose that the thousand
balls are numbered, and that the white ball happens to be ticketed 79.
Then the drawing of the white ball, and the drawing of No. 79, are the
very same event; how then can the one be credible, the other absolutely
incredible? A witness sees it drawn, and makes his report to us: if he
says athata No. 79 was drawn, according to Laplace he may be believed;
if he says a white ball was drawn, we are bound to disbelieve him. Is
this rational? Is it not clear, on the contrary, that the only
difference there could be in the credit due to him would arise from
moral causes, namely, from the influence which (if the witness knew that
there was but one white ball in a thousand) might be assigned to the
greater apparent wonder in the latter case? which to one kind of person
would be a temptation to deceive, or to take up a hasty impression,
while to another, the same thing would be a motive for assuring himself
more positively of the fact, and would therefore actually increase the
credit due to his testimony.

The mathematical reasoning which misled Laplace into this logical error,
is too long to be here quoted. It is found in the section of his Essai
Philosophique sur les Probabilités entitled De la Probabilité des
Témoignages, and is founded upon a misapplication, noticed by us in a
former place, of his own sixth theorem of the doctrine of chances; a
theorem which he himself describes as that by which we determine the
probability that a given effect was produced by one or by another of
several causes capable of producing it. The substance of his argument
may be briefly stated as follows: Treating the assertion of the witness
as the effect, he considers as its two possible causes, the veracity or
mendacity of the witness on the particular occasion, that is, the truth
or falsity of the fact. According to the theorem, the probability that
the effect was produced by a particular cause, is as the antecedent
probability of the cause, multiplied by the probability that the cause,
if it existed, would produce the given effect. Accordingly (says
bLaplaceb) in the case of the thousand tickets, the cause mendacity
might produce any one of 999 untrue statements, while in the case of the
balls, there being only two statements to make, viz., white or black,
and one of these being true, the cause mendacity could only produce one
untrue statement: and consequently (the antecedent probability of
mendacity from the character of the witness being Edition: current;
Page: [1153] supposed the same in both cases) mendacity was 999 times
less likely to have produced the particular assertion made, and is
therefore 999 times less likely to have existed, in the former case than
in the latter.

The error of this argument seems to be cthe same whichc we pointed out
in a former chapter,* that of applying a theorem, only true of the
degrees of probability of causes, to the probability of what are neither
causes nor indications of causes, nor in any other way specially
connected with the effect. The point in question is, the comparative
probability of two suppositions, that the witness lies, and that he
speaks truth. But these are not two possible causes of the given effect
(the witness’s assertion); they are merely two possible qualities of it.
The truth of the assertion is, indeed, on the supposition of veracity,
the cause of its being made; but the falsity of it is not, on any
supposition, a cause of its being made. It is not incompatible with the
dishonesty of the witness, that he should have spoken the truth: the
difference between the two suppositions of honesty and dishonesty is,
that on the one he would certainly speak the truth, while on the other
he was just equally likely to speak that or anything else. If the
falsity of the proposition were a real cause for his asserting it, and
there were no possible mode of accounting for a false assertion but by
supposing that it is made precisely because of its falsity, I do not see
how Laplace’s argument could be resisted. The case where there are 999
possible false assertions, and that in which there is but one, would
then present a vast difference in the probability that the assertion
actually made proceeded from falsity; because in the one case a
mendacious witness was sure to assert the one false fact, in the other
there would be an equal chance of his asserting any one of the 999. But
as it is, the falsity was a mere accident of the assertion, not the
cause of it; and even on the supposition of dishonesty, the statement is
as likely to be true as false, while on the supposition of honesty it is
certain to be true. The assertion, therefore, is credible.

[With these remarks we][4] shall [close the discussion of the Grounds of
Disbelief; and along with it, such exposition as][5] our space admitted,
[and as the writer][6] had [it in his power to furnish, of the Logic of
Induction.][7]

Edition: current; Page: [1154]


Appendix H

Book VI, Chapter xi (“Of the Logic of Practice, or Art; including
Morality and Policy”), §6, in MS, 1st (1843), and 2nd (1846) editions

[This section was replaced by §§6 and 7 of the 3rd (1851) and subsequent
editions (the chapter itself became no. xii with the addition of a new
Chapter xi in the 5th [1862] edition). The 1846 version is printed
below, with variant notes giving the readings of the MS and 1st
edition.]

§ 6. [Application of the preceding principles to Morality] After these
observations on the Logic of Practice in general, little needs here be
said of that department of Practice which has received the name of
Morality; since it forms no part of the appropriate object of this work
to discuss how far morality depends, like other arts, upon the
consideration of means and ends, and how far, if at all, upon anything
else.

This, however, may be said; that questions of practical morality are
partly similar to those which are to be decided by a judge, and partly
to those which have to be solved by a legislator or administrator. In
some things our conduct ought to conform itself to a prescribed rule; in
others, it is to be guided by the best judgment which can be formed of
the merits of the particular case.

Without entering into the disputed questions respecting the foundation
of morality, we may consider as a conclusion following alike from all
systems of ethics, that, in a certain description of cases at least,
morality consists in the simple observance of a rule. The cases in
question are those in which, although any rule which can be formed is
probably (as we remarked on maxims of policy) more or less imperfectly
adapted to a portion of the cases which it comprises, there is still a
necessity that some rule, of a nature simple enough to be easily
understood and remembered, should not only be laid down for guidance,
but universally observed, in order that the various persons concerned
may know what they have to expect: the inconvenience of uncertainty on
their part being a greater evil than that which may possibly Edition:
current; Page: [1155] arise, in a minority of cases, from the imperfect
adaptation of the rule to those cases.

Such, for example, is the rule of veracity; that of not infringing the
legal rights of others; and so forth: concerning which it is obvious
that although many cases exist in which a deviation from the rule would
in the particular case produce more good than evil, it is necessary for
general security, either that the rules should be inflexibly observed,
or that the license of deviating from them, if such be ever permitted,
should be confined to definite classes of cases, and of a very peculiar
and extreme nature.

With respect, therefore, to these cases, practical ethics must, like the
administration of positive law, follow a method strictly and directly
ratiocinative: whether the rules themselves are obtained, like those of
other arts, from a scientific consideration of tendencies, or are
referred to the authority of intuitive consciousness or express
revelation.

In cases, however, in which there does not exist a necessity for a
common rule, to be acknowledged and relied on as the basis of social
life; where we are at liberty to inquire what is the most moral course
under the particular circumstances of the case, without referencea, or
without exclusive reference,a to the authorized expectations of other
people; there the Method of Ethics cannot differ materially from the
method of every other department of practice. Like other arts, it sets
out from a general principle, or original major premiss, enunciative of
its particular end: whether that end be the greatest possible happiness,
as is contended by some, or b(as others hold) the conformity of our
character to ideal perfection according to some particular standardb.
But on this as on other subjects, when the end has been laid down, it
belongs to Science to inquire what are the kinds of actions by which
this end, this happiness or this perfection of character, is capable of
being realized. When Science has framed propositions, which are the
completed expression of the whole of the conditions necessary to the
desired end, these are handed over to Art, which has nothing further to
do but to transform them into corresponding rules of conduct.

Edition: current; Page: [1156]


Appendix I

Typographical Errors in the 8th Edition

the list below gives those errors that are silently corrected in the
text. Typographical errors in earlier editions are ignored;1 slips of
the pen in the Press-copy Manuscript are listed in a note below.2 The
intention is to err on the cautious side: except when the error is
visually manifest, the evidence of other editions (and the source, in
the case of quotations) is given, to support the choice of readings; on
the other hand, evidence of editorial suspicion about retained variant
readings is indicated by “[printer’s error?]” at the end of the relevant
variant notes in the text. An example will be seen at 659c-c, where in
the MS “conceptions” was altered to “conception,” but “conceptions”
appears in 43 and 46, with “conception” restored in 51. Another, much
Edition: current; Page: [1157] less common case of retention, as a
variant, of a probable printer’s error, because it led to another
textual change, may be seen at 686c-c, where the original “applied”
became “implied” in 51, and “employed” in 56 (cf. 688b-b, where a
faintly interlined “a” before “separate assertion” in the MS does not
appear in 43, and in 46 “assertion” is changed to “assertions”). In a
few places Greek accents have been regularized.

The entries are in the following form: Page and line reference to the
present text. Reading in the 8th edition] Corrected reading in the
present edition [Evidence for the corrected reading]. In the evidence,
“as in MS,43” means that the corrected reading is found in the
manuscript and 1st edition; “as in 51—62” means that the corrected
reading is found in the 3rd to the 5th editions inclusive.

The first five entries are from the Table of Contents.

Edition: current; Page: [1158] Edition: current; Page: [1159] Edition:
current; Page: [1160]

Edition: current; Page: [1161]


Appendix J

The Press-Copy Manuscript of the Logic

the holograph manuscript from which the 1st edition of the Logic was
printed is in the British Museum (Add. MSS 41624-7). It was “bequeathed
by Mill to a friend, Mr. William Fidler of the India Office, from whose
daughters, the last of whom died in 1928, it came to Lady Magnay from
whom the Museum acquired it.”1 Bound in four volumes, it was folioed by
the Museum staff in 1937 as follows: Vol. I, ff. 1-322; Vol. II, ff.
1-231; Vol. III, ff. 1-365; Vol. IV, ff. 1-294.2 An earlier foliation,
evidently entered Edition: current; Page: [1162] for the most part by
Mill currently, shows some evidence of the rewriting process; this
foliation is based on the division of the work into Books.3 There is
much evidence of the printing process, including compositors’
signatures,4 marked equivalents to the paging of the first edition, and
folds.5

Edition: current; Page: [1163]
Following his most common practice,6 Mill wrote the text recto only,
reserving the opposite versos for notes, additions, and corrections, and
collected the folios into “gatherings” (estimated equivalents to the
signatures of the printed volumes) lettered from A-Z, Aa-Zz, and 3A-3E;
these gatherings, normally of twenty folios each, were originally sewn
together.7 The paper is of five makes and dates, as follows: J. Coles
(1836), G. Wilmot (1839), Ruse & Turners (1841), Munn & Co. (n.d., one
folio only), and Towgood’s Superfine (n.d.).8 As indicated in the
Textual Introduction, the Edition: current; Page: [1164] different
papers, the length of the gatherings, and other evidence of rewriting,
enable one to reconstruct some details of the process of composition.
Among the signs of rewriting one may note that Mill evidently did not
intend to use section divisions originally, but added them fairly late
in the rewriting, probably before the original submission of the
manuscript to Murray. Often the section number is quite obviously
squeezed into a paragraph indentation (sometimes subsequent to an
earlier revision). In other places, where there is rewriting on the
verso, a section number appears with no evidence that it was added
later; presumably before that stage (or at that stage) of the rewriting
Mill had decided on sectioning. In the final revisions further
alterations in section divisions were made, as cancellations
demonstrate.

It does not seem possible to date the inks or pens; all that can safely
be said is that prima facie, as one would expect, there are many
revisions current with the first inditing of the manuscript (even though
it presumably was adapted from an earlier, not extant, manuscript), and
that later revisions were made not in isolated single passages, but in a
more thorough way. The judgments based on a closer look at particular
passages support the other evidence (placing and kind of revision, short
pages, cancellations that do not continue from the end of one page to
the next, etc.), and have been taken into account in the description of
the process of revision in the Textual Introduction.

Given our attempt in this edition to give all substantive variant
readings, it may seem odd to some that we do not give manuscript
cancellations. Whatever one’s desires, however, a glance at any of the
heavily revised folios of the manuscript conclusively demonstrates the
impracticability of such a practice. Even an extended reproduction of
the longer cancellations would be inutile, especially because
intelligibility demands parallel presentation of the various levels. It
is appropriate, however, to give some examples of rewritten passages,
with the sole intention of illustrating various kinds of revision. They
should not be taken as indications of the relative importance,
complexity, or density of the revisions.

There are relatively few places in the final manuscript where Mill
cancelled a passage without replacing it; two of these may be taken as
illustrative. The first, a deleted paragraph (MS Vol. IV, f.129;
cancelled between the paragraphs Edition: current; Page: [1165] on p.
827 above), shows two stages of composition before the cancellation.9
The first reading is:

I am not attempting to stigmatize any fair attempt to shew that certain
of the feelings & opinions of mankind on moral subjects are the result
of artificial & casual [?] associations, while certain others cannot be
so accounted for, but must be part of the original formation of the
mind. Whether this can be really the fact or not, the enquiry into it is
legitimately within the scope of philosophy, but when the artificialness
is implied from the mere fact of divergence however small the minority
may be who diverge, that which ought to be proved is taken for granted,
& the proceeding is justly chargeable with being a case of the fallacy
under examination.

By cancellation and interlineation, Mill altered the passage to read:

I am not seeking to stigmatize any fair attempt to distinguish between
moral opinions & feelings which proceed from artificial or casual
associations, & others which cannot be so accounted for, but must be an
original growth of the mind. Whether there be any such distinction or
not, the enquiry into it is legitimately within the scope of philosophy.
But to imply the artificialness from the mere fact of divergence however
small the minority may be who diverge, is to commit the fallacy under
examination, by taking for granted that which ought to be proved.

The following cancelled passage, one of the longest in the MS, occurs at
the end of the second paragraph of Bk. V, Chap. 5, §5 (p. 792; MS Vol.
IV, ff. 80-1):

But on these considerations it is the less necessary [?] that we should
now dwell as they will occupy our attention very largely in the
succeeding Book.

It is not only in social & moral science but in physical also, that
empirical laws are apt to be viewed as ultimate laws of nature. An
example of this is the celebrated doctrine of Nature’s horror of a void.
This proposition was not an unnatural generalization of some familiar
appearances. But the tokens by which it might have been recognized as
merely empirical, were abundantly conclusive. For the proposition could
not mean that Nature was a sentient being actuated by motives & to whom
a vacuum being literally unpleasant, she took care to interfere whenever
there was any danger of so offensive a solution of continuity. The
meaning, though much disguised by the highly abstract phraseology
employed could only be that wherever there was any void space, or rather
wherever there otherwise would have been a void space, the adjacent
matter always pressed in & filled it, thus rendering a vacuum
impossible. Take for instance the doctrine of Aristotle that there is no
generation or corruption, beginning or end in the heavens: this could be
but an empirical law, for it assigns no cause & yet the supposed fact
which it asserts is one which must depend on causes. Another instance is
the scholastic doctrine, adhered to even by Galileo, that Nature seeks
her ends by the shortest road. Nature, doubtless whatever phrases might
be used never was really considered, subsequently to the times of
paganism, to be a living Edition: current; Page: [1166] being, or a
cause in itself capable of producing effects; but as a mere general
expression for the whole of the effects produced: the proposition
therefore may be thus translated, “all effects are produced by the
smallest employment of means which the general properties of matter
allow of.” Now this is not itself a law of causation, but a supposed
resemblance existing among all laws of causation & as such is
unsusceptible of any other induction than that by Simple Enumeration &
is a mere empirical law. If, indeed, any cause were introduced to
account for it, as the supposed purposes of the Creator, the case would
be different, & the generalization would not be open to the imputation
of erecting an empirical law into a law of nature. But it would be open
to the imputation of being false.

The most frequent kind of rewriting, of course, is that which replaces
single words and short phrases, with a view to clarity and precision.
One such passage is interesting because of its content, and also because
it comes at a place where the incompleteness of the first version
demonstrates that a folio (or more) was cancelled and removed. The
original wording, which concludes at the end of MS Vol. IV, f.207, was:

As justice & the love of truth enjoin that one should always grapple
with the best & most reasonable form of any opinion one is contending
against, we shall endeavour to the utmost of our power to make out as
good a case for the chemical school of political speculation as its
nature admits of & to

This was altered to:

As it is a rule both of justice & of good sense, to grapple, in
preference, with the best & most reasonable form of any opinion, I will
endeavour to make as good a case for the chemical school of political
speculation as its nature admits of & to

Then the whole passage was cancelled, presumably along with its
continuation on the next folio, and another folio was substituted,
beginning with a new paragraph, the second sentence of which is the
final version:

It is a rule both of justice & of good sense to grapple not with the
absurdest but with the most reasonable form of a wrong opinion. (MS Vol.
IV, f.208; p. 880 above.)

Examples of this kind occur on virtually every folio of the manuscript,
and need not be exemplified at length, though one more typical
illustration of Mill’s concern for the correct degree of qualification
may be useful. In describing Victor Cousin’s lectures on Locke, Mill
finally settled on this wording (MS Vol. IV, f.50; p. 770e-e above):
“which as a resumé of the objections of the opposite school to that
great man’s doctrines is a work of eminent merit”; originally “all”
appeared before “the objections”, and “eminent merit”, which originally
read “extraordinary merit”, in an intermediate stage read “unrivalled
merit”.

Two passages may be cited as of potential interest to students of Mill’s
moral philosophy. The opening sentence of Bk. VI, Chap. xii, §2 (pp.
943-4 above), went through some intricate revision, including many
current cancellations Edition: current; Page: [1167] that did not lead
to complete syntactical units. What he first wrote, however, may be
reconstructed thus: “In doing this” (i.e., characterizing the general
method of Art, as distinguished from Science) “it is necessary to
commence by making a distinction according as we are bound”; he then
broke off, and tried to substitute “between two different” for the last
five words, and broke off again, beginning there a new sentence,
starting “In some cases we are bound to conform our practice to a
preestablished rule; in others it is part of our task to find the rule,
by which we are to govern our conduct.” The final version, again
involving current cancellations not here given, reads: “In all branches
of practical business there are cases in which an individual is bound to
conform his practice to a preestablished rule, while there are others in
which it is part of his task to find or construct the rule, by which he
is to govern his conduct.” (MS Vol. IV, f.284.)

The second passage has a relation to the much debated question of Mill’s
quantity-quality distinction in Utilitarianism. In his discussion (p. 73
above) of the difference between water and wine, Mill’s final manuscript
reading of one sentence is: “In the first case however we say that the
difference is only in quantity; in the last, there is a difference in
quality, while the quantity of the water & of the madeira is the same.”
This sentence originally concluded “there is a difference in quality,
but none in quantity” and the passage continued with the following
sentences, which were currently cancelled:

What leads us to make this distinction? If we reflect we shall find it
to be this: we think that the gallon of water, without being itself
altered in any respect, may by merely adding to it something exactly
like itself, be made precisely to resemble the ten gallons; while by no
such process could a gallon of water be made precisely similar to a
gallon or to ten gallons of madeira. The same principle extends to all
other cases. I say I have the same pain which I had yesterday, but a
greater quantity, or which is an equivalent expression, the same degree
of it; if I say this it is assuredly because I feel as if the pain I
have today might be produced by adding to the pain I had yesterday other
sensations of pain exactly similar to it: but if there be anything in my
sensations today that I cannot figure to myself as being so produced, I
say I have now a different kind of pain; there is a difference of
quality & not merely of quantity. Or I may reverse the matter, & say
that by taking away a part of the sensation or of the object, what is
left is less in quantity than that of which it is the remnant. (MS Vol.
I, ff. 96-7.)

It is a matter of regret that Mill never developed his thoughts on the
Science of Ethology that he sketches in Bk. VI, Chap. v. A cancelled
paragraph (replaced by the first paragraph of §6, pp. 872-3 above)
suggests one line of approach that might well have been interesting.
Having compared the current states of development in Psychology and
Ethology, he says:

The object of Psychology is to ascertain what are the simple elements of
which the human mind is composed, & the laws which connect these with
outward circumstances, either as causes or as effects. The most familiar
of the simple elements Edition: current; Page: [1168] of the mind are
simple sensations. These are produced by outward objects & by the inward
action of the bodily organization. So far however, if not probable, that
[sic] at least the instincts of animals & that portion of human nature
which corresponds to them, may be found to have as positive, & perhaps
as direct a connexion with peculiarities of nervous organization,
whether cerebral or otherwise, as any of our mere sensations have. It is
certain that no mode has been suggested in which these instincts can
receive any satisfactory explanation from psychological causes alone.
(MS Vol. IV, ff. 195-6.)

(It is possible that the confused syntax of the fourth sentence, which
bridges the two folios, indicates that a full folio was cancelled and
extracted at this point.)

There is almost no limit to the number of examples that might be chosen
to illustrate different points. For instance, the discussion of
Coleridge’s distinction between the “conceivable” and the “imaginable,”
which eventually appeared in Bk. V, Chap. iii, §3 (p. 755e), originally
was a heavily revised note to Bk. II, Chap. v, §1 (p. 225; MS Vol. I,
f.296v); and at MS Vol. I, f.290 (p. 220), a cancelled passage
concerning the effect of acids and alkalis on vegetable substances
suggests yet another intervention by Bain to correct a scientific
example. Unfortunately, consultation of the manuscript remains essential
for those interested in specific passages that may have been rewritten.
To substantiate the earlier assertion that full reproduction is
impossible, here is one example, certainly not among the most
complicated.

In the reconstruction, the final version is given in boldface; italic
type indicates current cancellations during both the original
composition and the rewriting that did not produce coherent syntax; and
roman type indicates cancellations in the rewriting.

In those ~~In all~~ subjects which are at ~~one~~ the same time familiar
& complicated, & especially ~~in that which is both~~ on those which are
~~both those in so~~ so much ~~so as high a degree as the~~ of both
these things as moral and social subjects are, it ~~phenomena~~ is
matter of common remark how many ~~of the~~ important propositions are
believed & repeated from habit, while no account could be given and no
sense is practically manifested ~~& no account could be given~~ of the
truths which they convey.

Reconstructed, the process probably was as follows: Mill first wrote “In
all subjects which are at one” (cancel “one”) “the same time familiar &
complicated,

Edition: current; Page: [none]
[lf0223-08_figure_004.jpg]
Folio from Book VI, Chapter v, of the Press-copy Manuscript British
Museum

Edition: current; Page: [1169]
& especially in that which is both” (cancel “in that which is both”) “on
[sic] those which are both those in so high a degree as the moral &
social phenomena” (cancel “phenomena” and interline the next three
words) “subjects are, it is matter of common remark how many of the
important propositions are believed & repeated from habit, while no
sense is practically manifested & no account could be given of the
truths which they convey.” In the later rewriting, Mill cancelled “In
all” and interlined “In those”; cancelled “both those in so high a
degree as” and interlined “so much so as”; then cancelled the interlined
“so as” and the original “the” before “moral”, and interlined “of both
these things as”; cancelled “of the”; and by cancellation and
interlineation altered “no sense is practically manifested & no account
could be given” to “no account could be given and no sense is
practically manifested”. The final reading is, then: “In those subjects
which are at the same time familiar & complicated, & especially on those
which are so much of both these things as moral & social subjects are,
it is matter of common remark how many important propositions are
believed & repeated from habit, while no account could be given and no
sense is practically manifested of the truths which they convey.” (MS
Vol. III, f. 297; p. 681 above.)

It must be realized that even such a complex and unsatisfactory
reconstruction would be further complicated by the introduction of the
variants in the printed versions. In this case the slip of the pen
(“on”) was corrected to “in” in all the editions; “so much of both these
things” became “both these things in so great a degree” in the 2nd
edition, and “so in as great a degree” in the 3rd and subsequent
editions; and an “a” appears before “matter of common remark” in the
final three editions.

Trusting that the inutility of such a reproduction has been
demonstrated, let us close with a brief example of a rather different
kind.

It is often (and correctly) asserted that Mill is a highly impersonal
writer, and what evidence there is of his manuscript revisions (most
notably in the “Early Draft” of his Autobiography) indicates that he
strove for this impersonality. One cancellation in the Logic,
illustrated in the facsimile opposite, helps bear out the assertion. The
passage occurs where, in Bk. VI, Chap. v (p. 890 above), Mill turns to a
discussion of the “interest-philosophy of the Bentham school.” As will
be seen, Mill altered “generally” to “commonly”, and deleted the
following: “(& to one of the most eminent of whom the present writer
owes as deep a debt, as a son ever owed to a father) have”, interlining
the two “a”s before cancellation.

Edition: current; Page: [1170]


