
Mignet’s French Revolution

this is a very sprightly narrative of the French Revolution, in two
small volumes: which is as much as to say, that it is calculated to be
most extensively popular. It possesses, indeed, all the requisites for a
popular history. It tells an interesting story; it tells it in an
interesting manner; it is not too long to be readable; it addresses
itself to the reigning sentiment in the nation for which it is written,
and there is just philosophy enough in it to persuade common readers
that they are deriving instruction, while there is not enough to task
their attention or their patience. There is a sort of middle point which
it is difficult to hit exactly, between a philosophical history and a
mere narrative. M. Mignet seems to have aimed at this point; he has at
any rate attained it.

The old mode of writing a history resembled the mode of writing a novel;
with only this difference, that the facts were expected to be true. In
both cases there was a story to be told, and he who told it best was the
best novelist, or the best historian. The poems which preceded the first
histories, and which were probably intended, with some qualifications,
to pass for histories, were written with the same ends in view as the
prose histories which followed them. Greater license of amplification
was, indeed, allowed to the poet, but in other respects the standard of
excellence was the same: he who raised the most vivid conceptions, and
the most intense emotions, was the greatest master of his art. This mode
of writing history attained its highest excellence in the hands of the
Greek and Roman historians. Livy, perhaps, exemplifies it in its purest
state. In what remains of his history we have a surprising instance of
the perfection to which the art of narration may be carried, where no
other part of the duties of a historian is attended to; and for that
very reason. Thucydides, with the exception of his early chapters,[*]
which consist chiefly of a comment upon evidence, may be regarded as
another variety of the same class. Each stands preeminent among his
countrymen in the talent of narrative, each avoids generalization, and
when he has any reflections to make, puts them into the mouth of one of
the dramatis personae; retaining the character of the story-teller, even
when he puts on that of the orator or the politician.

Between this style of historical composition, and the more modern one,
which makes history subservient to philosophy, in which the narrative
itself is but a Edition: current; Page: [4] secondary object, the
illustration of the laws of human nature and human society being the
first, there is an intermediate style, which endeavours to unite the
characteristic properties of both the others. In this the primary object
is still the gratification of that large class, who read only for
amusement. With this purpose long inductions of facts or trains of
reasoning being inconsistent, they are accordingly avoided, or banished
to an appendix. Dramatic interest is with these, as with the first class
of historians, the main object; but such general reflections are
interspersed, drawn from the surface of the subject, as may be
comprehended without any effort of attention, by an ordinary
understanding. The common reader is thus provided with such instruction,
or supposed instruction, as his habits of mind render him capable of
receiving, and is possessed with a high idea of the powers of the
writer, who can communicate wisdom in so easy and entertaining a form.
Of the popularity which may be acquired by this mode of writing history,
the success of Hume is a striking example.[*] Excelling all modern
historians in his powers of narrative, he has also obtained credit for
the profundity of his reflections. That his reputation for this quality
is so widely diffused, is of itself a sufficient proof that it is
undeserved. Had his reflections been really profound, we may venture to
affirm that they would have been less popular. By a profound reflection,
is meant a reflection, the truth of which is not obvious at first sight,
and to a cursory reader, but which, in proportion as a man grows wiser,
and takes a deeper insight into things, forces itself upon his assent.

When we say, that M. Mignet seems to have formed himself in this school,
and that he is the highest specimen of it, among recent writers, which
our recollection suggests to us, we have conveyed, we think, a tolerably
accurate conception of his character as a historian. Little, therefore,
remains to be done beyond the selection of such passages as seem best
adapted to exhibit the degree in which he possesses the various
attributes of his class: for we do not purpose to enter at present into
the general question of the French revolution; it being our intention,
at no distant period, to treat of that subject at greater length.[†] In
the main, our view of the subject accords with that of M. Mignet; and
for this reason, among others, we are anxious that his work should be
extensively circulated in this country. There is nothing more
disgraceful to Englishmen than their utter ignorance, not only of the
causes and effects, but of the very events, the story, of the French
revolution. With the majority of them, even of those among them who read
and think, the conception they have of that great event is all
comprehended in a dim but horrible vision of mobs, and massacres, and
revolutionary tribunals, and guillotines, and fishwomen, and heads
carried on pikes, and noyades, and fusillades, and one Edition: current;
Page: [5] Robespierre, a most sanguinary monster. What the Tory prints
choose to tell them of this most interesting period of modern history,
so much they know, and nothing more: that is, enough to raise in their
minds an intense yet indefinite horror of French reforms and reformers,
and as far as possible of all reforms and reformers. Now, however, when
they have ceased to tremble for themselves, and to start from their
sleep at the terrific idea of a landing of French Jacobins or a rising
of English ones to confiscate their property and cut their throats, they
can, perhaps, bear to look at the subject without horror; and we exhort
them to buy and read M. Mignet’s work, that they may know in what light
the revolution is regarded by the nation which saw and felt it, which
endured its evils, and is now enjoying its benefits.

M. Mignet, in his two volumes, had not space to do more than relate the
story of the revolution. Proofs, in seven hundred pages, he could give
none; his work is not even attended by the pièces justificatives, which
usually follow in the train of a French history. The revolution has been
long une cause jugée, in the minds of all disinterested persons in
France; and none of M. Mignet’s countrymen would have asked him for his
proofs, who would have been capable of being convinced by them if
offered. To an English reader, this omission will diminish in some
degree the value of the book. A writer who opposes the current opinion,
has need of all the proofs he can muster. Happily, the proofs are not
scanty, and are, even in this country, accessible.[*] We purpose to lay
some of them before our readers ere long.

M. Mignet’s narrative powers are of a high order. He has mastered the
grand difficulty in narration; he is interesting, without being
voluminous; concise, without being vague and general Former writers on
the French revolution had either lost themselves in a sea of details,
dwelling on circumstance after circumstance with such painful minuteness
that he who had patience to read to the end of the story had time before
he arrived there to forget the beginning; or had contented themselves
with a meagre abstract, describing the most remarkable scenes in terms
so general as to have fitted a hundred other scenes almost as well. In
narrative, as in description, it is impossible to excite vivid
conceptions, in other words it is impossible to be interesting, without
entering somewhat into detail. A particular event cannot be
characterized by a general description. But details are endless. Here
then is the dilemma. All the details it is not possible to give, not
only because nobody would read them, but because if read they would
defeat their own purpose. If the reader’s conception wants vivacity
where there are no details, where there is excess of details it wants
distinctness. The multitude of the parts injures the ensemble. The
difficulty is in the apt selection of details. It is in judging which of
the individualizing features it is best to delineate, when there is not
room for all: it is in fixing upon those features which are the most
strikingly Edition: current; Page: [6] characteristic, or which, if
delineated, will of themselves suggest the remainder, that the rarest
quality, perhaps, of the skilful narrator displays itself. M. Mignet
possesses this quality in an extraordinary degree. His narrative may be
pronounced a model of the apt selection of details. No one has better
allied circumstantiality with condensation. We have all heard of graphic
descriptions. M. Mignet’s is a graphic narrative: and whoever looks even
at the outside of the voluminous compilations which are called Histories
of the Revolution, and then turns to M. Mignet’s small volumes, will
wonder by what art he can abridge so much, with so little of the
appearance of an abridgement.

We quote the following sketch of the state of affairs at the opening of
the Etats Généraux, partly for the complete justification which it
affords of the early revolutionists, and partly as a specimen of the
manner in which M. Mignet has executed one of the most important parts
of his task:

The government ought to have been better aware of the importance of the
States-general. The re-establishment of that assembly announced of
itself a great revolution. Looked forward to by the nation with eager
hope, they reappeared at a moment when the ancient monarchy was in a
state of decrepitude, and when they alone were capable of reforming the
state, and supplying the necessities of the king. The difficulties of
the times, the nature of their commission, the choice of their members,
every thing announced that they were convoked no longer as the payers of
taxes, but as the makers of laws. The public voice and the instructions
of their constituents had confided to them the right of regenerating
France; and public support, and the enormity of existing abuses,
promised them strength to undertake and accomplish this great task.

It was the interest of the monarch to associate himself in their
undertaking. By this means he might have re-established his power, and
protected himself against the revolution, by being himself the author of
it. Had he taken the lead in reforms, settled with firmness but with
justice the new order of things; had he realized the wishes of the
nation by defining the rights of the citizen, the functions of the
States-general and the bounds of the royal authority; had he sacrificed
his own arbitrary power, the superiority of the nobles, and the
privileges of the corporate bodies; had he, in short, executed all the
reforms which were called for by the public voice, and subsequently
effected by the Constituent Assembly; he would have prevented the fatal
dissensions which afterwards broke out. It is rarely that a prince
consents to the diminution of his power, and has the wisdom to concede
what he will ultimately be forced to sacrifice. Yet Louis XVI would have
done so, if instead of being ruled by those around him, he had obeyed
the impulses of his own mind. But utter anarchy prevailed in the royal
councils. At the meeting of the States-general, no measures had been
adopted, nothing previously settled, to prevent future disputes. Louis
wavered irresolute, between his ministry, directed by Necker, and his
court, governed by the queen and several princes of his family.

The minister, satisfied with having carried the double representation of
the commons, dreaded the king’s indecision and the discontent of the
court. Insufficiently alive to the magnitude of a crisis which he
regarded as financial rather than political, instead of anticipating he
waited for the result, and flattered himself that he could guide the
course of events which he had done nothing to prepare. He felt that the
ancient organization of the states could no longer be maintained, and
that the existence of three estates, with each a veto on the other two,
was a hindrance to the accomplishment of reforms and to the conduct of
administration. He hoped, after the effects of this threefold opposition
should be proved by Edition: current; Page: [7] experience, to reduce
the number of the orders, and obtain the adoption of the British form of
government, including the nobles and clergy in one chamber, and the
commons in another. He did not perceive that when once the struggle had
begun, his interference would be vain, and half-measures be satisfactory
to nobody, that the weaker party from obstinacy, and the stronger from
the force of circumstances, would refuse their assent to this system of
conciliation. A compromise can only be satisfactory, while the victory
is undecided.

The court, far from wishing to give regularity to the States-general,
desired to annul them. It preferred the occasional resistance of the
great public corporations to a division of authority with a permanent
assembly. The separation of the orders favoured its designs: by
fomenting their disunion, it sought to prevent them from acting. From
the vice of their organization, former States-general had effected
nothing, and it the more confidently anticipated a similar result now,
as the first two estates seemed less than ever inclined to acquiesce in
the reforms demanded by the third. The clergy desired to retain their
wealth and privileges, and foresaw that they would have more sacrifices
to make than advantages to gain. The nobles were conscious that even in
resuming their long-lost political independence, they would have more to
concede to the people on the one hand, than to obtain from the monarch
on the other. The approaching revolution was about to take place almost
exclusively in favour of the commons, and the first two estates were led
to coalesce with the court against the commons, as they had previously
coalesced with the commons against the court. Interest was the sole
motive of this change of side; and they allied themselves to the monarch
with no attachment to him, as they had defended the people with no view
to the public good.

No means were spared to keep the nobles and clergy in this disposition.
Courtship and seducements were lavished upon their leaders. A committee,
partly composed of the most illustrious personages, was held at the
house of the Comtesse de Polignac, and the principal members of the two
orders were admitted to it. It was there that two of the most ardent
defenders of liberty in the parliament, and before the convocation of
the States-general, d’Epréménil and d’Entragues, were won over, and
became its most inveterate enemies. There were regulated the costumes of
the three orders,[*] and etiquette first, intrigue next, and lastly
force, were applied to disunite them. The court was led away by the
recollection of the old States-general: and imagined it possible to
manage the present like the past; to keep down Paris by the army, and
the deputies of the commons by those of the nobles; to control the
States, by disuniting the orders, and to disunite the orders by reviving
the old usages which elevated the nobility and humiliated the commons.
It was thus that after the first sitting of the assembly, they imagined
that they had prevented every thing by conceding nothing.*

Of the rapidity and dramatic interest of his narrative, the following
passage is an example. He has just been relating the early acts of the
Constituent Assembly.

The attempt to prevent the formation of the assembly having failed,
nothing remained to the court but to become a party to its proceedings,
in order to get the direction of them into its own hands. By prudence
and good faith it might yet have repaired its errors and effaced the
memory of its hostilities. There are times when we can originate
sacrifices; there are others when we can do no more than take the merit
of accepting them. At the opening of the States-general the monarch
might have made the constitution. It was now only time to receive it
from the assembly; if he had accommodated himself to this situation, his
situation Edition: current; Page: [8] would infallibly have been
improved. But the counsellors of Louis, recovered from the first emotion
of surprise at their defeat, resolved to have recourse to the bayonet,
having had recourse to authority in vain. They intimated to him that the
contempt of his commands, the safety of his throne, the maintenance of
the laws of the kingdom, and even the happiness of his people, demanded
that he should recal the assembly to submission; that the assembly,
sitting at Versailles, in the immediate neighbourhood of Paris, and
supported by both places, required to be subdued by force; that it must
either be removed or dissolved; that this design required immediate
execution, to arrest the progress of the assembly, and that to carry it
into effect it was necessary to call in the troops without delay, to
intimidate the assembly, and keep down Paris and Versailles.

While these schemes were in preparation, the deputies of the nation were
commencing their legislatorial labours, and preparing that constitution
so impatiently waited for, and which they thought it no longer fitting
to delay. Addresses poured in from Paris and the great towns, applauding
their wisdom, and encouraging them to carry forward the work of the
regeneration of France. In this posture of affairs the troops arrived in
great numbers; Versailles assumed the appearance of a camp; the hall of
the states was surrounded by guards, and entrance interdicted to the
public; Paris was environed by several bodies of troops, which seemed
posted to undertake, as need might be, a blockade or a siege. These
immense military preparations, the arrival of trains of artillery from
the frontiers, the presence of foreign regiments, whose obedience was
without limits, every thing gave indication of sinister designs. The
people were in agitation; the assembly wished to undeceive the king, and
request the removal of the troops. On the motion of Mirabeau, it
presented to the king a firm and respectful address, but in vain.[*]
Louis declared that he was sole judge of the necessity of calling in or
of withdrawing the troops, which he assured them were no more than an
army of precaution, to prevent disturbances, and protect the assembly;
he likewise offered to remove the assembly to Noyon or Soissons, in
other words, to place it between two armies, and deprive it of the
support of the people.[†]

Paris was in the most violent fermentation; that immense city was
unanimous in its devotion to the assembly: its own danger, that of the
national representatives, and the scarcity of subsistence, predisposed
it to insurrection. The capitalists, from interest and the fear of a
national bankruptcy, enlightened men and all the middle class from
patriotism, the populace, oppressed by want, imputing its sufferings to
the court and the privileged orders, desirous of agitation and of
novelty, had ardently embraced the cause of the revolution. It is
difficult to figure to one’s self the internal commotion which agitated
the capital of France. Awakened from the repose and silence of
servitude, it was still, as it were, astonished at the novelty of its
situation, and intoxicated with liberty and enthusiasm. The press blew
up the flame; the newspapers gave circulation to the deliberations of
the assembly, and seemed to make their readers actually present at its
meetings: and the questions which were there agitated, were again
discussed in the open air, in the public places. It was in the Palais
Royal especially that the deliberative assembly of the capital was held.
It was thronged by a multitude, which seemed permanent, but which was
perpetually changing. A table was the rostra, the first comer was the
orator; they harangued on the dangers of the country, and exhorted to
resistance. Already, on a motion made at the Palais Royal, the prisons
of the Abbaye had been forced, and some grenadiers of the French guards
carried off in triumph, Edition: current; Page: [9] who had been
confined there for refusing to fire upon the people. This commotion had
led to no result; a deputation had solicited, in favour of the liberated
prisoners, the good offices of the assembly, who had appealed to the
clemency of the king in their behalf: they had returned to their
confinement, and had received their pardon. But this regiment, one of
the bravest and fullest in its numbers, had become favourable to the
popular cause.[*]

We give the sequel of this passage in the original, despairing to
preserve its spirit in a translation.

Telles étaient les dispositions de Paris lorsque Necker fut renvoyé du
ministère. La cour, après avoir établi des troupes à Versailles, à
Sèvres, au Champ-de-Mars, à Saint-Denis, crut pouvoir exécuter son plan.
Elle commença par l’exil de Necker et le renouvellement complet du
ministère. Le maréchal de Broglie, Lagallissonnière, le duc de la
Vauguyon, le baron de Breteuil et l’intendant Foulon, furent désignés
comme remplaçants de Puiségur, de Montmorin, de la Luzerne, de
Saint-Priest et de Necker. Celui-ci reçut le samedi, 11 juillet, pendant
son dîner, un billet du roi qui lui enjoignait de quitter le royaume sur
le champ. Il dîna tranquillement sans faire part de l’ordre qu’il avait
reçu, monta ensuite en voiture avec madame Necker, comme pour aller à
Saint-Ouen, et prit la route de Bruxelles.

Le lendemain dimanche, 12 juillet, on apprit à Paris, vers les quatre
heures du soir, la disgrace de Necker et son départ pour l’exil. Cette
mesure y fut considérée comme l’exécution du complot dont on avait
aperçu les préparatifs. Dans peu d’instants la ville fut dans la plus
grande agitation; des rassemblements se formèrent de toutes parts, plus
de dix mille personnes se rendirent au Palais-Royal, émues par cette
nouvelle, disposées à tout, mais ne sachant quelle mesure prendre. Un
jeune homme plus hardi que les autres, et l’un des harangueurs habituels
de la foule, Camille Desmoulins, monte sur une table, un pistolet à la
main, et il s’écrie. “Citoyens, il n’y a pas un moment à perdre; le
renvoi de M. Necker est le tocsin d’une Saint-Barthélemy de patriotes!
ce soir même tous les bataillons suisses et allemands sortiront du
Champ-de-Mars pour nous égorger! il ne nous reste qu’une ressource,
c’est de courir aux armes.” On approuve par de bruyantes acclamations.
Il propose de prendre des cocardes pour se reconnaître et pour se
défendre.—“Voulez-vous, dit-il, le vert, couleur de l’espérance, ou le
rouge, couleur de l’ordre libre de Cincinnatus?”—“Le vert, le vert,
répond la multitude.” L’orateur descend de la table, attache une feuille
d’arbre à son chapeau, tout le monde l’imite, les marronniers du Palais
sont presque dépouillés de leurs feuilles, et cette troupe se rend en
tumulte chez le sculpteur Curtius.

On prend les bustes de Necker et du duc d’Orléans, car le bruit que ce
dernier devait être exilé, s’était aussi répandu; on les entoure d’un
crêpe et on les porte en triomphe. Ce cortége traverse les rues
Saint-Martin, Saint-Denis, Saint-Honoré, et se grossit à chaque pas. Le
peuple fait mettre chapeau bas à tous ceux qu’il rencontre. Le guet à
cheval se trouve sur sa route, il le prend pour escorte; le cortége
s’avance ainsi jusqu’à la place Vendôme, où l’on promène les deux bustes
autour de la statue de Louis XIV. Un détachement de royal allemand
arrive, veut disperser le cortége, est mis en fuite à coups de pierres,
et la multitude continuant sa route, parvient jusqu’à la place Louis XV.
Mais là, elle est assaillie par les dragons du prince de Lambesc; elle
résiste quelques moments, est enfoncée, le porteur d’un des bustes et un
soldat des gardes-françaises sont tués, le peuple se disperse, une
partie fuit vers les quais, une autre se replie en arrière sur les
boulevards, le reste se précipite dans les Tuileries par le pont
tournant. Le prince de Lambesc les poursuit dans le jardin, le sabre nu,
à la tête de ses cavaliers; il charge une multitude sans armes qui
n’était point du cortége et Edition: current; Page: [10] qui se
promenait paisiblement. Dans cette charge, un vieillard est blessé d’un
coup de sabre; on se défend avec des chaises, on monte sur les
terrasses, l’indignation devient générale, et le cri aux armes retentit
bientôt partout, aux Tuileries, au Palais-Royal, dans la ville et dans
les faubourgs.

Le régiment des gardes-françaises était, comme nous l’avons déjà dit,
bien disposé pour le peuple; aussi l’avait-on consigné dans ses
casernes. Le prince de Lambesc, craignant malgré cela qu’il ne prît
parti, donna ordre à soixante dragons d’aller se poster en face de son
dépôt, situé dans la Chaussée-d’Antin. Les soldats des gardes, déjà
mécontents d’être retenus comme prisonniers, s’indignèrent à la vue de
ces étrangers, avec lesquels ils avaient eu une rixe peu de jours
auparavant. Ils voulaient courir aux armes, et leurs officiers eurent
beaucoup de peine à les retenir en employant, tour-à-tour, les menaces
et les prières. Mais ils ne voulurent plus rien entendre, lorsque
quelques-uns des leurs vinrent annoncer la charge faite aux Tuileries et
la mort d’un de leurs camarades. Ils saisirent leurs armes, brisèrent
les grilles, se rangèrent en bataille, à l’entrée de la caserne, en face
des dragons, et leur crièrent: Qui vive?—Royal Allemand.—Etes-vous pour
le tiers-état?—Nous sommes pour ceux qui nous donnent des ordres.—Alors
les gardes-françaises firent sur eux une décharge qui leur tua deux
hommes, leur en blessa trois et les mit en fuite. Elles s’avancèrent
ensuite au pas de charge et la baionnette en avant jusqu’à la place
Louis XV, se placèrent entre les Tuileries et les Champs-Elysées, le
peuple et les troupes, et gardèrent ce poste pendant toute la nuit. Les
soldats du Champ-de-Mars reçurent aussitôt l’ordre de s’avancer.
Lorsqu’ils furent arrivés dans les Champs-Elysées, les gardes-françaises
les reçurent à coups de fusil. On voulut les faire battre, mais ils
refusèrent: les Petits-Suisses furent les premiers à donner cet exemple
que les autres régiments suivirent. Les officiers désespérés ordonnèrent
la retraite, les troupes rétrogradèrent jusqu’à la grille de Chaillot,
d’où elles se rendirent bientôt dans le Champ-de-Mars. La défection des
gardes-françaises, et le refus que manifestèrent les troupes, même
étrangères, de marcher sur la capitale, firent échouer les projets de la
cour.

Pendant cette soirée le peuple s’était transporté à l’Hôtel-de-Ville, et
avait demandé qu’on sonnât le tocsin, que les districts fussent réunis
et les citoyens armés. Quelques électeurs s’assemblèrent à
l’Hôtel-de-Ville, et ils prirent l’autorité en main. Ils rendirent
pendant ces jours d’insurrection les plus grands services à leurs
concitoyens et à la cause de la liberté par leur courage, leur prudence
et leur activité; mais dans la première confusion du soulèvement, il ne
leur fut guère possible d’être écoutés. Le tumulte était à son comble;
chacun ne recevait d’ordre que de sa passion. A côté des citoyens bien
intentionnés étaient des hommes suspects qui ne cherchaient dans
l’insurrection qu’un moyen de désordre et de pillage. Des troupes
d’ouvriers, employés par le gouvernement à des travaux publics, la
plupart sans domicile, sans aveu, brûlèrent les barrières, infestèrent
les rues, pillèrent quelques maisons; ce furent eux qu’on appela les
brigands. La nuit du 12 au 13 se passa dans le tumulte et dans les
alarmes.*

After every allowance is made (and much ought to be made) for the deep
interest of the events themselves, great praise is still due to the
powers both of narration and description, which the above passage
displays.

M. Mignet generally subjoins to each chapter a résumé of the progress of
events during the period which it embraces. The same sort and degree of
talent is manifested in these résumés which is conspicuous in the body
of the work. We Edition: current; Page: [11] quote the following, though
one of the longest, not because it is the best, but because it contains
a summary view of the early history of the Revolution:

If one were to describe a nation which had just passed through a great
crisis, and to say, There was in this country a despotic government
whose authority has been limited, two privileged orders whose supremacy
has been abolished, an immense population already enfranchised by the
growth of civilization and intelligence, but destitute of political
rights, and which, when they were refused to its entreaties, has been
compelled to assume them by force; if to this it were added that the
government, after resisting for a time, had at length yielded to the
revolution, but that the privileged orders stedfastly persevered in
their resistance, the following are the conclusions which might be drawn
from these data:

The government will feel regret, the people will show distrust, the
privileged orders, each in its own way, will make war on the new order
of things. The nobles, too feeble at home to make any effectual
opposition, will emigrate and stir up foreign powers, who will make
preparations for an attack; the clergy, who abroad would be deprived of
their means of action, will remain in the interior, and there endeavour
to raise up enemies to the revolution. The people, threatened from
without, endangered from within, irritated against the emigrants for
exciting foreigners to hostilities, against foreigners for attacking its
independence, and against the clergy for stirring up insurrections at
home, will treat the emigrants, the foreigners, and the clergy as
enemies. It will first demand that the refractory priests be placed
under surveillance, next that they be banished, that the revenues of the
emigrants be confiscated, and finally, that war be made upon
confederated Europe, to prevent the disadvantage of having to sustain
the attack. The original authors of the revolution will condemn those of
its measures which are inconsistent with the law; the continuators of
the revolution will see in them, on the contrary, the salvation of their
country. A discord will break out between those who prefer the
constitution to the state, and those who prefer the state to the
constitution, the prince, impelled by his interests as king, his
affections, and his conscience, to reject this policy, will pass for an
accomplice in the counter-revolutionary conspiracy, because he will
appear to protect it. The revolutionists will then attempt, by
intimidation, to draw the king to their side, and, failing of success,
they will subvert his power.

Such was the history of the Legislative Assembly. The internal tumults
led to the decree against the priests; the menaces of foreigners to that
against the emigrants; the confederacy of foreign powers, to the war
against Europe; the first defeat of our armies, to the formation of the
camp of twenty thousand. The suspicions of the Girondists were directed
towards Louis, by the refusal of his assent to most of these decrees.[*]
The division between that party and the constitutional monarchists, the
latter wishing to appear legislators, as in time of peace, the former,
enemies, as in time of war, disunited the partisans of the revolution.
In the minds of the Girondists, liberty depended upon victory, and
victory upon these decrees. The 20th of June was an attempt to compel
the acceptance of the decrees; on its failure, they deemed it necessary
to renounce the revolution or the throne, and they made the 10th of
August. Thus but for the emigration which produced the war, and the
schism in the church Edition: current; Page: [12] which produced the
tumults, the king would probably have been reconciled to the revolution,
and the revolutionists would never have thought of a republic.*

We have given this and other extracts in a translation with reluctance.
Our only remaining specimen shall be in the original language.

The following is a brief but interesting résumé of the decline and fall
of the virtuous and unfortunate Gironde:

Ainsi succomba le parti de la Gironde, parti illustre par de grands
talents et de grands courages, parti qui honora la république naissante
par l’horreur du sang, la haine du crime, le dégoût de l’anarchie,
l’amour de l’ordre, de la justice et de la liberté; parti mal placé
entre la classe moyenne, dont il avait combattu la révolution, et la
multitude dont il repoussait le gouvernement. Condamné à ne pas agir, ce
parti ne put qu’illustrer une défaite certaine, par une lutte courageuse
et par une belle mort. A cette époque, on pouvait avec certitude prévoir
sa fin: il avait été chassé de poste en poste: des Jacobins, par
l’envahissement des Montagnards; de la commune, par la sortie de Pétion;
du ministère, par la retraite de Roland et de ses collègues; de l’armée,
par la défection de Dumouriez. Il ne lui restait plus que la convention;
c’est là qu’il se retrancha, qu’il combattit, et qu’il succomba. Ses
ennemis essayèrent tour-à-tour, contre lui, et des complots et des
insurrections. Les complots firent créer la commission des douze,[*] qui
parut donner un avantage momentané à la Gironde, mais qui n’en excita
que plus violemment ses adversaires. Ceux-ci mirent le peuple en
mouvement, et ils enlevèrent aux Girondins, d’abord leur autorité en
détruisant les douze, ensuite leur existence politique en proscrivant
leurs chefs.

Les suites de ce désastreux évènement ne furent selon la prévoyance de
personne. Les Dantonistes crurent que les dissensions des partis
seraient terminées, et la guerre civile éclata. Les modérés du comité de
salut public crurent que la convention reprendrait toute la puissance,
et elle fut asservie.[†] La commune crut que le 31 mai lui vaudrait la
domination, qui échut à Robespierre, et à quelques hommes dévoués à sa
fortune ou à l’extrême démocratie. Enfin, il y eut un parti de plus à
ajouter aux partis vaincus, et dès-lors aux partis ennemis; et comme on
avait fait, après le 10 août, la république contre les constitutionnels,
on fit, après le 31 mai, la terreur contre les modérés de la
république.†

Did space permit, we would gladly quote M. Mignet’s characters of the
leading members of the Constituent Assembly. In general it appears to us
that the characters of eminent men, which we read in historians, are
very little to be depended upon. It is no easy matter to draw a
character at once correct and complete, even of one who is personally
known to us, if there be any thing about him more than common; but from
hearsay, or from his public acts, it may be pronounced impossible. The
troubled period, however, of the French revolution exhibited many of its
actors in such varied situations, several of them very trying Edition:
current; Page: [13] ones, that the data it affords for judging of their
characters, though far from adequate, are less scanty than ordinary. M.
Mignet has turned these data to the best account. His portraits seem
accurate, and they are, at any rate, animated.

Our preliminary observations will have prepared the reader to find that
we cannot speak altogether so favourably of M. Mignet’s reflections as
of his narrative. The prevailing vice of French writers, since
Montesquieu, is that of straining at point, at sententiousness, at being
striking—we want a word—at producing an effect by mere smartness of
expression; and from this vice M. Mignet’s work, though one of the best
of its kind, is not wholly free. The sort of writers in whom this defect
is conspicuous, and of whom, in recent times, Madame de Staël is one of
the most favourable specimens, can never communicate a fact without
edging in, to account for it, some axiom or principle, wide in its
extent and epigrammatic in its form. Generalization in history is so far
from being blamable, that history would be of no use without it, but
general propositions intended to be of any use, concerning the course of
events in matters where large bodies of men are concerned, cannot be
compressed into epigrams; for there is not one of them that is true
without exception, and an epigram admits not of exceptions. What do
these generalizations amount to? Commonly to this: that something which
has happened once or twice will happen always.

M. Mignet’s generalizations are, in most cases, the generalizations of
an acute mind; but in his anxiety to be sententious, he almost always
overdoes the generalization; he affirms that to be true in all cases
which is only true in some, or enunciates without qualification a
proposition which must be qualified to be defensible. He generalizes
upon first impressions; and as first impressions are sometimes right, he
often, by generalizing on the first impression of a remarkable fact,
stumbles upon a valuable and even a recondite truth—a truth which, if it
did not stand single among so many faux brillans, might be supposed to
have emanated from a mind profoundly versed in human nature. When this
happens, the point of the expression adds great force to the sentiment,
and imprints it in the imagination. Here, however, M. Mignet is far
excelled by Madame de Staël, whose chief merit, in our opinion, is the
unrivalled felicity with which she has given expression to many
important truths suggested to her forcibly by the circumstances of the
times in which she lived, which will be remembered long after the
brilliant paradoxes and pompous inanities, which she threw out in such
abundance along with them, shall be forgotten.

M. Mignet has been occasionally betrayed into dressing up a truism in
epigrammatic guise, and bringing it out with the air of an oracle, as a
piece of consummate wisdom. The following maxims—“C’est toujours sur le
passé qu’on règle sa conduite et ses espérances” (p. 458). “Tout ce qui
existe s’étend” (p. 166), to account for the rapid growth of the Jacobin
club. “Il ne suffit pas d’être grand homme, il faut venir à propos” (p.
107). “Dès qu’il y a des partis déplacés dans un état, il y a lutte de
leur part,” &c. (p. 204), and several others, are examples.

Edition: current; Page: [14]
The following are obvious cases of incorrect generalization: “Tous les
partis sont les mêmes, et se conduisent par les mêmes maximes, ou si
l’on veut par les mêmes nécessités” (p. 518), merely because the
Girondists and the Montagnards died with equal courage.

“Quand on sait ce qu’on veut, et qu’on le veut vite et bien, on
l’emporte toujours” (p. 357). Had he said souvent, the proposition would
have been true: as it stands, it is extravagant.

“En révolution les hommes sont mûs par deux penchans, l’amour de leurs
idées et le goût du commandement” (p. 442). Two very powerful forces, it
is true; but that they are far from being the only ones which act upon
man, “en temps de révolution,” is evident enough. The other principles
of human nature are not suspended, during that period, or any other.

“En révolution les hommes sont facilement oubliés, parce que les peuples
en voient beaucoup et vivent vite. Si l’on ne veut pas qu’ils soient
ingrats, il ne faut pas cesser un instant de les servir à leur manière”
(pp. 160-1). A general proposition grounded on one or two instances, and
only on the surface of those.

The next two are examples of important truths, or rather of
approximations to important truths, spoiled by their epigrammatic form:
“On est bientôt, en révolution, ce qu’on est cru être” (p. 311). “Le
plus grand tort des partis, après celui d’être injustes, est celui de ne
vouloir pas le paraître” (p. 317).

To have expressed accurately what there is of truth in these maxims, in
such manner as to be intelligible, would have spoiled all the point of
the phrase.

The following remark, with a slight qualification, contains the
expression of an important fact: “Dès qu’on est en révolte, le parti
dont l’opinion est la plus extrême et le but le plus précis, l’emporte
sur ses associés” (p. 388). The party which has the most definite
purpose commonly prevails; and this (as it happens) is generally the
party which goes to the greatest lengths in matter of opinion. The men
who have no fixed set of opinions follow the march of events: those who
have, lead it.

The following is a profound remark, happily expressed: “Barrère, qui,
comme tous les esprits justes et les caractères faibles, fut pour la
modération, tant que la peur ne fit pas de lui un instrument de cruauté
et de tyrannie” (p. 363). It is most true, as is hinted in this passage,
that the great incentive to cruelty is fear.

The last observation which we shall quote, relates to the formation of a
judicial establishment; and, though somewhat loosely expressed,
indicates an acute perception of an important principle of legislation:
“Ce redoutable pouvoir, lorsqu’il relève du trône, doit être inamovible
pour être indépendant; mais il peut être temporaire lorsqu’il relève du
peuple, parce qu’en dépendant de tous, il ne dépend de personne” (p.
153).

We shall now take our leave of M. Mignet’s work, by recommending the
perusal of it to all who desire either to be amused by a most
entertaining and well told story, or to learn, by a few hours reading,
what intelligent Frenchmen think and say on the subject of the French
Revolution.

Edition: current; Page: [15]



Modern French Historical Works

though we have not, like so many of our contemporaries, made it our
grand occupation, to impress our countrymen with a deep sense of their
own wisdom and virtue, and to teach them how proud they ought to be of
every thing English, more especially of every thing that is English and
bad; we are far from being unconscious how much they have really to be
proud of, and in how many respects they might be taken as models by all
the nations of the world. If we saw them in any danger of forgetting
their own merits, we too might preach them a sermon on that hacknied
text. But it is not their failing to underrate themselves, or to
overrate other nations. They are more in need of monitors than of
adulators; and we cannot but think that it may be of some use to them to
know, that if there are some points in which they are superior to their
neighbours, there are others in which they are inferior; that they may
learn something from other nations, as well as other nations from them.

While the Quarterly Review is labouring to convince us that we are a
century and a half in advance of our nearest continental neighbours,[*]
it is impossible to shut our eyes to the fact, that those neighbours are
at present making a much greater figure in the world of literature than
ourselves. This is something quite new in the history of the two
countries; it certainly was not the case before the French revolution;
but it undoubtedly is the case now. While our littérateurs, with the
usual fate of those who aim at nothing but the merely ornamental, fail
of attaining even that; an entirely new class of writers has arisen in
France, altogether free from that frivolousness which characterized
French literature under the ancien régime, and which characterizes the
literature of every country where there is an aristocracy. They write as
if they were conscious that the reader expects something more valuable
from them than mere amusement. Though many of them are highly gifted
with the beauties of style, they never seem desirous of shewing off
their own eloquence; they seem to write because they have something to
say, and not because they desire to say something. In philosophy, they
do not sacrifice truth to rhetoric; in history they do not sacrifice
truth to romance. This change in the character of French literature is
most of all remarkable in their historical compositions. The historians
of ci-devant France were justly charged with despising facts, and
Edition: current; Page: [18] considering, not what was true, but what
would give scenic interest to their narrative; the French historians of
the present day are distinguished by almost German research, and by a
scrupulousness in producing vouchers for their minutest details, which
forbids the idea of their having any thing in view but truth.

In the last five years France has produced many historical works of
great importance; more than were ever produced by one nation within the
same space of time. Some of these have been already mentioned in this
journal;[*] others we may perhaps take a future opportunity of making
known to our readers. At the present moment, two of the most important
lie before us; and we have derived so much instruction as well as
gratification from their perusal, that we purpose giving in the present
article some account of their contents.

M. Dulaure has named his work a history of Paris: the title is less
attractive than the book. It is a history of Paris, even in the ordinary
sense; but if it had been no more, we should have left it to
antiquaries, and to the amateurs of steeples, columns, and old
tomb-stones. M. Dulaure’s work, as a topographical history, is
admirable; but it has other and far greater merits. Our histories of
London are histories of buildings,[†] but his subject is men. His
history of Paris is a chapter of the history of mankind. After
describing the city of Paris as it existed at each period of its
history, he does what is not often done by antiquaries, he condescends
to bestow some attention upon the inhabitants. This part of his book,
which, we are happy to observe, has been detached from the rest, and
printed as a separate work in two octavo volumes, is not so much a
history of Paris, as a history of civilization in France; which is, to a
great degree, the history of civilization in Europe. In it we may read
how men were governed, and how they lived and behaved, in the good old
times; subjects on which little is said in the vulgar histories, and
that little is but little to be relied upon. M. Dulaure has one merit,
which is not a common one with historians: he pays great regard to
facts, and little to assertions. He has not been satisfied with taking
upon trust from one author, what he had already taken upon trust from
another. His work is not a mere register of the opinions of his
predecessors, predecessors who did but register the opinions of their
contemporaries. His ideas, such as they are, are his own.

Edition: current; Page: [19]
M. de Sismondi is already known to the public as a historian. His
History of France, though it has not done every thing which a history of
France might have done, may be pronounced worthy of his reputation; and,
when completed, will supply an important desideratum in literature.
Indeed, when it is considered in what spirit, and with what objects, all
former histories of France had been written, it is matter of
congratulation that they were as dull in manner as they were dishonest
in their purpose, and deceptious in their tendency; and that the sphere
of their mischievousness was considerably narrowed, by the happy
impossibility of reading them. We have in our own history a standing
example how deep a root party lies may take in the public mind, when a
writer, in whom the arts of the most consummate advocate are combined
with all the graces of style, employs his skill in giving them the
colour of truth.[*] It is most fortunate, therefore, that the first
readable history of France should be the production of a writer who is
of no party, except that of human nature; who has no purpose to serve
except that of truth, and whose only bias is towards the happiness of
mankind. The chief defect of M. de Sismondi’s work, considered as a
popular history, is the prolixity of the three first volumes; a space
which, we should think, might have been better occupied than in relating
how one dull, uninteresting battle or murder was succeeded by another
exactly similar, in the reigns of the rois fainéans, or of the grandsons
of Louis the Debonair. M. de Sismondi, perhaps, may urge in his defence,
that his object was, to give a practical feeling of the state of society
which he was describing: that, dull as these incidents are, their
incessant recurrence was the sole characteristic of the period; a period
the most distracted and miserable which is recorded in history: that to
have merely related a battle and a murder or two, as a specimen of the
rest, would have made but a feeble impression; and that it was necessary
to convince the reader by tedious experience, that the history of the
times consisted of nothing else. How far this apology might avail M. de
Sismondi with ordinary readers, we do not consider ourselves perfectly
qualified to judge: for ourselves, we think that our incredulity would
have yielded to a less ponderous argument than three mortal volumes. It
is but just to state, that these volumes do give, in a high degree, that
practical feeling of the times, which they are apparently designed to
convey, and that the reader who will have patience to go through them
(for without reading them he will not fully understand the history of
the subsequent period), will be amply repaid by the never-flagging
interest which is kept up throughout the other six volumes.

All that is published of M. de Sismondi’s work, and the more novel and
interesting part of M. Dulaure’s, relate to the middle ages; and to that
period we shall, in the present article, confine our remarks; reserving
the privilege of making ample use, on future occasions, of the important
information which M. Edition: current; Page: [20] Dulaure has furnished
relative to the later period of the French monarchy. Our purpose at
present is, to do something towards forming, if possible, a correct
estimate of what is called the age of chivalry. Hitherto, in this
country especially, we have judged of that age from two or three of the
facts, and no more: and even of those we have looked only at one side.
The works before us are almost the first, in which any pains have really
been taken to discover the truth with regard to the age of chivalry. In
these, however, an ample stock of facts has been collected, and the
subject is now ripe for a deliberate examination. All these facts lead
but to one conclusion; and that conclusion is so directly at variance
with the conceptions ordinarily entertained respecting the age of
chivalry, that the very enunciation of it will be startling to the
majority of readers; and it will not be embraced upon any evidence not
absolutely irresistible. We are persuaded, however, that the more
narrowly the records of the period are looked into, and the more
accurately its real history becomes known, the more strictly conformable
this conclusion will appear to historical truth.

The conclusion is, that the compound of noble qualities, called the
spirit of chivalry (a rare combination in all ages) was almost unknown
in the age of chivalry; that the age so called was equally distinguished
by moral depravity and by physical wretchedness; that there is no class
of society at this day in any civilized country, which has not a greater
share of what are called the knightly virtues, than the knights
themselves; that, far from civilizing and refining the rest of the
world, it was not till very late, and with great difficulty, that the
rest of the world could succeed in civilizing them.

If this conclusion be true, it must be obvious that there is not in all
history a truth of greater importance. There is scarcely any portion of
history the misapprehension of which has done more to rivet the most
mischievous errors in the public mind. The age of chivalry was the age
of aristocracy, in its most gigantic strength and wide-extending sway;
and the illusions of chivalry are to this hour the great stronghold of
aristocratic prejudices. All that is aristocratic in European
institutions comes to us from those times. In those times lived our
ancestors, whose wisdom and virtue are found so eminently serviceable in
bearing down any attempt to improve the condition of their descendants.
All those whose great grandfathers had names, and who think it more
honourable (as it certainly is less troublesome) to have had brave and
virtuous ancestors, than to be brave and virtuous themselves; all those
who, loving darkness better than light, would have it thought that men
have declined in morality in proportion as they have advanced in
intelligence; all, in short, whose interest or taste leads them to side
with the few in opposition to the many, are interested in upholding the
character of the age of chivalry. “On nous a dit,” says M. de Sismondi,

que la plus basse superstition, que l’ignorance et la brutalité des
manières, que l’asservissement des basses classes, que l’anéantissement
de toute justice, de tout frein salutaire pour les plus hautes,
n’avaient point empêché cet héroïsme universel que nous Edition:
current; Page: [21] avons nommé la chevalerie, et qui n’exista jamais
que dans des fictions brillantes. Plutôt que de perdre cette douce
illusion, et de détruire ce monde poétique, ferons-nous violence à
l’histoire, et nous refuserons-nous à voir qu’un semblable état social
n’a jamais produit que l’intolérable souffrance et l’avilissement de la
féodalité?*

Before we proceed to indicate, for we can but indicate, the evidence of
the important proposition which is the grand result both of M. Dulaure’s
and of M. de Sismondi’s work, we think it proper to exhibit a specimen
of what may be termed a mild, candid, and well-bred mode of dealing with
unwelcome assertions; for we are not, as yet, entitled to call them
truths. It always gives us pleasure to meet with these virtues in a
controversialist; and the serviles in France, to do them justice, seem
nowise inferior to their English brethren in these points. No sooner did
M. Dulaure’s work make its appearance than the hue and cry was raised
against it. The sort of arguments, with which the book and its author
were assailed, are nearly decisive of the great merit of both. Invective
in general, and imputation of enmity to religion, royalty, and his
country, in particular, these, together with defamation of his private
character, are the reply which has been made to M. Dulaure’s work.†

We own that we are in general predisposed in favour of a man whom we
hear accused by a certain class of politicians of being an enemy to his
country. We at Edition: current; Page: [22] once conclude, that he has
either actually rendered, or shown himself disposed to render, some
signal service to his country. We conclude, either that he has had
discernment to see, and courage to point out, something in his own that
stands in need of amendment, or something in another country which it
would be for the advantage of his own to imitate; or that he has loved
his country well enough to wish it free from that greatest of
misfortunes, the misfortune of being successful in an unjust cause; or
(which is the particular crime of M. Dulaure), that he has given his
countrymen to know, that they once had vices or follies which they have
since corrected, or (what is worse still), which they have yet to
correct. Whoever is guilty of any one of these crimes in this country,
is a fortunate man if he escapes being accused of un-English feelings.
This is the epithet which we observe to be appropriated to those, whose
wish is that their country should deserve to be thought well of. The man
of English feelings is the man whose wish is, that his country should be
thought well of; and, above all, should think well of itself,
particularly in those points wherein it deserves the least. The modern
English version of the maxim Spartam nactus es, hanc exorna,[*] may be
given thus—England is your country, be sure to praise it lustily. This
sort of patriotism is, it would appear, no less in request with certain
persons in France, than with the corresponding description of persons in
England. Accordingly, M. Dulaure’s bold exposure of the vices and
follies of his countrymen in the olden time, has been thought by many
persons extremely un-French. But he shall speak for himself.

L’histoire, quoique très-instructive, lorsqu’elle est écrite avec une
sévère fidélité, a des parties qui peuvent paraître désolantes aux
lecteurs peu familiarisés avec ses tableaux austères; aux lecteurs
habitués au régime des panégyriques et des complimens; aux lecteurs
pénétrés d’un aveugle respect pour les temps passés et pour les
personnes revétues de la puissance; aux lecteurs trompés par des
historiens qui, dans la crainte des persécutions, ou dans l’espoir des
récompenses, ont altéré les traits les plus caractéristiques des
personnages historiques.

Si l’on présente à ces lecteurs mal disposés des vérités qui leur sont
inconnues, des vérités contraires à leurs préventions, à leurs idées
reçues, ils s’irritent contr’elles, ne pouvant les vérifier, ils les
révoquent en doute, ou accusent l’auteur d’être inexact, même infidèle.
C’est ce qu’ils ont fait pour mon Histoire de Paris.

On m’a, en conséquence de ces préventions, adressé plusieurs reproches,
et surtout celui d’avoir écrit en ennemi de la France. Je n’ai écrit
qu’en ennemi de la barbarie, qu’en ennemi des erreurs et des crimes qui
l’accompagnent. J’aime beaucoup mon pays, mais j’aime autant la vérité.
[And wherefore should he love truth, but for the sake of his country?]

On m’a encore accusé d’avoir de préférence cité les crimes, et passé
sous silence les actes de vertu. Ignore-t-on que, dans les temps
malheureux dont j’ai décrit les moeurs, les vices étaient la règle
générale, et les actes de vertu les exceptions.

Je devais abondamment décrire le mal, puisque le mal abondait; mais je
n’ai pas négligé le peu de bien que les monumens historiques m’ont
fourni. . . . Qu’on me cite une action, Edition: current; Page: [23]
justement célèbre, justement louable, et non étrangère à mon sujet, que
je n’aie mentionnée honorablement?

On s’est permis de dire que la publication de mon Histoire de Paris
était un scandale sans exemple. Ce reproche, qui doit s’adresser plutôt
aux personnages historiques qu’à l’historien, prouve que celui qui me
l’adresse n’a lu ni Tacite, ni Suétone, ni les monumens de notre
histoire, ni Grégoire de Tours, ni nos annales, ni nos chroniques, ni
les écrits de l’abbé Suger, ni des milliers de pièces où les actions
scandaleuses se reproduisent à chaque page. Il n’a pas lu non plus les
Homélies du pape saint Grégoire-le-Grand, qui dit. Si du récit d’un fait
véritable il résulte du scandale, il vaut mieux laisser naitre le
scandale que de renoncer à la vérité.[*]

Je pourrais ramener les lecteurs de bonne foi; je ne réussirais jamais à
persuader ceux qui ont pris le parti de se refuser à l’évidence.*

The countryman who, being present at a dispute in Latin, discovered
which of the disputants was in the wrong, by taking notice which of them
it was who lost his temper, would have had little difficulty in deciding
between M. Dulaure and his ultra antagonists.

The tone of fearless honesty in the above passage, and the beautiful
simplicity of its style, are maintained throughout the work, and may
serve, once for all, as a specimen of its general character. Our whole
remaining space will be far from sufficient to do justice to the more
important subject of this article.

We premise, that whatever we may say against the age of chivalry, is or
is not to be applied to chivalry itself, according to the ideas which
the reader may attach to the term. If by chivalry be meant the feelings,
habits or actions of an ordinary chevalier, we shall easily shew it to
have been not admirable, but detestable. But if by chivalry be meant
those virtues, which formed part of the ideal character of a perfect
knight, it would be absurd to deny its beneficial tendency, or to doubt
that the estimation in which those virtues were held contributed to
render them more prevalent than they otherwise would have been, and by
that means to elevate the moral condition of man. We propose only to
inquire, to what extent any such virtues really were prevalent during
the age of chivalry.

A few introductory observations on the feudal system (and on so hacknied
a subject we promise that they shall be few) are an indispensable
introduction to a view of that state of society of which the feudal
system formed so important a feature.

It is now acknowledged, and therefore needs not here be proved, that the
feudal system was not the work of contrivance, of skill devising means
for the attainment of an end, but arose gradually, and, as it were,
spontaneously, out of the Edition: current; Page: [24] pre-existing
circumstances of society; and that the notion of its having been
introduced into the countries of western Europe by their Gothic and
Teutonic conquerors is wholly erroneous. It is now known that those
barbarians were very like any other barbarians; and that without any
refined notions of feudal or any other sort of polity, they spread
themselves over the land and appropriated it. Their kings, like all
other kings, had exactly as much power as they could get; that is to
say, in a rude nation, more or less according to circumstances.
Originally they enjoyed, during good behaviour, a considerable share of
voluntary obedience, but had little power of enforcing any obedience
which was not voluntary. They became powerful sovereigns, however, when
the followers of a single chief, scattered in small parties over a large
country, acquired the habit of looking to the king and not to their
countrymen in a body, for protection in case of need.

The vigorous monarchs of the second race, from Pépin d’Héristal to
Charlemagne, at first under the title of Maires du Palais, afterwards
under that of kings, extended the Frankish empire over Germany, Italy,
and a great part of Spain, as well as over Belgium and France. The
military talents of these sovereigns, and the accession of power which
they derived from their vast territorial acquisitions, put a finishing
hand to the change which had been going on from the time of Clovis
downwards, and the government of Charlemagne may be considered a
despotic monarchy. As such, it shared the fate of other despotisms.
After a few generations, the sceptre fell into the hands of princes
entirely destitute of spirit and ability; the reins of government became
relaxed; the power of the state became unequal to the protection of its
subjects; disorder at first insensibly crept in, but soon advanced with
gigantic strides; and the empire, which had spread itself from one end
of Europe to the other, became incapable of opposing effectual
resistance to the most contemptible aggressor.

In the despotic governments of Asia, this series of events has always
been, from the beginning of history, of periodical recurrence. A Pepin
founds a great empire, a Charlemagne consolidates it, which it then
becomes the occupation of a series of Lothaires to lose. By the time it
has reached the condition of Germany and France in the third and fourth
generations of the descendants of Charlemagne, internal revolt or
foreign invasion subverts the old dynasty, and establishes a new one;
which, after a time, degenerates, and is in its turn displaced. Events
took another turn among the conquerors of Europe. They had as yet no
standing armies; the nurseries of that class of military adventurers who
have always so much abounded in Asia, the materials and instruments of
revolutions. Nor was a Genghis or a Timour found among the pirates of
the north. The enemies whom Europe had to dread were a race who sought,
not conquest, but plunder. The Danes or Normans, repelled from our own
country by the vigour of Alfred, fell with redoubled fury upon France,
and reduced its northern provinces almost to the condition of a desert.
The government, which had, by this time, fallen into the last stage of
Edition: current; Page: [25] decrepitude, could still less protect its
subjects against these invaders, than it could protect them against one
another.

A state of anarchy has this advantage over a despotism, that it
invariably works its own cure. When the monarch could no longer protect
his subjects, they were forced to protect themselves. Protect themselves
they could not, except by combination: and they therefore combined.
Where all were left to their own resources, it of course happened, that
some had resources, and some had not. Those who had, were able to
command assistance, and could therefore protect themselves: those who
had not, were reduced to seek protection from others. The monarch, to
whom they had been accustomed to look for protection, being no longer
capable of affording it, their next recourse was to their strongest
neighbour. Land was at that time the only source of wealth; the great
landholder alone had the means of fortifying a castle, and maintaining a
sufficient number of warriors to defend it. To him, therefore, all his
neighbours, and among the rest the smaller landholders, had recourse. To
induce the superior to extend his protection over their land and its
produce, they had no return to offer except their aid in defending his.
Here we see the principle of the feudal system. The forms of that system
arose gradually; we have not room to show how.

The combination, which to its weaker members had been intended only as a
means of defence, gave to its stronger head an accession of strength for
purposes of attack. The weaker communities or principalities had often
to sustain aggressions from the stronger; which they sometimes found
themselves able to resist, and sometimes not. In the latter case, the
same motives which had induced individuals to place themselves under the
protection of a combination, induced the head of that combination, when
in his turn attacked, to place himself under the protection of the head
of a stronger combination than his own. And thus arose by degrees the
great feudal principalities which we hear of for the first time during
the decline of the Carlovingian race, and some of which were large and
powerful kingdoms, when the authority of the feeble descendant of
Charlemagne did not extend beyond the city of Laon and its vicinity.

In England, during the reign of Edward the Confessor, the formation of
the feudal system had already proceeded thus far. Godwin Earl of Wessex,
Leofric Earl of Mercia, Siward Earl of Northumberland, and others, were
virtually independent princes, any one of them capable of coping
single-handed with the acknowledged monarch of their common country. It
has been supposed that the feudal system was introduced into England at
the Conquest. But this is only so far true, that the great lords had
not, until that epoch, become the vassals of the crown. In France and
Germany, this last step in the formation of the feudal system was taken
at a much earlier date; but in what manner, and when, is left, like
every thing that is valuable in the history of that remote period, to
inference and conjecture. It appears probable that the chiefs who, under
the name of dukes and counts, had already Edition: current; Page: [26]
exercised, by the king’s appointment, a delegated authority in the
municipal towns, and who, in the decline of the royal power, had
gradually withdrawn themselves from subjection, became the heads of all
the greater combinations: or perhaps that the heads of those
combinations found it convenient to obtain, from the petty prince who
was still called king of France, a nominal delegation of his nominal
authority, to facilitate the establishment of their ascendancy over the
fortified towns; for an expiring authority always lingers in the towns
for some time after it has lost all footing in the country. The
transition was easy (when feudal ideas gained vigour) from this relation
to the scarcely less nominal one of lord and vassal; for the paramountcy
of the king was for many years almost a nominal privilege.

Thus arose the feudal system: of the workings of which we shall now
attempt a rapid sketch. Our examples and proofs will be drawn chiefly
from France. This, to an English reader, requires explanation. Our
reasons for not selecting our own country as the theatre on which to
exhibit feudality and its train of effects, are these:—In the first
place, no one has yet been found to perform for England the service
which has been performed by M. Dulaure for his own country; the toilsome
and thankless service of dragging into light the vices and crimes of
former days: and, secondly, the feudal system never existed in its
original purity, in England. The kings of England enjoyed, from the
Conquest downwards, a degree of power which the kings of continental
Europe did not acquire till many generations later. There were no
Godwins and Leofrics after the Conquest. The lands having come into the
possession of the followers of the Conqueror at different times, as they
were successively forfeited by their Saxon proprietors, all the various
territorial acquisitions of a great baron were rarely situated in one
part of the island, he was never strong enough in any one of his fiefs
to establish his independence in that one, while the attempt, even if
successful, would have involved the forfeiture of the rest. The king,
therefore, was always stronger than any one, or any two or three, of his
vassals. They could resist him only when combined. It is difficult to
say how much of our present liberty we may not owe to this fortunate
vigour of the royal authority, which compelled the barons to have
recourse to parliaments, as the single means of effectual opposition to
the encroachments of the king. This comparative strength of the general
government of the country mitigated many of the worst evils of the
feudal system. Great crimes could not be committed with the same
impunity in England as in France. Private wars never prevailed to the
same extent: it being the interest of the king to make himself the
arbiter of all disputes, and his power being in general sufficient to
enforce obedience. It was only in times of acknowledged civil war, such
as the calamitous period which followed the usurpation of Stephen, that
England was subject to those evils from which France never was free.

In Germany, on the other hand, the principal feudatories not only made
themselves independent, but remained so. It is in France that we must
contemplate Edition: current; Page: [27] the feudal system, if we wish
to observe it in both its stages; the feudal aristocracy and the feudal
monarchy; the period in which the great vassals were independent
princes, and the period in which they were subjects. Each of these
periods had its peculiar characteristics: we will begin with the first.

In the year 987, Hugh Capet, one of the chiefs who at that time shared
France among them, usurped the throne. We have already stated the narrow
limits, within which the possessions of the descendant of Charlemagne
were at that time confined. Hugh Capet therefore acquired, as king of
France, little territory beyond what he had previously held as count of
Paris; a domain greatly inferior to that of the dukes of Burgundy or
Normandy, or the counts of Flanders or Poitiers. It extended, in length,
from Laon to Orleans, in breadth from Montereau to Pontoise. He and his
immediate successors, being princes of no talent, instead of enlarging
their territory or extending their influence, allowed what power they
had to slip out of their hands; and, in the reign of Philip, third in
descent from Hugh Capet, we find their authority bounded by the walls of
five towns, Paris, Orleans, Etampes, Melun, and Compiègne.

The combinations which gave birth to the feudal system had, to a certain
extent, answered their end. They afforded considerable protection
against foreign, and some degree of protection against internal,
assailants. The seed was put into the ground with some chance that he
who sowed would be enabled to reap: and, from this time, progression in
wealth and civilization recommenced. But, though some security to person
and property is absolutely necessary to enable wealth to accumulate at
all, the feudal system is a decisive experiment how small a portion of
security will suffice.

Three classes composed, at this early period, the population of a feudal
kingdom: the serfs who produced food, the nobles, or military caste, who
consumed it, and a class of freemen who were neither nobles nor serfs:
but this class, among the laity at least, soon terminated its
short-lived existence. A class of freemen it can scarcely be called.
Their freedom, the sort of freedom which they enjoyed, excluded them
from protection, without exempting them from tyranny. The slave was at
least secure from the oppressions of all masters but his own; the
freeman was, like uninclosed land, the common property of all. We learn
from the capitularies, or ordinances, of the Carlovingian race, that the
ingenui, or free-born, were frequently forced to perform menial offices
in the houses of the seigneurs: if poor, they were compelled to follow
the nobles to the wars; if rich, they were amerced in an amount
exceeding their property.* They were thus driven to seek subsistence and
comparative security by becoming the slaves of their oppressors. As for
the serfs, they were, literally, in the condition of domestic cattle;
their master considered them as such, and treated them in the same
manner, or rather, much more cruelly, because he feared them more. They
were liable, at Edition: current; Page: [28] his will, to the infliction
of any amount of stripes; to the loss of their ears, eyes, nose, feet,
or hands, and, finally, of their lives. Power absolutely unchecked, in
the hands of such men as the feudal chieftains, men utterly unaccustomed
to control any impulse of passion, had its customary effect. We are
informed that a hundred and fifty lashes were a frequent punishment for
the most trivial fault.*

In order to form some further conception of this state of society, we
have to imagine a perpetual civil war: war, not between two great
divisions of the nation, which might rage in one district, leaving the
others in tranquillity, but between every landed proprietor and his next
neighbour.

That the knights of old were very easily affronted, is acknowledged by
their panegyrists themselves. Even in these days, when that salutary
instrument of moral discipline, the gallows, renders the consequences of
an affront offered to an irascible neighbour somewhat less serious than
formerly, we are not wont to regard irascible characters with much
veneration or esteem. But we invest the irascible characters of former
days with all the courage of a captain of dragoons, and so delighted are
we with our own romantic conceptions, that we are ready to fall down and
worship their imaginary original. When a knight was insulted, or thought
fit to consider himself so, our notion is, that with scrupulous regard
to all the niceties of modern honour, he sent his squire with a defiance
to his enemy, challenging him to single combat. Possibly some knights
might have been found who were thus punctilious; but the generality of
them had a much less refined notion of the point of honour.
Assassination, indeed, though horribly frequent, was but the exception,
not the rule; or society must have ceased to exist. It was the
labourers, and other cattle, on the offender’s estate, who in general
paid the penalty of their master’s offence. The insulted party sallied
out of his castle, and without any previous notice, proceeded to
devastate the lands of his enemy; destroying the crops, burning the
habitations, and carrying away both the species of live stock above
spoken of. This done, he made haste to seek shelter in his castle,
before his enemy had time to call together his vassals and pursue him.
The other party, if he did not succeed in overtaking the plunderers,
retaliated by entering upon the domain of the aggressor, and doing all
the mischief he could. If they met, a battle took place; and woe to the
vanquished! If unfortunate enough to be taken prisoner, he was subjected
to the most excruciating torments, until forced to comply with whatever
demands the victor’s rapacity might dictate. Catasta was the name of the
most usual instrument of torture. The prisoner, being placed on an iron
cage, or chained down upon an iron bed, was exposed, in that situation,
to fire. One of M. Dulaure’s anecdotes will serve for illustration.
Theobald V, Count of Chartres and Blois, a contemporary of our Henry II,
and one of the most powerful feudatories north of the Loire, was engaged
in hostilities with Sulpice, Seigneur of Amboise. His enemy fell into
his hands, was put in irons, and exposed every day to the Edition:
current; Page: [29] catasta. In vain did he offer large sums by way of
ransom; the rapacity of the conqueror would be satisfied with nothing
less than the possession of the town and castle of Chaumont. The
required concession was at length extorted from the agonized captive:
but his vassals still held the place, and refused to surrender it. His
life speedily fell a sacrifice to this horrible torture.*

The celebrated anecdote of King John and the Jew’s teeth,[*] as it has,
besides the cruelty, something whimsical in it, fixes itself in the
memory; and is perpetually quoted as an extraordinary instance of the
cruel treatment to which the Jews were subject in that reign. Yet what
is this, compared to what we here see practised by one seigneur upon
another? Judge what must have been the treatment of the mere knight, and
still more that of the burgess and the slave.

The fortresses, in which the terrified cultivators took refuge, were
generally strong enough to defy any means of attack which the art of war
at that time afforded. But the strongest castle might be taken by
treachery or surprise, and, on these occasions, men, women and children
were cut to pieces. This, indeed, was in a manner the law of war. On the
storming of a place, it was the ordinary course of events. We hear much
of the horrible butcheries which were practised in the wars of religion,
on the storming of a town. We imagine, few are aware that these
butcheries were neither new nor extraordinary; that they were no more
than what the barons practised in their most ordinary wars, both foreign
and domestic, when they had not even the imaginary dictates of their
horrible superstition to plead in excuse.

It was an easy transition from these exploits to highway robbery. This
practice, we are accordingly informed, was universal among the poorer
nobility. Any honest employment would have been disgraceful: they wanted
money, if they had cities to pillage, it was well; if not, they pillaged
travellers. An Indian Brahmin, when his profession fails him, is at
liberty to engage in the occupations of that caste which is next in rank
to his own: on a similar principle, the greatest chieftains of France,
princes of the blood, and even kings themselves, when they could no
longer support themselves by their respective vocations of governing and
fighting, betook themselves to the profession of a highwayman as the
next in dignity. Eudes I, Duke of Burgundy; another Eudes, brother to
King Henry I; Philip, a son of King Philip I, and that monarch himself,
are numbered among the high-born predecessors of Cartouche and Turpin.
What was to them only an occasional resource, was to an inferior class
of nobles their daily bread. Sometimes they sallied out, and waylaid
pedlars on the highway, or pilgrims journeying with valuables to some
sacred place: at other times they seized the peasants in the public
market, stripped them of what they had, and detained them prisoners, or
put them to the torture, to extort the disclosure of hidden treasure.

Edition: current; Page: [30]
When Louis VI, surnamed le Gros, the fourth descendant of Hugh Capet who
filled the throne, and the first who was worthy of it, arrived at the
age of manhood, the royal authority was at the lowest ebb. For many
years of his life, he found full occupation in reducing his immediate
subjects, the petty landholders of the royal domain, to a moderate
degree of obedience. A description of the state in which he found that
portion of France, may serve as a specimen of what must have been the
condition of the remainder.

The rural counts, viscounts, and barons, who held immediately of the
king, in the duchy of France, had availed themselves of Philip’s
weakness to shake off his authority altogether, in the castles in which
they had fortified themselves. From these castles they sallied forth and
fell upon the travellers and traders (marchands) who passed within reach
of their retreat, unless the latter consented to redeem themselves with
a high ransom, they equally abused their strength against the
monasteries, and against all the ecclesiastical lords. Sometimes they
went and lodged with them, together with their squires, their soldiers,
their horses, and their dogs, and required that the religious
establishment whose forced hospitality they were enjoying, should defray
the expense of their maintenance for months; sometimes they levied
contributions in money or in kind, upon the peasants of the bishops or
monks, as a compensation for the protection which these warriors
promised to extend towards them. The barons, in particular, who were
vassals of any ecclesiastical body, seemed to think that their vassalage
itself gave them a title to the spoil of their clerical superiors.*

Louis, who was not only king of France, but the immediate feudal
superior of these freebooters, found himself not only no match for their
united strength, but scarcely able to cope with the lord of a castle
single-handed. He prudently limited his first undertakings to the
protection of the monasteries against the extortions of the nobility. By
this means he obtained the sanction of the church, and the co-operation
of the abbey troops, by whose aid he repressed the disorders of the
principal Châtelains, and brought most of them into comparative
subjection to his authority.

The names and designations of some of these worthies have been preserved
to us. Hugh de Pompone, Seigneur of Crécy, and Châtelain of Gournay,
infested with his depredations, not only the highway, but the river
Marne, stopping passengers by land and water, and levying contributions.
When attacked by Louis, this bandit was defended by his father, Guy,
Count of Rochefort, and by Theobald, Count of Champagne. The fortress of
Montlhéri, the patrimony and residence of a branch of the Montmorency
family, was the retreat of a band of robbers, who desolated the whole
country from Corbeil to Châteaufort, and interrupted all communication
between Paris and Orleans. Hugh, Seigneur of Puiset, a place situated
not far from the road which connects Chartres with Orleans, plundered
travellers to the very gates of Chartres. Louis reduced his castle, and
retained him for some time in confinement; but on his succeeding, by the
death of an uncle, to the county of Corbeil, the relinquishment of this
inheritance in favour of Louis was the price of his release. This lesson
produced no change in his habits of life. No sooner was Edition:
current; Page: [31] Louis occupied in another quarter, than he rebuilt,
in violation of an express engagement, the fortifications of Puiset,
seized the king’s peasants in the public market-place, and extorted sums
of money by way of ransom.

But these were vulgar trespasses, hardly worthy of mention. It was
reserved for Thomas de Marne, a baron of Picardy, to exemplify in its
perfection the true greatness of villainy. “This seigneur,” says the
abbot of Nogent.[*] quoted by M. de Sismondi,

had, from his earliest youth, continually augmented his riches by the
pillage of travellers and pilgrims, and extended his domain by
incestuous marriages with rich heiresses, his relations. His cruelty was
so unheard-of, that even butchers, who nevertheless pass for unfeeling,
are more sparing of the sufferings of the cattle which they are slaying,
than he was of the sufferings of men for he was not contented with
punishing them by the sword, for determinate faults, as people are
accustomed to do, he racked them by the most horrible tortures. When he
wished to extort a ransom from his captives, he hung them up by some
delicate part of the body; or laid them upon the ground, and, covering
them with stones, walked over them; beating them at the same time, until
they promised all that he required, or perished under the operation.*

It was not until the twenty-second year of his reign, that Louis could
subjugate this demon in human form. For eighteen years at least of this
long interval, he continued his execrable mode of life; and might have
continued it longer, had he not, when besieged in his castle of Coucy,
been mortally wounded and taken prisoner in a sortie. “The king,” says
M. de Sismondi, “tried to induce him, in his last moments, to release
the traders whom he had kidnapped on the highway; whom he kept in prison
to extort a ransom, or tortured for his amusement: but even in the
agonies of death Coucy refused all mercy, and seemed to regret the loss
of dominion over his prisoners, much more than the termination of
life.”[†] Thus perished Thomas de Marne. But his eldest son Enguerrand
de Coucy trod faithfully in his steps; and succeeded in making head
against the whole power of the king. After being vainly besieged in the
castle of la Fère, he was taken into favour, and received in marriage a
princess of the blood royal.

In 1109, says M. Dulaure, one of those horrible occurrences, so frequent
in the annals of feudality, took place at the castle of la Roche-Guyon
on the Seine. The lord of this castle, Guy de la Roche-Guyon, is praised
by contemporary writers for renouncing the practices of his father and
grandfather: “Il était enclin à se conduire en homme probe et honnête,
et s’abstenait de pillage et de vol: ‘Peut-être,’ adds one author, ‘se
serait-il laissé aller aux habitudes de ses pères, s’il eût plus
longuement vécu.’ ”† This chief, whom the chronicler supposes to have
died just Edition: current; Page: [32] in time to save his virtue, was
assassinated by Guillaume his brother-in-law, who, with the aid of
several knights, laid an ambuscade in the chapel of the castle, and
murdered Guy, his wife and children, and every other human being in the
place. Had this been all, he might have retained the castle to the end
of his natural life: but he was suspected by the neighbouring barons of
being in an understanding with the English. They resolved to dislodge
him. Being besieged in the castle, he opened the gates, stipulating for
his life and liberty. It seems that some of the besiegers were not
parties to the capitulation. Guillaume was massacred, together with the
rest of the besieged: we are not told whether by those who had not
engaged for his safety, or by those who had.

In this state was the royal domain, under the fifth of the Capets. But
enough of causes; it is time to look at effects. Of the seventy-three
years which composed the reigns of Hugh Capet, his son, and grandson,
forty-eight were years of famine; being two out of three. Of these
famines, pestilence was almost a uniform, cannibalism a frequent,
accompaniment.* So much for the feudal system, and the perpetual civil
war which was its consequence. In the long reign of Charlemagne we hear
only of two famines; and even under the feeble Louis le Débonnaire,
whose reign was disgraced by so many rebellions, there is only mention
of one.† So much more destructive of security was feudal order, than
what elsewhere goes by the name of civil war; and so endurable a thing
is even despotism, compared with “liberty,” when all the liberty is for
a few barons, and the mass of the people are slaves.

In this country, it has been the interest of the powerful, that the
abominations of the clergy in the middle ages should be known; and
accordingly they are known. But it has not been the interest of the
powerful in this country, that the abominations of the barons should be
known; and consequently they are not simply unknown, but their authors
are believed to have been patterns of the noblest virtues. The clergy
were, in reality, by many degrees the less wicked of the two. They at
all times administered better justice to their vassals, than the
military chiefs; they at all times discouraged depredations and private
wars. True it is, that in their eyes these were secondary offences; it
was not for such crimes that interdicts and excommunications were sent
forth: these were reserved for the man who married his fourth cousin, or
who presumed to summon an ecclesiastic before a secular court. Robbery
and murder were not, it is true, sins of so black a dye as the
foregoing; they were sins, however, and, as such, were condemned. To the
exertions of the clergy was owing the truce of God, one of the most
curious traits in the character of the times. In a council composed of
laymen and ecclesiastics, held in the diocese of Perpignan, it was
resolved that three days and two nights in each week should be allowed
to the nobles, to fight, burn, and plunder, under certain Edition:
current; Page: [33] restrictions; by which concession it was hoped to
induce them to suspend those recreations during the remainder of the
week. This attempt to compromise with the vices of the times, was not,
we are told, at first, altogether unsuccessful. But the compact was not
adopted in all the districts of France, nor even in the royal domain;
and as there existed no means of enforcing its observance, it fell every
where into desuetude. It being thought that the time allowed for pillage
was possibly not quite long enough, it was enlarged to four days and
three nights, and at length to nearly six days and five nights; but the
shortest intermission of mutual devastation was more than could be
endured.*

During the succeeding reigns, the power of the crown was gradually on
the increase, and that of the great feudatories on the wane. Many of the
most powerful fiefs became, by marriage or otherwise, integral parts of
the English or French monarchies. The expulsion of the English from the
north of France, by Philip Augustus, added their possessions to the
royal domain; and the enfranchisement of the large towns, which
uniformly allied themselves with the king against their old masters,
enabled him to break the power of the feudal aristocracy. While this
great change in the frame of society was going on, no improvement took
place in the moral habits of the nobility. They continued to rob on the
highway, and to quarrel and fight with one another, as before. Nor was
it till long after the reign of Saint Louis, that the châtelains of
France universally abandoned the profession of a highwayman. “Tels,”
says M. Dulaure,

étaient les chevaliers du douzième et treizième siècle, dont la loyauté
tant exaltée dans les romans, dans les compositions poétiques, et sur
notre scène moderne, se trouve constamment démentie par l’histoire. Ces
hommes auxquels on attribue tant d’exploits glorieux, tant d’actions
généreuses et honorables, n’étaient que des brigands impitoyables, des
misérables dignes de figurer dans les bagnes ou les cachots de Bicétre.
Je révèle ici une des nombreuses impostures de nos écrivains.†

It is not asserted, that there were no exceptions to this general
depravity. All which is contended for is, that the virtuous characters
of those days were as much less virtuous than those of our own, as the
wicked characters were more wicked, and that they were proportionally
much more rare. Such is not the impression conveyed by the romances of
chivalry; and it is the misfortune of modern writers, that they have
mistaken the romances of chivalry for the history of chivalry. We shall
be told, that romances are good evidence of manners. We answer with M.
Roederer:‡ of manners, yes: of the characters of their heroes, not at
all. The romances of chivalry did not even profess to represent the
knights as they were, but as they ought to be. What would be thought of
a writer who should seriously infer, Edition: current; Page: [34] that
in the time of Richardson the character of an English gentleman
resembled that of Sir Charles Grandison?[*]

Even Mr. Hallam does not believe in the reality of knights-errant; of
persons who travelled about, liberating captives, and redressing
wrongs.[†] But a romance must have a hero, and a hero must be a
character to be admired. There never was a state of society (howsoever
depraved) in which the character of a redresser of wrongs was not
admired; on the contrary, it is admired in the direct ratio of the
frequency of grievous wrongs. The romances of the east abound with good
viziers: when the hero is a vizier, we may be sure he is always a good
one: and how often does a good vizier arise? About as often as a good
king: once in two hundred years.

One would expect to find the most admirable models of chivalrous virtue
among those whose names and actions history has celebrated, and who were
most admired by their contemporaries.* In these respects no chevalier
ever exceeded Richard Coeur de Lion. A few anecdotes, therefore, of his
life, will go far to illustrate, not only the practical morality of the
age, but moreover its theoretical standard of moral approbation. This
mirror of chivalry is first introduced to our notice in the character of
a rebellious and treacherous son, intrusted by his father with the
government of a province, and exciting that province to rebel. As Duke
of Edition: current; Page: [35] Aquitaine, we find him carrying off the
wives and daughters of his principal vassals; and, after keeping them
until he was weary of possession, giving them away in presents to his
followers.* When reconciled to his father, he turns round upon his
former partizans, invades their territories, captures their towns, and
loads them with exactions.† Again and again received into favour, again
and again did he rebel. At length his father died, and he succeeded to
the throne. His first act, in this new situation, was to place his
father’s treasurer, Stephen of Tours, seneschal of Anjou, in irons: nor
did he release him until (says Roger de Hoveden) he had delivered up all
the late king’s money, and his own, to the last penny.‡

He appears to no greater advantage as a champion of the cross. It is
related of him, that, when walking in the streets of Messina, he heard
the cry of a hawk proceeding from the house of a peasant. A hawk, in
England, was to plebeians a prohibited bird. Richard, forgetting that he
was no longer in England, but in a country where the peasants had
knives, and knew how to use them, entered the house, and took possession
of the bird; but an assembled crowd speedily put him to flight. The same
imperious temper and despotic habits soon after led him to commit a
still greater outrage. A monastery, situated on the strait of Messina,
appeared to him a convenient place for lodging his magazines: with him,
to desire and to seize were one; he turned out the monks, and put a
party of soldiers into their place. Disgusted at these and other acts of
oppression, the inhabitants of Messina shut the gates upon Richard and
his troops; a conflict ensued, and he forced his way into the place.§
Another anecdote, which is related of him while at Messina, is
strikingly characteristic of his jealous and vindictive disposition. In
the crusading army he had no rival in warlike exercises, except a French
knight, named Guillaume des Barres. On one occasion, while the knights
were exercising without the walls, an ass passed by loaded with reeds,
which then, as now, were used in that country as vine props. They seized
the reeds, and commenced a mock fight. Richard and Guillaume des Barres
were opposed to one another. Their reeds were shivered at the first
shock, but the reed of Guillaume tore Richard’s cloak. This
insignificant mischance provoked Richard to such a degree of fury, that
he rushed upon his adversary, and strove violently to unhorse him. In
this endeavour he was defeated, which inflamed his passion still more;
he swore that he would be for ever the enemy of Guillaume des Barres,
and was mean enough to require that the king of France should withdraw
his protection from that knight, and banish him from Messina. Nor was it
till long after, that, by the entreaties of Philip, aided by those of
all the barons and prelates in the army, who placed themselves on their
knees Edition: current; Page: [36] before him, he was prevailed upon to
restrain his resentment during such time as he and Guillaume should both
wear the badge of the crusade.*

The conduct of Coeur de Lion, after the surrender of Acre, was even in
that age remarkable for its ferocity. The garrison and inhabitants were
to remain prisoners for forty days, at the expiration of which term, if
not previously ransomed, they were to be at the mercy of the conqueror.
Not being ransomed, they were, by Richard’s order, put to death in cold
blood.†

On his return to England, having laid siege to Nottingham, he erected a
gibbet within sight of the walls, and hanged several men-at-arms whom he
had taken prisoners, to strike terror into the besieged.‡

At a later period, we find him raising the wind in a manner truly royal,
by turning off his chancellor,[*] and declaring all the acts of that
functionary null and void; obliging those whose titles were thus
invalidated, to purchase valid ones, or forfeit their right.

We soon after find him swearing a truce with the king of France, and
violating it immediately.§ Nor was this his last breach of faith. After
resigning, by solemn treaty, the paramountcy of Auvergne to his rival
the king of France, and even undertaking to aid him in enforcing the
right against the unwilling Auvergnats, he broke the treaty, and made an
alliance with the Auvergnats against their new liege lord. He very soon
broke his faith with them too, and concluding a separate truce, looked
on quietly, and saw them subdued. The truce expired, and hostilities
renewed between the two kings. Richard had the assurance to renew his
correspondence with the Auvergnats, claim their performance of the
engagement which he himself had violated, and exhort them to renew the
war. They were too prudent to be again deceived; and the royal
troubadour consoled himself by composing satirical verses upon what he
termed their breach of faith.¶

Edition: current; Page: [37]
But the reader has probably had enough of the “glory of chivalry.”[*] To
be the glory of chivalry, indeed, nothing was necessary but the
reputation of military prowess: a reputation founded upon achievements
in war, and superiority in jousts and tournaments. The pomp and
pageantry which adorned these exhibitions have captivated the
imaginations, not only of contemporaries but of posterity; and when the
imagination is gained, the reason, as experience shows, very seldom
fails to follow. That the characteristics of a knight were undaunted
courage and the most ardent desire of glory, is a proposition which has
hitherto been taken for granted by the admirers, and hardly denied by
the impugners of chivalry; and when we wish to say of any one that he is
a pattern of all the military virtues, our expression is, that he is
worthy of the age of chivalry. Now this proceeds, as it appears to us,
upon a complete misapprehension. That courage and the love of glory were
not uncommon among the knights, it would be absurd to doubt; since these
are qualities which are never wanting, where there are dangers, and a
public opinion. But that either quality was universal among them is the
dream of a romancer; and we will venture to affirm, that there is more
real courage in a single regiment of the British or French army in the
year 1826, than there was in the whole chivalry of France or England
five centuries ago.

We must not be misled by the great estimation in which military prowess
was held. This is no proof of its universality, but the reverse. When
particular examples of any virtue are extravagantly praised, it is a
certain sign that the virtue is rare. It is pertinently remarked (we
believe, by M. Dulaure), that there are at this day hundreds in the
French army who possess all the heroic qualities which immortalized
Bayard,* but who are utterly unknown, precisely because there are so
many. Thus it is that we continue to talk of the continence of Scipio;
yet, what mighty matter did this continence amount to? He did not ravish
a beautiful woman, whom the fortune of war had thrown into his hands.[†]
Now, if this be greatness, what subaltern officer, we were going to say,
common soldier, in the British army, is not as great a man as Scipio? As
a proof of Scipio’s continence, the story is Edition: current; Page:
[38] ridiculous; but, as a proof of the lawless and brutal incontinence
of his contemporaries, this one anecdote, though it be but an anecdote,
is worth a thousand volumes.

The ardour of the knights for military enterprises was indeed universal.
But this ardour was no proof of exalted courage. Their military
enterprises exposed them to hardly any danger. Cased in impenetrable
armour, they could in general defy all attempts on life or limb; and the
battles of chivalry, how destructive soever to the almost unarmed
infantry, were rarely fatal to the men-at-arms. It might be, that a few
knights were trampled on by horses, or crushed, in falling, by the
weight of their armour. But if unhorsed, and at the victor’s mercy,
their lives were scarcely ever in any danger, except from private
vengeance; it was neither esteemed dishonourable to give, nor to accept,
a ransom; it was the law of war. To compare the courage of an average
knight, with that of a modern private soldier, would be like drawing a
comparison, for endurance of cold, between a man wrapped up in furs, and
a barefooted and naked savage.*

Trifling, however, as was the danger of their warlike enterprises, they
always courted in preference the least hazardous even of these. In their
hostilities with one another, we have already mentioned that it was
their great endeavour, after devastating the country, to escape to their
strongholds without the risk of an engagement. They always preferred to
encounter the inhabitants of the towns, who were destitute of defensive
armour, and of whom they might hope to cut down thousands without the
loss of a man. If, indeed, we look for real courage in the feudal times,
we must seek it among those brave citizens, who did not fear, under such
tremendous disadvantages, to face these terrible opponents in the field,
in defence of all that they held dear. Among the few pages of the feudal
annals which it gives pleasure to read, is that which records the
glorious struggle which the burgesses of Flanders, forsaken and sold by
their ally Edward I of England, maintained against Philippe le Bel and
the whole chivalry of France. Thousands and thousands of them were cut
to pieces; but they triumphed!

The taste of the chevaliers for tournaments, and other warlike
exercises, may be as easily explained as their love of military
adventure. M. de Sismondi treats both merely as the resources of
désoeuvré savages to expel ennui. They sought excitement in the lists
and in the field, as our German ancestors sought it by staking Edition:
current; Page: [39] their liberty on the throw of a die. “Un esprit
inquiet, un vague désir d’aventures, le besoin d’émotions, et l’espoir
d’améliorer sa condition par la violence plus que par l’industrie,
formaient alors le caractère de la noblesse Française.”* The following
passage characterizes chivalry with equal vigour and accuracy. We give
it in the original, because it is at the same time a specimen of the
style of M. de Sismondi’s work:

Les paysans, les bourgeois, tous ceux qui travaillaient pour gagner leur
misérable vie, qui se trouvaient sans cesse vexés, opprimés, insultés
par leurs supérieurs, ne demandaient que le repos, et une sûreté que
l’ordre public était loin de leur garantir, mais les nobles étaient, au
contraire, dévorés par l’ennui, et souvent aussi aiguillonnés par la
cupidité, leur esprit, qui n’avait reçu aucune culture, qui ne
soupçonnait pas même les avantages de l’instruction, ne trouvait aucune
ressource dans la solitude ou la vie domestique: toute occupation
laborieuse ou lucrative leur était interdite, elle dérogeait à la
noblesse, elle les assimilait à ces vilains qu’ils faisaient travailler
comme des bêtes de somme et qu’ils maltraitaient comme des ennemis. Les
cours plénières, les tournois, les pas d’armes se présentent à notre
imagination comme les divertissemens de cette noblesse brillante. Nous y
voyons les riches récompenses décernées à la valeur, et nous oublions
que même pour ceux qui pouvaient en jouir, huit jours de fête étaient
achetés par une année de langueur et de solitude. Mais tandis que les
serfs de chaque baron lui fournissaient le pain, la viande, peut-être la
laine et le lin dont il avait besoin pour sa consommation habituelle, il
fallait qu’il achetât les armes, les équipages, les habits somptueux
avec lesquels il voulait paraître aux fêtes chevaleresques, et lui qui
ne produisait rien, qui ne vendait rien, il n’avait jamais de l’argent,
il ne pouvait s’en procurer que par la rapine et par la guerre: la
cupidité avait donc bien plus de part que l’amour du danger à cet
empressement avec lequel il courait partout où il entendait le bruit des
armes La cupidité et l’ennui étaient les deux mobiles de la noblesse, la
vanité concourait avec l’ennui pour entretenir cette passion pour les
tournois que les excommunications de l’église ne pouvaient modérer; car
Grégoire IX avait de nouveau, le 27 Février 1228, frappé d’anathème ceux
qui combattaient dans les jeux de lance (hastiludia) et soumis leurs
terres à l’interdit. La cupidité et l’ennui conduisaient les
gentilshommes Français partout où la vue du sang ruisselant réveillait
l’âme engourdie, et où le pillage livrait au guerrier cet or qu’aucune
honnête industrie ne pouvait lui procurer.†

M. de Sismondi’s two great stimuli, cupidity and ennui, were quite
capable of leading them into danger, but it required another sort of
qualities to bring them successfully out of it. As often as the demand
for excitement and the demand for plunder brought a large number of them
together in one enterprise, the same passions invariably hurried them
into irregularities which put to hazard, if they did not frustrate, the
success of the expedition. Their impatience of subordination made them
regardless of discipline, and uncontrollable by the authority of their
commander; their habitual thoughtlessness rendered them incapable of
directing their own conduct, and they would not suffer it to be directed
by any one else. Let the admirer of chivalry read the history of any
enterprise of real danger in which they were ever engaged; of any of the
crusades for example, more especially of the Edition: current; Page:
[40] two last; let him mark, not only the rapine and cruelty, but the
stupidity, the supineness, the headlong confidence, the incapacity of
foreseeing and providing against the most obvious difficulties, which
rendered their whole career one series of blunders and misfortunes. If
he weighs all this, and moreover bethinks himself of the peculiar
character of their warfare, by which even personal prowess was made to
depend almost entirely on the steeds, the armour, and the bodily
strength of the combatants,* he must acknowledge that the far-famed
knights of the middle ages were nearly as destitute even of the military
virtues, in any extended sense of the term, as they were of all other
virtues whatsoever.

So much for the “cheap defence of nations.” Now for the “nurse of manly
sentiment and heroic virtue.”[*]

The characteristic virtues of chivalry, according to Mr. Hallam, were
loyalty, courtesy, and munificence.[†] Its claim to these qualities has
in general been allowed; and it has, on this foundation, been without
further question admitted to have been the great refiner of manners, and
purifier of morals. Is this notion well grounded, or not? Let us
inquire.

If by munificence be meant, according to Mr. Hallam’s definition,
“disdain of money,”[‡] meaning disdain of wealth, not only this quality
did not characterize the age of chivalry, but the diametrically opposite
qualities did. In no age was the thirst for plunder a more
all-engrossing passion, nor the source of more numerous or greater
crimes. But if it be only meant, that the wealth which was lightly got
was lightly squandered; that the feudal chief was profuse in bestowing
upon the instruments of his strength, or the ministers of his vanity or
his amusement, gifts which cost him nothing but the groans of his
bondmen, or the blood of those of his neighbour; the little value set
upon wealth thus obtained, is only a proof how lightly the crimes by
which it was purchased weighed upon the conscience of the offender. When
all that had been got by one crime had been expended, what could be more
obvious than, by another crime, to get more?

Loyalty is defined by Mr. Hallam to mean, fidelity to engagements. By
courtesy, was meant, not only ceremonious politeness, but good feeling
and good conduct towards each other, and particularly towards
prisoners.[§] Of both these qualities there were shining examples
towards the conclusion of the age of chivalry. There was but little of
either in the earlier period; and at no time were these virtues very
commonly practised. While the feudal nobility retained their turbulent
independence, no perfidy was thought too odious in order to gain an end,
nor any abuse of power too flagrant when practised upon the defenceless.
The Edition: current; Page: [41] treacherous devices which they employed
to entrap one another, the horrid cruelties which they practised upon
one another when entrapped, the assassinations which they sometimes
perpetrated, sometimes (though more rarely) suborned, and of which the
altar was not unfrequently the scene, are topics which we have already
in some measure illustrated, and have not room to exhibit further. When
one baron took a fancy to the wife of another, it appears, from several
instances related by M. de Sismondi, that he made no scruple of carrying
off the object of his passion, and marrying her; so much for the
loyalty, the courtesy, and we will add, the religion, of the times.*

Edition: current; Page: [42]
But when the greater barons ceased to be independent sovereigns, and the
smaller barons and knights to be subjects and retainers of those
sovereigns; when their exploits came to be performed in national armies,
and their virtues and vices to be exhibited on a great theatre, exposed
to the view of whole nations; they then became, for the first time,
amenable to a sort of public opinion. It is when individuals come under
the influence of public opinion, that they begin to exhibit some
glimmerings of virtue. But what kind of virtue? This will depend upon
the kind of public to whose opinion they are amenable. The only public
to which the knights of chivalry were amenable, was a public composed of
one another. The opinion which other classes might form concerning their
conduct, was a matter of too little importance to them to be at all
regarded.

The consequences of this situation well deserve to be traced. Though it
is not true of every individual that his interest makes his morality, it
is strictly true of every class of men. When a set of persons are so
situated as to be compelled to pay regard to the opinion of one another,
but not compelled to pay any regard to the opinion of the rest of the
world, they invariably proceed to fabricate two rules of action; one
rule for their behaviour to one another, another rule for their
behaviour to all persons except themselves. This was literally,
strictly, what the chevaliers did. A chevalier was bound by the opinion
of the chevaliers to keep his word with another chevalier, and to treat
him, when a prisoner, with gentleness and respect. His own interest
would prompt him to do so, if a man of common prudence; since he could
not know how soon he might be a prisoner, and might have occasion to be
released upon parole, or promise of ransom. But we are not to suppose
that it was necessary for a knight to fulfil his engagements with any
one except a knight. Exactly as the profligate man of fashion of the
present day will pay a gaming debt to the last farthing, though it leave
him pennyless, while he internally resolves never to pay his tradesmen
at all: so would a baron keep his word with another baron, and break his
word, and his oath too, with a low-born bourgeois.

History, though conversant only with events upon a great scale, affords
abundant evidence to bear out this assertion. Notwithstanding the
rapacity and avarice of the barons, their profusion rendered them in
general needy. The towns, which at first were part of their domain,
amenable to their jurisdiction and subject to their arbitrary exactions,
took advantage of their wants to purchase, among other privileges, that
of having an adminstration of justice and a municipal government of
their own. This was a concession which nothing but the most pressing
necessities could ever have extorted from those haughty superiors, and
which they never afterwards thought of without resentment. No
opportunity was missed of resuming the concession, and re-establishing
their former supremacy over the town; retaining, however, the
purchase-money of freedom. The pages of M. de Sismondi exhibit such
numerous examples of this kind of perfidy, that it is impossible to
suppose that it could have been considered at all disgraceful. Every
privilege, in fact, which a town could succeed in wringing from the
penury of its Edition: current; Page: [43] lord, was the commencement of
a long struggle between the town and the seigneur; the seigneur
struggling to get back his power, the townsmen to prevent him. If the
lord succeeded, any new attempt to throw off his authority was called
rebellion, and treated accordingly; for this also see Sismondi, passim.

King John of France, who was taken prisoner at Poitiers, is related to
have said, that if truth and good faith had disappeared from the earth,
they ought to be found on the lips and in the hearts of monarchs. This
John, who was surnamed the Good, and who, if the anecdote be authentic,
could talk in such magnifient terms about justice and good faith, had
solicited and obtained from the pope, a few years before, for himself
and his successors, a curious sort of privilege: it was that of
violating all vows made and to be made, all oaths taken and to be taken,
which they could not conveniently keep, quae servare commode non
possetis, commuting them for other pious works.*

This John, who was a contemporary of the Black Prince and of Bertrand du
Guesclin, and who lived, therefore, in the halcyon days of chivalrous
virtue, had, it seems, but an indifferent opinion of the knights of his
day. He accused the French knights of having become insensible to honour
and fame: Honoris et famae, proh dolor! neglectâ pulchritudine.† The
same prince, on hearing the song of Roland, observed, Il y a long-temps
qu’on ne voit plus de Roland en France. An old captain, who was present,
did not deny the fact, but threw all the blame of it upon the monarch
himself: On en verrait encore s’ils avaient un Charlemagne à leur tête.‡
Deceived, like ourselves, by romances, even the chevaliers of that day
looked back, it seems, with admiration, to the imaginary heroism of
their forefathers. Yet this was the most shining period of the age of
chivalry. It was also the last. A few years after, chivalry silently
expired. The use of fire-arms became general. Cuirasses, as it turned
out, were not bullet-proof. The chevaliers tried hard to render them so,
by making them thicker and thicker, heavier and heavier, till at last
(says Lanoue) Il n’y avait homme de trente ans qui n’en fût estropié.§
Finding that all this would not save them from gunpowder, the cowards
forsook the field, and abandoned the defence of their country and their
liege-lord to hired soldiers—to plebeians.

Such was the age of chivalry. But to all our denunciations of the vices
of that age, one glorious exception must be made. Either the whole
testimony of history is false, or Saint Louis never violated his word,
nor swerved from what he thought the dictates of his conscience.
Historians have not done justice to Saint Louis. He has been pictured as
a virtuous man, but a slave to priestcraft. Nothing can be more Edition:
current; Page: [44] unfounded. His mind was strongly tinctured with the
superstitions of the age; he conceived the deity not as an indulgent
father, but as an irritable and jealous master; all this is true: but it
is not true that he was priest-ridden; for he several times resisted not
only his clergy, but the pope himself.* He followed the dictates of his
own mind. His ideas of religious duty were his own; and every action of
his life was governed by them. He thought it his duty to persecute, and
he did persecute; he thought it his duty to be an ascetic, and he was an
ascetic; but he also thought it his duty to keep his word, and he kept
it inviolably; he thought it a sin even to retain what his predecessors
had unjustly acquired, and he made restitution with the most scrupulous
exactness. He was a perfect specimen of a mind governed by conviction; a
mind which has imperfect and wrong ideas of morality, but which adheres
to them with a constancy and firmness of principle, in its highest
degree perhaps the rarest of all human qualities.

When we contemplate one who in so barbarous an age, and under all the
temptations of power, although misled by a bad religion, did not make
that religion a substitute for morality, but devoted himself to the
fulfilment of his real duties, with the same earnestness as his
imaginary ones, we admire even the power over himself which his
austerities display; we lament the erroneousness of his opinions, but we
venerate the man. Very differently are we affected by the religion which
characterized the times. The knights and nobles of the day were as
pious, many of them, as Saint Louis himself; but how different a piety!
All his intolerance was theirs, without a spark of his virtue. When we
read of their crusades, their pilgrimages, and their persecutions, we
are apt, by a natural mistake, to speak of their fanaticism. But
fanaticism is far too respectable a name. Fanaticism supposes principle:
the notion of fulfilling a duty. Their fires were kindled not to fulfil
a duty, but to escape from its fulfilment. They thought to strike a
bargain with Omnipotence; to compound for one crime by practising
another. It was not from principle, but from mere selfishness, that they
burned heretics, slaughtered Saracens, and plundered Jews. They imagined
that he who sacrificed hecatombs of unbelievers to the God of mercy, was
freed from every moral obligation towards his fellow-men. Never did
their religion for a moment stand in the way of their passions. In
sacking a town, neither priests, nor nuns, nor crosses, nor relics, were
sacred to them.† In their private wars, the church lands, being an
easier prey, were even less respected than those of one another; nor
were their devastations restrained by that excommunication which
encroachments upon that species of property invariably entailed. But
they had been taught that by giving way to their darling passions, their
avarice and cruelty, against the miscreants who denied the faith, they
atoned for the indulgence of the same passions against the true Edition:
current; Page: [45] believers. The publication of a crusade, especially
against the emperor or the Albigenses, was commonly accompanied by an
offer to the champions of the cross, of—what? Remission of all sins,
past and future, in the other world, together with permission to rob
their creditors in this. They were exempted, during the crusade, from
the payment of interest on their debts. The cunning priests, who added
this earthly recompense to the heavenly one, knew well the sort of
persons with whom they had to deal. That some of the crusading knights
were mainly influenced by motives of religion, is as true, as that some
were influenced by the desire of military glory; but the great bulk were
influenced by nothing but M. de Sismondi’s “deux mobiles de la
noblesse,” cupidity and ennui.

There is one feature in the chivalrous character which has yet to be
noticed; we mean, its gallantry. And this we shall think it necessary to
examine the more fully, because we are persuaded that nine-tenths of the
admiration of chivalry are grounded upon it. We own it is hard to speak
ill of men who could make vows to their lady-love that they would wear a
scarf over one eye till they should have signalized her charms by some
exploit, or who could leave the ranks and challenge one another to
single combat, to settle which man of them adored the most beautiful
mistress. We trust, however, that without treason to the fair sex, of
which we profess ourselves devoted admirers, it may be permitted to
doubt whether these fopperies contributed much to the substantial
happiness of women, or indicated any real solicitude for their welfare.
To us it seems very clear, that such demonstrations of eagerness, not to
make a woman happy, but to make the whole world acknowledge the
pre-eminence of her charms, had their source in mere vanity, and the
love of distinction; and that the knight who fought a duel concerning
the beauty of his mistress, because she was his mistress, would have
done the same thing for his falcon, if it had been the fashion.

If it could be proved that women, in the middle ages, were well treated,
it would be so decisive a proof of an advanced stage of civilization, as
it would require much evidence to rebut. That they were so treated,
however, is not to be believed without proof. That a knight prided
himself upon the beauty of his mistress, and deemed his honour concerned
in maintaining it at the sword’s point, is no proof. In the Asiatic
kingdoms, in which, above all countries in the world, women are not only
practically ill-treated, but theoretically despised, the whole honour of
a family is considered to be bound up in its women. If their seclusion
is intruded upon; if the foot of a stranger profanes the zenana, the
disgrace is indelible. This is one species of foppery: the gallantry of
the middle ages was another: and, like the ceremonious politeness which
distingished alike the chevaliers and the orientals, they characterize
that period in the progress of society, which may be termed the age of
false refinement, and which is situated half way between savage and
civilized life.

Good treatment of women, we have already observed, is one of the surest
marks of high civilization. But it seems to be very little considered,
in what good Edition: current; Page: [46] treatment of women consists.
It does not consist in treating them as idols to be worshipped, or as
trinkets to be worn for display; any more than in shutting them up like
jewels in a case, removed from the light of the sun and the sight of
men. In both cases, this treatment is a proof that they are valued; else
why are so much pains taken about them? But in both cases they are
valued exactly like beautiful trinkets; the value set upon them is quite
compatible with perfect indifference to their happiness or misery.

Professor Millar, perhaps the greatest of philosophical inquirers into
the civilization of past ages, has observed, with truth, that during the
savage state, when the attention of men is wholly engrossed by the
pursuit of the necessaries of life, the pleasures of sex are little
regarded, and little valued; but as soon as the satisfaction of their
more pressing wants gives leisure to cultivate the other enjoyments
within their reach, these pleasures are among the first which engage
their attention. If the savage state is, of all others, that in which
the sexual passion is weakest, the half-savage state, or the state
immediately bordering on barbarism, is that in which it is strongest.[*]
This remark explains the treatment of women in feudal Europe, as well as
in Asia, different as their condition in these two states of society may
appear. In Asia, where food could always be obtained with comparatively
trifling labour, and where very little clothing and lodging were
necessary either to existence or to comfort, the savage or hunting state
seems never to have existed; the pleasures of sex were probably
cultivated from the beginning, and, man abusing his natural superiority,
the women were made slaves. In Europe, on the contrary, as among the
North American Indians, women were not valued as sources of pleasure,
and were not valuable for the labour of hunting, in that state of
society the only kind of hard labour. No motives, therefore, existed for
reducing them to bondage; and when these barbarians over-spread the
Roman empire, and, possessing themselves of the land, began to lead an
idle life instead of a laborious one, this new state of society found
the women free. From this circumstance arose the different situation of
women in Asia and in feudal Europe. In the latter, where they were free,
to obtain the woman who was the object of desire became often a matter
of extreme difficulty, and generally could not be effected without her
own consent: in the former, where they were slaves, to obtain any number
of women independently of their consent, became, to a rich man, a matter
of no difficulty at all; and his solicitude was transferred to the means
of keeping them.

We thus see that the seclusion of women in Asia, and the idolatry of
them in Europe, were both marks of the same low state of civilization.
The latter, no doubt, gave to some women for a time more power. But we
must not overrate the value of this power to their happiness. The
question is not, how much power a knight would give his mistress leave
to fancy she exercised over him, in order that she might Edition:
current; Page: [47] consent to his obtaining power over her; but in what
manner he employed his power over her when obtained. Of the domestic
lives of the knights, we have hardly any direct information; and in the
absence of any, we may proceed upon the general presumption, that men
who were brutal towards one another, would not be less brutal towards
their wives. Allowing that a woman who had been an object of desire, and
who was still a source of vanity from her personal charms, might command
tolerable treatment on account of those charms, while they lasted, and
on account of her children at a later period; we profess ourselves not
to be of the number of those who sympathize exclusively with beautiful
women. Although the heroines of romances were somehow always beautiful,
it may yet be inferred, from the inherent probabilility of the thing,
that there were ugly women in those days as well as in our own; though
we are left to conjecture what sort of treatment may peradventure have
been undergone by such ill-fated females, if any such there were. A
knight who had to maintain at the point of the sword, that his lady was
the most beautiful lady in the whole world, would, in common prudence,
attach himself to some fair one, whose pretensions to that character
might be maintained without subjecting him to any extraordinary degree
of ridicule. We know, in point of fact, that a small number of beautiful
women engrossed all the admiration and all the vows of all the knights,
and that the large and unattractive majority were altogether neglected.
It is the treatment of them, however, and not that of their more
attractive sisters, which is the test of civilization.

There is positive evidence, how little regard was paid by a warrior of
the age of chivalry, to the feelings even of the object of his passion,
when he had the power of gratifying that passion independently of her
consent. If a baron happened to be smitten by the charms of the daughter
of one of his vassals, he demanded of her father, as a matter of course,
that she should be yielded up to his embraces.* The frequency of rapes
and abductions, even in the case of women of elevated rank, is another
important proof how little connection the foppish gallantry of that age
had with the real happiness of the sex affected to be adored. We have
mentioned in a former page the chivalrous treatment of the Gascon ladies
by Coeur de Lion. Matilda, daughter of Malcolm III, King of Scotland,
while residing in England previously to her marriage with our Henry I,
is well known to have taken the habit of a nun, “not,” says Hume, “with
a view of entering into a religious life, but merely in consequence of a
custom, familiar to the English ladies, who protected their chastity
from the brutal violence of the Normans, by taking shelter under that
Edition: current; Page: [48] habit, which, amidst the horrible
licentiousness of the times, was yet generally revered.”*

We reject the giants of romance; why should we continue to believe in
the reality of the knights-errant, their antagonists? Yet if both are
the representatives of really existing personages, let us remember that
the knights who liberated imprisoned damsels were few, while the giants
who held these damsels in durance were many; and that the prototypes of
the giants were knights and noblemen, though they were not
knights-errant.

Though it is almost unnecessary to add, that whatever portion of power
or good treatment the women enjoyed, was confined entirely to the women
of rank, and that all other women were, like their husbands, slaves; we
will, however, conclude our observations on this subject, by a very
sensible passage from M. Roederer’s work, already alluded to, in which
this as well as some other very pertinent observations are forcibly put.
The age of chivalry, he says,

Fut pour les femmes, ainsi que les hommes, une période d’abjection et de
malheur. Ne regardant pas le bonheur des seigneurs qui opprimaient la
nation comme partie du bonheur de la nation, ou comme une compensation
de son malheur, je ne compte pas non plus la gloire des châtelaines dans
le bilan des femmes Françaises du même temps. Celles-ci vivaient dans
l’oppression comme leurs pères, leurs maris, leurs enfans. On pourrait
même contester à ces dames de château, qui brillaient de tant d’éclat
sur les amphithéâtres d’un tournoi, qui étaient pour la confrérie des
chevaliers l’objet d’un culte religieux et d’une adoration solennelle;
on pourrait leur contester un bonheur correspondant à de si belles
apparences, et demander si cette idolâtrie qui leur était vouée, n’était
pas une des pompes de la grandeur de ces temps-là, l’ostentation
intéressée d’une courtoisie profitable, ou l’exagération d’une servilité
réelle sous des apparences passionnées; et si, dans l’intérieur de la
société domestique, les grandes dames n’étaient pas exposées comme les
autres à toute la rudesse d’une domination sans frein?

(Louis XII et François Ier, Vol. I, pp. 297-8.)

We have dwelt so long upon the period of the feudal aristocracy, that we
have not time to give a detailed character of the feudal monarchy; and
perhaps it will be better, before attempting the task, to wait for the
additional materials which we may expect to find in the next portion of
M. de Sismondi’s history. We shall content ourselves with mentioning a
few facts, merely to show that the aristocracy did not change its
character during the two or three centuries which followed its
subjugation by the crown.

Enguerrand de Coucy, having seized two young noblemen, who, with their
preceptor, had trespassed on his forests in pursuit of rabbits, hanged
them all three. In the reign of any other prince than Saint Louis, he
might possibly have come off with impunity. Saint Louis at first
intended to put him to death, but at the intercession of all the great
barons, he contented himself with imposing a heavy Edition: current;
Page: [49] fine, and three years exile in Palestine, with the forfeiture
of the seignorial rights of haute justice, and garenne: of keeping
rabbits, and of judging men.*

Guy de Montfort assassinated Henry, son of Richard, Duke of Cornwall,
before the altar, at Viterbo.†

Saint Louis besieged the castle of La Roche de Gluy upon the Rhone, to
punish its lord for practising robbery on the highway: having made
himself master of the castle, he restored it to its owner, first
stipulating for the discontinuance of his depredations.‡

The next person of whom we shall make mention is Amalric, Viscount of
Narbonne, who, having the droit de justice, violated the laws, and, what
was of more consequence, offended the monarch, by putting to death two
of his own vassals, notwithstanding their appeal to the royal court.
Amalric’s sovereign was far from being a Saint Louis; he imprisoned the
rebellious vassal for a time, then took him from prison and put him at
the head of an army.§

Jourdain de l’Isle, sire (seigneur) of Casaubon, after receiving the
royal pardon eighteen times for different offences, was hanged the
nineteenth for rape, rapine, and murder. This happened under Charles IV,
in 1323.

Hannot and Pierre de Léans were hanged in 1332, for assassinating la
demoiselle Péronne d’Estreville in the church.

Mathieu de Houssaie was condemned to a gibbet in 1333; Jourdan Ferron, a
damoiseau or page, in the same year. In the following year eleven nobles
were executed (suppliciés) for the assassination of Emeri Béranger.

Adam de Hordain, another knight, was hanged in 1348, and so on.¶ It was
not till the climax of the power of Louis XIV, that the nobles were
reduced into perfect obedience to the laws.

As the king’s government, however, increased in strength, assassination
became too dangerous to be openly practised, and a safer mode of taking
vengeance upon an enemy now came into vogue. Accusations of poisoning
became frequent, and gained general credit. The imperfection of the
courts of justice, and the peculiar nature of this crime, generally
prevented the fact from being judicially proved; but the generality of
the suspicion is a sufficient proof of the spirit of the times. Another
mode of getting rid of an enemy was suggested by the superstitions of
the day. The practice of enchantments, for the destruction of particular
persons, became very frequent. The efficacy of these operations was
imaginary, but the intention was real. Waxen images, says M. Dulaure,
play a very conspicuous part in French history. A waxen image was
constructed, as nearly as possible resembling the person intended to be
destroyed; a priest was Edition: current; Page: [50] employed to baptise
the image by the name of the intended victim, and it was then tortured,
mutilated, or pierced through and through, with the proper forms of
incantation. The effect of the operation thus performed upon the image,
was supposed to be felt by its human namesake in his own person.

The gradual disuse of trial by battle, which was abolished by Saint
Louis in his own domains, and discouraged every where, both by him and
his successors; the substitution of technical procedure in the king’s
court, and the gradual supercession of the seignorial jurisdictions by
the royal ones, gave rise and encouragement to another sort of crime,
judicial perjury. This, which is perhaps the most pernicious of
offences, because it destroys the efficacy of the remedy against all
others, and the frequency of which is, for that and other reasons, one
of the most decisive tests of the moral depravity of a nation, became,
if we may credit historians, horribly frequent. Corruption in the judges
also became a common offence.*

When the nobles no longer enjoyed any power of their own, except over
their serfs and domestics, they had no chance for importance but by
resorting to the court, and rivalling with one another in magnificence
and servility.† The means of magnificence had to be squeezed out of
their vassals, whose situation consequently became more miserable than
ever.‡ The same cause brought about a considerable change in the manners
of the nobility. No longer permitted to seek excitement in private wars,
they sought it in the licentiousness of a court. Intrigue took the place
of rape, as poisoning had done of assassination. The manners of the
later period of the age of chivalry, and of the age which immediately
succeeded it, as they are pictured in Brantôme[*] and other works of his
day, were dissolute to a degree never since equalled. Nor did their
debauchery resemble the refined gallantry of the court of Louis XV; it
was coarse and gross to a degree of which even the language of Rabelais
is hardly an exaggeration. To sum up all in few words: when the vices of
a highwayman ended, the vices of a courtier began.

We had intended to quote some striking anecdotes of the times; such as
the expedition of the pastoureaux, the destruction of the Templars, the
pretended conspiracy of the lepers to poison the fountains and subvert
Christianity: and to have sketched the persecutions of the Jews and of
the Albigenses, and the still more extraordinary persecution of the
mendicant Franciscans, for offending the Edition: current; Page: [51]
pope, by denying that their meat was their own at the moment when they
were putting it into their mouths. But these, and innumerable other
interesting facts, which M. Dulaure and M. de Sismondi have recorded, we
must content ourselves with exhorting the reader to gather from those
authors themselves. Both works are as delightful in style, as they are
important in matter. The manner of M. Dulaure is characterized by
extreme neatness and exquisite simplicity, and carries the reader along
with it, by its deep earnestness, and high tone of moral feeling. To one
who is daily sickened by the repulsive tone of heartless levity, and
recklessness about good and evil, which is one of the besetting sins of
our own literature in the present day, this quality of M. Dulaure’s work
renders it peculiarly attractive.* M. de Sismondi’s style is more
diffuse, but almost always sprightly, and frequently eloquent. His
eloquence, however, flows naturally from him; neither he nor M. Dulaure
is infected by that rage for fine writing, which is the bane of all real
eloquence; they never declaim, never hunt after common-place metaphors,
but speak the plain and unaffected language of men who wish that the
reader should think of their ideas more than of themselves.

There is little appearance in M. Dulaure’s work of a generalizing, that
is, of a philosophical, mind: he states the facts as he finds them,
praises and censures where he sees reason, but does not look out for
causes and effects, or parallel instances, nor applies the general
principles of human nature to the state of society he is describing, to
show from what circumstances it became what it was. It is true he does
not profess to be a historian, but only to sketch a tableau moral M. de
Sismondi aims much more at generalization; and the reflections with
which he frequently commences his chapters, exhibit far more of the
genuine philosophy of history, than is to be found in any other work on
the middle ages (those of Professor Millar excepted)[*] with which we
are acquainted.

The badness of those ages will now be thoroughly understood by a large
class of readers in France. In this country, we cannot hope that it will
be comprehended as yet. There is no popular book on the middle ages in
our language; nor any book in which the truth is plainly and fully told
concerning chivalry and its times. Millar’s Historical View of the
English Government, though admirable as far as it goes, is rather a
history of institutions, than of morals and manners, and when it does
touch upon the latter, is not detailed enough to give any thing like a
vivid conception of the times. The design of the work, moreover, is
confined to our own country. Yet he is almost the only writer we have,
who has made the middle ages a subject of philosophical investigation.
There is, indeed, Mr. Hallam; but we should be much Edition: current;
Page: [52] surprised if the nation which has produced a Millar, could
admire or read the History and Government of Europe during the Middle
Ages. This work appears to us equally faulty in the design and in the
execution. In the first place, the design is fundamentally bad. The work
is neither a history of Europe, nor a history of European civilization.
Considered as a history of Europe, it is the most meagre of abstracts.
Conceive an attempt to write “the history of France from its conquest by
Clovis to the invasion of Naples by Charles VIII,” in one chapter of
ninety-nine quarto pages! It is evident that nothing worth relating of
the history of France could be included in that compass: it is not a
historical sketch, but a chronological table, or the table of contents
to a historical work; and it is long since we remember to have read
ninety-nine duller pages. If, on the other hand, the work was intended
to be a history, not of Europe, but of its civilization, why encumber it
with several hundred pages of tiresome and useless narrative? Even in
the dissertations, which compose the remainder of the work, we cannot
help seeing much more of pretension than of real merit. Mr. Hallam is
not wanting in liberality; his leanings are in general towards the side
of the many; his incidental remarks are frequently pointed in
expression, and occasionally soar somewhat above the level of
common-place. But he has neither discernment enough to see through any
reigning error, nor philosophy enough to trace the causes and
consequences of the things which he describes; but deals out little
criticisms and little reflections, and little scraps of antiquarian
lore, which neither throw any light upon the condition of mankind in the
middle ages, nor contribute either to support or illustrate any
important principle: in fine, he has succeeded in rendering a sketch of
one of the most remarkable states of society ever known, at once
uninstructive and tiresome. The best part of his work is that which
relates to our own country. In this part he must be allowed the merit of
having resorted to the original authorities, and established several
interesting points of constitutional history. But considering him as a
historian of the middle ages, we are compelled to pronounce his work an
utter failure. Its want of merit is rendered still more striking, when
compared with the merit of other writers. To appreciate Mr. Hallam, it
is not even necessary to have read Millar; it is sufficient to have read
Sismondi.


Scott’s Life of Napoleon

sir walter scott cannot write any thing which, as a literary
composition, will not be read with pleasure; and if it were possible to
consider the work before us merely as a well-told story, we are not sure
that it is inferior even to the most perfect of his former productions.
Few books, indeed, have ever afforded so much for minute criticism to
fasten upon; and that description of critics with whom the substitution
of one connecting particle where another would have been more
appropriate is a crime for which all the higher excellencies of
composition cannot atone, have made so great a noise concerning its
small blemishes, that comparatively little has been heard of its
uncommon merits.[*] But the extreme of carelessness in the minutiae of
style, a fault always more endurable than the opposite one of a too
studious and visible attention to them, is pardonable, and almost
allowable, in a writer who has merits of so much higher a rank than mere
correctness. In Sir Walter Scott, no faults are worth noting except
those which impair the effect of beauties. The author who could conceive
and execute the admirable narrative of Napoleon’s first Italian
expedition, in the third volume,[†] could afford to be inelegant, to be
even ungrammatical, in every page. His occasional repetitions, and the
intermixture of many inappropriate, among many felicitous, similies,
will be forgiven by those who know how few writers are capable of
unfolding a complicated and intricate train of events so that it shall
appear simple and intelligible, and of maintaining, throughout a
voluminous work, so lively, rapid, and spirited a style, that the
interest never flags, the attention never is wearied; in which qualities
this work pre-eminently excels.

But these excellencies do not suffice to constitute a history. From that
which is offered to the public as a record of real events, something
more is required than that it should be sprightly and entertaining. The
Life of Napoleon would be admirable as a romance: to have made it any
thing higher, would have required far other endowments than had been
displayed even in the most finished performances of the Author of
Waverley.[‡]

If it be any part of the duty of an historian to turn the facts of
history to any use; Edition: current; Page: [56] and if a fact can be of
use only by being made subservient either to the confirmation or
illustration of a principle; the historian who is fit for his office
must be well disciplined in the art of connecting facts into principles,
and applying principles to the explanation of facts: he must be a man
familiar with generalization and general views; a man whose knowledge is
systematic, whose mind can embrace classes as well as individuals, who
can discriminate between the results of narrow and partial observation,
and those of enlarged experience; in short, a philosopher. Further, if
it be ever the duty of an historian to elicit real facts, from vague,
scanty, or conflicting, testimony, it is necessary that he should be
profoundly skilled in the difficult art of weighing evidence: he must be
capable of combining together a chain of circumstances, each of which
proves nothing by itself, but every thing when skilfully combined; he
must be practised in striking the balance between opposing testimonies,
or between testimony on the one side and probability on the other; he
must be, to sum up this also in one word, a consummate judge. Sir Walter
Scott’s title to these high qualifications still remained to be
established. It is in the present volumes that we must look for the
proof of it, if proof is to be found.

Of the degree in which he possessed those more common qualities, which
suffice for giving a correct statement of ordinary events—the qualities
of industry, candour, and impartiality—the public had some means of
judging from his previous performances. And first, with respect to
industry; while his earlier writings had proved how much he is capable
of, his later ones had afforded no less conclusive evidence, that any
degree of pains employed upon his productions, more than was necessary
to their sale, was, in his estimation, superfluous. Applying himself in
this frame of mind to the composition of an historical work, it was not
very likely that he should have recourse to any other than the vulgar
authorities, nor, consequently, that he should take any other than the
vulgar view of the events which he relates. And the celerity with which
he projected and completed a work which, to execute it tolerably, would
have required many years reading, was a satisfactory proof, if there
were no other, that, on this point at least, the presumption had not
been fallacious.

With respect to his candour: if the studied forbearance towards
political adversaries which distinguishes his writings, had flowed from
a genuine, passionate, and overpowering love of truth, there would have
been room for highly favourable anticipations indeed. But the prevailing
tone of his works in every other respect, forbids us to ascribe to any
such cause his specious semblance of impartiality. There is sufficient
evidence in Sir Walter Scott’s writings, that he is a person of a mild
and tolerant disposition, constitutionally exempt from acrimony of all
kinds, with a decided bias towards aristocratic persons and aristocratic
opinions, but not attaching so much importance to the difference between
one opinion and another, as to feel, even towards persons of the most
opposite principles, much positive dislike. This original liberality,
and almost indifference, in matters of opinion, enabled him to fall
easily into a practice which he appears to Edition: current; Page: [57]
have prescribed to himself from an early period—that of adopting such a
mode of writing as should be best calculated to win the good word and
good opinion of every body. For this purpose he has laboured, with a
skill and success surpassing all previous example; and since to please
all is to please persons of all political opinions, the precise degree
of compromise conducive to this end, was very accurately calculated, and
studiously employed. All the substantial advantage in point of opinion
must, indeed, be given to the aristocracy, because they, being
accustomed to entire subservience, can ill bear any thing which falls
far short of it; while, on the other hand, even democrats and democratic
principles must be treated with a certain appearance of respect,
because, the object being to please every body, it will not do to make
intemperate and offensive attacks either upon men or opinions in which
any considerable section of the reading public take an interest. But the
democrats, being accustomed to pure abuse, are tolerably well satisfied
when they meet with a writer in whom the abuse is a little qualified;
and their favour is sufficiently attained by keeping somewhat to the
liberal side of high Tory opinions, and allowing a fair share of the
common feelings and intellect of men, to persons who, by Tory writers in
general, are considered as destitute of them, being addicted to the
notion that the House of Commons should represent the people, and
similar heterodoxies. By this mark, accordingly, Sir Walter Scott has
guided himself; and has taken pains to be, on all occasions, a little
more just towards the friends of the people than is usual with their
enemies. His Old Mortality is a miserable travestie of the Scottish
Covenanters, compared with Laing’s History, or Mr. Galt’s Ringan
Gilhaize;[*] and so is his View of the French Revolution, compared with
Mignet or Bailleul.[†] But a bigotted Tory can scarcely read either work
without some mitigation of his prejudices. Sir Walter Scott is not the
man from whom it could be expected that he should be an unbiassed judge
between the aristocracy and the people; but considering him as the
advocate of the aristocracy against the people, he is not altogether an
illiberal or disingenuous one.

The work may be appropriately divided into two parts; the History of the
French Revolution, and that of the Reign of Napoleon Bonaparte. This is
somewhat more than a merely chronological division. The two subjects are
as unlike as those of the Iliad and of the Odyssey; though, like these,
they form a portion of the same series of events, and concern in part
the same persons. The former period seems to contain nothing but what is
extraordinary; the latter, hardly any thing but what is common-place.
The reign of Napoleon affords little or nothing to the historian,
Edition: current; Page: [58] except ordinary characters and ordinary
events. The career which he ran, had been trodden times out of number by
successful adventurers; there have never been wanting just such men as
he, when such prizes have been attainable by them: the most obvious
causes suffice to account for every event in his history: to comprehend
it thoroughly, there needed no extraordinary depth of philosophy; the
lowest impulses of the lowest description of human beings are the moving
principle of the whole, and few men know and understand less of these
than they ought. Where one man is the sole disposer of events, history
is easily written: it is only to study the character of that one man: if
this be vulgar, all is vulgar; if it be peculiar, he who has seized its
peculiarities has the key to all which may appear remarkable in the
events of the period. The lines of Napoleon’s character are few, and
strongly marked: to trace them correctly, far inferior powers to those
of Sir Walter Scott would have been sufficient. And if his story be
inaccurate, as we have no doubt that it is, in many of the details,
those details are of such sovereign unimportance for any purpose of
utility or instruction, that we, for our share, should have little
objection, provided they be amusing, to dispense altogether with their
being true.

To write the history of the French Revolution was a task requiring far
other powers, involving far other difficulties. To say that, on no
occasion, did surprising events succeed one another with such breathless
rapidity, that never were effects so extraordinary produced by such a
complication of causes, nor in so short a space of time, would be to
form a very inadequate idea of the peculiarities of that momentous
period, considered as a theme for history. It was marked by a
characteristic still more embarrassing to such men as those by whom
history is commonly written. The moving forces in this vast convulsion,
the springs by which so much complex machinery was now set in motion,
now stopt, now swept away, were of a class for the laws of whose action
the dictionary of historical common-places does not yet afford one
established formula—a class which the routine-historian has not yet been
taught by familiarity to fancy that he understands. Heretofore, when a
change of government had been effected by force in an extensive and
populous country, the revolution had been made always by, and commonly
for, a few: the French Revolution was emphatically the work of the
people. Commenced by the people, carried on by the people, defended by
the people with a heroism and self-devotion unexampled in any other
period of modern history, at length terminated by the people when they
awoke from the frenzy into which the dogged resistance of the privileged
classes against the introduction of any form whatever of representative
government, had driven them; the French Revolution will never be more
than superficially understood, by the man who is but superficially
acquainted with the nature and movements of popular enthusiasm. That
mighty power, of which, but for the French Revolution, mankind perhaps
would never have known the surpassing strength—that force which converts
a whole people into heroes, which binds an entire nation together
Edition: current; Page: [59] as one man, was able, not merely to
overpower all other forces, but to draw them into its own line, and
convert them into auxiliaries to itself. The vulgar politician finds to
his confusion (if indeed it is in the power of any vulgar politician to
make the discovery), that all the causes which he is in the habit of
calling in upon other occasions to account for every thing in history
which perplexes him, are powerless here; that party interests, and class
interests, and personal interests, and individual depravity, and
individual virtue, and even the highest endowments of individual
intellect and genius, appear to influence the train of events only when
they fall in with it, and add force to the current, which, as often as
they are thrown into opposition with it, they are found inadequate to
withstand. The rules by which such a period is to be judged of, must not
be common rules: generalizations drawn from the events of ordinary
times, fail here of affording even that specious appearance of
explanation, which is the utmost that such empirical philosophy can ever
accomplish. The man who is yet to come, the philosophical historian of
the French Revolution, will leave these solemn plausibilities far
behind, and will draw his philosophy from the primaeval fountain of
human nature itself. Whatever else he may derive from what are called
the records of past times, a lesson which he will not learn from them
is, what is meant by a people; or from what causes, and in obedience to
what laws, the thing, which that name expresses, is accustomed to act,
on those rare occasions on which the opportunity of acting is allowed to
it, and it is quite possible to be a tolerable poet, and much more than
a tolerable novelist, without being able to rise to the comprehension of
that one idea, or to know more of those laws and those principles than a
child in the cradle.

We have stated but a part of the inherent difficulties of the subject.
That the very facts of the French Revolution, from the multitude of
conflicting testimonies, are incapable of being elicited but by one who
possesses all the endowments of the most sagacious and practised judge,
is still but a part, perhaps not the greatest part, of those
difficulties. Suppose the facts ascertained—to interpret and account for
them would demand, along with the most minute knowledge of the
circumstances of France and of the French people for centuries back, a
mind profoundly conversant with human nature under all the modifications
superinduced by acting upon the extensive theatre of a whole nation; and
the deepest insight into the springs of human society, into the causes
by the perpetual and often unseen agency of which, a nation is made to
be what it is, in respect to civilization, morals, modes of thinking,
physical condition, and social relations. Nor is this all. To judge of
the French Revolution, is to judge statesmen, and the acts of statesmen,
in novel and critical situations. It is to form an estimate of great
changes in the government and institutions of a country; of new laws
established, of old ones overthrown, and of the manner in which the helm
of government was conducted through a course beset with perils and
difficulties more trying, perhaps, than were ever before experienced by
a great and powerful nation. It is not too much to expect, that the
writer, whose judgment is to guide that of his readers in such high
concerns, shall Edition: current; Page: [60] himself know as much as
philosophy and experience can teach, of the science of government and
legislation: that he shall be well skilled both in the theory and in the
practice of politics; shall know at the same time what is best in
itself, and how to make allowance for the obstacles and counteracting
forces, which often render what is not best in itself, necessary either
as a precaution or as a compromise.

To this rare combination of qualities, Sir Walter Scott has no claim. In
political and social philosophy his principles are all summed up in the
orthodox one, that whatever is English is best; best, not for England
only, but for every country in Christendom, or probably the world. By
starting from this point it must be acknowledged that much trouble is
saved, and not a little of what is apt to be thought the duty of a
historian, very comfortably abridged. To a mind properly imbued with
this axiom, to sit in judgment upon the statesmen or institutions of
other countries is an easy task. To inquire patiently into the
suitableness of a system of government to the nature of man in general,
or to the circumstances of any nation in particular; to examine how far
it did or did not provide for the exigencies of that nation; to take
account of the degree in which its framers might expect that causes
peculiar to that nation would promote, modify, or impede, its action;
and, if it be pronounced bad, to consider what means they had by whom it
was adopted, of establishing any thing better; all this, to a person of
such enlarged views, is unnecessary labour. Sir Walter Scott settles all
these questions in a moment, by a summary appeal to that ever-ready
standard of comparison, English practice. Whatever he finds here
established, or whatever bears the same name with any thing which is
here established, is excellent, and if the statesmen of France,
unfortunately for themselves, not judging of things by the same
comprehensive rule, formed a different opinion, the folly thus evinced
accounts for all the subsequent misfortunes of their country. Should an
institution happen not to be English, it is condemned: and here
something more of thought is required in making out a case against it,
though not much; for nobody is ignorant how ridiculously easy it is to
find inconveniences and dangers on one side of every political question,
sufficient to decide it, if we only take care to keep our eyes well shut
to the inconveniences and dangers on the other. Although, too, no other
reasons for condemnation should be discoverable, there is one argument
against all systems that are not English, which can never be wanting;
they are untried theories: no free institutions except ours, according
to our author, having ever had the sanction of experience; for it never
occurs to him that the principle of an institution may have been tried
successfully any number of times, although the exact model may be to be
found nowhere.

While Sir Walter Scott’s acquirements are of this mean description, in
the science of politics, and the philosophy of the social union, he is
almost equally deficient in that acquaintance with facts, without which
the most philosophical statesman is no better qualified to judge what is
fittest for a nation, than the most profound physician to prescribe what
is fittest for a patient whom he has not seen. There is no proof, in
this work of Sir Walter Scott, that he has taken the trouble to Edition:
current; Page: [61] make himself well acquainted with the state of
France at the time when the Revolution broke out; with the physical
condition and mental peculiarities of the people, the habitual feelings
and modes of thinking of the different classes of society, and the
working of the great machine of government in the detail. Not only is
there no proof that he has made himself well acquainted with these
circumstances, but there is conclusive proof that he has not made
himself acquainted with them at all; that he has scarcely so much as
adverted to them as being among the things which it is necessary for a
historian of the Revolution to know; and has therefore committed all the
mistakes that are incident to a historian who is thoroughly unacquainted
with the spirit of the times which he is describing. His complete
ignorance of the position in which individuals and parties were placed,
leads him regularly to ascribe their actions to other than the true
causes. He blames men who did the best they could, for not doing better;
treats men who had only a choice of inconveniences, as if they were the
masters of events, and could regulate them as they pleased; reproaches
men who were beset by dangers on both sides, because they did not, to
avoid the dangers on one side, precipitate themselves into those on the
other; goes to search for discreditable motives at an immense distance,
when the most creditable ones were obviously afforded by the state of
affairs; and judges of the conduct of men in the crisis of a revolution,
by the same standard which he would have applied to persons securely in
possession of the governing power in peaceable times.

Such and no higher being the qualifications which Sir Walter Scott
brings to the task of making an estimate, moral and philosophical, of
the French Revolution; the reader may judge what is the value of his
opinions on the subject, and how well the conception which his book
conveys of the Revolution resembles its real character. The work has, in
addition to these, all the defects of a book hastily written: it is
utterly without research. The author has been satisfied with resorting
to the most hackneyed and obvious authorities: he has read perhaps one
or two of the professed histories of the period; some of the more
popular of the memoirs he has consulted, but we find it difficult to
believe that he has read them: he has left but few references at the
bottom of the page to betray to the public in general the superficiality
of his reading, but, that some even of these few are made from memory,
is demonstrated by his referring, for proof of an assertion, to the very
passage which proves the assertion to be false.* The documents which
breathe the Edition: current; Page: [62] living spirit of the time, the
only monuments of really cotemporary history, (which is the most
different thing imaginable from history written by cotemporaries, after
they have undergone a thousand changes of opinion and feeling, and when
the genuine impression of the present events has faded from their
recollection) are the decrees of the national assemblies, the speeches
of their members, the papers laid before them, and the immensely
numerous books, pamphlets, and periodicals, of the day. These genuine
authorities, as neither fame nor profit was to be got by consulting
them, our author had not thought it necessary to consult. We doubt
whether he has given, to more than two or three of them, even the most
cursory perusal.

It may be thought surprising, that a book should be offered to the
public, by so distinguished a writer, as the history of so recent and so
universally interesting a period, in which so little pains have been
taken to ensure that which, all other qualities being put out of the
question, is at any rate a sine quâ non of history, namely, truth. But
our author enjoyed two advantages, either of which would have made it
safe for him to deviate from the truth even more widely than he has: he
wrote for readers thoroughly ignorant of the subject, and for readers
the whole of whose prepossessions were more or less strongly on his
side. For being ignorant of the subject, some of his readers have the
excuse, that to this very hour there does not exist one tolerable
account of this remarkable portion of history, in the English tongue.
But the number of Englishmen to whom works written in the French
language are accessible, is now so great, that the marvellous extent of
their ignorance respecting the French Revolution, must be regarded as a
proof, that this reading nation chuses to read dissertations on Aeolic
Digammas, or Iron Masks,[*] or any other matter of frivolous and idle
curiosity, sooner than any thing which will furnish them with evidence
upon matters on which their minds have been made up without it. For
ignorance has not here had the effect which conscious ignorance in a
well-regulated mind ought to have, that of preventing them from forming
any opinion. Acted upon as their ignorance has been, from day to day and
from year to year, by the torrents of unmeasured and undiscriminating
invective which have been poured forth against the Revolution, by men
who knew nearly as little about it as the public themselves, but who
knew perfectly what mode of treating the subject Edition: current; Page:
[63] would be acceptable to those on whom the reputation and the sale of
their lucubrations depended; a feeling has been generated, which
predisposes men to credit upon any evidence or no evidence, any
assertion with respect to the French Revolution or revolutionists,
provided only it be sufficiently unfavourable: and he who would seek to
refute even the most extravagant of these assertions, finds it difficult
to obtain a hearing, and scarcely possible to persuade.

It cannot, however, be deemed of small importance to the best interests
of mankind, that the opinions which they form on such a subject as the
French Revolution, should be correct opinions. So long as all who hold
the lot of mankind to be capable of any material improvement, or
conceive that any good can be accomplished by taking the powers of
government out of the hands of those who are interested in abusing them,
are deemed to be sufficiently answered by pointing to the calamitous
issue of that great experiment; so long it will be a duty not to suffer
that its history should be rendered the fitter to form the groundwork of
these decisive conclusions, by being falsified and garbled. It is not in
such an article as the present, that we can pretend to sketch the true
history or trace the character of the French Revolution. But we can at
least shew that Sir Walter Scott is not to be trusted; which we the more
willingly do, as, in refuting his misrepresentations, we are exposing à
fortiori those of the crowd of hirelings, who with inferior abilities,
but with the same purposes, daily essay to fling each his minute and
separate portion of dirt upon some of the noblest deeds and brightest
characters in history. Such men are not important enough for any other
chastisement than they may indirectly suffer, from the blow aimed at a
more formidable enemy, and we shall mention them no further in this
notice.

The work opens with a sketch of the state of France before the
Revolution, and a view of the remote causes of that catastrophe. The
whole of this is comprehended in two chapters, which consist of
seventy-nine pages: a shorter space, therefore, than is frequently taken
up by the dull introductions of our author’s novels, is all that he
allows for what ought to be the quintessence of the internal history of
France during more than a century. To have executed this portion of his
task well, would of itself have required more reading and research than
he has given to the entire work. It is almost unnecessary to say,
therefore, that he has performed it ill, and has not only failed to
communicate full and accurate knowledge, but has betrayed the lamentable
extent of his own ignorance. This is the more to be regretted, as he has
stated the little which he knows, with considerable force, and very
tolerable fairness. The influence of such an aristocracy as that of
France upon the national literature, is powerfully delineated; the
character of the noblesse and clergy, during the fifty years preceding
the Revolution, is traced with an indulgent, but with no feeble hand:
and the exclusion of the tiers-état, that is, of almost the whole of the
talent, and much the greater part of the opulence, of France, from all
employment or influence in the affairs of the state, is deservedly
reprobated. Our author, however, shares the vulgar error, which
considers this monopoly of office Edition: current; Page: [64] as the
principal, and almost the sole, cause of the Revolution: at least we may
gather as much from the fulness with which he developes and expatiates
upon it, while all the other causes are lumped together in a short and
passing notice. This is by no means a trifling error; on the contrary,
few can be named, which have contributed more to prevent the Revolution
from being understood, or to lend an apparent sanction to the
conclusions which aristocratic logic has drawn from it for aristocratic
purposes. We dwell not upon the gross injustice towards the eminent men
who originally took the lead in the Revolution, and whom this theory
represents as ambitious spirits, struggling for no higher object than
the removal of their personal disabilities, instead of patriots striving
to free their country from a yoke which weighed it down to the earth. We
shall not insist upon this, characteristic though it be—for thus it is
that our author always contrives to disguise or throw into the shade
whatever is exalted in purpose or generous in sentiment, in those whose
principles he disapproves, while he gives credit to the royalists for
the most chivalrous disinterestedness and honour, not only without
evidence, but in direct contradiction to the testimony of the better
members of their own body. But (to say no more upon this point) mark the
implied imputation upon the French people, which this theory of the
Revolution conveys. If the excesses of the Revolution had no greater
provocation than our author tells us of, what must not we think of them?
Slur over the fact that every man’s liberty was at the mercy of every
minister or clerk of a minister, or lacquey of a minister, or mistress
of a lacquey of a minister—that every man’s property was at the mercy of
intendants and subdélégués, and the whole fry of agents and sub-agents
in one of the most odious systems of fiscal tyranny ever known; sink all
this, and a hundred things besides, and fix upon non-admissibility to
office as the great practical grievance of the tiers-état, and what is
the inference? For our author certainly will not succeed in persuading
anybody, that it was the ineligibility of the merchants and avocats of
Paris and Bordeaux to public offices, and of their sons to promotion in
the army, which caused the peasants of several of the provinces of
France to rise in arms and burn the houses of their seigneurs:[*] the
provocations, therefore, which are assigned, being obviously
insufficient, and the real ones having been carelessly overlooked or
purposely passed over, the only explanation which seems to offer itself
is the perversity of the people: of whose supposed readiness at all
times, unless kept down by terror, to rise against their superiors and
make war upon person and property, another example is thus manufactured.

Sir Walter Scott may be well assured that the grievances which could
excite in the peasantry feelings of such bitter hatred towards the
privileged classes, were grievances which affected themselves, and not
other people. The Roman tribune understood the nature of the people much
better, when he reproached them with being abundantly eager and zealous
when their efforts were required to prevent the Edition: current; Page:
[65] usurpation of their lands, or protect their persons from the
rapacity and cruelty of their creditors, but deaf to the call of their
leaders when there was nothing to contend for except the privilege of
rewarding those leaders with offices and honours.[*] The feelings of the
people are not wont to be excited by an abstract principle. It is not a
distant or a contingent evil which works upon them. The tyranny which
excites them to resistance must be felt, not conceived; they must
discover it by their sensations, not by their reason. The abuses which
they resent, are those which bear upon their direct interests; which
“come home to their business and bosoms.”[†] Never yet did a people hate
their superiors, but for some real or imagined wrong; never were they
stimulated to such outrages as those which signalized the breaking out
of the French Revolution, except by the intolerable pressure of active,
grinding oppression. And in no country, pretending to civilization, had
the peasantry been so borne down by oppression as in France. “Les jeunes
gens et les étrangers,” says Madame de Staël.

qui n’ont pas connu la France avant la révolution, et qui voient
aujourd’hui le peuple enrichi par la division des propriétés et la
suppression des dímes et du régime féodal, ne peuvent avoir l’idée de la
situation de ce pays, lorsque la nation portait le poids de tous les
priviléges. Les partisans de l’esclavage dans les colonies ont souvent
dit qu’un paysan de France était plus malheureux qu’un nègre. . . . La
misère accroît l’ignorance, l’ignorance accroît la misère; et quand on
se demande, pourquoi le peuple François a été si cruel dans la
révolution, on ne peut en trouver la cause que dans l’absence de
bonheur, qui conduit a l’absence de moralité.*

Our author himself observes, that in La Vendée alone had the privileged
classes done their duty towards the cultivators of the soil, and that in
La Vendée alone was any stand made by those cultivators in their
defence.[‡] This observation is an approach to the true theory of the
causes of the Revolution, and is conceived in a spirit of which it were
to be wished that there were more frequent examples in these volumes.
Indications of such a spirit are indeed not rare in his occasional
remarks; in which respect he resembles many other writers, who have
falsified history in the gross, as thoroughly as himself. He is far too
acute not to see a part of the truth; far too slightly acquainted with
the monuments of the times, to have the faintest or most distant
perception of it as a whole. We may perhaps take some future opportunity
of making known to our readers, what substantial reasons the peasants
had for detesting both the government and their seigneurs. In the
meantime, we Edition: current; Page: [66] shall do no more than refer
them to a book which is in every man’s hands. If, in place of his first
two chapters, Sir Walter Scott had merely reprinted the concluding
dissertation in the first volume of Arthur Young’s excellent work on
France,[*] he would have done more to convey a just idea of the causes
of the French Revolution than will be done by twenty such productions as
his “Preliminary View.” We believe, that most men who have read that
dissertation, will exclaim with its author, who had himself seen and
heard all he describes—that no man of common sense and feeling can
lament the fall of such a government, or look with any but a mitigated
severity upon the terrible retribution which an oppressed people exacted
from their tyrants the moment they were free.

Among the causes which most powerfully promoted, or at least directed,
the tendency to change, our author justly assigns a high rank to the
increased influence of literature. And here we may be sure that the
opportunity is eagerly seized, of recommending himself to our moral
public, by an invective against the French philosophers, as they are
termed; principally upon the two points of licentiousness and
irreligion. In the course of this diatribe, our author manifests no very
accurate knowledge of the writings or lives of these objects of his
somewhat undiscriminating dislike. As for fairness, it would be too much
to expect it from such a writer on such a subject; and accordingly we
are not surprised to find the immense benefits which the philosophers
conferred upon their country and mankind, altogether overlooked, while
whatever either is, or can be made to appear, objectionable in them or
in their works, is grossly exaggerated. Thus, they are gravely stated to
have been engaged in a sort of “anti-crusade,” not only against
Christianity, but against “religious principles of every kind;”[†] a
description which, if applicable at all, can apply only to one or two of
them, and those neither the ablest nor the most influential, perhaps to
one only, and him not a Frenchman, the Baron d’Holbach; while on the
other hand, how large a portion of the writings of Rousseau, and
especially of Voltaire, is taken up in maintaining and enforcing the
being and attributes of God, is known to every one who has read them.
The ancient fiction of a “league,” a “conspiracy,”[‡] is revived; when
it is notorious, that the supposed heads of this conspiracy, Voltaire
and Rousseau, were at open war with each other, that Condorcet, in like
manner, did not disguise his contempt for Mably,[§] that Turgot wrote
against Helvétius,[¶] while equal dissensions and differences of opinion
existed among the less distingished thinkers and writers of Edition:
current; Page: [67] the class; and that nothing like an organized system
of concert or co-operation ever existed among any portion of their
number. Our author can know little of French literary history, or he
would not talk of the close union and alliance which existed among the
philosophers, “and more especially the Encyclopedists”[*]—we presume,
between Diderot and d’Alembert—for of these two individuals only was
this formidable corps, whose name has so long resounded from every
corner of Europe, composed; they having written (with scarcely any
exception but that of a small number of articles by Voltaire) the whole
of the moral, theological, and metaphysical part of the Encyclopédie;[†]
and it is worthy of remark, that of this pair of conspirators against
religion, d’Alembert never published a single line against it. With
respect to licentiousness, our author forgets that what was the vice of
their age and of the society in which they moved, cannot with justice be
laid at their door; it was not they who made French society what it was;
on the contrary, it was through the influence principally of their
writings, that it ever became any thing else. It is high time that Sir
Walter Scott should be told, if he has not yet found it out, that
licentiousness was a quality with which what are termed the philosophers
were not more, but, on the contrary, less chargeable, than most writers
of their day; that none of the authors peculiarly remarkable for it were
to be found in their ranks, while several of those most distinguished by
it (among whom it is sufficient to name Piron) were no less
characterized by a bitter hostility against the persons and principles
of the philosophers: that the virtues most opposite to licentiousness,
found in Rousseau, if not always a consistent, at least an enthusiastic,
advocate, and that many of the most distinguished among the
philosophical writers, as Condillac, Condorcet, and above all, Turgot,
were pure on this point, some of them to a degree of scrupulosity.
However, it must be admitted, that several of the writers whom our
author mentions, have produced works in some degree deserving the
character which he assigns to them. Most certainly we do not quarrel
with him for expressing his disapprobation of these writings: he should
remember, however, that there ought to be bounds even to the most
merited censure, and that there is still an immense distance between any
licentiousness of which they can be accused, and that libertinism, which
he justly characterizes as inconsistent with manly and virtuous
patriotism. Because the ideas prevalent in a country allow a certain
latitude of speaking, or even of acting, with respect to the branch of
morality here concerned, it does not follow that all who in any degree
avail themselves of this licence must therefore make the pursuit of
sensual gratifications the business of their lives. Such an occupation,
like the Edition: current; Page: [68] inordinate pursuit of every other
merely individual enjoyment, is incapable of co-existing with any nobler
aspirations, and if it does not begin, is sure to terminate, in utter
selfishness; but it is false that voluptuousness, in this sense of the
word, was, or is, more prevalent in France than in any other nation; and
most especially is it false that any portion of the philosophers, either
in their own lives, or in the doctrines and principles they inculcated,
are chargeable with it.*

Edition: current; Page: [69]
Our author does not, like others of the alarmists, represent the
philosophers, with the “licence and infidelity”[*] which they promoted,
as the sole causes of, and movers in, the Revolution. He owns that a
great political change would have been needed, and would have taken
place,

had the French court and her higher orders retained the simple and
virtuous manners of Sparta, united with the strong and pure faith of
primitive Christians. The difference lay in this, that a simple,
virtuous, and religious people, would have rested content with such
changes and alterations in the constitution of their government as might
remove the evils of which they had just and pressing reason to complain.
They would have endeavoured to redress obvious and practical errors in
the body politic, without being led into extremes, either by the love of
realizing visionary theories, the vanity of enforcing their own
particular philosophical or political doctrines, or the selfish
arguments of demagogues, who, in the prospect of bettering their own
situation by wealth, or obtaining scope for their ambition, aspired, in
the words of the dramatic poet, to throw the elements of society into
confusion, and thus

-   

    —disturb the peace of all the world
-   

    To rule it when ’twas wildest.*

Now, inasmuch as the most moral and religious people that ever existed,
the English of the reign of Charles I, carried their “changes and
alterations” so far as to abolish monarchy and cut off the king’s head,
we see that our author’s ideas of avoiding “extremes” and redressing
“obvious and practical errors,” are of a tolerably radical extent.

It well becomes him to rail at theorists, who can overlook such a fact
because it interferes with his theory. But it is ever thus with those
who style themselves par excellence the men of practice and experience.

Our author takes a juster view of the causes which produced the errors
of the Revolution, in the following acute and original remarks on the
state of infancy in which the public mind had been kept by the
restraints on the press.

An essay on the French monarchy, showing by what means the existing
institutions might have been brought more into union with the wishes and
wants of the people, must have procured for its author a place in the
Bastille, and yet subsequent events have shown, that a system which
might have introduced prudently and gradually into the decayed frame of
the French government the spirit of liberty, which was originally
inherent in every feudal monarchy, would have been the most valuable
present which political wisdom could have Edition: current; Page: [70]
rendered to the country. The bonds which pressed so heavily on the
subject might thus have been gradually slackened, and at length totally
removed, without the perilous expedient of casting them all loose at
once. But the philosophers, who had certainly talent sufficient for the
purpose, were not permitted to apply to the state of the French
government the original principles on which it was founded, or to trace
the manner in which usurpations and abuses had taken place, and propose
a mode, by which, without varying its form, those encroachments might be
restrained, and those abuses corrected. An author was indeed at liberty
to speculate at any length upon general doctrines of government; he
might imagine to himself an Utopia or Atalantis, and argue upon abstract
ideas of the rights in which government originates; but on no account
was he permitted to render any of his lucubrations practically useful,
by adapting them to the municipal regulations of France. The political
sage was placed with regard to his country, in the condition of a
physician prescribing for the favourite sultana of some jealous despot,
whom he is required to cure without seeing his patient, and without
obtaining any accurate knowledge of her malady, its symptoms, and its
progress. In this manner the theory of government was kept studiously
separated from the practice. The political philosopher might, if he
pleased, speculate upon the former, but he was prohibited, under severe
personal penalties, to illustrate the subject by any allusions to the
latter. Thus, the eloquent and profound work of Montesquieu[*]
professed, indeed, to explain the general rights of the people, and the
principles on which government itself rested, but his pages shew no mode
by which these could be resorted to for the reformation of the
constitution of his country. He laid before the patient a medical
treatise on disease in general, instead of a special prescription,
applying to his peculiar habits and distemper.

In consequence of these unhappy restrictions upon open and manly
political discussion, the French government in its actual state was
never represented as capable of either improvement or regeneration; and
while general and abstract doctrines of original freedom were everywhere
the subject of eulogy, it was never considered for a moment in what
manner these new and more liberal principles could be applied to the
improvement of the existing system. The natural conclusion must have
been, that the monarchical government in France was either perfection in
itself, and consequently stood in need of no reformation, or that it was
so utterly inconsistent with the liberties of the people as to be
susceptible of none. No one was hardy enough to claim for it the former
character, and least of all those who presided in its councils, and
seemed to acknowledge the imperfection of the system by prohibiting all
discussion on the subject. It seemed, therefore, to follow, as no unfair
inference, that to obtain the advantages, which the new elementary
doctrines held forth, and which were so desirable and so much desired, a
total abolition of the existing government to its very foundation, was
an indispensable preliminary; and there is little doubt that this
opinion prevailed so generally at the time of the Revolution, as to
prevent any firm or resolute stand being made in defence even of such of
the actual institutions of France as might have been amalgamated with
the proposed reform.*

This is well thought, and well expressed; and the illustration which
concludes the first paragraph, has a merit which our author’s figurative
illustrations do not always possess; it really illustrates.

The reign of Louis XVI previous to the Revolution, is sketched in our
author’s usual lively manner; the character of that well-meaning, but
weak and vacillating prince, is justly estimated, and the series of
blunders by which the court not only Edition: current; Page: [71]
precipitated the crisis, but threw away the chances of giving it a
direction favourable to themselves, are tolerably exposed.[*] But what
our author sees and condemns in these proceedings is their weakness
only, not their wickedness. The frantic struggles of enraged despotism
to put down by force that rising spirit of liberty, which it already
hated and feared with as much intensity as now after twenty years of
exile—these are to be mildly censured, not for the atrocity of the end,
but for the inefficacy of the means, and because the conspirators, being
as imbecile as they were base, had the awkwardness to endanger their
precious persons and privileges by the consequences of failure. A
government, beggared by its profligate expenditure, exhausts every
illegal resource, and tries all that can be done by the most desperate
and tyrannical expedients to extort money from the people without giving
them in return those constitutional reforms to which they were entitled;
and this conduct appears to our author highly blameable, because it was
bad policy, and rendered the crown “odious and contemptible.”[†] A
government does its utmost to tread out the few sparks which centuries
had not extinguished of freedom and constitutional control—it does this
not so much as a year before the assembly is convened, which is destined
to give to France a representative constitution; and this our author
condemns—why? Because it excites “national discontent!”[‡] So liberal
and indulgent is Sir Walter Scott towards the royalists: but his
liberality and indulgence stop there. When every violence which tyranny
prompted and fear would permit, has been tried in vain, this government
at length has recourse to the people, and condescends to ask for what it
has at last found that it no longer has power to seize: the National
Assembly meets, and by means of a temporary popular enthusiasm, wrings
from the government ten times as many of its unjust privileges, as the
parliaments had ever dreamed of questioning; it adds, by its reforms,
the parliaments themselves, and the whole of the privileged classes, to
the number of its enemies;—and now, if the Assembly is not so silly as
to suppose that the power of misrule has been resigned willingly, if it
harbours even a suspicion that the fate of the parliaments is in reserve
for it, or takes the commonest precaution to secure itself against the
hostility of the court, and of the numerous and powerful classes whom it
has offended,—not only its conduct is disapproved of, but its motives
are misconstrued, and its whole system of action tortured and perverted.
“Et voilà justement comme on écrit l’histoire.”*

Edition: current; Page: [72]
There is something amusing in the naïveté with which our author lays it
down, that the elections ought to have been tampered with, to obtain
returns favourable to the court; evidently without the slightest
suspicion that a course so perfectly according to the English model, can
deserve or incur the disapprobation of any body. He says, with equal
gravity, that the public mind ought to have been Edition: current; Page:
[73] preoccupied with arguments of a sound and virtuous tendency. This
is extremely fine; but by whom preoccupied? By the court and aristocracy
of France? “Sound and virtuous”[*] arguments from such a quarter would
indeed have been something new. By Necker? Does our author suppose that
he could have retained his office for an hour, if he had attempted to
promulgate among the people, either in his ministerial or in his private
capacity, ideas of rational freedom? Necker shewed himself, on more than
one occasion during the Revolution, unequal to the Edition: current;
Page: [74] great difficulties of his very trying situation; but a writer
who can so little appreciate those difficulties is scarcely entitled to
sit in judgment on him, and affect to point out by what means he might
have been more successful.

There was a reason, more than Sir Walter Scott dreams of, for doing
nothing to gain over the tiers-état to the court. Nobody doubted that
they would be on the side of the court, without prompting. It was not
from the commons, but from the privileged orders, that all resistance to
the will of the monarch had previously come; it was they who, when
called upon for the sacrifice of their pecuniary immunities, had
demanded the convocation of the Etats Généraux to sustain them in their
refusal. The commons, it was well known, were, and with good reason,
inveterately hostile to the privileged orders, but they neither were,
nor did any one suppose them to be, disaffected to the king; on the
contrary, the privileged classes openly proclaimed that the tiers-état
would be, as it had ever been, in favour of the king, and against
liberty, that is, against aristocratical ascendancy. Accordingly the
court party took no trouble to gain the tiers-état, while, on the
contrary, every man and even every woman about the palace was
assiduously engaged in paying court to the deputies of the noblesse,
from whom alone any resistance was apprehended; and succeeded in gaining
those who had taken the lead in the previous resistance, d’Epréménil and
d’Antraigues.*

Edition: current; Page: [75]
That chivalrous loyalty, therefore, which Sir Walter Scott admires in
the noblesse, only commenced when they discovered that other persons
than themselves were about to gain the ascendancy in the Etats Généraux,
and that the engine which they had constructed in hopes to wield it
against the royal authority, was wrested from them and turned against
themselves, by that people whom they had scorned. Then, they were
extremely willing to make a parade of their loyalty; as some of them who
had never before mentioned the name of God but in mockery, became
patterns of devotion from the moment when they had hopes that the yell
of fanaticism might serve them to incite the country-people against the
Assembly.* Then they were ready to die for that king, whom many of them
had ridiculed and lampooned; that queen, whose character they had been
the first to vilify;† and that despotism, against which, for their own
purposes, they had struck the first blow.‡ Yet, amid all this pretence,
still true to their character, they thought merely of their own
privileges, and not for one instant of his safety whom they professed to
serve. The majority fled to the courts of other despots, there to stir
up foreign enemies, to make war upon their country in the name of their
king: that king being all the time, as they studiously gave out, a
captive in the hands of the very men whom they thus irritated to frenzy.
Those who remained proclaimed everywhere the king’s insincerity, made
his name a pretext for all their liberticide intrigues, and leagued
themselves with the worst of the Jacobins to promote every measure which
they Edition: current; Page: [76] thought calculated to raise the
disorder to its height, in order to ruin those whom they hated bitterest
of all, the partisans of an orderly and well-regulated liberty.*

We have now arrived at the opening of the Revolution itself; and from
this point we can no longer give to our author’s attempt at history,
even that qualified praise which we have bestowed upon the introductory
chapters. From this point it conveys none but false impressions: it is a
story skilfully, and even artfully constructed for a purpose. We have no
intention of imputing insincerity to Sir Walter Scott. Though he
obviously attempts throughout to impress the reader with a certain view
of the facts, he probably is himself persuaded that this view is the
true one. But that important branch of the talent of the narrator, which
Sir Walter Scott in his character of a romancer pre-eminently possesses,
the art of so relating every incident that it shall strike the reader
not as an isolated incident, but as a part of the train of events,—of
keeping the whole posture of affairs, such as it is supposed to be in
the story, constantly present to the reader’s conception, and almost to
his sight—is a talent most delightful in a novelist, most dangerous when
the subject is real history, and the author’s view of the posture of
affairs happens to be wrong. It is nothing less than the art of so
dressing up a fact, as to make it appear to mean more than it does; of
so relating and arranging the events to be related, as to make them tell
a different story from what would be implied in the mere chronological
recital of them. We are far from maintaining that this mode of relating
facts is always blameable. We by no means affirm that an historian
should be required to state first the naked facts, without any admixture
of inference, and then speculate upon causes, motives, and characters,
if he pleases. It would often be impossible to find room for all the
facts, upon which inferences of this sort may very properly have been
founded; and such part of the facts as are related, when the nature of
the case does not permit the introduction of the whole, may justifiably
be coloured, that is, although not sufficient in themselves to prove the
theory, may be so related as to suggest it, if the theory be true, and
evidence to prove it be produceable on fit occasions. Our quarrel with
Sir Walter Scott is, that his theory is not true: that his view of the
rationale of the French Revolution is not capable of being proved, but
capable, on the contrary, of being disproved by the most cogent Edition:
current; Page: [77] evidence. And if this be so, it undoubtedly is a
great additional evil, that what cannot be proved is insinuated almost
in every sentence; that the language in which the events are related,
invariably implies a particular mode of accounting for them; that every
separate fact as it arises, finds the reader artificially prepared to
put that interpretation upon it which the author’s system requires; that
causes are feigned, and the events so managed as to appear the natural
consequences of them; that the hypothesis is slid in and gains credence
under cover of the facts, because they are so related as seemingly not
to allow of any other explanation.

During the Revolution, a variety of shades of opinion manifested
themselves, and a variety of distinct and hostile parties grew up, among
the defenders of the popular cause. The vulgar mouth-pieces of
aristocracy to whom in our own country the office of forming the public
sentiment on the Revolution was abandoned, have generally lumped all
these parties and opinions together, in order that all of them, and the
Revolution itself, might share the opprobrium which is justly due to the
terrorists alone. Sir Walter Scott is quite superior to these low
artifices: but he has fallen into an error as gross, and far more
plausible. He has committed the very common blunder of ascribing to
persons what was the effect of circumstances, and to settled design what
was the result of immediate impulse. Every one of his characters has a
part premeditated and prepared, and is ready to march upon the stage and
enact it at the precise moment when his entrée will produce the most
striking scenic effect. All the parties which gradually arose during the
Revolution are represented as already existing from its commencement. At
the very opening of the drama, we have already Constitutionalists,
Republicans, and Jacobins, all of whom are described as even then
entertaining all the opinions, and prosecuting systematically all the
designs, which they manifested when they were most conspicuous, and most
powerful. The struggle between the people and the court is made to
appear, in all its stages, to have arisen solely from the endeavours of
these different parties to carry their supposed designs into effect: the
events are, with much skill, so presented as on every occasion to make
the revolutionists appear the aggressors; they are pictured as
omnipotent, having nothing to fear, nothing, for any good purpose, to
desire; while the court and the aristocracy are represented from the
first in no character but that of helpless unresisting victims,
altogether without power even of self-defence, and quite impotent for
attack. If any precaution, therefore, is taken, under the idea that any
attack from that quarter is possible, it is held up as a studied
indignity, intended to prepare the way for the subversion of the throne,
and clear the ground for trying quackish political experiments, at the
expense of a nation’s happiness.

Now there is not a word of all this but what is purely fabulous. There
is not a truth in history more firmly established, than the
non-existence of any republican party at the commencement of the
Revolution. The wishes of all then centered in a constitutional
monarchy. There may have been, and probably were, speculative
philosophers, at that time as at most others, who preferred in the
abstract a Edition: current; Page: [78] republican form of government;
but, if such there were, they had not the remotest idea of introducing
it into France; and it is not proved that at this early period so much
as one member of the Constituent Assembly was even in this speculative
sense a republican. If any were so, they were of the number of those
whom Sir Walter Scott acknowledges to have been, in their conduct,
supporters of monarchy.* The men who formed the extremity of the côté
gauche, who were esteemed the most exagérés among the democrats, were
Barnave, Duport, and the Lameths: yet all these, when at length there
was a republican party, were its most determined opponents, and threw
away safety, fortune, popularity, every thing which they most valued, to
save the throne. One of the Lameths, even, on the subversion of
monarchy, expatriated with La Fayette, and shared with him that
memorable captivity which the brutal vengeance of an infuriated
despot[*] inflicted, and in which the author of “New Morality,” in a
spirit worthy of his sarcasm upon Ogden, found matter for savage
exultation.[†]

The very name of a French republic was scarcely breathed, never publicly
pronounced, until the king’s flight from Paris: when two years
experience, terminated by that ill-fated attempt, had clearly proved the
impossibility of trusting to his good faith, so long as all who
surrounded him were inveterately hostile to the new order of things;
when the experiment of a free constitution with him at its head, had
decidedly failed, and all discerning persons saw the impossibility of
arriving at a settled government, or maintaining the authority of the
laws, while the executive authority was in hands which could not safely
be intrusted with the power necessary to enforce them. It was not till
after ample and melancholy experience of this fact, that some of those
who afterwards composed the Girondist party became republicans; but even
then, by the great majority of that party, nothing more was at first
thought of than a change of monarch; and nothing more would have been
thought of to the last, if the Duke of Orleans, the only member of the
royal family who was not inveterately hostile to the popular cause, had
been of a character to possess, or to deserve, the smallest portion of
public respect.

It may surprise some readers to find that Sir Walter Scott makes no
allusion to the Orleanist party, which used to be employed with so much
effect, in the character of a bugbear, by the enemies of liberal
principles in France. This party, which was supposed to comprise all the
abler and more energetic of the adherents Edition: current; Page: [79]
of the popular cause, was represented as compassing the king’s
destruction as a means, and, as an end, the elevation of the Duke of
Orleans either to the regency or to the throne, and of themselves to the
principal offices of state. As it is unquestionable that Orleanists, if
not an Orleanist party, did at one time exist, the discerning reader,
when he finds that Sir Walter Scott is generous enough to forego all the
advantages which the impugners of the popular leaders have derived from
the connexion of several of them with that unhappy man, is apt to think
that a writer with his partialities would hardly have been so
unnecessarily candid on this point, without some ulterior object. Sir
Walter Scott has sagacity enough to know, that different imputations
suit different times, and that attacks upon visionary theorists take
much better now, in this country at least, than accusations of aiming at
personal aggrandizement under the mask of popular principles. This we
suspect to be the true reason of his conjuring up a republican party,
and putting aside not only what is fictitious, but what is true, in the
denunciations of royalist writers against the Orleanists. For it is
impossible that he should be ignorant (scanty and careless as his
reading on the subject of the Revolution has been), that not
Republicanism but Orleanism was the only reproach, connected with
designs against the king, which was imputed at the time to any
individual member of the Constituent Assembly: not Republicanism but
Orleanism was the accusation brought against the only member of it, whom
our author singles out by name as one of the republican party;* and, in
fact, the only shade of opinion which existed in the Edition: current;
Page: [80] Assembly beyond what our author terms the party of Bailly and
La Fayette, was Orleanism. The difference between the Orleanists and the
other section of the popular party did not consist in a greater
hostility to royalty; for, on the contrary, their leader Mirabeau was
inclined, as his speeches prove, to give a larger share of power to the
king than even Necker himself, the largest indeed which was at all
consistent with the circumstances of the time, or perhaps with
constitutional freedom.[*] The distinction lay in this—that, while both
parties desired a monarchical and representative government, La Fayette
and the majority felt sufficient confidence in the good intentions of
Louis, to be desirous of retaining him at its head, while the other
party would have preferred his peaceable deposition, and the elevation
of some individual to the constitutional throne, who had never known
what it was to be a despot. All the more discerning among the friends of
freedom, and especially Mirabeau, perhaps the only true statesman whom
the Revolution produced, thoroughly distrusted the king. They knew, what
in our times some other persons ought to have learned,—that it is next
to an impossibility for a monarch, used to absolute power, to
accommodate himself to limitations; and they were convinced that Louis,
at least, was not the man who would be an exception to the rule.
Incapable of maintaining and abiding by his firmest convictions, if they
were in opposition to the will of those by whom he was immediately
surrounded, he was formed to be the tool of any person who had the
opportunity and the will to use him as such: completely at the beck of
his queen and her counter-revolutionary counsellors, he had shewn by his
conduct both before and immediately after the meeting of the Etats
Généraux, that he was capable of being hurried into every extreme of
despotism by such counsellors, although he personally did not share the
passions in which their counsels originated: and the patriots thought,
not without reason, that the man who, after saying that nobody except
Turgot and himself desired the good of the people,[†] could dismiss this
same Turgot a few months Edition: current; Page: [81] afterwards, at the
persuasion of the very men of whose worthlessness he was so clearly
convinced, was a man whose good feelings were no security against the
worst conduct. Having this opinion of Louis, these statesmen, though
fully aware of all the objections to the Duke of Orleans as a man, still
thought, that owing the crown to the new order of things, and being
unable to maintain it by any support but that of the friends of freedom,
he would be less objectionable as the head of a constitutional monarchy,
than a man who thought himself, and was thought by a powerful party, to
be a despot by divine right. Our Revolution of 1688 formed at once a
precedent for such a settlement of affairs, and an example of its
beneficial effects. It is deeply to be regretted that uncontrollable
circumstances prevented these views from being realized. As it turned
out, the change of dynasty was only thought of for an instant, not by a
party, but by scattered individuals, and thought of merely, like the
republic at a later period, as a pis aller. The nullity of the Duke of
Orleans as a politician, which became more clearly manifested by
subsequent events, and the complete annihilation of the little character
he possessed, detached from him all the more sincere and disinterested
of his adherents; and when Louis had so acted that even Sir Walter Scott
admits he ought not to have been replaced on the throne,[*] these and
many others, being of the same opinion with Sir Walter Scott, became
republicans because they had no choice.*

But it is not the republicans alone that have had the misfortune to
offend our author: the constitutional royalists come in for nearly an
equal share of his displeasure. Much good indignation, and no
inconsiderable quantity of what is intended to be wit, is expended upon
them, for rejecting the counsels of experience, and attempting to
renovate the constitution of France by means of abstract and untried
theories. It is with such vulgar weapons, that Sir Walter Scott does not
disdain to assail some of the most remarkable men who have ever figured
in public affairs. To point out the real faults in the conduct of the
early revolutionists—to shew in what respects the means which they
employed, were ill-suited to attain the ends which they had in
view,—this, it is not every body who is capable of; but if to dub them
theorists be sufficient, then there is not a creature so dull, so
ignorant, so thoroughly mean in understanding and void of ideas, who is
not perfectly competent to condemn philosophers and statesmen without a
hearing, and decide at his ease all the questions which perplexed the
most thinking Edition: current; Page: [82] men of their day. It seems no
more than reasonable to demand, in behalf of conclusions which are the
result of thought, that some portion of thought shall also be deemed
necessary in order to criticize them; and that a body of men, who
comprised in their ranks nearly all the political wisdom which could be
found in an age and country abounding in it, shall at least be thought
worthy of having their motives and reasons weighed, and of being
condemned, if condemned they must be, for the injustice or inexpediency
of their course of action, not for its novelty.

It cannot be denied that the early revolutionists did attempt to
discover what was the best possible form of government; and, having, in
their own opinion, found it, did endeavour to bring the government of
their own country as nearly into accordance with it as they could. We
shall not seek to defend them against these imputations; but, if our
author’s objection to their scheme of government be that it was untried,
we are entitled to require him to shew that there was any tried scheme,
which would have afforded better prospects of success.

His opinion on the subject might have been foretold. It is, that they
should have adopted the English constitution; or something as nearly
resembling it as possible.

Now this, from a writer who is perpetually crying out against visionary
projects, is a tolerable specimen of a visionary project; and its author
is justly chargeable with the very fault which he imputes to the
revolutionists, that of being so wedded to a favourite system, as to
insist upon introducing it at all hazards, even when the very
circumstances which constitute its excellence at other times, would
infallibly work its destruction.

It is not on account of the imperfections of the British constitution,
great as we deem these to be, on its native soil, that we blame those
who, at this period of the Revolution, sought to introduce it into
France. With all its defects, we are well content that foreign nations
should look to it as their model; for there is little danger of their
copying it in those parts which are the cause of our evils. It is not
probable that they should fail of making their Lower House a real
representative organ: and as we should be satisfied with this in our own
country, so we are of opinion that in any other, the British
constitution, with this modification alone, would suffice for good
government.

But what may be very true of a settled order of things, it may be
altogether absurd to affirm of a revolution. Why do the King and the
House of Peers, in this country, never convert the powers which they
constitutionally possess, to the overthrow of the constitution and the
abolition of the House of Commons? Nobody supposes that it is because
they would not; for it is the theory of our constitution, that every one
who has power seeks its enlargement, and, in times more favourable to
them, they have attempted such things. It is because they could not; and
because, power to effect such schemes being manifestly wanting, the
desire never arises in their minds. Nobody, however, will deny that it
is in their power to impede and thwart in a hundred ways the operations
of the Commons, and even to Edition: current; Page: [83] put a stop to
the business of government altogether. They have, therefore, much power,
capable of being mischievously employed. Our security against their so
employing it is, that they could serve no purpose by doing so, except
that of destroying the constitution; and, of success in such a design,
they well know that they have no chance. Give them a chance, and you
will soon know the mischief which they can still do. Let the time ever
come, when by the exercise of their powers in a manner opposed to the
end for which those powers were given, the king may hope to erect an
absolute monarchy, or the peers to establish themselves in undivided
rule as an aristocratical senate, and we are justified in saying that
either their powers must be suspended, or the government cannot be
carried on. Such was the posture of affairs during the French
Revolution; and he who does not carry this conviction along with him
through the whole of its history, will never form a rational conception
of the Revolution in any of its stages, much less as a whole.

If the attempt to establish a government of two chambers on the English
model, had been made, the Upper House must have been formed from among
the high noblesse and clergy, either by the king’s choice, or by the
suffrages of the privileged orders themselves. In whichever way
selected, this second chamber would have been, as the high noblesse and
the high clergy almost universally were, inveterately hostile to nearly
every necessary reform, and (as soon as they saw that they were not
about to have absolute control over the legislature) to the
representative system itself. Not one of the great objects of the
Revolution would, with their consent, have been effected; and either
those objects must have been renounced, or it would have been necessary
to decide which chamber should turn the other out of doors, or, what is
most probable, the court would have taken advantage of their dissensions
to discredit them in the public mind, and would have availed itself of
the authority of one branch of the legislature to rid itself for ever of
both. This is what stamps the conduct and counsels of Mounier (whom our
author characterizes as one of the wisest men in France),[*] of Lally
Tolendal, and the remainder of the modérés (or monarchiens, as they were
afterwards called), with absurdity; and marks them as altogether unequal
to the difficulties of the crisis which they had aided so powerfully in
bringing on. That the intentions of these men were good, is not to be
denied; but the good intentions of men, who not only give the most
unseasonable and ruinous advice, but desert their post and abandon their
country because that advice is not listened to, are of little use. The
emigration of Mounier and Lally, at the time when, if ever, the presence
of wise and moderate men was required, admits of but one excuse, and
that is, the supposition that they were conscious of being deficient in
all the qualities which could be available in Edition: current; Page:
[84] troubled times, and felt that the moment was past when such men as
they were, could act a part in the Revolution.*

Our author next pronounces that the Assembly erred, by not giving
sufficient power to the king.[*] He gets over all the difficulties of
this question very summarily. It was surely very foolish in the Assembly
to waste so much time and labour in anxious deliberation on points which
our author settles so perfectly at his ease. Nothing can be more
conclusive than the case he can always make out against them; nothing
more completely satisfactory than the reasons he gives, to prove them
always in the wrong; and the chief impression which is made upon the
reader, is one of astonishment, that a set of persons should have been
found so perversely blind to considerations so obviously dictated by
sound policy and common sense. But when we examine the original
authorities, we find that these considerations were no more unknown or
unheeded by the Assembly than by our author himself. The difference in
point of knowledge between them and him consisted chiefly in this, that
they likewise knew the reasons which made for the other side of the
question, and might therefore be pardoned if, being thus burthened with
arguments on both sides, they were slower to decide, and sometimes came
to a different decision from that which, as long as we confine ourselves
to one, appears so eminently reasonable.

The point which Sir Walter Scott so quietly disposes of was, in fact,
the great difficulty of their situation. There is no denying, that the
king, or whoever else is placed at the head of the executive, ought to
have more power than the Constituent Assembly gave him. And most of the
popular leaders felt this strongly enough; all, after a very short
experience of the constitution they had framed. In truth, the executive
had not power enough to enforce obedience to the laws, or to prevent, in
many places, the most worthless part of the population, often headed and
organized by professional robbers, from availing themselves of the
universal relaxation of restraint, and perpetrating the most horrid
enormities. The popular party knew all this; but they knew also, that
every atom of power which they gave to the executive over the military,
through whom alone these disorders could have been suppressed, would be
employed at the first favourable opportunity to put down the Revolution
and restore absolute monarchy. It was this conviction, strong from the
first, and continually gaining strength by the conduct of the court from
1789 to 1792, which finally brought on, and rendered imperatively
necessary, the subversion of the throne. And it is this conviction which
induced even d’Escherny, Edition: current; Page: [85] a writer who
regards the republicans with horror, and calls the constitution of 1791
un systême monstrueux, to declare, that the day of the 10th of August
decided whether France should be governed by an absolute king, or by
demagogues, meaning the republican leaders.*

“Avant d’avoir une monarchie constitutionnelle,” says M. Bailleul, “il
fallait vaincre les hommes puissans qui n’en voulaient pas. Les erreurs
viennent de ce qu’on confond toujours les institutions avec les combats
qu’il fallait livrer pour les obtenir.”† This is a truth which, as
applied to the French Revolution, our author cannot or will not see. In
reading him, nobody would ever guess, that France had for the time no
choice but between an absolute monarchy and a republic. Of the first we
should never learn from him that there was the least danger; and to the
latter, France according to him was only brought by the criminal
recklessness of a set of hair-brained enthusiasts, wild in their ends
and unscrupulous in the choice of their means, who were willing to let
murder and rapine loose upon society, to deluge their country with
bloodshed, and stain their consciences with guilt, for the mere
difference between monarchical and republican forms.

“N’est-il pas bien étrange de voir,” says M. Bailleul, “et ceux qui
prennent le titre d’historiens, et ceux qui prétendent faire de la
morale sur la révolution, en saisir l’esprit, comme Madame de Staël,”
and we will add, like Sir Walter Scott, “faire une abstraction entière
et complète de l’attaque, ne s’occuper que de ceux contre qui elle est
dirigée, signaler comme des forfaits, non seulement les coups que par
erreur ou par esprit de vertige, ils se sont portés entr’eux, mais
appeler surtout crimes, forfaits, les combats qu’ils ont livrés aux
ennemis de la patrie?”‡ This sentence might be imagined to have been
written on purpose to describe the work before us. Our author
systematically “makes abstraction of the attack,” and treats the defence
as a premeditated and unprovoked aggression. This it is to start
Edition: current; Page: [86] with false ideas, and read just enough to
be confirmed in them—not enough to correct them.

Burke has asserted, in one of his rhapsodies against the French
Revolution, that, from the day when the Etats Généraux assembled at
Versailles, despotism was no more.[*] We will not take this assertion in
the sense in which it was meant; for, in that sense, nothing was ever
thrown out even by that author in his wildest moments, more glaringly
absurd. But there is a sense in which it is perfectly well founded; that
despotism, and the National Assembly, could not subsist together; and
that the existence of the one necessarily implied the subversion of the
other. The popular party were thoroughly aware of this. So were the
royalists. They knew that, not indeed when the Assembly met, but as soon
as it shewed itself firmly determined that France should be free, she
was free, and could not be again enslaved while the Assembly remained,
to guard and consolidate her freedom. Accordingly, the dissolution of
the Assembly entered into all their plans; and they never, for a single
moment, ceased plotting to accomplish it. We agree with Burke, that the
Revolution, so far as it was necessary or justifiable, was terminated
when the Assembly met. From that time the struggle was not for a
revolution, but against a counter-revolution. To the well-grounded
apprehension of such a calamity, and to the precautions necessary to be
taken in order to guard against it, ought really to be ascribed all
those proceedings, both of the constitutionalists and of the Gironde,
which, in the former party, our author imputes to the desire of reducing
the royal authority to a name; in the latter, to a fanatical hatred even
of the name.[†]

Could the revolutionists forget that the attempt to put down the
Revolution had once been made, and had failed only because the military
had remembered that they were citizens before they were soldiers? We
allude to the events which preceded the insurrection of Paris and the
destruction of the Bastille.

Few of our readers, we hope, are ignorant, that in July 1789, when the
Constituent Assembly had only sat for a few weeks, when it had done
nothing, as yet, of what our author deems blameable in its proceedings;
when his friends Lally and Mounier were still predominant in its
counsels; when it had scarcely begun to occupy itself with the reform of
abuses, or the establishment of a constitution, and had only had time to
shew that it would not resign the entire power of legislation to the
privileged classes, by giving to each order a separate voice; so early
as this, troops from distant parts of the kingdom were marched upon
Paris; a large force, under an avowed anti-revolutionist,[‡] was
encamped in its immediate vicinity, and artillery was moved upon that
city and upon Versailles, sufficient for a siege. At this juncture,
Necker, and all the ministers not decidedly hostile to the new Edition:
current; Page: [87] order of things, received an abrupt dismissal, and
Necker was banished from France. They were succeeded by men notoriously
inimical to the Revolution;[*] men odious to the people, some of them
for their personal corruption, all for their political views, and every
thing seemed prepared for dissolving the Assembly and crushing
resistance by force of arms. That this purpose was really entertained,
none but the most prejudiced and dishonest even among the royalist
writers have hitherto been bold enough to deny. The king in person, at
the famous séance royale, had threatened the Assembly with dissolution
if it did, what it had nevertheless done.* The courtiers themselves made
no secret of what was intended: with their accustomed fool-hardiness,
they openly triumphed in the approaching humiliation of the popular
party, and punishment of its leaders; and it is a fact known to many now
living, that several members of the minority of the noblesse, who had
relatives or friends connected with the court, were warned by them to
save themselves, by a timely flight, from the death or captivity which
was in store for them.† At this crisis the people rose in arms,
organized the burgher-milita afterwards called the National Guard, were
joined by a portion of the military, took the Bastille, and reduced the
court to the necessity of indefinitely postponing the execution of its
criminal design. Now let us hear our author speculate, and conjecture,
and calculate, probabilities, in opposition to the plain and
well-established facts above related.

The successful party may always cast on the loser the blame of
commencing the brawl, as the wolf punished the lamb for troubling the
course of the water, though he drank lowest down the stream. But when we
find one party completely prepared, and ready for action, forming plans
boldly, and executing them skilfully, and observe the other uncertain
and unprovided, betraying all the imbecility of surprise and indecision,
we must necessarily believe the attack was premeditated on the one side,
and unexpected on the other. The abandonment of thirty thousand stand of
arms at the Hotel des Invalides, which were surrendered without the
slightest resistance, though three Swiss regiments lay encamped in the
Champs Elysées; the totally unprovided state of the Bastille, garrisoned
by about one hundred Swiss and Invalids, and without provisions even for
that small number; the absolute inaction of the Baron de Bezenval,
who—without entangling his troops in the narrow streets, which was
pleaded as his excuse—might, by marching along the Boulevards, a passage
so well calculated for the manoeuvres of regular troops, have relieved
the siege of that fortress; and finally, that general’s bloodless
retreat from Paris—shew that the king had, under all these
circumstances, not only adopted no measures of a hostile character, but
must, on the contrary, have issued such orders as prevented his officers
from repelling force by force. We are led, therefore, to believe, that
the scheme of assembling the troops round Paris was one of those
half-measures, to which, with great Edition: current; Page: [88]
political weakness, Louis resorted more than once—an attempt to
intimidate by the demonstration of force, which he was previously
resolved not to use.*

And accordingly, the insurrection is ascribed to “dark intrigues,”[*]
which had been long formed by the Republican and Jacobin parties for the
subversion of the throne. Thus far Sir Walter Scott. Now hear the
marquis de Ferrières; himself a member of the Assembly, a deputy of the
noblesse, who always voted with the noblesse, and who is so far from
being a revolutionist, that there are few of the revolutionists to whom
he will allow the common merit of sincerely desiring the public good:
“Trente régimens,” says he, “marchaient sur Paris. Le prétexte était la
tranquillité publique; l’objet réel, la dissolution des états” (Vol. I,
p. 71); with much more to the same effect, from which we shall quote
only what follows. The circumstances which it relates took place on the
very day on which the Bastille was taken, and are the more memorable
from the allusion made to them the next day by Mirabeau, in perhaps the
most splendid apostrophe recorded in history.[†]

La cour était résolue d’agir cette même nuit. Les régimens de
Royal-Allemand et de Royal-Etranger avaient reçu ordre de prendre les
armes. Les hussards s’étaient portés sur la place du château; les
gardes-du-corps occupaient les cours. A ces préparatifs menaçans la cour
joignit un air de fête, qui, dans la circonstance, ajoutait l’insulte à
la cruauté. Le comte d’Artois, les Polignac, Mesdames, Madame,[‡] et
Madame d’Artois, se rendirent sur la terrasse de l’orangerie. On fit
jouer la musique des deux régimens. Les soldats, auxquels on n’avait pas
épargné le vin, formèrent des danses: une joie insolente et brutale
éclatait de toutes parts: une troupe de femmes, de courtisans, d’hommes
vendus au despotisme, regardaient cet étrange spectacle d’un oeil
satisfait, et l’animaient par leurs applaudissemens. Telle était la
légèreté, ou plutôt l’immoralité de ces hommes, qu’assurés, à ce qu’ils
croyaient, du succès, ils se livraient à un insultant triomphe.
L’assemblée nationale offrait un aspect bien différent, un calme
majestueux, une contenance ferme, une activité sage et tranquille, tout
annonçait les grands desseins dont elle était occupée, et le danger de
la chose publique. Ce n’était point ignorance des desseins de la cour.
L’assemblée savait qu’au moment même de l’attaque de Paris, les régimens
de Royal-Etranger et les hussards devaient environner la salle des
états-généraux, enlever les députés que leur zèle et leur patriotisme
avaient désignés pour victimes, et en cas de résistance employer la
force. Elle savait que le roi devait venir le lendemain faire accepter
la déclaration du 23 Juin, et dissoudre l’assemblée;[§] que déjà plus de
quarante mille exemplaires de cette déclaration étaient envoyés aux
intendans et aux subdélégués, avec ordre de la publier, et de l’afficher
dans toute l’étendue du royaume.

(Vol. I, pp. 130-1.)

Is this sufficient? We are curious to know what more unexceptionable
evidence our author can demand. No doubt he disbelieves Ferrières—though
he too can quote Ferrières when it answers his purpose. No doubt he
disbelieves Madame de Edition: current; Page: [89] Staël;* he
disbelieves Bailly;† he disbelieves Dumouriez—a writer to whom, on other
occasions, he gives even more credit than is due, and who informs us,
that, even at Cherbourg, the royalists were exulting in their
anticipated victory, and triumphing in the thought that the minority of
the noblesse were, perhaps, already in the Bastille.‡ But we will make
free to inquire, does he disbelieve two persons, who ought to know
whether the design existed or not; viz. the person who planned it, and
the person who was to have executed it—the minister Breteuil, and the
minister and commander of the troops, the Maréchal de Broglie himself?
The former boasted, both subsequently and at the time, not only of the
conspiracy, but of what were to have been its sanguinary consequences;
and named several of the very men who were marked out to pay with their
lives the penalty of having wished their country to be free. As for
Broglie, the letter is extant in which he offered himself to be the
wretched instrument in the perpetration of crimes, compared with which
those of the butcher of Porlier and Lacy are innocence itself.[*] “Avec
cinquante mille hommes,” says he, “je me chargerais volontiers de
dissiper tous ces beaux esprits qui calculent sur leurs prétentions, et
cette foule d’imbécilles qui écoutent, applaudissent, et encouragent.
Une salve de canons, ou une décharge de coups de fusils, aurait bientôt
dispersé ces argumentateurs, et remis la puissance absolue qui s’éteint,
à la place de cet esprit républicain qui se forme.” See the
Correspondence published at Paris and London in 1789, and never
disavowed; or the History, by the abbé de Montgaillard.§ We shall now
adopt the words of the latter author.

Lorsque le maréchal de Broglie eut pris le commandement des troupes
destinées à dissoudre l’assemblée des états-généraux, le baron de
Breteuil, qu’on pouvait considérer en quelque sorte, comme premier
ministre, par l’influence sans bornes qu’il exerçait sur l’esprit de la
reine et sur celui du roi, le baron de Breteuil disait, portes ouvertes;
“Au surplus, s’il faut brûler Paris, on brûlera Paris, et l’on décimera
ses habitans, aux grands maux, les grands remèdes.” On répète mot pour
mot ce qu’on a entendu dire au baron de Breteuil en 1794, ce dont il se
glorifiait encore à cette époque.¶ . . . On tient également de ce
ministre, que le duc Edition: current; Page: [90] d’Orléans, le marquis
de la Fayette, le comte de Mirabeau, l’abbé Sieyès, Barnave, Chapelier,
Lally-Tolendal, Mounier, et huit ou dix autres membres de l’assemblée
nationale étaient désignés comme victimes impérieusement réclamées par
le salut du trône et de l’état. Une compagnie de canonniers avait été
casernée aux écuries de la reine, et l’on ne cachait pas que cette
compagnie était destinée à mitrailler l’assemblée.*

Let no man wonder that Mounier and Lally, men whose love of freedom was
sufficiently lukewarm to suit even Sir Walter Scott, were doomed to
perish on the same scaffold with Barnave and Mirabeau. To have desired
the liberty of France was an offence which nothing could redeem. By
being more scrupulous, more moderate, a less envenomed opponent than the
rest, all which was ever gained was, to be more bitterly detested. An
enemy always hates those most whom he most fears; a criminal ever most
abhors those among his pursuers whom he believes to be most inflexibly
virtuous.

It is of little use to heap up quotations in order to convince a writer
who, by an elaborate argument, concludes that it is most likely a thing
is white, when every credible person who has seen it assures him that it
is black. yet we cannot refrain from quoting one passage more; it is
from Lacretelle; an author whose principles are those of the most
decided royalism, and who has written a History of the Constituent
Assembly, in a spirit generally as unfair as that of Sir Walter Scott,
but who, on this occasion, pays the following tribute to truth:

Le château était rempli de généraux, de colonels, d’aides-de-camp qui
revenaient essouflés de leurs courses insignifiantes. Tout présentait à
la fois un air de mystère et de confiance. Le roi seul laissait lire sur
son visage la perplexité de son esprit. La reine semblait jouir avec
orgueil de la pensée qu’elle seule dirigeait toute cette noblesse armée
pour la défense du trône. Sa figure était empreinte d’une majesté
nouvelle. Les adorateurs de la cour lui faisaient oublier les aveugles
et atroces malédictions du peuple. Il n’était plus douteux pour personne
qu’un coup d’état ne dût être frappé. Quelles en devaient être la force
et l’étendue? Les mémoires de ce temps sont si stériles et si rares,
qu’ils fournissent peu de moyen d’éclaircir ce mystère. Ce qu’il y a de
certain, c’est que la reine, ni le comte d’Artois, n’avaient ni conçu ni
présenté des projets sévères et cruels, qui, fort éloignés de leurs
propres penchans, auraient fait une violence intolérable au coeur du
roi. Il s’agissait, si j’en crois et la vraisemblance et les
renseignemens particuliers qu’il m’a été possible de recueillir, de
faire respecter la déclaration du 23 Juin dans toute son étendue, d’y
ajouter encore quelques clauses satisfaisantes pour le parti populaire,
et de dissoudre l’assemblée, si elle persistait à vouloir, à elle seule,
déterminer la constitution du royaume.†

This is the testimony which Sir Walter Scott would refute by a
ratiocination: and what a ratiocination! Nothing can be more engaging
than the amiable simplicity which it betokens, if the author is himself
persuaded by his own reasoning. That want of preparation, or rather of
means adequate to the intended purpose, which Edition: current; Page:
[91] was really owing to blind, besotted, headlong confidence, imagining
that the troops had only to show themselves and all would be quiet, he,
good man, esteems a demonstrative proof that no violence was intended!
Truly it is no wonder that they were unprepared, when, on the very day
of the capture of the Bastille, at the very instant when a deputation of
the Assembly was waiting upon the king, to represent to him the state of
Paris, and express their alarms; “l’intendant de Paris était dans la
chambre, en bottes et le fouet à la main, assurant que tout était
tranquille;”* when, “le soir même du 14 Juillet, on regardait à
Versailles dans les cercles des femmes à-la-mode et des petits-maîtres,
tous les avis que l’on recevait de Paris comme autant de fables; à les
entendre, il ne s’agissait que de quelques misérables, dont la
maréchaussée ferait justice.”†

Hear Ferrières again: “La cour, habituée à voir Paris trembler sous un
lieutenant de police, et sous une garde de huit cents hommes à cheval,
ne soupçonna pas même une résistance. Elle ne prévit rien, ne calcula
rien, ne songea pas même à s’assurer des soldats dont elle voulait faire
l’instrument de ses desseins.” (Vol. I, p. 75.) And again, speaking of
the ministers, “Ils regardaient la situation de Paris comme l’effet
d’une émeute passagère; ils ne doutaient pas qu’à l’approche des troupes
le peuple tremblant ne se dispersât, que les chefs consternés ne
vinssent implorer la clémence du monarque” (p. 116). He even intimates a
suspicion that they allowed the insurrection to proceed, in order that
they might have a better excuse for the rigorous measures which they had
previously resolved upon (p. 115).‡

No wonder that the king had not given the necessary orders, when he was
kept in such profound ignorance of what was passing, that he did not
even know of the insurrection, and the capture of the Bastille, until
the duc de Liancourt, a member of the popular party in the Assembly, who
had access to him by office, as grand master of his wardrobe, awakened
him in the night, and apprised him of those events which his counsellors
had till then concealed from him: “Mais, dit le roi, après un silence,
c’est une révolte.—Sire, c’est une Révolution.”§

Our readers must excuse us for dwelling a little longer on this great
aera in the history of the Revolution. If the events themselves are
important, the manner in Edition: current; Page: [92] which they are
here treated is no less curious, as a specimen of the book. We are
presented with a lecture, in a strain of lofty morality, on the duties
which were incumbent upon Louis in this great emergency.[*] We are told,
that he ought to have marched into Paris at the head of his guards, and
put down the insurrection by the strong hand of power: his life itself
was not too much to be sacrificed in the performance of this sacred
obligation, so exalted is Sir Walter Scott’s idea of the duties of
kings; but, when the revolt was quelled, our author is pleased to say
that Louis would have been infinitely criminal, if he had not given to
his subjects a national representation. This is excellent advice, and
admirably, no doubt, the latter part of it would have been observed, if
the enterprise had succeeded; but we could have suggested something
which would have been still better, viz. not to attempt to deprive his
subjects of the national representation which they already possessed.
This would have been less grand; it would not have called upon the
monarch for any exposure of his life; but it would have prevented the
insurrection. To tell us that Louis ought to have put down the tumults
and to have renounced despotism, when if he had renounced despotism
there would have been no tumults to put down, is a very pleasant way of
begging the question against the people. Other persons besides kings
would have reason to be thankful for a similar lesson of morality. You
rob a man of his watch: the man discovering the theft, seizes you by the
collar, and insists upon your giving back the stolen property: at this
juncture Sir Walter Scott comes up, and lectures you as follows: Knock
down the insolent aggressor: when you have done this, I shall then hold
you infinitely criminal, if you do not restore to him his watch; but in
the mean time, I will gladly assist you in chastising him, his violence
deserves it!

We must not pass unnoticed another characteristic trait in our author’s
narrative of these transactions. When the soldiers, who were intended to
overawe Paris, fraternized with the people, and refused to fire upon
their fellow citizens, he can find no means of accounting for conduct so
extremely un-military, except the influence of debauchery. “They were
plied,” says he, “with those temptations which are most powerful with
soldiers—wine, women, and money, were supplied in abundance—and it was
amidst debauchery and undiscipline that the French army renounced their
loyalty, which used to be even too much the god of their Edition:
current; Page: [93] idolatry, and which was now destroyed like the
temple of Persepolis, amidst the vapours of wine, and at the instigation
of courtezans.”*

Does not Sir Walter Scott richly deserve the pointed sarcasm of Madame
de Staël, upon the royalist party? “Un des grands malheurs de ceux qui
vivent dans les cours, c’est de ne pouvoir se faire une idée de ce que
c’est qu’une nation.”† Once more, does our author really not believe in
the possibility of public spirit or patriotism, or if these expressions
do not please him, sincere enthusiasm? The alternative was that of being
slaves or freemen, of enslaving their countrymen or helping them to be
free; and he can find no more creditable motive for preferring freedom,
than wine, women, and money! If Sir Walter Scott had one tenth part as
much knowledge of the Revolution, as an author who writes its history
ought to have, he would have known that the sentiments which, according
to him, it required debauchery to excite in the regiments assembled at
the metropolis, were shared by the military without the aid of
debauchery, all over France. Let him read, for example, the address of
the garrison of Strasbourg to the National Assembly on the 16th October,
1789, a perfect model of propriety and good taste:‡ let him read in
Dumouriez’s Memoirs§ the conduct of the garrison of Cherbourg; let him
read in Bouillé’s Memoirs,¶ or in Soulavie’s Annals of Louis XVI,[*] or
in the Life of Malesherbes, the refusal of the troops in Dauphiné, even
before the Revolution, to act against the people:** let him read in the
Histoire de la Révolution par Deux Amis de la Liberté, numerous
instances of the most sublime disinterestedness and self-devotion in
these very gardes-françaises whom he has so unjustly inculpated, and he
will then see whether these were men who needed the “vapours of wine”
and the “instigation of courtezans,” to impel them to act as citizens
and freemen ought.[†]

We make no apology for having detained our readers so long on the first
and greatest epoch of the Revolution. Where, from the immensity of the
subject, much must necessarily be left undone, it is better to establish
one important point thoroughly, than a hundred imperfectly. If the
reader is now convinced, that Sir∥ Edition: current; Page: [94] Walter
Scott has altogether misunderstood and misrepresented that event upon
which all the subsequent history of the Revolution turns (and if he is
not, we utterly despair of making any impression upon him), he will be
willing to believe without much further proof, that the other great
events of the Revolution are similarly dealt with. Yet, in alluding to
the plots and aggressions of the royalist party against the order of
things established by the Constituent Assembly, we cannot help pausing
for a moment at the famous fifth of October, 1789, to give a further
specimen of our author’s fitness for the office of an accurate and
impartial historian.

We need scarcely remind any reader, not thoroughly unacquainted with the
facts of the Revolution, that, on the occasion to which we allude, the
king was brought from Versailles to the Tuileries, under circumstances
of considerable indignity, by a mob of Parisians who sallied out from
Paris for this if for any preconcerted purpose, and by a portion of
whom, during their stay at Versailles, various excesses were committed,
and in particular an attempt was made (there is too much reason to
believe) against the life of the queen. In all this, our author is very
perfect; but he never hints that a plot existed among the royalists to
convey the king to Metz, and placing him under the protection of the
anti-revolutionary general Bouillé, to commence a civil war; that a
variety of other intrigues were on foot for effecting a
counter-revolution, and that the removal of the king from Versailles to
Paris, was really on the part of the revolutionists a defensive act. Yet
he would have found all this asserted not only by many writers of the
constitutional party, but by the royalist Ferrières;* it has been avowed
by Breteuil, Bouillé,[*] and the comte de Mercy, then ambassador of
Austria at the court of France;† and it may be gathered even from the
proceedings before the Châtelet, notwithstanding the strenuous efforts
of that tribunal to disguise it. Our author does not scruple to quote
Ferrières for an insignificant expression vaguely attributed to Barnave,
which he imagines can be turned in some manner to the discredit of that
distinguished person.[†] We have seen, however, that Sir Walter Scott
can be very incredulous, as well as very easy of belief, when a
favourite hypothesis is concerned. Even if he did not give credit to the
assertion of Ferrières with respect to the royalist plots, that
assertion proves at least, that their reality was generally believed;
and might have suggested to our author that there may have been a more
creditable motive for wishing to bring the king to Paris, than the
desire of placing him and the Assembly “under the influence of popular
frenzy.”[‡]

But our author had a different theory. We need scarcely say, that in his
theory all is ascribed to the manoeuvres of the republican party; his
established mode of accounting for all the commotions under the first
two national assemblies. The Edition: current; Page: [95] imputed object
of these agitators, is of course the establishment of a republic; and he
insinuates that regicide formed, even at this time, part of their
ultimate intentions. Need we repeat, that this pretended republican
party is a mere fiction of his own brain; that no such party existed for
nearly two years afterwards; and that most of the men who subsequently
composed it were, at this time, peaceably following their professions at
Bordeaux or Marseilles? Will our author pretend that Mirabeau and the
Duke of Orleans were republicans, or will he deny, that, by the
universal admission of revolutionists and royalists, this affair was
concerted by them, if concerted at all? Sir Walter Scott is not
contented with inventing leaders for this popular tumult, he must invent
subordinate agents for it too. “The Jacobins were the first to sound the
alarm through all their clubs and societies.”[*] The reader may form
some conception of the accuracy of this history, and of the spirit in
which it is written, when we inform him, that at this time the Jacobin
club did not exist, much less any of the affiliated societies. The
“alarm” was sounded, to use our author’s expression, not in any club or
society, but in the district assemblies, and in a place tolerably well
known in the Revolution, to wit, the gardens of the Palais-Royal; not by
Jacobins, but by all the more ardent and enthusiastic partisans of the
Revolution, to whom indeed it is sufficiently fashionable to give that
now opprobrious name, but who had nothing whatever in common with the
party called the Terrorists, to whom alone the appellation of Jacobins
is usually given by our author.

The reader must forgive us, if a desire to do justice to the wisest,
most honest, and most calumniated, body of legislators, who ever held in
their hands the destinies of a nation, induces us to be more prolix than
may perhaps suit that class of minds, to whom the truth or falsehood of
an historical statement is matter of indifference compared with its
liveliness or dulness. It is for the maligner of the Constituent
Assembly, it is for the apologist, the panegyrist, of the vindictive and
sanguinary satellites of despotism, it is for him to be amusing, he
knows that his readers, at least those whom he chiefly cares for, are to
the full as eager to believe him, as he to be believed. It is for Sir
Walter Scott to assert: our part must be to prove. Assertion is short,
and proof is long: assertion is entertaining, and proof is dull:
assertion may be read, as glibly and as cursorily as it is written;
proof supposes thought in the writer, and demands it of the reader.
Happy the historian who can permit himself to assert, for he will count
ten readers to one of him who is compelled to prove!

There was scarcely a month during the first three years of the
Revolution, which was not signalized by some plot or
counter-revolutionary movement in the interior.* In the south of France,
large bodies of armed men were repeatedly collected, for the avowed
purpose of restoring the ancient order of things. The Edition: current;
Page: [96] assemblages which took place and the camps which were formed
at Jalès and elsewhere, form a highly important, though to most persons
almost an unknown, chapter of the history of the Revolution.* Armed
bodies of emigrant Frenchmen were constantly hovering over the
frontiers, by the connivance, and at length with the open encouragement,
of the neighbouring powers: while France might be said to be without an
army for her defence, the officers being counter-revolutionists almost
to a man, feuds existing in most of the regiments between them and the
soldiers, which were fomented even by the royalists, in order to
disorganize the army, and disable it from offering any effectual
resistance.† The ministers of the king were several of them declared
anti-revolutionists. The courtiers and the privileged classes were
continually giving out, that the emigrants were on the point of
returning with a powerful army to dissolve the Assembly, and deliver its
leaders to the rigour of the law.‡ The royalists openly and universally
asserted that the king was insincere in his professions of attachment to
the new institutions; and nothing contributed more than these reports,
to convert the enthusiastic attachment which was universally manifested
towards him when he gave in his adhesion to the constitution, into
suspicion and hatred. Ferrières has no doubt that, if Louis had put
forth his authority, and exerted his personal influence over the troops,
he could have crushed the Assembly;§ and so conscious were the popular
leaders of their own insecurity, that the abbé Sieyès said to a person,
from whom we have the information, toutes les nuits je vois ma tête
rouler sur le plancher. Even in 1791, the aristocrats, according to
Ferrières, “ne parlaient que de guerre, de sang, et de vengeance.”¶ It
was suspected at the time, it is now fully established by the avowals of
the minister Bertrand de Moleville (who enters into the minutest details
on the subject), that the king was in regular correspondence with the
emigrants and with foreign powers, to procure his restoration to
absolute authority by Austrian bayonets. Meanwhile he continued to
profess, in language apparently the most feeling and sincere, his
adherence to the new order of things. He came spontaneously to the
Assembly on the 4th of February, 1790, to associate himself formally
(such was his expression) with the plans and proceedings of the
Assembly; and professed a devoted attachment to the new constitution, in
a really eloquent and affecting speech, if we could suppose it to be
sincere, which rendered him for a considerable time the idol of the
people.[*] At the federation of July 1790∥ Edition: current; Page: [97]
(an event of which, strange to say, our author makes no mention), he
solemnly swore adherence to the constitution; he spontaneously renewed
his oath but a few weeks before his flight from Paris;* he spontaneously
addressed to his ambassadors abroad, for communication to the courts at
which they were accredited, a long letter, embodying every thing in
sentiment which was constitutional, and revolutionary, and such as La
Fayette himself would have dictated, together with the firmest
assurances that he highly approved of the Revolution; that France’s
greatest enemies were the enemies of the new order of things, and that
the pretence that he was not free was a calumny:† again and again he
solemnly assured La Fayette, Rochambeau, and others, that he had no
intention of flying; and this almost up to the very day when he fled to
join the allies, leaving behind him a solemn protestation against all
which had been done since the 5th of October 1789, from which date, he
pretended, his want of liberty had rendered the sanction which he had
given to all the decrees of the Assembly, a nullity.[*]

We do not recite these facts for the sake of casting reproach upon the
memory of Louis. His faults have been bitterly expiated. But, in bare
justice to the men who, after all this, had the generosity to replace
him on the throne, it ought to be considered whether they had not reason
to be niggardly of power to such a king, so circumstanced; a king, whose
word, whose oath, was an empty sound; a king, incapable of adhering to
his firmest convictions, and surrounded by persons who, if he formed an
honest resolution, never suffered him to keep it.

If we have had any success at all in convincing our readers, we have now
made it apparent to them, that the Constituent Assembly understood their
own position, and that of their country, far better than Sir Walter
Scott imagines, and that if they did not adopt the course which he,
judging after the event, imagines would have prevented the ills which
befel their country, it was not because they were less wise than he, but
because they were wiser. No course which they could have adopted would
have been so dangerous, as to establish a vigorous and efficient
executive government with Louis at its head. And few will blame them for
not having adopted the only third course which was open to them, the
deposition and confinement of the king; few will deny that, before
proceeding to this last and most painful extremity, such a scheme of
limited monarchy as they attempted was an experiment which they would
not have been excusable if they had refused to try. It is on the
probabilities of success which this scheme held out, that we ground the
Edition: current; Page: [98] justification of the Constituent Assembly;
it is on the failure of the experiment, that we rest our defence of the
Gironde, or, as our author terms it, the Republican party, who succeeded
them.

None have sustained so much injustice at the hands of our author as this
last, and most unfortunate party: of none have the conduct and aims been
so miserably misunderstood, so cruelly perverted. The following extract
is a very favourable specimen of his mode of treating them.

After saying that the Girondist party was “determined that the
Revolution should never stop until the downfal of the monarchy,” our
author continues:

Its most distinguished champions were men bred as lawyers in the south
of France, who had, by mutual flattery, and the habit of living much
together, acquired no small portion of that self-conceit and
over-weening opinion of each other’s talents, which may be frequently
found among small provincial associations for political or literary
purposes. Many had eloquence, and most of them a high fund of
enthusiasm, which a classical education, and their intimate
communication with each other, where each idea was caught up, lauded,
re-echoed, and enhanced, had exalted into a spirit of republican zeal.
They doubtless had personal ambition, but in general it seems not to
have been of a low or selfish character. Their aims were often
honourable though visionary, and they marched with great courage towards
their proposed goal, with the vain purpose of erecting a pure republic
in a state so disturbed as that of France, and by hands so polluted as
those of their Jacobin associates. It will be recorded, however, to the
disgrace of their pretensions to stern republican virtue, that the
Girondists were willing to employ, for the accomplishment of their
purpose, those base and guilty tools which afterwards effected their own
destruction. They were for using the revolutionary means of insurrection
and violence, until the republic should be established, and no longer;
or, in the words of the satirist,

-   

    For letting Rapine loose, and Murther,
-   

    To rage just so far, but no further;
-   

    And setting all the land on fire,
-   

    To burn to a scantling, but no higher.*

He afterwards terms them, in a spirit of more bitter contempt, “the
association of philosophical rhapsodists, who hoped to oppose pikes with
syllogisms, and to govern a powerful country by the discipline of an
academy.”†

He derides “the affected and pedantic fanaticism of republican zeal of
the Girondists, who were amusing themselves with schemes, to which the
country of France, the age and the state of manners were absolutely
opposed.”‡

And elsewhere, he calls them, “the Brissotin, or Girondist faction” (he
seldom, if ever, terms the supporters of despotism a faction), “who,
though averse to the existence of a monarchy, and desiring a republic
instead, had still somewhat more Edition: current; Page: [99] of
principle and morals than the mere Revolutionists and Jacobins, who were
altogether destitute of both.”*

The utmost which he can find to say in behalf of the purest and most
disinterested body of men, considered as a party, who ever figured in
history, among whose leaders not so much as one man of even doubtful
integrity and honour can be found, is, that they had “somewhat more” of
principle and morals, than persons who were “altogether destitute of
both”!

His commendations of one of their number are less sparingly bestowed.

In raking up the disgusting history of mean and bloody-minded
demagogues, it is impossible not to dwell on the contrast afforded by
the generous and self-devoted character of Barbaroux, who young,
handsome, generous, noble-minded, and disinterested, sacrificed his
family-happiness, his fortune, and finally his life, to an enthusiastic,
though mistaken, zeal for the liberty of his country.†

Unquestionably nothing can be better deserved than this panegyric; but
why is a particular individual singled out to be the subject of it, when
he, although excellent, was only one among many, alike in all the noble
qualities which adorned this favourite of our author, and for the misery
of France, alike also in their unhappy fate? Justice required that the
same measure should be dealt out to them as to Barbaroux, even if it
were true that their zeal for the liberty of their country was a
“mistaken” zeal, and that they were for using the “revolutionary means
of insurrection and violence” to establish a republic. But their zeal
was not a mistaken zeal, and they were not for establishing a republic
by insurrection and violence; most of them did not contemplate a
republic at all, and designed at most nothing further than to depose the
king, and elevate the young prince royal, under the direction of a
council of regency, to the constitutional throne.

These may be startling assertions to some, who have formed their
opinions solely from the indefatigable perseverance with which Sir
Walter Scott, almost in every page, assures us of the contrary: but
however paradoxical here, on the other side of the channel they are
established truths, which few persons indeed of any party think of
disputing, and of which nothing but the profound ignorance of our
countrymen on the Revolution, could render it necessary to offer any
proof: especially as this is not in any degree a question of opinion and
reasoning, but one of mere fact and evidence, which every person, who
has read the authorities carefully, is competent to decide.

We have already mentioned, that the first germ of a republican party
appeared in France, when the king, after a long course of dissimulation
and insincerity, fled from the capital, and was brought back by force.
Notwithstanding the decisive evidence which he had thus afforded of his
undiminished hostility to the constitution, the predominant party in the
Constituent Assembly thought fit to Edition: current; Page: [100]
restore him to the throne. We are far from contending that they ought to
have acted otherwise, although Sir Walter Scott is of that opinion, and
maintains that they were alike wrong in again offering, and Louis in
accepting, the constitutional crown.[*] What is now his opinion, was
that of many of the more ardent revolutionists at the time; and, among
the rest, of a few who subsequently became aggregated to the Gironde
party; for the great majority, including those from whom that party
derives its distinctive name, were not in Paris until they came thither
as members of the second National Assembly. In July 1791, before the
resolution had been definitively taken to reinstate the king, a meeting
was held in the Champ de Mars to subscribe a petition calling for his
dethronement.[†] In this document no change in the monarchical
constitution of France, as decreed by the Constituent Assembly, was
hinted at: but the acknowledged fact, that the petition was drawn up by
Brissot, whose speculative opinions were certainly republican, together
with an expression of Brissot and Pétion, about the same time, which is
recorded by Madame Roland, “qu’il fallait préparer les esprits à la
république,”[‡] and the fact, that a newspaper under the title of The
Republican was set on foot at this period by Brissot and Condorcet
(although it only reached the second number), seem to render it
probable, that if they had succeeded in obtaining the deposition of
Louis, they would really have made an effort for the establishment of a
republican government in preference to a change of monarch.* When the
Assembly, however, under the guidance of Barnave and Chapelier, esteemed
up to that time the most democratic of the popular leaders,
re-established royalty in the person of the former sovereign, the idea
of a republic was dropped, and the two or three men who had entertained
it became amalgamated with the general body of the Girondist party, who,
as we have previously stated, were not republicans.

The difference between the Constitutionalists and the Gironde, at the
opening of the second, or Legislative Assembly, is thus expressed by
Mignet: “Il [the Gironde party] n’avait alors aucun projet subversif;
mais il était disposé à défendre la révolution de toutes les manières, à
la différence des constitutionnels, qui ne voulaient la défendre qu’avec
la loi.”[§] This assertion of Mignet (whom however we do not cite as an
authority, since he was not, any more than ourselves, a contemporary and
actor in the scene) is borne out by the direct testimony of every
credible witness who had any tolerable means of knowing the fact. It is
demonstrated as cogently by the recorded acts and speeches of the men
themselves.

Edition: current; Page: [101]
Sir Walter Scott, as we have already observed, has allowed, has asserted
indeed, with more confidence than we should venture to do, that the
reasons for deposing Louis preponderated, at the time of his return from
Varennes, over those for retaining him on the throne.[*] These reasons,
which our author considered sufficient, could be no others, than the
certainty of the king’s insincerity, and the necessity of having a first
magistrate sincerely attached to the constitution. Let us reflect how
vastly more imminent that necessity had become, in the interval which
separated the meeting of the second National Assembly from the memorable
10th of August 1792.

During this period, a new and most formidable element of danger had been
introduced into the already perilous and embarrassing state of public
affairs. A foreign despot had not only countenanced the emigrants in
their warlike preparations, and in assuming a hostile attitude on the
frontier, but had presumed to require, as a condition of friendship
between the two governments, the re-establishment of the monarchy upon
the footing of the royal declaration of the 23rd of June, 1789.[†] War
had ensued; its commencement had been disastrous, an invasion was at
hand, and the disorganization of the army, from the general relaxation
of discipline, the emigration of most of the officers, and the want of
military experience in the soldiers, had reached to such a height, that
nothing but the most unheard-of efforts, such efforts as were at last
made by Dumouriez and Carnot, could give the nation a chance of saving
herself from the enemies of her freedom. It was not in such times as
these that France could be preserved by men who were only half desirous
that she should extricate herself from her difficulties. There were
needed other “organizers of victory”[‡] than a chief magistrate who
sympathized with the invaders of his country more than with his country
itself. It was not from Louis that exertions could be expected for the
prosecution of a war against his own brothers, and the assertors of his
absolute authority. Yet not so soon did the Gironde renounce the hope of
saving at once their country and the king. Louis, who was as vacillating
in his choice of counsellors as in his counsels, had changed from a
purely royalist to a mixed administration composed of constitutionalists
and royalists. The divisions which speedily arose in this motley
ministry (our author is here, as usual, most elaborately wrong) had
terminated by the dismissal of the leading constitutional minister,[§]
which the Assembly soon caused to be succeeded by the forced retirement
of his royalist colleagues. Louis selected his next ministers from the
ranks of the Gironde; and so far was this party from entertaining any
hostility to the king, that Roland and Clavières, as Madame Edition:
current; Page: [102] Roland informs us,[*] were at first completely the
dupes of his apparent sincerity. Had he consented to the strong measures
which they deemed necessary to secure the constitution against its
foreign and internal enemies, they would have continued in office, and
Louis probably, had remained constitutional monarch of France. But he
refused to sanction the two decrees of the Assembly, for the banishment
of the non-juring priests,* and for the formation of a camp of twenty
thousand men under the walls of Paris.[†] The discussions consequent on
this refusal occasioned the dismissal of the Girondist ministers, and
ultimately produced the downfall of the throne: not however until the
leading Girondists had made another effort to save the unfortunate and
misguided monarch, which we shall relate in the words of their friend
and apologist Bailleul.

J’ai déjà dit plusieurs fois dans le cours de cet ouvrage, et je viens
de répéter tout à l’heure, que le parti républicain se formait
insensiblement, et n’existait pas. En effet, l’autorité royale
circonvenue, obsédée par les intrigues et les projets de la
conspiration, ne laissait plus même échapper de ces lueurs de bonne
volonté qui avaient jusque-là soutenu l’espoir des patriotes. Que faire?
Que résoudre dans cet état d’anxiété? L’établissement d’une république
se présentait à eux comme une dernière ressource, s’il était impossible
de sauver autrement la liberté, contre laquelle toutes les forces
étaient dirigées.

Puisque Madame de Stael† veut bien accorder quelque valeur aux députés
que l’on a désignés sous le nom de Girondins,[‡] a-t-elle pu croire que
des hommes de ce talent, tout grand qu’était leur enthousiasme, n’aient
pas quelquefois réfléchi sur la position où se trouvait la France, et
qu’ils se soient ainsi précipités en aveugles dans les événemens les
plus affreux et les plux épouvantables? A-t-elle pu croire même qu’ils
n’aient pas prévu les dangers dont cette conflagration les menaçait
personnellement? Ce serait une bien grande erreur. Non-seulement ils y
avaient pensé, mais ils en étaient occupés, et singulièrement
préoccupés: on en jugera par le récit suivant.

Je ne crois pas me tromper, en disant que les trois hommes les plus
distingués du parti appelé de la Gironde, étaient Vergniaud, Guadet, et
Gensonné. Vergniaud, l’un des orateurs les plus éloquens qui aient
jamais parlé aux hommes, avait une âme encore bien au-dessus de son
talent. Guadet, d’un caractère emporté, était un homme de beaucoup
d’esprit, plein de franchise, et capable de revenir à toutes les idées
saines et raisonnables La gravité de Gensonné eût pû passer en proverbe:
esprit méditatif et profond, chacune de ses paroles, même dans la
conversation, était pesée et mûrie avant d’être livrée à l’examen et à
Edition: current; Page: [103] la réflexion des autres. On fera peut-être
bien à des hommes de cette supériorité, la grâce de croire, sans que
j’insiste, qu’ils ne se sont pas trouvés environnés de toutes les
circonstances extraordinaires et redoutables, sans y donner
quelqu’attention. Voici ce que Vergniaud et Gensonné ont répété nombre
de fois devant moi, et tous les prisonniers qui se trouvaient alors à la
Conciergerie, du côté nommé des douze.

Ils avaient cherché à se ménager une entrevue avec Thierry,
valet-de-chambre du roi. Cette entrevue eut lieu. Là, Vergniaud, Guadet
et Gensonné exposèrent à Thierry les dangers de la patrie et les dangers
personnels du roi; ils lui en indiquèrent les causes, et, par suite, ils
tracèrent des plans de conduite, au moyen desquels des rapprochemens
indispensables, si l’on ne voulait livrer l’état aux plus horribles
convulsions, auraient lieu.

Thierry, accoutumé à n’entendre que les choses les plus dégoûtantes sur
le compte de ces hommes; qui, comme tout ce qui composait l’entourage du
roi, croyait être généreux à leur égard, en pensant qu’ils ne mangeaient
pas des petits enfans, fut on ne peut plus ébahi de tant de franchise,
de raison et de prévoyance; je dois dire plus, il en fut touché il leur
exprima à quel point il était enchanté de les avoir entendus, il ne leur
dissimula point combien cette ouverture lui donnait de consolations et
d’espérances, et il les termina en les priant de mettre par écrit tout
ce qu’il venait d’entendre, s’ils l’autorisaient à en faire part au roi.
La proposition fut acceptée avec empressement. On se sépara, en
convenant du jour où l’on se réunirait. Tous furent exacts au
rendez-vous. Un mémoire contenant le fond de ce qui avait été dit à
Thierry dans la premiere conférence, lui fut remis. Il promit de le
communiquer aussitôt au roi, et de faire connaître sa réponse; ce qui
donna lieu à une troisième réunion, dans laquelle Thierry, fondant en
larmes, déclara que l’on ne voulait entendre à aucun rapprochement.
Vergniaud lui répondit: Dites bien à votre maître que nous ne nous
dissimulons pas nos propres dangers, mais qu’à partir de ce moment il
n’est plus en notre pouvoir de le sauver. Voilà ce que j’ai entendu
dire, répéter, et répéter encore par Vergniaud et par Gensonné. Guadet
n’était pas avec nous à la Conciergerie, il était en fuite. Ce mémoire,
confié par eux à Thierry, s’est, autant qu’il m’en souvient, retrouvé
dans l’armoire de fer, et l’on en fit un des chefs les plus graves de
l’accusation de ses auteurs.[*]

This Mémoire, admirable for its good sense and good feeling, may be seen
in the Appendix to the second volume of the Memoirs of Dumouriez, as
recently reprinted at Paris.[†] It is with difficulty that we refrain
from increasing the length of an already long article, by transcribing
this document into our pages. We beseech the reader to refer to it, to
read it diligently, and then endure, if he can, to hear these men
represented as conspirators, who plotted the destruction of royalty, who
watched the king’s acts with a desire to find them such as afforded a
hold for misrepresentation, and were never so well pleased as when he
rendered himself unpopular, and gave pretexts for holding up his office
as a nuisance, and himself as an enemy of the people. We cannot deny
ourselves the pleasure of employing, for the expression of our own
feelings, the affecting words of M. Bailleul.

O vous qui serez grands dans la postérité, vous dont je reçus, avec vos
derniers adieux, les protestations d’un amour si sincère, si ardent pour
votre patrie, l’expression si pure de vos voeux pour le bonheur de vos
concitoyens; vous qui versiez des larmes si amères sur les malheurs de
ces temps, et qui en retraciez les causes avec tant de justesse et
d’énergie, Edition: current; Page: [104] auriez-vous jamais cru qu’on
eût pu vous accuser d’avoir bouleversé la France pour le plaisir
d’essayer un systême de gouvernement absolument nouveau pour elle, et
qu’une femme aimant la liberté, par conséquent la vérité, écrirait, sous
les yeux des témoins de votre courage, de votre sublime dévouement et de
vos derniers momens, ces paroles: “Les Girondins voulurent la
république, et ne parvinrent qu’à renverser la monarchie?”[*] Ils ne
voulaient que la liberté; une monarchie constitutionnelle franchement
établie eût fait leur bonheur. M. de Lally, cité par Madame de Staël, en
proclamant que leur existence et leur mort furent également funestes à
la patrie,[†] a commis dans la première partie de son assertion une
effroyable injustice; il a prouvé qu’il ne soupçonnait même pas les
causes véritables des événemens qui se sont succédés avec tant de
rapidité à cette époque.*

Greatly as we have already exceeded the usual limits of an article, we
cannot permit ourselves to leave the stain which is attempted to be cast
upon men in so many respects admirable, imperfectly washed away. We
should feel as if we had violated a duty, if we did not exhibit by ample
evidence how unanimously men of all parties have concurred in
exculpating the Girondists from the imputations now sought to be fixed
upon them by Sir Walter Scott. We shall offer no apology to the reader
for heaping up a multitude of attestations; we do not solicit his
attention to this mass of evidence, we demand it. We demand it in the
name and in behalf of the whole human race, whom it deeply imports that
justice should be done, at least by another age, to the few statesmen
who have cared for their happiness. Does the man exist who, having read
the accusation brought against such men, will consider it too much
trouble to listen to the defence? Let such amuse themselves with
romance; it belongs to other men to read history.

Our first quotation shall be drawn from the Histoire de la Révolution de
France, par Deux Amis de la Liberté, one of the most impartial works
which have appeared on the subject of the Revolution, and written, as
our quotation will shew, in a spirit very far indeed from being
favourable to the Gironde:

La vérité est, que ni les uns ni les autres [the Gironde nor the
Montagne] ne pensoient à cette époque à fonder une république en France.
Le parti de la Gironde ou de Brissot, fier d’appartenir à une ville qui
s’étoit, plus qu’aucune autre, fait remarquer par un ardent amour pour
la liberté, comptant d’ailleurs sur le talent de la plupart des
individus qui le composoient, vouloit s’illustrer par quelque coup
d’éclat, soit en se rendant maître des volontés d’un monarque au moins
avili, soit en le faisant descendre d’un trône où il ne pouvoit plus
être qu’un objet de dérision, afin d’y placer son fils dont ils auroient
dirigé l’enfance, exercé les pouvoirs et distribué les faveurs. S’il
n’est pas démontré par des preuves écrites, que ce fussent-là les
intentions ultérieures de Brissot et des députés de la Gironde, ou de
ceux qui suivoient la même bannière, le projet n’en est pas moins
incontestable, pour tous les hommes qui ont un peu observé la conduite
des intrigans qui s’agitoient alors, et je dirai à ceux qui peuvent en
douter, rappelez-vous les discours des chefs, quelques jours avant que
le canon écrasât le château des Tuileries, vous les verrez éperdus,
essayant de soutenir, pour quelque tems encore, le colosse ruiné qu’ils
avoient Edition: current; Page: [105] eux-mêmes sappé par ses bases,
vous les verrez effrayés de l’audace de ceux dont jusqu’alors ils
avoient su diriger les mouvemens, qu’ils avoient regardés comme des
machines dont ils avoient cru pouvoir disposer à volonté, vous les
verrez prévoir les désordres sanglans auxquels cette troupe avide de
trésors, avide de pouvoirs dont elle étoit incapable de jouir, devoit
nécessairement s’abandonner: mais il n’étoit plus tems, l’abîme qu’ils
avoient eux-mêmes ouvert étoit sous leurs pas; il n’y avoit plus
d’espoir rétrograde, il fallait suivre le torrent, et s’y précipiter.

Au surplus, leur conduite publique prouvoit assez qu’ils ne vouloient
qu’une simple déchéance. Dans toutes les adresses qu’ils se faisoient
faire contre le roi, on ne demandoit que la déchéance, on ne parloit que
de la déchéance, en maintenant l’acte constitutionnel, jamais on n’y
insinua le mot de république.

Mais voici un fait plus positif: lorsque, pour porter le dernier coup de
massue à Louis XVI, on fit venir à la barre les prétendues sections de
Paris, le maire a leur tête. Pétion, l’intime ami de Brissot, et la plus
vigoureuse colonne du parti, Pétion, introduit dans la salle du corps
législatif, tout enivré de sa gloire présente, et encore plus de celle
qui l’attendoit, dit hautement, et avec une naïveté qui n’étoit qu’à
lui, aux députés qui faisoient grouppe à l’entrée de la salle. Ma foi,
Messieurs, je vois que la régence me tombe sur la tête, je ne sais pas
comment m’en défendre. Et ce propos, ou tel autre semblable, il l’a
répété plusieurs fois, des personnes qui l’ont entendu, et qui vivent
encore, peuvent dire si on en impose.

(Vol. VII, pp. 12-15.)

Compare this account of the conduct and designs of the Gironde with that
of Sir Walter Scott. Need we say more?

Our next citation shall be from Toulongeon, also a constitutional
monarchist, equal to the author last quoted in impartiality, and far
superior to him in philosophy. We shall not quote from this writer any
of the passages in which he denies the existence of a republican party
at the commencement of the Revolution. In his account of the events
which followed the king’s flight, he says, “La république n’était alors
même, ni dans l’opinion de ceux qui réfléchissaient, ni dans le
sentiment de ceux qu’il détermine toujours seuls” (Vol. II, p. 49). Of
the Gironde at the opening of the second national assembly, he remarks,
“Ce parti ne voulait pas la république; mais la marche de ce parti
rendit la république nécessaire” (Vol. II, p. 91). Even in June, 1792,
“Vergniaud, Isnard, étaient des chefs du parti de la Gironde: ils
voulaient mettre l’autorité royale dans leur dépendance; mais ils ne
voulaient pas la détruire en l’avilissant” (Vol. II, p. 171). Again,
“Vergniaud, Guadet, tout ce qu’on appelait la Gironde, parce que les
députés de ce département s’y faisaient le plus remarquer, voulut
d’abord gouverner la royauté, plus encore par son influence et par son
crédit, que par l’autorité, qu’ils aimaient mieux distribuer qu’exercer;
et lorsque la royauté fut abolie, ils voulurent fonder la république par
les moyens licites et avec les formes légales” (Vol. III, p. 9). And,
finally, of Vergniaud, on the very day of the subversion of the throne,
“Au dix Août, il voulait encore une monarchie systématique peut-être,
mais tempérée. Dès que le mot république fut proclamé, il fut
républicain.” (Vol. IV, p. 11.)[*] These are Sir Walter Scott’s
fanatical Edition: current; Page: [106] enthusiasts, who plotted the
destruction of royalty for years before, and made no scruple of
employing insurrection and bloodshed to realize their visionary projects
of a pure republic.

“Quoique la faction des Girondins,” says Soulavie, “fût un composé de
toute sorte d’opinions, sa majorité a voulu une régence pendant la
minorité du fils de Louis XVI, pour gouverner et pour perdre la reine,
dont les projets connus de contre-révolution mettaient en péril,
non-seulement l’existence politique mais la vie même des Girondins.”* If
we were disposed to place much dependence upon anecdotes, which are only
related by this author, we could transcribe several which he adduces to
show that not only down to the subversion of the throne, but almost to
the very day when the convention met and the republic was proclaimed,
neither the Gironde nor the Montagne had finally decided upon
establishing it: we could quote the story which he tells of the almost
ludicrous consternation of Condorcet and Sieyès, when this event was
reported to them,† and the declaration of the minister Montmorin to
Soulavie himself, that a republic was then the least bad of all
governments which were likely to be established, but that what the
Gironde desired was a regency, which would be infinitely worse.[*] As we
have less confidence, however, in the testimony of Soulavie, than in
that of either of the writers whom we have before quoted, we allude to
his evidence only in confirmation of theirs, and shall proceed to show
that the royalists themselves, even those among them who have spoken of
the Gironde with the most bitter hatred, have by no means accused them
of being republicans, but of wishing for a king who should distribute
honours and places among themselves, or, at most, of being indifferent
to every form of government, provided they themselves were at the head
of it. We have no apprehension that these last imputations should be
believed, for Sir Walter Scott himself does ample justice to the
character of the Girondists, as far as regards personal views; but, that
the only accusation brought against them by their bitterest enemies
should be that of selfish ambition,[†] proves at least the extreme
absurdity of the charge of fanatical republicanism, and the following
passages further add the direct testimony of the most decided, and the
most trustworthy of the royalist writers, to the fact that most of these
statesmen were not republicans.

We shall begin with Ferrières, generally the most candid and impartial
of the royalists, but whose moderation entirely deserts him when he
touches upon the Girondists. This writer particularly distinguishes the
Girondist party from the republicans. Among the latter, he ranks Buzot
and Pétion; but of the Girondists, especially the deputies of the
Gironde itself, Vergniaud, Guadet, Gensonné, Edition: current; Page:
[107] Ducos, and Fonfrède, he says, “Les Girondins étaient assez
indifférens à la forme du gouvernement pourvu qu’ils gouvernassent et
qu’ils pussent disposer de l’argent et des places; mais sentant que les
constitutionnels ne lâcheraient pas leur proie, ils se rallièrent aux
républicains, attendant à prendre un parti décidé d’après les événemens,
et à se vendre à la cour ou à se donner à la république, selon que
l’exigeraient leurs intérêts et les circonstances” (Vol. III, pp.
16-17). Assuredly, if these persons had shown the slightest symptom of
fanatical attachment to a republican government, and hatred of royalty,
such things could not have been said of them. Again, long after the
insurrection, or rather tumult, of the 20th June 1792, we are told by
Ferrières, “les Girondins ne voulaient qu’effrayer la cour. La déchéance
n’entrait pas alors dans leurs vues,” (Vol. III, p. 165): that Pétion
opposed the insurrection of the 10th of August, because it was the wish
of the Gironde that the deposition of Louis should be decreed by the
Assembly, and executed without tumult or violence (p. 178); that the
Gironde had no concern in that insurrection (p. 180); that they were
astonished at it (p. 182); that even at the opening of the convention,
“la république n’était point définitivement arrêtée dans l’opinion des
Girondins” (p. 245); and was carried independently of them, by what he
terms the republican party.

Our next authority shall be Bertrand de Moleville, a royalist far more
inveterately prejudiced than Ferrières; a man who avowedly disapproves
of the introduction of any form of representative government into
France, and cannot quite reconcile himself to its existence in England;
and this man, it is important to observe, was a minister of Louis within
a few months preceding his deposition. This author always speaks of the
Girondists in the bitterest terms, and even accuses them of what we
believe was never imputed to them by any other writer (it was scarcely
insinuated even in the acte d’accusation against them, by the horrible
Amar),[*] we mean personal corruption. After speaking of the letter
(formerly alluded to) which was addressed to the king by the trois
scélérats (it is thus that he designates Vergniaud, Guadet, and
Gensonné)*—of which letter he seems to confess that he knew the contents
only at second-hand (he certainly gives a most incorrect account of
them), he next describes a plan of insurrection, which he affirms to
have been devised by the Gironde in consequence of the ill success of
their attempt to conciliate the king; and hereupon he observes.

Les chefs du parti de la Gironde, qui avaient conçu et dirigé ce plan,
n’avaient point alors le projet de détruire le gouvernement monarchique,
ils voulaient seulement que la déchéance du roi fût prononcée, pour
faire passer la couronne à son fils, et établir un conseil de régence
qu’ils auraient composé de leurs créatures, s’ils n’avaient pu s’y
placer eux-mêmes, et sur lequel ils auraient eu, dans tous les cas,
assez d’influence pour être assurés d’en obtenir tout l’argent et tous
les emplois qu’ils auraient demandés, mais, comme il était bien plus
aisé d’exciter une insurrection violente, que de la modérer à volonté,
et d’en Edition: current; Page: [108] obtenir précisément tels ou tels
résultats, ils n’auraient pas hésité à abandonner ce plan, si le roi
avait voulu consentir à rappeler au ministère trois scélérats [by this
polite expression we are here to understand Roland, Servan and
Clavières] qui leur étaient trop servilement dévoués, pour oser leur
rien refuser.

(Vol. II, p. 122.)

The abbé Georgel, a Jesuit, than whom the abbé Barruel himself scarcely
regards the Revolution with a more frantic abhorrence, takes precisely
the same view of the conduct and designs of the Gironde.* We shall not
prolong our article by quoting, in the ipsissima verba of this author,
any portion of his dull abuse. The substance of it is all contained in
the passages which we have already quoted from Bertrand and Ferrières.

It will be thought, probably, that we have rather been too profuse than
too sparing of evidence to prove Sir Walter Scott ignorant of his
subject, and the story of the reckless enthusiasm and republican zeal of
the Girondists a romance. It will amuse the reader to compare the above
quotations with the passages which we previously transcribed from Sir
Walter Scott. They contradict him point-blank in every particular,
whether of praise or of blame. In support of his view of the Gironde we
can find only one authority, that of Madame de Staël;[*] the most
questionable of all witnesses, when she deposes to any facts but those
within her own immediate observation. We have not nearly exhausted the
evidence on the other side. We have cited as yet none of the witnesses
who may be supposed partial to the Gironde, except Bailleul, from whom,
moreover, we have drawn but a small part of the testimony which his
highly instructive pages afford. We shall only further direct the
attention of the reader to Lavallée, a writer of no very decided
political opinions, but friendly to the Gironde, being personally
acquainted with their principal leaders, and having been an employé of
Roland, when minister of the interior. From him we have an interesting
statement of what passed at a secret meeting of the leading Girondists
and one or two other persons. They were all agreed that France was in a
state nearly approximating to anarchy; that it would remain so, until
there was a change of government; and that, with a view to this change,
it was above all to be desired, that the king should voluntarily
abdicate; but they were by no means agreed, supposing that a change
could be brought about, what the change should be. Brissot declared
strongly for a republic; Gensonné desired time for consideration;
Condorcet and Guadet were not indisposed to a proposition which was
made, of elevating the prince of Conti to the Regency; and, when the
meeting broke up, nothing had been resolved upon.† If any decision was
subsequently come to, the appointment of the Girondist ministry, which
took place Edition: current; Page: [109] subsequently, must naturally
have altered it; and what is known of their subsequent plans has been
already stated.

We shall here take our leave, both of the Girondists and of Sir Walter
Scott. We have left much unsaid, which cannot so properly be said on any
other occasion; many misrepresentations unanswered, which it would have
been of importance to expose. We would willingly have entered into
considerable details respecting the royalist party, whose faults our
author has extenuated as much as he has exaggerated those of the
revolutionists; respecting the Montagnards, some of whom individually he
has treated with great injustice, and of whose character and principles
of action, as a body, he has no more than the most superficial
conception; respecting the libéraux of the present day, whom he has
treated, in the latter part of his work, with greater asperity and
unfairness than is shewn towards the revolutionists themselves.* We
could have wished to take notice of his sophisms on the Napoleon
Code,[*] and on every subject, without exception, connected with English
institutions and English politics; sophisms which are adapted to the
state of all these different questions twenty years ago, and which prove
that from that time he has kept his eyes closed to all that has been
passing around him, and can neither accommodate his mode of defence to
the present modes of attack, nor to the existing state of the public
mind. But we must forbear all this, and in conclusion, we shall only
say, that with all the faults which we have pointed out Edition:
current; Page: [110] and all those which we have not pointed out in this
book, the lover of truth has reason to rejoice at its appearance. Much
as Sir Walter Scott has wronged the honest part of the revolutionists,
the general opinion has hitherto wronged them far more; and to have much
chance of correcting that opinion, it was perhaps necessary to temporize
with it, and at first give into some portion of the prevailing error.
The work contains juster views, and above all, breathes a less malignant
spirit, than almost any other Tory publication on the Revolution, and
will so far work a beneficial effect upon many minds, which would turn
from a perfectly true history of the Revolution without examination or
inquiry. We have, therefore, pointed out the errors of this work, not
with any wish to see its influence diminished, far less with any
hostility towards the author, for whom, politics apart, we share that
admiration which is felt by every person possessing a knowledge of the
English language. We have been influenced solely by the conviction, that
if some readers can as yet endure no more than a part of the truth,
there are many who are fully prepared to listen to the whole; and that
our remarks have a greater chance of being extensively read and attended
to, by being connected, however indirectly, with so celebrated a name.


Alison’s History of the French Revolution

of history, the most honoured, if not honourable species of composition,
is not the whole purport biographic? History, it has been said, is the
essence of innumerable biographies.[*] Such, at least, it should be:
whether it is, might admit of question. But, in any case, what hope have
we in turning over those old interminable chronicles, with their
garrulities and insipidities; or still worse, in patiently examining
those modern narrations, of the philosophic kind, where philosophy,
teaching by experience, must sit like owl on house-top, seeing nothing,
understanding nothing, uttering only, with solemnity enough, her
perpetual most wearisome hoo, hoo,—what hope have we, except the for
most part fallacious one of gaining some acquaintance with our
fellow-creatures, though dead and vanished, yet dear to us; how they got
along in those old days, suffering and doing, to what extent, and under
what circumstances, they resisted the devil, and triumphed over him, or
struck their colours to him, and were trodden under foot by him; how, in
short, the perennial battle went, which men name life, which we also in
these new days, with indifferent fortune, have to fight, and must
bequeath to our sons and grandsons to go on fighting, till the enemy one
day be quite vanquished and abolished, or else the great night sink and
part the combatants; and thus, either by some Millennium or some new
Noah’s Deluge, the volume of universal history wind itself up! Other
hope, in studying such books, we have none and that it is a deceitful
hope, who that has tried knows not? A feast of widest biographic insight
is spread for us; we enter full of hungry anticipation, alas! like so
many other feasts, which life invites us to, a mere Ossian’s feast of
shells,[†] the food and liquor being all emptied out and clean gone, and
only the vacant dishes and deceitful emblems thereof left! Your modern
historical restaurateurs are indeed little better than high-priests of
famine, that keep choicest china dinner-sets, only no dinner to serve
therein. Yet such is our biographic appetite, we run trying from shop to
shop, with ever new hope, and, unless we could eat the wind, with ever
new disappointment.*

Thus writes, although in a publication unworthy of him, an author whom
the multitude does not yet, and will not soon understand. The biographic
aspect here so exclusively dwelt upon, is indeed not the only aspect
under which history may profitably and pleasantly be contemplated: but
if we find ourselves disappointed of what it ought to afford us in this
kind, most surely our search will be equally vain for all other fruit.
If what purports to be the history of any portion of mankind, keep
Edition: current; Page: [114] not its promise of making us understand
and represent to ourselves what manner of men those were whose story it
pretends to be, let it undertake what else it may, it will assuredly
perform nothing.

To know our fellow-creature, [we still quote from the same author,] to
see into him, understand his goings forth, decipher the whole heart of
his mystery;[*] nay, not only to see into him, but even to see out of
him, to view the world altogether as he views it, so that we can
theoretically construe him, and could almost practically personate him,
and do now thoroughly discern both what manner of man he is, and what
manner of thing he has got to work on and live on.[†]

This is what a perfect biography, could such be obtained, of any single
human being, would do for us, or more properly enable us to do for
ourselves, and the perfection of a history, considered in its biographic
character, would be to accomplish something of the same kind for an
entire nation or an entire age. Thus in respect to the French
Revolution, though complete insight is not to be had, we should have
been thankful for anything that could have aided us in forming for
ourselves even an imperfect picture of the manner in which a Frenchman,
at the period of the breaking out of the Revolution lived: what his
thoughts were habitually occupied with; what feelings were excited in
him by the universe, or by any of the things that dwell therein; above
all, what things he fixed his desires upon; what he did for his bread;
what things he cared for besides bread; with what evils he had to
contend, and how he was enabled to bear up against them; what were his
joys, what his consolations, and to what extent he was able to attain
them. Such clear view of him and of his circumstances, is the basis of
all true knowledge and understanding of the Revolution. Having thus
learnt to understand a Frenchman of those days, we would next be helped
to know, and to bring vividly before our minds, the new circumstances in
which the Revolution placed him, how those circumstances painted
themselves to his eyes, from his point of view; what, as a consequence
of the conception he formed of them, he thought, felt, and did, not only
in the political, but perhaps still more in what may be called “the
private biographic phasis; the manner in which individuals demeaned
themselves, and social life went on, in so extraordinary an element as
that; the most extraordinary, one might say, for the ‘thin rind of
habit’ was utterly rent off, and man stood there with all the powers of
civilization, and none of its rules to aid him in guiding these.”[‡]

Such things we would willingly learn from a history of the Revolution;
but who among its historians teaches the like? or has ought of that kind
to teach? or has ever Edition: current; Page: [115] had the thought
strike him that such things are to be taught or learnt? Not Mr. Alison’s
predecessors, of whom, nevertheless, there must be some twenty who have
written better books than his; far less Mr. Alison himself. How should
he? When in the course of ages a man arises who can conceive a
character, though it be but of one being, and can make his readers
conceive it too, we call him a dramatist, and write down his name in the
short list of the world’s great minds; are we then entitled to expect
from every respectable, quiet, well-meaning Tory gentleman, that he
shall be capable of forming within himself, and impressing upon us, a
living image of the character and manner of existence, not of one human
being, but of a nation or a century of mankind? To throw our own mind
into the mind and into the circumstances of another, is one of the most
trying of all exercises of the intellect and imagination, and the very
conception how great a thing it is, seems to imply the capacity of at
least partially performing it.

Not to judge Mr. Alison by so high a standard, but by the far lower one
of what has actually been achieved by previous writers on the subject,
let us endeavour to estimate the worth of his book, and his
qualifications as a historian.

And first, of his merits. He is evidently what is termed a kind-hearted,
or, at the very least, a good-natured man. Though a Tory, and,
therefore, one in whom some prejudices against the actors in the
Revolution might be excused, he is most unaffectedly candid and
charitable in his judgment of them. Though he condemns them as
politicians, he is more indulgent to them as men than even we are, who
look with much less disapprobation upon many of their acts. He has not,
indeed, that highest impartiality which proceeds from philosophic
insight, but abundance of that lower kind which flows from milkiness of
disposition. He can appreciate talent; he does not join in the
ill-informed and rash assertion of the Edinburgh Review, reechoed by the
Quarterly, that the first authors of the French Revolution were mediocre
men;[*] on the contrary, speaking in his preface of the Constituent
Assembly, he talks of its “memorable discussions,” and of himself as
“most forcibly impressed with the prodigious, though often perverted and
mistaken ability, which distinguished them.”[†] Mr. Alison has a further
merit, and in a man of his quality of mind it is a most positive one—he
is no canter. He does not think it necessary to profess to be shocked,
or terrified, at opinions or modes of conduct contrary to what are
deemed proper and reputable in his own country. He does not guard his
own respectability by a saving clause, whenever he has occasion to name
or to praise even a Mirabeau. We should never think of this as a quality
worthy of particular notice in a mind accustomed to vigorous and
independent thought; but in Edition: current; Page: [116] whatever mind
it exists, it is evidence of that which is the first condition of all
worth, a desire to be rather than to seem.

Having said thus much on the favourable side, turn we to the other
column of the account, and here we have to say simply this, that, after
reading both these volumes carefully through, we are quite completely
unable to name any one thing that Mr. Alison has done, which had not
been far better done before; or to conjecture what could lead him to
imagine that such a work as he has produced was any desideratum in the
existing literature on the subject. It is hard to say of any book that
it is altogether useless; that it contains nothing from which man,
woman, or child can derive any one particle of benefit, learn any one
thing worth knowing; but a more useless book than this of Mr. Alison’s,
one which approaches nearer to the ideal of absolute inutility, we
believe we might go far to seek.

We have not often happened to meet with an author of any work of
pretension less endowed than Mr. Alison with the faculty of original
thought; his negation of genius amounts almost to a positive quality.
Notwithstanding, or, perhaps, in consequence of, this deficiency, he
deals largely in general reflections; which accordingly are of the
barrenest; when true, so true that no one ever thought them false; when
false, nowise that kind of false propositions which come from a
penetrating but partial or hasty glance at the thing spoken of, and,
therefore, though not true, have instructive truth in them; but such as
a country-gentleman, accustomed to be king of his company, talks after
dinner. The same want of power manifests itself in the narrative.
Telling his story almost entirely after Mignet and Thiers,[*] he has
caught none of their vivacity from those great masters of narration; the
most stirring scenes of that mighty world-drama, under his pen turn
flat, cold, and spiritless. In his preface he apologizes for the
“dramatic air” produced by inserting fragments of speeches into his
text:[†] if the fact were so, it would be a subject of praise, not of
apology; but if it were an offence, we assure Mr. Alison that he never
would be found guilty of it; nothing is dramatic which has passed
through the strainer of his translations; even the eloquence of Mirabeau
cannot rouse within him one spark of kindred energy and fervour. In the
humbler duties of a historian he is equally deficient; he has no faculty
of historical criticism, and no research; his marginal references point
exclusively to the most obvious sources of information; and even among
these he refers five times to a compilation, for once to an original
authority. In this he evinces a candour worthy of praise, since his
crowded margin betrays that scantiness of reading which other authors
leave theirs blank on purpose to conceal. We suspect he has written his
book rather from memory and notes than with the works themselves before
him; Edition: current; Page: [117] else how happens it that he
invariably misspells the name of one of the writers, he oftenest refers
to?* why are several of the names which occur in the history, also
misspelt, in a manner not to be accounted for by the largest allowance
for typographical errors? why are there so many inaccuracies in matter
of fact, of minor importance indeed, but which could hardly have been
fallen into, by one fresh from the reading of even the common histories
of the Revolution? The very first and simplest requisite for a writer of
French history, a knowledge of the French language, Mr. Alison does not
possess in the necessary perfection. To feel the higher excellences of
expression and style in any language implies a mastery over the language
itself, and a familiarity with its literature, far greater than is
sufficent for all inferior purposes. We are sure that any one who can so
completely fail to enter into the spirit of Mirabeau’s famous “Dites-lui
que ces hordes étrangères dont nous sommes investis,”[*] of that
inspired burst of oratory upon la hideuse banqueroute,[†] and of almost
everything having any claim to eloquence which he attempts to render,
must be either without the smallest real feeling of eloquence, or so
inadequately conversant with the French language, that French eloquence
has not yet found its way to his soul. We are the more willing to give
Mr. Alison the benefit of this excuse, as we find his knowledge of
French at fault in far smaller things. He mistakes l’impôt du timbre for
a tax on timber; fourche, apparently from not understanding what it is,
he translates a fork, and chariot a chariot. The waggoner Cathelineau he
terms a charioteer, and the victims of the revolutionary tribunal are
carried from the prison to the guillotine in a chariot. Mr. Alison might
with as much reason call the dead-cart, during the plague of London, by
that name.

If our sole object were to declare our opinion of Mr. Alison’s book, our
observations might stop here. But Mr. Alison’s subject seems to require
of us some further remarks, applicable to the mode in which that subject
is treated by English writers generally, as well as by him.

* * * * *

aHistory is interesting under a two-fold aspect, it has a bscientificb
interest, and a cmoralc or dbiographicd interest. A scientific, inasmuch
as it exhibits the general Edition: current; Page: [118] laws of the
moral universe acting in circumstances of complexity, and enables us to
trace the connexion between great effects and their causes. A moral or
biographic interest, inasmuch as it erepresents to use the characters
and lives of human beings, and calls upon us, according to their
deservings or to their fortunes, for four sympathy, our admiration, or
our censuref.

gNow, withoutg entering at present, more than to the extent of a few
words, into the hscientifich aspect of the history of the French
Revolution, or stopping to define the place which we would assign to it
as an event in universal history, we need not fear to declare utterly
unqualified for estimating the French Revolution any one who looks upon
it as arising from causes peculiarly French, or otherwise than as one
turbulent passage in a progressive irevolutioni embracing the whole
human race. All political revolutions, not effected by foreign conquest,
originate in moral revolutions. The subversion of established
institutions is merely one consequence of the previous subversion of
established opinions. The jhundredj political revolutions of the last
three centuries were but a few outward manifestations of a moral
revolution, which dates from the great breaking loose of the human
faculties commonly described as the “revival of letters,” and of which
the main instrument and agent was the invention of printing. How much of
the course of that moral revolution yet remains to be run, or how many
political revolutions it will yet generate before it be exhausted, no
one can foretell. But it must be the shallowest view of the French
Revolution, which can knowk consider it as any thing but a mere
lincidentl in a great change in man himself, in his mbeliefm, in his
principles of conduct, and therefore in the outward arrangements of
society; a change nwhich is but half completed, and which is now in a
state of more rapid progress here in England, than any where elsen.

Now if this view be justo, which we must be content for the present to
assumeo, surely for an English historian, writing at this particular
time concerning the French Revolution, there was something pressing for
consideration of greater interest and importance than the degree of
praise or blame due to the few individuals who, with more or less pofp
consciousness what they were about, happened to be personally implicated
in that strife of the elements.

Edition: current; Page: [119]
But also, if, feeling his incapacity for treating history from the
scientific point of view, an author thinks fit to confine himself to the
qmoralq aspect, surely some less common-place moral result, some more
valuable and more striking practical lesson, might admit of being drawn
from this extraordinary passage of history, than merely this, that men
should beware how they begin a political convulsion, because they never
can tell how or when it will end; which happens to be the one solitary
general inference, the entire aggregate of the practical wisdom, deduced
therefrom in Mr. Alison’s book.

Of such stuff are ordinary rmen’sr moralities composed. Be good, be
wise, always do right, take heed what you do, for you know not what may
come of it. Does Mr. Alison, or any one, really believe that any human
thing, from the fall of man to the last bankruptcy, ever went wrong for
want of such maxims as these?

A political convulsion is a fearful thing: granted. Nobody can be
assured beforehand what course it will take: we grant that too. What
then? No one ought ever to do any thing which has any tendency to bring
on a convulsion: is that the principle? But there never was an attempt
made to reform any abuse in Church or State, never any denunciation
uttered, or mention made of any political or social evil, which had not
some such tendency. Whatever excites dissatisfaction with any one of the
arrangements of society, brings the danger of a forcible subversion of
the entire fabric so much the snearer: doess it follow that there ought
to be no censure of any thing which exists? Or is this abstinence,
peradventure, to be observed only when the danger is considerable? But
that is whenever the evil complained of is considerable; because the
greater the evil, the stronger is the desire excited to be freed from
it, and because the greatest evils are always those which it is most
difficult to get rid of by ordinary means. It would follow, then, that
mankind are at liberty to throw off small evils, but not great ones,
that the most deeply-seated and fatal diseases of the social system are
those which ought to be left for ever without remedy.

Men are not to make it the sole object of their political lives to avoid
a revolution, no more than of their natural lives to avoid death. They
are to take reasonable care to avert both those contingencies when there
is a present danger, but tthey aret not to forbear the pursuit of any
worthy object for fear of a mere possibility.

Unquestionably it is possible to do mischief by striving for a larger
measure of political reform than the national mind is ripe for; and so
forcing on prematurely a struggle between elements, which, by a more
gradual progress, might have been brought to harmonize. And every honest
and considerate umanu, before he engages Edition: current; Page: [120]
in the career of a political reformer, will inquire whether the moral
state and intellectual culture of the people are such as to render any
great improvement in the management of public affairs possible. But he
will inquire too, whether the people are likely ever to be made better,
morally or intellectually, without a vpreviousv change in the
government. If not, it may still be his duty to strive for such a change
at whatever wrisksw.

What decision a perfectly wise man, at the opening of the French
Revolution, would have come to upon these several points, he who knows
most will be most slow to pronounce. By the Revolution, substantial good
has been effected of immense value, at the cost of immediate evil of the
most tremendous kind. But it is impossible, with all the light which has
been, or probably ever will be, obtained on the subject, to do more than
conjecture whether France could have purchased improvement cheaper;
whether any course which could have averted the Revolution, would not
have done so by arresting all improvement, and barbarizing down the
people of France into the condition of Russian boors.

A revolution, which is so ugly a thing, certainly cannot be a very
formidable thing, if all is true xthe Toriesx say of it. For, according
to them, it has always depended upon the will of some small number of
persons, whether there should be a revolution or ynoy. They invariably
begin by assuming that great and decisive immediate improvements, with a
certainty of subsequent and rapid progress, and the ultimate attainment
of all zpracticalz good, may be had by peaceable means at the option of
the leading reformers, and that to this they voluntarily prefer civil
war and massacre for the sake of marching somewhat more directly and
rapidly towards their ultimate ends. Having thus made out a revolution
to be so mere a bagatelle, that, except by the extreme of knavery or
folly, it may always be kept at a distance; there is little difficulty
in proving all revolutionary leaders knaves or fools. But unhappily
theirs is no such enviable position; a far other alternative is commonly
offered to them. We will hazard the assertion, that there anevera yet
happened a political convulsion, originating in the desire of reform,
where the choice did not, in the full persuasion of every person
concerned, lie between ballb and cnothingc; where the actors in the
revolution had not thoroughly made up their minds, that, without a
revolution, the enemies of all reform would have the entire ascendency,
and that not only there would be no present improvement, but the door
would for the future be shut against dalld endeavour towards it.

Edition: current; Page: [121]
Unquestionably, such was the conviction of those who took part in the
French Revolution, during its earlier stages. eTheye did fnotf choose
the way of blood and violence in preference to the way of peace and
discussion. Theirs was the cause of law and order. The States General at
Versailles were a body, legally assembled, legally and constitutionally
sovereign of the country, and had every right which law and opinion
could bestow upon them, to do all that they did. But as soon as they did
any thing disagreeable to the king’s courtiers, (at that time they had
not even gbegung to make any alterations in the fundamental institutions
of the country,) the king and his advisers took steps for appealing to
the bayonet. Then, and not till then, the adverse force of an armed
people stood forth in defence of the highest constituted authority—the
legislature of their country—menaced with illegal violence. The Bastille
fell; the popular party became the stronger; and success, which so often
is said to be a justification, has here proved the reverse: men who
would haveh ranked with Hampden and Sidney, if they had quietly waited
to have their throats cut, ibecomei odious monsters because they have
been victorious.

We have not now time nor space to discuss the quantum of the guilt which
attaches, not to the authors of the Revolution, but to the jsubsequent,
to the variousj revolutionary governments, for the crimes of the
Revolution. Much was done which could not have been done except by bad
men. But whoever examines faithfully and diligently the records of those
times, whoever can conceive the circumstances and look into the mindsk
of the men who planned and lwhol perpetrated those enormities, will be
the more fully convinced, the more he considers the facts, that all
which was done had one sole object. That object was, according to the
phraseology of the time, to save the Revolution; to msavem it, no matter
by what means; to defend it against its irreconcilable enemies, within
and without; to prevent the undoing of the whole work, the restoration
of all nwhichn had been demolished, and the extermination of all who had
been active in demolishing; to keep down the royalists, and drive back
the foreign invaders; as the means to these ends to erect all France
into a camp, subject the whole French people to the obligations and the
arbitrary discipline of a besieged city, and to inflict death, or suffer
it with equal readiness—death or any other evil—for the sake of
succeeding in the object.

Edition: current; Page: [122]
But nothing of all this is dreamed of in Mr. Alison’s philosophy:[*] he
knows not enough, oneither of his professed subject, noro of the
universal subject, the nature of man, to have got even thus far, to have
made this first step towards understanding what the French Revolution
was. In this he is without excuse, for had he been even moderately read
in the French literature, psubsequentp to the Revolution, he would have
found this view of the details of its history familiar to every writer
and to every reader.a

It was scarcely worth while to touch upon the French Revolution for the
sake of saying no more about it than we have now said; yet it is as
much, perhaps, as the occasion warrants. Observations entering more
deeply into the subject will find a fitter opportunity when it shall not
be necessary to mix them up with strictures upon an insignificant book.


The Monster Trial

so little is the general course of French affairs attended to in this
country, that when, as at present, some single event, either from its
importance or its strangeness, attracts a certain degree of notice, its
causes, and all which could help to explain it, have been forgotten. It
is true that the most assiduous reader of only the English newspapers,
even if he retained all he had read, would understand little or nothing
of the real character of events in France, for the editors of the
English newspapers are as ignorant of France as they probably are of
Monomotapa; and their Paris correspondents, being mostly Frenchmen,
write as if for Frenchmen, and repeat the mere gossip of the day,
pre-supposing as already known all which Englishmen would care to know.
By being the solitary exception to this rule, the writer who signed
“O.P.Q.”[*] in the Morning Chronicle gained a temporary popularity,
merely because, unlike the rest of the fraternity, he assumed that his
readers knew nothing, and had to learn everything. In the Examiner
alone, for the last four years, those who take interest in the fate of
that great country, which divides with ourselves the moral dominion of
Europe, have had the passing events placed carefully before them with
regular explanatory comments.[†]

From that paper we quote part of an article which appeared on the 26th
January, 1834, descriptive of the character and objects of that portion
of the French republicans against whom the procès-monstre[‡] is mainly
directed.

The Société des Droits de l’Homme is at present the hobgoblin or bugbear
of the juste milieu. The language and manner of the partisans of Louis
Philippe with respect to that association are a curious medley of
affected contempt and intense personal hatred, not without an admixture
of fear. They are constantly and studiously imputing to the members of
the society the absurdest opinions and the most criminal purposes, they
are incessantly averring, with a degree of emphasis which betrays a
lurking doubt, that those opinions and purposes are abhorred by the
French people, and that the society has not, and never will have, the
support of any class whatever, even the lowest. Yet, in the very same
breath in which they declare it to be harmless by reason of its
insignificance, they proclaim it so mischievous and so formidable, that
society is certain to perish unless it be put down, by whatever means.

In truth, the alarmists are equally wrong in both feelings, whether the
feelings be sincere or affected. This much-talked-of association is not
to be despised; neither, on the other Edition: current; Page: [126]
hand, is it to be feared. It does not aim at subverting society, and
society would be too strong for it if it did. Were we to believe some
people, the edifice of society is so tottering, and its foundations so
unstable, that a breath is enough to blow it down; nay, there cannot be
any stir in the surrounding atmosphere, nor any knocking upon the
ground, without its certain destruction. But we have another idea of
society than this; for us it is something more steady and solid than a
house of cards. The evil we are apprehensive of is stagnation, not
movement; we can anticipate nothing in the present age but good, from
the severest, from even the most hostile scrutiny of the first
principles of the social union. Instead of expecting society to fall to
pieces, our fear is lest (the old creeds, which formerly gave to the
established order of things a foundation in men’s consciences, having
become obsolete) the fabric should mechanically hold together by the
mere instinctive action of men’s immediate personal interests, without
any basis of moral conviction at all. Rather than see this we should
prefer to see the whole of the working classes speculatively Owenites or
Saint Simonians. We are not frightened at anti-property doctrines. We
have no fear that they should ever prevail so extensively as to be
dangerous. But we have the greatest fear lest the classes possessed of
property should degenerate more and more into selfish, unfeeling
Sybarites, receiving from society all that society can give, and
rendering it no service in return, content to let the numerical majority
remain sunk in mental barbarism and physical destitution. . . .a

The bSociety of the Rights of Manb some months ago embodied their
principles on the subject of property in the form of a manifesto, along
with which they republished, as a compendium of their opinions, a
Declaration of the Rights of Man,[*] which was proposed by Robespierre
to the National Convention to be prefixed to their republican
constitution,[†] and was by that body rejected. The name of Robespierre
was well calculated to excite a prejudice against this document, but any
thing more harmless than its contents can scarcely be conceived Such,
however, was not the impression of the Parisian public. The writer of
this was at Paris when the document made its appearance, and he well
remembers his Edition: current; Page: [127] astonishment at the nature
and intensity of the sentiments it appeared to excite. Those who did not
deem it too contemptible to be formidable were filled with
consternation. The Government party, the Carlists, the Liberals, were
unanimous in crying anarchy and confusion: even Republicans shook their
heads and said, “This is going too far.” And what does the reader
imagine was the proposition which appeared so startling and so alarming
to all parties? It was no other than the definition which, in the
Robespierrian declaration of rights, was given of the “right of
property,” and ran as follows.

“The right of property is the right which every one possesses of using
and enjoying the portion of wealth which is guaranteed to him by the
law.” (La portion de biens qui lui est garantie par la loi.)[*]

Such is the superstitious, or rather idolatrous, character of the
respect for property in France, that this proposition actually appeared
an alarming heresy, was denounced with the utmost acrimony by all the
enemies of the propounders, and timidly and hesitatingly excused rather
than vindicated by their friends. The maxim was evidently too much for
all parties, it was a doctrine considerably in advance of them, even
republicans required some time to make up their minds. Ardent
revolutionists, men who were ready to take up arms at five minutes’
notice for the subversion of the existing dynasty, doubted whether they
could admit, as a speculative truth, that property is not of natural
right, but of human institution, and is the creature of law. Truly,
there is little fear for the safety of property in France. We believe
that in no country in the world, not even the United States of America,
is property so secure, the most violent convulsion would not endanger
it; in a country where nearly two-thirds of the male adult population
possess property in land, and where the notions entertained of the
inviolability of property are so pedantic and (if we may be permitted
the expression) so prudish, that there are persons who will gravely
maintain that the state has no right to make a road through a piece of
land without the owner’s consent, even on payment of compensation.

Strange as it may appear, in the declaration of rights, drawn up by
Robespierre, and adopted by the Société des Droits de l’Homme, there is
not, with the one exception which we have mentioned, one single
proposition on the subject of property which was considered
exceptionable even by those who were so scandalized at the above
definition. No limitation of the right of property was hinted at; no new
or alarming maxim promulgated, unless such be implied in the recognition
of the principle of the English poor laws, that society is bound to
provide subsistence and work for its indigent members;[†] and this
document was rejected by the convention, by the body which put to death
Louis XVI, and created the revolutionary tribunal, rejected by that body
as anarchical. Yet there are people who believe that the principle of
the French revolution was spoliation of property! For the thousandth
time, we say to the English Tories and Whigs, that they are as utterly
ignorant of the French revolution as of the revolutions among the
inhabitants of the moon. Acts of injustice were done; rights, which
really partook of the nature of property, were not always treated as
such; but the respect of the revolutionary assemblies for all that they
considered as entitled to the name of property amounted to actual
narrowness and bigotry. We do not affirm this solely of the
comparatively moderate and enlightened men who composed the constituent
assembly, but in even a greater degree of the violent revolutionists of
the convention, to whose obtuser and less cultivated intellects such a
prejudice was more natural. In the height of the reign of terror
anti-property doctrines would have been scouted, even more decidedly
than now; no one dared avow them for fear of the guillotine; nor do
Edition: current; Page: [128] such doctrines figure in the history of
the revolution at all, save in the solitary instance of the conspiracy
of Baboeuf, greatly posterior to the fall of Robespierre and the
Montagne.c[*]

In April, 1834, about three months after the above article was written,
the leaders in a general strike of the silk-weavers of Lyons, which had
just terminated unsuccessfully, were prosecuted by order of government;
and this prosecution, together with the knowledge that the detestable
law[†] then in progress through the Chambers for putting down all
associations unlicensed by government would be applied to the extinction
of trades’ unions, provoked the unfortunate insurrection at Lyons, which
lasted five days, and was with some difficulty suppressed. This was not
a political, but a trades’ union insurrection. The government, however,
took that base advantage of the alarm excited by it which all French
governments have long been accustomed to take of all events exciting a
panic among those who have something to lose. They got up an
insignificant riot in the streets of Paris, called it an insurrection,
took the most violent measures for repressing it, (a house was broken
open, and all the inhabitants, twenty or thirty in number, butchered by
the troops,) and availed themselves of the excuse for seizing the
persons and papers of all the leading members of the Société des Droits
de l’Homme.[‡] Not one of those leaders was even suspected of being
concerned in either of the two insurrections, but the opportunity was
thought a good one for laying, under colour of law, the clutches of the
government upon the correspondence of the society. It is now a year that
these distinguished persons have been kept in prison; and that time has
been employed in manufacturing, from the papers which government got
into its possession, evidence of a plot. The next desideratum was, to
bring the prisoners before a tribunal which would be sure to convict
them. Paris juries had been tried, Edition: current; Page: [129] and
found not sufficiently docile. They had always scouted the miserable
attempts to hunt down innocent men on charges of treason and conspiracy;
and memorable had been the exposure, on more than one such occasion, of
the malignant and fraudulent artifices of the government. There was,
however, a resource. In servile imitation of the English constitution,
the Chamber of Peers had been, by the French charter, invested with the
power of trying ministers for treason or malversation on the prosecution
of the Chamber of Deputies.[*] This provision Louis Philippe, following
a questionable precedent of Louis XVIII’s reign, has applied to the case
of persons who are not ministers, nor prosecuted by the Chamber of
Deputies; and has brought the pretended authors of the pretended
republican conspiracy of Paris, along with the presumed authors of the
real trades’ union revolt at Lyons, before the Chamber of Peers, that
is, before a body named by the government, and mostly holding places
under it.

Nothing can denote more complete ignorance of France than the daily
speculations in our liberal newspapers as to the embarrassments which
the Chamber of Peers is supposed to have brought upon itself by
consenting to be made the tool of the government in this matter, and the
loss it is likely to sustain in public estimation. The Chamber of Peers
is so happily situated, that it cannot possibly suffer any loss of
public estimation; any change on that score must be to its advantage. It
is as completely insignificant as our House of Lords would be if it were
a body of mere pensioners, not hereditary, containing as little talent
as at present, and scarcely any fortune. The Chamber of Peers,
previously to this trial, was heartily despised. It may now attain the
more honourable, and, to a Frenchman especially, far more enviable
position of being hated. By showing that it has still the power (in
spite of the imbecility inherent in its constitution) of making itself
formidable as an instrument of tyranny in the hands of the other two
branches of the legislature, it may have a chance, which it certainly
had not before, of regaining a certain sort of consideration. The
Monster Trial is its last throw for political importance.



Carlyle’s French Revolution

this is not so much a history, as an epic poem; and notwithstanding, or
even in consequence of this, the truest of histories. It is the history
of the French Revolution, and the poetry of it, both in one; and on the
whole no work of greater genius, either historical or poetical, has been
produced in this country for many years.

It is a book on which opinion will be for some time divided; nay, what
talk there is about it, while it is still fresh, will probably be
oftenest of a disparaging sort; as indeed is usually the case, both with
men’s works and with men themselves, of distinguished originality. For a
thing which is unaccustomed, must be a very small thing indeed, if
mankind can at once see into it and be sure that it is good: when,
therefore, a considerable thing, which is also an unaccustomed one,
appears, those who will hereafter approve, sit silent for a time, making
up their minds; and those only to whom the mere novelty is a sufficient
reason for disapproval, speak out. We need not fear to prophesy that the
suffrages of a large class of the very best qualified judges will be
given, even enthusiastically, in favour of the volumes before us; but we
will not affect to deny that the sentiment of another large class of
readers (among whom are many entitled to the most respectful attention
on other subjects) will be far different; a class comprehending all who
are repelled by quaintness of manner. For a style more peculiar than
that of Mr. Carlyle, more unlike the jog-trot characterless uniformity
which distinguishes the English style of this age of Periodicals, does
not exist. Nor indeed can this style be wholly defended even by its
admirers. Some of its peculiarities are mere mannerisms, arising from
some casual association of ideas, or some habit accidentally picked up;
and what is worse, many sterling thoughts are so disguised in
phraseology borrowed from the spiritualist school of German poets and
metaphysicians, as not only to obscure the meaning, but to raise, in the
minds of most English readers, a not unnatural nor inexcusable
presumption of there being no meaning at all. Nevertheless, the
presumption fails in this instance (as in many other instances); there
is not only a meaning, but generally a true, and even a profound
meaning; and, although a few dicta about the “mystery” and the
“infinitude”[*] which are in the universe and in man, and such like
topics, are repeated in varied phrases greatly too often for our taste,
this must be borne with, proceeding, as one cannot but see, Edition:
current; Page: [134] from feelings the most solemn, and the most deeply
rooted which can lie in the heart of a human being. These
transcendentalisms, and the accidental mannerisms excepted, we pronounce
the style of this book to be not only good, but of surpassing
excellence; excelled, in its kind, only by the great masters of epic
poetry; and a most suitable and glorious vesture for a work which is
itself, as we have said, an epic poem.

To any one who is perfectly satisfied with the best of the existing
histories, it will be difficult to explain wherein the merit of Mr.
Carlyle’s book consists. If there be a person who, in reading the
histories of Hume, Robertson, and Gibbon (works of extraordinary talent,
and the works of great writers)[*] has never felt that this, after all,
is not history—and that the lives and deeds of his fellow-creatures must
be placed before him in quite another manner, if he is to know them, or
feel them to be real beings, who once were alive, beings of his own
flesh and blood, not mere shadows and dim abstractions; such a person,
for whom plausible talk about a thing does as well as an image of the
thing itself, feels no need of a book like Mr. Carlyle’s; the want,
which it is peculiarly fitted to supply, does not yet consciously exist
in his mind. That such a want, however, is generally felt, may be
inferred from the vast number of historical plays and historical
romances, which have been written for no other purpose than to satisfy
it. Mr. Carlyle has been the first to shew that all which is done for
history by the best historical play, by Schiller’s Wallenstein,[†] for
example, or Vitet’s admirable trilogy,* may be done in a strictly true
narrative, in which every incident rests on irrefragable authority; may
be done, by means merely of an apt selection and a judicious grouping of
authentic facts.

It has been noted as a point which distinguishes Shakespeare from
ordinary dramatists, that their characters are logical abstractions, his
are human beings: that their kings are nothing but kings, their lovers
nothing but lovers, their patriots, Edition: current; Page: [135]
courtiers, villains, cowards, bullies, are each of them that, and that
alone; while his are real men and women, who have these qualities, but
have them in addition to their full share of all other qualities (not
incompatible), which are incident to human nature.[*] In Shakespeare,
consequently, we feel we are in a world of realities; we are among such
beings as really could exist, as do exist, or have existed, and as we
can sympathise with; the faces we see around us are human faces, and not
mere rudiments of such, or exaggerations of single features. This
quality, so often pointed out as distinctive of Shakespeare’s plays,
distinguishes Mr. Carlyle’s history. Never before did we take up a book
calling itself by that name, a book treating of past times, and
professing to be true, and find ourselves actually among human beings.
We at once felt, that what had hitherto been to us mere abstractions,
had become realities; the “forms of things unknown,” which we fancied we
knew, but knew their names merely, were, for the first time, with most
startling effect, “bodied forth” and “turned into shape.”[†] Other
historians talk to us indeed of human beings; but what do they place
before us? Not even stuffed figures of such, but rather their
algebraical symbols; a few phrases, which present no image to the fancy,
but by adding up the dictionary meanings of which, we may hunt out a few
qualities, not enough to form even the merest outline of what the men
were, or possibly could have been; furnishing little but a canvas,
which, if we ourselves can paint, we may fill with almost any picture,
and if we cannot, it will remain for ever blank.

Take, for example, Hume’s history; certainly, in its own way, one of the
most skilful specimens of narrative in modern literature, and with some
pretensions also to philosophy. Does Hume throw his own mind into the
mind of an Anglo-Saxon, or an Anglo-Norman? Does any reader feel, after
having read Hume’s history, that he can now picture to himself what
human life was, among the Anglo-Saxons? how an Anglo-Saxon would have
acted in any supposable case? what were his joys, his sorrows, his hopes
and fears, his ideas and opinions on any of the great and small matters
of human interest? Would not the sight, if it could be had, of a single
table or pair of shoes made by an Anglo-Saxon, tell us, directly and by
inference, more of his whole way of life, more of how men thought and
acted among the Anglo-Saxons, than Hume, with all his narrative skill,
has contrived to tell us from all his materials?

Or descending from the history of civilization, which in Hume’s case may
have been a subordinate object, to the history of political events: did
any one ever gain from Hume’s history anything like a picture of what
may actually have been passing, in the minds, say, of Cavaliers or of
Roundheads during the civil wars? Does any one feel that Hume has made
him figure to himself with any precision Edition: current; Page: [136]
what manner of men these were; how far they were like ourselves, how far
different; what things they loved and hated, and what sort of conception
they had formed of the things they loved and hated? And what kind of a
notion can be framed of a period of history, unless we begin with that
as a preliminary? Hampden, and Strafford, and Vane, and Cromwell, do
these, in Hume’s pages, appear to us like beings who actually trod this
earth, and spoke with a human voice, and stretched out human hands in
fellowship with other human beings; or like the figures in a
phantasmagoria, colourless, impalpable, gigantic, and in all varieties
of attitude, but all resembling one another in being shadows? And
suppose he had done his best to assist us in forming a conception of
these leading characters: what would it have availed, unless he had
placed us also in the atmosphere which they breathed? What wiser are we
for looking out upon the world through Hampden’s eyes, unless it be the
same world which Hampden looked upon? and what help has Hume afforded us
for this? Has he depicted to us, or to himself, what all the multitude
of people were about, who surrounded Hampden; what the whole English
nation were feeling, thinking, or doing? Does he shew us what
impressions from without were coming to Hampden—what materials and what
instruments were given him to work with? If not, we are well qualified,
truly, from Hume’s information, to erect ourselves into judges of any
part of Hampden’s conduct!

Another very celebrated historian, we mean Gibbon—not a man of mere
science and analysis, like Hume, but with some (though not the truest or
profoundest) artistic feeling of the picturesque, and from whom,
therefore, rather more might have been expected—has with much pains
succeeded in producing a tolerably graphic picture of here and there a
battle, a tumult, or an insurrection; his book is full of movement and
costume, and would make a series of very pretty ballets at the
Opera-house, and the ballets would give us fully as distinct an idea of
the Roman empire, and how it declined and fell, as the book does. If we
want that, we must look for it anywhere but in Gibbon. One touch of M.
Guizot removes a portion of the veil which hid from us the recesses of
private life under the Roman empire, lets in a ray of light which
penetrates as far even as the domestic hearth of a subject of Rome, and
shews us the government at work making that desolate;[*] but no similar
gleam of light from Gibbon’s mind ever reaches the subject; human life,
in the times he wrote about, is not what he concerned himself with.

On the other hand, there are probably many among our readers who are
acquainted (though it is not included in Coleridge’s admirable
translation) with that extraordinary piece of dramatic writing, termed
“Wallenstein’s Camp.”[†] Edition: current; Page: [137] One of the
greatest of dramatists, the historian of the Thirty Years’ War,[*]
aspired to do, in a dramatic fiction, what even his genius had not
enabled him to do in his history—to delineate the great characters, and,
above all, to embody the general spirit of that period. This is done
with such life and reality through ten acts, that the reader feels when
it is over as if all the prominent personages in the play were people
whom he had known from his childhood; but the author did not trust to
this alone: he prefixed to the ten acts, one introductory act, intended
to exhibit, not the characters, but the element they moved in. It is
there, in this preliminary piece, that Schiller really depicts the
Thirty Years’ War; without that, even the other ten acts, splendid as
they are, would not have sufficiently realized it to our conception, nor
would the Wallensteins and Piccolominis and Terzskys of that glorious
tragedy have been themselves, comparatively speaking, intelligible.

What Schiller must have done, in his own mind, with respect to the age
of Wallenstein, to enable him to frame that fictitious delineation of
it. Mr. Carlyle, with a mind which looks still more penetratingly into
the deeper meanings of things than Schiller’s, has done with respect to
the French Revolution. And he has communicated his picture of it with
equal vividness; but he has done it by means of real, not fictitious
incidents. And therefore is his book, as we said, at once the authentic
History and the Poetry of the French Revolution.

It is indeed a favourite doctrine of Mr. Carlyle, and one which he has
enforced with great strength of reason and eloquence in other places,
that all poetry suitable to the present age must be of this kind:[†]
that poetry has not naturally any thing to do with fiction, nor is
fiction in these days even the most appropriate vehicle and vesture of
it; that it should, and will, employ itself more and more, not in
inventing unrealities, but in bringing out into ever greater
distinctness and impressiveness the poetic aspect of realities. For what
is it, in the fictitious subjects which poets usually treat, that makes
those subjects poetical? Surely not the dry, mechanical facts which
compose the story; but the feelings—the high and solemn, the tender or
mournful, even the gay and mirthful contemplations, which the story, or
the manner of relating it, awaken in our minds. But would not all these
thoughts and feelings be far more vividly aroused if the facts were
believed, if the men, and all that is ascribed to them, had actually
been; if the whole were no play of imagination, but a truth? In every
real fact, in which any of the great interests of human beings are
implicated, there lie the materials of all poetry; there is, as Mr.
Carlyle has said, the fifth act of a tragedy in every peasant’s
death-bed;[‡] the life of every heroic character is a heroic poem, were
but the man of genius found, who could so write it! Not falsification of
the reality is wanted, not the representation of it as being any thing
which it is not; only a deeper understanding of what it is; the Edition:
current; Page: [138] power to conceive, and to represent, not the mere
outside surface and costume of the thing, nor yet the mere logical
definition, and caput mortuum of it—but an image of the thing itself in
the concrete, with all that is loveable or hateable or admirable or
pitiable or sad or solemn or pathetic, in it, and in the things which
are implied in it. That is, the thing must be presented as it can exist
only in the mind of a great poet: of one gifted with the two essential
elements of the poetic character—creative imagination, which, from a
chaos of scattered hints and confused testimonies, can summon up the
Thing to appear before it as a completed whole: and that depth and
breadth of feeling which makes all the images that are called up appear
arrayed in whatever, of all that belongs to them, is naturally most
affecting and impressive to the human soul.

We do not envy the person who can read Mr. Carlyle’s three volumes, and
not recognize in him both these endowments in a most rare and remarkable
degree. What is equally important to be said—he possesses in no less
perfection that among the qualities necessary for his task, seemingly
the most opposite to these, and in which the man of poetic imagination
might be thought likeliest to be deficient; the quality of the
historical day-drudge. A more pains-taking or accurate investigator of
facts, and sifter of testimonies, never wielded the historical pen. We
do not say this at random, but from a most extensive acquaintance with
his materials, with his subject, and with the mode in which it has been
treated by others.

Thus endowed, and having a theme the most replete with every kind of
human interest, epic, tragic, elegiac, even comic and farcical, which
history affords, and so near to us withal, that the authentic details of
it are still attainable; need it be said, that he has produced a work
which deserves to be memorable? a work which, whatever may be its
immediate reception, “will not willingly be let die;”[*] whose
reputation will be a growing reputation, its influence rapidly felt, for
it will be read by the writers; and perhaps every historical work of any
note, which shall hereafter be written in this country, will be
different from what it would have been if this book were not.

The book commences with the last illness of Louis XV which is introduced
as follows:

President Hénault, remarking on royal Surnames of Honour how difficult
it often is to ascertain not only why, but even when, they were
conferred, takes occasion in his sleek official way to make a
philosophical reflection. “The Surname of Bien-aimé (Well-beloved),”
says he, “which Louis XV bears, will not leave posterity in the same
doubt. This Prince, in the year 1744, while hastening from one end of
his kingdom to the other, and suspending his conquests in Flanders that
he might fly to the assistance of Alsace, was Edition: current; Page:
[139] arrested at Metz by a malady which threatened to cut short his
days. At the news of this, Paris, all in terror, seemed a city taken by
storm: the churches resounded with supplications and groans; the prayers
of priests and people were every moment interrupted by their sobs; and
it was from an interest so dear and tender that this Surname of
Bien-aimé fashioned itself, a title higher still than all the rest which
this great Prince has earned.”*

So stands it written; in lasting memorial of that year 1744. Thirty
other years have come and gone; and “this great Prince” again lies sick;
but in how altered circumstances now! Churches resound not with
excessive groanings, Paris is stoically calm, sobs interrupt no prayers,
for indeed none are offered, except Priests’ Litanies, read or chanted
at fixed money-rate per hour, which are not liable to interruption. The
shepherd of the people has been carried home from Little Trianon, heavy
of heart, and been put to bed in his own Château of Versailles: the
flock knows it, and heeds it not. At most, in the immeasurable tide of
French Speech (which ceases not day after day, and only ebbs towards the
short hours of night), may this of the royal sickness emerge from time
to time as an article of news. Bets are doubtless depending, nay some
people “express themselves loudly in the streets.”† But for the rest, on
green field and steepled city, the May sun shines out, the May evening
fades, and men ply their useful or useless business as if no Louis lay
in danger.[*]

The loathsome deathbed of the royal debauchee becomes, under Mr.
Carlyle’s pencil, the central figure in an historical picture, including
all France: bringing before us, as it were visibly, all the spiritual
and physical elements which there existed, and made up the sum of what
might be termed the influences of the age. In this picture, and in that
of the “Era of Hope” (as Mr. Carlyle calls the first years of Louis
XVI,)[†] there is much that we would gladly quote. But on the whole we
think these introductory chapters the least interesting part of the
book; less distinguished by their intrinsic merit, and more so by all
the peculiarities of manner which either are really defects, or appear
so. These chapters will only have justice done them on a second reading,
once familiarized with the author’s characteristic turn of thought and
expression, we find many passages full of meaning, which, to unprepared
minds, would convey a very small portion, if any, of the sense which
they are not only intended, but are in themselves admirably calculated
to express, for the finest expression is not always that which is the
most readily apprehended. The real character of the book, however,
begins only to display itself when the properly narrative portion
commences. This, however, is more or less the case with all histories,
though seldom to so conspicuous an extent.

The stream of the narrative acquires its full speed about the hundred
and sixty-fifth page, and the beginning of the fourth book. The
introductory rapid sketch of what may be called the coming-on of the
Revolution, is then ended, and Edition: current; Page: [140] we are
arrived at the calling together of the States General. The fourth book,
first chapter, opens as follows:

The universal prayer, therefore, is to be fulfilled! Always in days of
national perplexity, when wrong abounded and help was not, this remedy
of States General was called for; by a Malesherbes, nay by a Fénélon:*
even Parlements calling for it were “escorted with blessings.”[*] And
now behold it is vouchsafed us, States General shall verily be!

To say, let States General be, was easy; to say in what manner they
shall be, is not so easy. Since the year 1614, there have no States
General met in France, all trace of them has vanished from the living
habits of men. Their structure, powers, methods of procedure, which were
never in any measure fixed, have now become wholly a vague Possibility.
Clay which the potter may shape, this way or that:—say rather, the
twenty-five millions of potters; for so many have now, more or less, a
vote in it! How to shape the States General? There is a problem. Each
Body-corporate, each privileged, each organised Class has secret hopes
of its own in that matter; and also secret misgivings of its own,—for,
behold, this monstrous twenty-million Class, hitherto the dumb sheep
which these others had to agree about the manner of shearing, is now
also arising with hopes! It has ceased or is ceasing to be dumb; it
speaks through Pamphlets, or at least brays and growls behind them, in
unison,—increasing wonderfully their volume of sound.

As for the Parlement of Paris, it has at once declared for the “old form
of 1614.” Which form had this advantage, that the Tiers Etat, Third
Estate, or Commons, figured there as a show mainly, whereby the Noblesse
and Clergy had but to avoid quarrel between themselves, and decide
unobstructed what they thought best. Such was the clearly declared
opinion of the Paris Parlement. But, being met by a storm of mere
hooting and howling from all men, such opinion was blown straightway to
the winds; and the popularity of the Parlement along with it,—never to
return. The Parlement’s part, we said above, was as good as played.
Concerning which, however, there is this further to be noted, the
proximity of dates. It was on the 22nd of September that the Parlement
returned from “vacation” or “exile in its estates;” to be reinstalled
amid boundless jubilee from all Paris. Precisely next day, it was that
this same Parlement came to its “clearly declared opinion:” and then on
the morrow after that, you behold it “covered with outrages;” its outer
court, one vast sibilation, and the glory departed from it for
evermore.† A popularity of twenty-four hours was, in those times, no
uncommon allowance.

On the other hand, how superfluous was that invitation of Lornénie, the
invitation to thinkers! Thinkers and unthinkers, by the million, are
spontaneously at their post, doing what is in them. Clubs labour:
Société Publicole; Breton Club; Enraged Club, Club des Enragés. Likewise
dinner-parties in the Palais Royal; your Mirabeaus, Talleyrands dining
there, in company with Chamforts, Morellets, with Duponts and hot
Parlementeers, not without object! For a certain Neckerean
lion’s-provider, whom one could name, assembles them there;‡—or even
their own private determination to have dinner does it. And then as to
pamphlets—in figurative language, “it is a sheer snowing of pamphlets;
like to snow up the Government thoroughfares!”[†] Now is the time for
friends of freedom; sane, and even insane.

Edition: current; Page: [141]
Count, or self-styled Count, d’Aintraigues, “the young Languedocian
gentleman,” with perhaps Chamfort the Cynic to help him, rises into
furor almost Pythic; highest, where many are high.* Foolish young
Languedocian gentleman, who himself so soon, “emigrating among the
foremost,” must fly indignant over the marches, with the Contrat
Social[*] in his pocket,—towards outer darkness, thankless intriguings,
ignis-fatuus hoverings, and death by the stiletto! Abbé Sieyès has left
Chartres Cathedral, and canonry and book-shelves there; has let his
tonsure grow, and come to Paris with a secular head, of the most
irrefragable sort, to ask three questions, and answer them. What is the
Third Estate? All. What has it hitherto been in our form of government?
Nothing. What does it want? To become something.[†]

D’Orleans, for be sure he, on his way to Chaos, is in the thick of
this,—promulgates his Deliberations;† fathered by him, written by Laclos
of the Liaisons Dangereuses.[‡] The result of which comes out simply.
“The Third Estate is the Nation.”[§] On the other hand, Monseigneur
d’Artois, with other Princes of the Blood, publishes, in solemn Memorial
to the King, that, if such things be listened to, Privilege, Nobility,
Monarchy, Church, State, and Strongbox are in danger.‡ In danger truly:
and yet if you do not listen, are they out of danger? It is the voice of
all France, this sound that rises. Immeasurable, manifold, as the sound
of outbreaking waters: wise were he who knew what to do in it,—if not to
fly to the mountains, and hide himself!

How an ideal, all-seeing Versailles Government, sitting there on such
principles, in such an environment, would have determined to demean
itself at this new juncture; may even yet be a question. Such a
Government had felt too well that its long task was now drawing to a
close, that, under the guise of these States General, at length
inevitable, a new omnipotent Unknown of Democracy was coming into being,
in presence of which no Versailles Government either could or should,
except in a provisory character, continue extant. To enact which
provisory character, so unspeakably important, might its whole faculties
but have sufficed; and so a peaceable, gradual, well-conducted
Abdication and Dominedimittas have been the issue!

This for our ideal, all-seeing Versailles Government. But for the actual
irrational Versailles Government? Alas! that is a Government existing
there only for its own behoof, without right, except possession, and now
also without might. It foresees nothing, sees nothing; has not so much
as a purpose, but has only purposes,—and the instinct whereby all that
exists will struggle to keep existing. Wholly a vortex, in which vain
counsels, Edition: current; Page: [142] hallucinations, falsehoods,
intrigues, and imbecilities whirl; like withered rubbish in the meeting
of winds! The Oeil-de-Boeuf has its irrational hopes, if also its fears.
Since hitherto all States General have done as good as nothing, why
should these do more? The Commons indeed look dangerous; but on the
whole is not revolt, unknown now for five generations, an impossibility?
The Three Estates can, by management, be set against each other; the
Third will, as heretofore, join with the King, will, out of mere spite
and self-interest, be eager to tax and vex the other two. The other two
are thus delivered bound into our hands, that we may fleece them
likewise. Whereupon, money being got, and the Three Estates all in
quarrel, dismiss them, and let the future go as it can! As good
Archbishop Loménie was wont to say: “There are so many accidents; and it
needs but one to save us.”—How many to destroy us?

Poor Necker in the midst of such an anarchy does what is possible for
him. He looks into it with obstinately hopeful face; lauds the known
rectitude of the kingly mind; listens indulgent-like to the known
perverseness of the queenly and courtly;—emits if any proclamation or
regulation, one favouring the Tiers Etat; but settling nothing; hovering
afar off rather, and advising all things to settle themselves. . . .[*]

But so, at least, by Royal Edict of the 24th of January,* does it
finally, to impatient expectant France, become not only indubitable that
national deputies are to meet, but possible (so far and hardly further
has the royal regulation gone) to begin electing them.[†]

The next Chapter is “The Election.”

Up then, and be doing! The royal signal-word flies through France, as
through vast forests the rushing of a mighty wind. At Parish Churches,
in Townhalls, and every House of Convocation; by Bailliages, by
Seneschalsies, in whatsoever form men convene, there, with confusion
enough, are primary assemblies forming. To elect your electors; such is
the form prescribed: then to draw up your “Writ of Plaints and
Grievances (Cahier de plaintes et doléances),” of which latter there is
no lack.

With such virtue works this Royal January Edict; as it rolls rapidly, in
its leathern mails, along these frost-bound highways, towards all the
four winds. Like some fiat, or magic spell-word;—which such things do
resemble! For always, as it sounds out “at the market-cross,”
accompanied with trumpet-blast, presided by Bailli, Seneschal, or other
minor functionary, with beefeaters; or, in country churches, is droned
forth after sermon, “au prône des messes paroissiales,”[‡] and is
registered, posted, and let fly over all the world,—you behold how this
multitudinous French people, so long simmering and buzzing in eager
expectancy, begins heaping and shaping itself into organic groups. Which
organic groups, again, hold smaller organic grouplets: the inarticulate
buzzing becomes articulate speaking and acting. By Primary Assembly, and
then by Secondary, by “successive elections,” and infinite elaboration
and scrutiny, according to prescribed process,—shall the genuine.
“Plaints and Grievances” be at length got to paper; shall the fit
National Representative be at length laid hold of.

How the whole People shakes itself, as if it had one life, and, in
thousand-voiced rumour, Edition: current; Page: [143] announces that it
is awake, suddenly out of long death-sleep, and will thenceforth sleep
no more![*] The long looked-for has come at last; wondrous news, of
victory, deliverance, enfranchisement, sounds magical through every
heart. To the proud strong man it has come, whose strong hands shall no
more be gyved, to whom boundless unconquered continents lie disclosed.
The weary day-drudge has heard of it, the beggar with his crust
moistened in tears. What! To us also has hope reached; down even to us?
Hunger and hardship are not to be eternal? The bread we extorted from
the rugged glebe, and, with the toil of our sinews, reaped and ground,
and kneaded into loaves, was not wholly for another, then, but we also
shall eat of it, and be filled? Glorious news (answer the prudent
elders), but all too unlikely!—Thus, at any rate, may the lower people,
who pay no money taxes and have no right to vote,* assiduously crowd
round those that do, and most halls of assembly, within doors and
without, seem animated enough.[†]

Has the reader often seen the state of an agitated nation made thus
present, thus palpable? How the thing paints itself in all its
greatness—the men in all their littleness! and this is not done by
reasoning about them, but by showing them. The deep pathos of the last
paragraph, grand as it is, is but an average specimen, as, indeed, is
the whole passage. In the remaining two volumes and a half there are
scarcely five consecutive pages of inferior merit to those we have
quoted. The few extracts we can venture to make, will be selected, not
for peculiarity of merit, but either as forming wholes in themselves, or
as depicting events or situations, with which the reader, it may be
hoped, is familiar.† For the more he previously knew of the mere outline
of the facts, the more he will admire the writer, whose pictorial and
truly poetic genius enables him for the first time to fill up the
outline.

Our last extract was an abridged sketch of the State of a Nation: the
next shall be a copious narrative of a single event: the far-famed Siege
of the Bastille. How much every such passage must suffer by being torn
from the context, needs scarcely be said; and nothing that could be
said, could, in this case, make it adequately felt. The history of the
two previous days occupies twenty-two pages, rising from page to page in
interest. We begin at noon on the fourteenth of July:

All morning, since nine, there has been a cry every where. To the
Bastille! Repeated “deputations of citizens” have been here, passionate
for arms; whom de Launay has got Edition: current; Page: [144] dismissed
by soft speeches through portholes. Towards noon, Elector Thuriot de la
Rosière gains admittance; finds de Launay indisposed for surrender; nay
disposed for blowing up the place rather. Thuriot mounts with him to the
battlements; heaps of paving-stones, old iron and missiles lie piled;
cannon all duly levelled; in every embrasure a cannon,—only drawn back a
little! But outwards, behold, O Thuriot, how the multitude flows on,
welling through every street; tocsin furiously pealing, all drums
beating the générale; the Suburb Saint-Antoine rolling hitherward
wholly, as one man! Such vision (spectral yet real) thou, O Thuriot, as
from thy Mount of Vision, beholdest in this moment: prophetic of what
other Phantasmagories, and loud-gibbering Spectral Realities, which thou
yet beholdest not, but shalt! “Que voulez-vous?” said de Launay, turning
pale at the sight, with an air of reproach, almost of menace.
“Monsieur,” said Thuriot, rising into the moral-sublime, “What mean you?
Consider if I could not precipate both of us from this height,”—say only
a hundred feet, exclusive of the walled ditch![*] Whereupon de Launay
fell silent. Thuriot shews himself from some pinnacle, to comfort the
multitude becoming suspicious, fremescent, then descends; departs with
protest; with warning addressed also to the Invalides,—on whom, however,
it produces but a mixed indistinct impression. The old heads are none of
the clearest; besides, it is said, de Launay has been profuse of
beverages (prodigua des boissons). They think, they will not fire,—if
not fired on, if they can help it; but must, on the whole, be ruled
considerably by circumstances.

Wo to thee, de Launay, in such an hour, if thou canst not, taking some
one firm decision, rule circumstances! Soft speeches will not serve;
hard grape-shot is questionable, but hovering between the two is
unquestionable. Ever wilder swells the tide of men; their infinite hum
waxing ever louder, into imprecations, perhaps into crackle of stray
musketry,—which latter, on walls nine feet thick, cannot do execution.
The outer drawbridge has been lowered for Thuriot; new deputation of
citizens (it is the third, and noisiest of all) penetrates that way into
the outer court: soft speeches producing no clearance of these, de
Launay gives fire; pulls up his drawbridge. A slight sputter,—which has
kindled the too combustible chaos, made it a roaring fire-chaos! Bursts
forth Insurrection, at sight of its own blood (for there were deaths by
that sputter of fire), into endless rolling explosion of musketry,
distraction, execration;—and over head, from the fortress, let one great
gun, with its grape-shot, go booming, to shew what we could do. The
Bastille is besieged!

On, then, all Frenchmen that have hearts in their bodies! Roar with all
your throats, of cartilage and metal, ye Sons of Liberty; stir
spasmodically whatsoever of utmost faculty is in you, soul, body or
spirit; for it is the hour! Smite, thou Louis Tournay, cartwright of the
Marais, old-soldier of the Regiment Dauphine, smite at that outer
drawbridge-chain, though the fiery hail whistles round thee! Never, over
nave or felloe, did thy axe strike such a stroke. Down with it, man;
down with it to Orcus, let the whole accursed Edifice sink thither, and
Tyranny be swallowed up for ever! Mounted, some say on the roof of the
guard-room, some “on bayonets stuck into joints of the wall,” Louis
Tournay smites, brave Aubin Bonnemère (also an old soldier) seconding
him: the chain yields, breaks; the huge drawbridge slams down,
thundering (avec fracas).[†] Glorious: and yet, alas, it is still but
the outworks. The Eight grim Towers, with their Invalides’ musketry,
their paving stones and cannon-mouths, still soar aloft intact;—ditch
yawning impassable, stone-faced; the inner drawbridge with its back
towards us: the Bastille is still to take!

To describe this siege of the Bastille (thought to be one of the most
important in History) perhaps transcends the talent of mortals. Could
one but, after infinite reading, get to understand so much as the plan
of the building! But there is open Esplanade, at the end of the Edition:
current; Page: [145] Rue Saint-Antoine; there are such Forecourts, Cour
Avancé, Cour de l’Orme, arched Gateway (where Louis Tournay now fights);
then new drawbridges, dormant-bridges, rampart-bastions, and the grim
Eight Towers: a labyrinthic mass, high-frowning there, of all ages from
twenty years to four hundred and twenty;—beleaguered, in this its last
hour, as we said, by mere Chaos come again![*] Ordnance of all calibres;
throats of all capacities; men of all plans, every man his own engineer:
seldom since the war of Pygmies and Cranes[†] was there seen so
anomalous a thing. Half-pay Elie is home for a suit of regimentals; no
one would heed him in coloured clothes half-pay. Hulin is haranguing
Gardes Françaises in the Place de Grève. Frantic patriots pick up the
grape-shots: bear them, still hot (or seemingly so), to the
Hôtel-de-Ville:—Paris, you perceive, is to be burnt! Flesselles is “pale
to the very lips,” for the roar of the multitude grows deep. Paris
wholly has got to the acme of its frenzy; whirled, all ways, by panic
madness. At every street-barricade, there whirls simmering, a minor
whirlpool,—strengthening the barricade, since God knows what is coming:
and all minor whirlpools play distractedly into that grand
Fire-Mahlstrom which is lashing round the Bastille.

And so it lashes and it roars. Cholat the wine-merchant has become an
impromptu cannoneer. See Georget, of the marine service, fresh from
Brest, ply the King of Siam’s cannon.[‡] Singular (if we were not used
to the like). Georget lay, last night, taking his ease at his inn;[§]
the King of Siam’s cannon also lay, knowing nothing of him, for a
hundred years. Yet now, at the right instant, they have got together,
and discourse eloquent music. For, hearing what was toward, Georget
sprang from the Brest Diligence, and ran. Gardes Françaises also will be
here, with real artillery: were not the walls so thick!—Upwards from the
Esplanade, horizontally from all neighbouring roofs and windows, flashes
one irregular deluge of musketry,—without effect. The Invalides lie
flat, firing comparatively at their ease from behind stone; hardly
through portholes, shew the tip of a nose. We fall, shot; and make no
impression!

Let conflagration rage; of whatsoever is combustible! Guard-rooms are
burnt, Invalides’ mess-rooms. A distracted “Perukemaker with two fiery
torches” is for burning “the saltpetres of the Arsenal;”[¶]—had not a
woman run screaming, had not a Patriot, with some tincture of Natural
Philosophy, instantly struck the wind out of him (butt of musket on pit
of stomach), overturned barrels, and stayed the devouring element. A
young beautiful lady, seized escaping in these Outer Courts, and thought
falsely to be de Launay’s daughter, shall be burnt in de Launay’s sight;
she lies swooned on a paillasse: but again a Patriot, it is brave Aubin
Bonnemère the old soldier, dashes in, and rescues her. Straw is burnt;
three cartloads of it, hauled thither, go up in white smoke, almost to
the choking of Patriotism itself; so that Elie had, with singed brows,
to drag back one cart, and Réole the “gigantic haberdasher” another.[∥]
Smoke as of Tophet;[**] confusion as of Babel;[††] noise as of the Crack
of Doom![‡‡]

Blood flows; the aliment of new madness. The wounded are carried into
houses of the Edition: current; Page: [146] Rue Cerisaie; the dying
leave their last mandate not to yield till the accursed Stronghold fall.
And yet, alas, how fall? The walls are so thick! Deputations, three in
number, arrive from the Hôtel-de-Ville; Abbé Fauchet (who was one) can
say, with what almost superhuman courage of benevolence.* These wave
their Town-flag in the arched Gateway: and stand, rolling their drum;
but to no purpose. In such Crack of Doom, de Launay cannot hear them,
dare not believe them: they return, with justified rage, the whew of
lead still singing in their ears. What to do? The Firemen are here,
squirting with their fire-pumps on the Invalides’ cannon, to wet the
touchholes; they unfortunately cannot squirt so high; but produce only
clouds of spray. Individuals of classical knowledge propose catapults.
Santerre, the sonorous brewer of the suburb Saint-Antoine, advises
rather that the place be fired, by a “mixture of phosphorus and
oil-of-turpentine spouted up through forcing pumps:” O
Spinola-Santerre,[*] hast thou the mixture ready? Every man his own
engineer! And still the fire-deluge abates not; even women are firing,
and Turks; at least one woman (with her sweetheart), and one Turk.†
Gardes Françaises have come: real cannon, real cannoneers. Usher
Maillard is busy, half-pay Elie, half-pay Hulin rage in the midst of
thousands.

How the great Bastille Clock ticks (inaudible) in its Inner Court there,
at its ease, hour after hour; as if nothing special, for it or the
world, were passing! It tolled One when the firing began; and is now
pointing towards Five, and still the firing slakes not.—Far down, in
their vaults, the seven Prisoners[†] hear muffled din as of earthquakes,
their Turnkeys answer vaguely.

Wo to thee, de Launay, with thy poor hundred Invalides! Broglie is
distant, and his ears heavy: Besenval hears, but can send no help. One
poor troop of Hussars has crept, reconnoitring, cautiously along the
quais, as far as the Pont Neuf. “We are come to join you,” said the
Captain; for the crowd seems shoreless. A large-headed dwarfish
individual, of smoke-bleared aspect, shambles forward, opening his blue
lips, for there is sense in him; and croaks: “Alight then, and give up
your arms!” The Hussar-Captain is too happy to be escorted to the
barriers, and dismissed on parole. Who the squat individual was? Men
answer, It is M. Marat, author of the excellent pacific Avis au
Peuple![‡] Great truly, O thou remarkable Dogleech, is this thy day of
emergence and new-birth, and yet this same day come four years—!—But let
the curtains of the Future hang.

What shall de Launay do? One thing only de Launay could have done: what
he said he would do. Fancy him sitting, from the first, with lighted
taper, within arm’s length of the powder-magazine; motionless, like old
Roman Senator, or bronze Lamp-holder; coldly apprising Thuriot, and all
men, by a slight motion of his eye, what his resolution was:—Harmless he
sat there, while unharmed; but the King’s fortress, meanwhile, could,
might, would, or should, in nowise, be surrendered, save to the King’s
Messenger: one old man’s life is worthless, so it be lost with honour;
but think, ye brawling canaille, how will it be Edition: current; Page:
[147] when a whole Bastille springs skyward!—In such statuesque,
taper-holding attitude, one fancies de Launay might have left Thuriot,
the red Clerks of the Bazoche, Curé of Saint-Stephen and all the
tagrag-and-bobtail of the world, to work their will.

And yet, withal, he could not do it. Hast thou considered how each man’s
heart is so tremulously responsive to the hearts of all men, hast thou
noted how omnipotent is the very sound of many men? How their shriek of
indignation palsies the strong soul, their howl of contumely withers
with unfelt pangs? The Ritter Gluck confessed that the ground-tone of
the noblest passage, in one of his noblest Operas, was the voice of the
populace he had heard at Vienna, crying to their Kaiser, Bread!
Bread![*] Great is the combined voice of men, the utterance of their
instincts, which are truer than their thoughts, it is the greatest a man
encounters, among the sounds and shadows, which make up this World of
Time. He who can resist that, has his footing somewhere beyond time. De
Launay could not do it Distracted, he hovers between two, hopes in the
middle of despair, surrenders not his fortress, declares that he will
blow it up, seizes torches to blow it up, and does not blow it. Unhappy
old de Launay, it is the death-agony of thy Bastille and thee! Jail,
jailoring and jailor, all three, such as they may have been, must
finish.

For four hours now has the World-Bedlam roared call it the
World-Chimaera, blowing fire! The poor Invalides have sunk under their
battlements, or rise only with reversed muskets: they have made a white
flag of napkins, go beating the chamade, or seeming to beat, for one can
hear nothing. The very Swiss at the Portcullis look weary of firing,
disheartened in the fire-deluge, a porthole at the drawbridge is opened,
as by one that would speak. See Huissier Maillard, the shifty man! On
his plank, swinging over the abyss of that stone-ditch; plank resting on
parapet, balanced by weight of patriots,—he hovers perilous such a dove
towards such an ark! Deftly, thou shifty Usher, one man already fell,
and lies smashed, far down there, against the masonry! Usher Maillard
falls not deftly, unerring he walks, with outspread palm. The Swiss
holds a paper through his porthole, the shifty Usher snatches it, and
returns. Terms of surrender Pardon, immunity to all! Are they
accepted?—“Foi d’officier, on the word of an officer,” answers half-pay
Hulin,—or half-pay Elie, for men do not agree on it, “they are!” Sinks
the drawbridge,—Usher Maillard bolting it when down; rushes-in the
living deluge the Bastille is fallen! Victoire! La Bastille est prise!*

We quote next the passage on the Burning of Châteaux. Mr. Carlyle gives
rather a different account from what English people have been used to,
of that feature of the Revolution:

Starvation has been known among the French commonalty before this, known
and familiar. Did we not see them, in the year 1775, presenting, in
sallow faces, in wretchedness and raggedness, their Petition of
Grievances, and, for answer, getting a brand-new gallows forty feet
high?[†] Hunger and darkness, through long years! For look Edition:
current; Page: [148] back on that earlier Paris riot, when a great
personage, worn out by debauchery, was believed to be in want of
blood-baths; and mothers, in worn raiment, yet with living hearts under
it, “filled the public places”[*] with their wild Rachel-cries,—stilled
also by the gallows. Twenty years ago, The Friend of Men (preaching to
the deaf) described the Limousin peasants as wearing a pain-stricken
(souffre-douleur) look, a look past complaint, “as if the oppression of
the great were like the hail and the thunder, a thing irremediable, the
ordinance of nature.”* And now, if in some great hour, the shock of a
falling Bastille should awaken you; and it were found to be the
ordinance of art merely; and remediable, reversible!

Or has the reader forgotten that “flood of savages,” which, in sight of
the same Friend of Men, descended from the mountains at Mont d’Or?
Lank-haired haggard faces; shapes rawboned, in high sabots; in woollen
jupes, with leather girdles studded with copper-nails! They rocked from
foot to foot, and beat time with their elbows too, as the quarrel and
battle which was not long in beginning went on; shouting fiercely; the
lank faces distorted into the similitude of a cruel laugh. For they were
darkened and hardened: long had they been the prey of excise-men and
tax-men, of “clerks with the cold spurt of their pen.” It was the fixed
prophecy of our old Marquis, which no man would listen to, that “such
Government by Blind-man’s-buff, stumbling along too far, would end by
the General Overturn, the Culbute Générale!”[†]

No man would listen, each went his thoughtless way;—and Time and Destiny
also travelled on. The Government by Blind-man’s-buff, stumbling along,
has reached the precipice inevitable for it. Dull Drudgery, driven on,
by clerks with the cold dastard spurt of their pen, has been driven—into
a Communion of Drudges! For now, moreover, there have come the strangest
confused tidings; by Paris Journals with their paper wings; or still
more portentous, where no Journals are,† by rumour and conjecture:
Oppression not inevitable, a Bastille prostrate, and the Constitution
fast getting ready! Which Constitution, if it be something and not
nothing, what can it be but bread to eat?

The traveller, “walking up hill bridle in hand,” overtakes “a poor
woman;” the image, as such commonly are, of drudgery and scarcity,
“looking sixty years of age, though she is not yet twenty-eight.” They
have seven children, her poor drudge and she: a farm, with one cow,
which helps to make the children soup, also one little horse, or garron.
They have rents and quit-rents, Hens to pay to this Seigneur, Oat-sacks
to that; King’s taxes, Statute-labour, Church-taxes, taxes enough;—and
think the times inexpressible. She has heard that somewhere, in some
manner, something is to be done for the poor. “God send it soon; for the
dues and taxes crush us down (nous écrasent)!”‡

Fair prophecies are spoken, but they are not fulfilled. There have been
Notables, Edition: current; Page: [149] Assemblages, turnings out and
comings in. Intriguing and manoeuvring; parliamentary eloquence and
arguing, Greek meeting Greek in high places,[*] has long gone on; yet
still bread comes not. The harvest is reaped and garnered, yet still we
have no bread. Urged by despair and by hope, what can Drudgery do, but
rise, as predicted, and produce the General Overturn?

Fancy, then, some five full-grown millions of such gaunt figures, with
their haggard faces (figures hâves); in woollen jupes, with
copper-studded leather girths, and high sabots,—starting up to ask, as
in forest-roarings, their washed Upper-Classes, after long unreviewed
centuries, virtually this question. How have ye treated us; how have ye
taught us, fed us, and led us, while we toiled for you? The answer can
be read in flames, over the nightly summer-sky. This is the feeding and
leading we have had of you. Emptiness,—of pocket, of stomach, of head,
and of heart. Behold there is nothing in us, nothing but what nature
gives her wild children of the desert. Ferocity and Appetite, Strength
grounded on Hunger. Did ye mark among your Rights of Man, that man was
not to die of starvation, while there was bread reaped by him? It is
among the Mights of Man.

Seventy-two Châteaus have flamed aloft in the Maconnais and Beaujolais
alone this seems the centre of the conflagration, but it has spread over
Dauphiné, Alsace, the Lyonnais; the whole south-east is in a blaze. All
over the north, from Rouen to Metz, disorder is abroad, smugglers of
salt go openly in armed bands the barriers of towns are burnt;
toll-gatherers, tax-gatherers, official persons put to flight. “It was
thought,” says Young, “the people, from hunger, would revolt,”[†] and we
see they have done it Desperate Lackalls, long prowling aimless, now
finding hope in desperation itself, everywhere form a nucleus. They ring
the Church bell by way of tocsin, and the Parish turns out to the work.*
Ferocity, atrocity, hunger and revenge: such work as we can imagine!

Ill stands it now with the Seigneur, who, for example, “has walled up
the only Fountain of the Township;” who has ridden high on his chartier
and parchment; who has preserved Game not wisely but too well.[‡]
Churches also, and Canonries, are sacked, without mercy; which have
shorn the flock too close, forgetting to feed it. Wo to the land over
which Sansculottism, in its day of vengeance, tramps roughshod,—shod in
sabots! Highbred Seigneurs, with their delicate women and littles ones,
had to “fly half-naked,” under cloud of night; glad to escape the
flames, and even worse. You meet them at the tables-d’hôte of inns;
making wise reflections or foolish that “rank is destroyed,” uncertain
whither they shall now wend.† The metayer will find it convenient to be
slack in paying rent. As for the Tax-gatherer, he, long hunting as a
biped of prey, may now get hunted as one, his Majesty’s Exchequer will
not “fill up the Deficit,”[§] this season: it is the notion of many that
a Patriot Majesty, being the Restorer of French Liberty, has abolished
most taxes, though, for their private ends, some men make a secret of
it.

Where this will end? In the Abyss, one may prophesy; whither all
Delusions, are, at all moments, travelling; where this Delusion has now
arrived. For if there be a Faith, from of old, it is this, as we often
repeat, that no Lie can live for ever. The very Truth has to change its
vesture, from time to time; and be born again. But all Lies have
sentence of death written down against them, in Heaven’s Chancery
itself, and, slowly or fast, advance incessantly Edition: current; Page:
[150] towards their hour. “The sign of a Grand Seigneur being landlord,”
says the vehement plain-spoken Arthur Young, “are wastes, landes,
deserts, ling, go to his residence, you will find it in the middle of a
forest, peopled with deer, wild boars and wolves. The fields are scenes
of pitiable management, as the houses are of misery. To see so many
millions of hands, that would be industrious, all idle and starving, oh,
if I were legislator of France, for one day, I would make these great
lords skip again!”* O Arthur, thou now actually beholdest them
skip;—wilt thou grow to grumble at that too?

For long years and generations it lasted, but the time came.
Featherbrain, whom no reasoning and no pleading could touch, the glare
of the firebrand had to illuminate, there remained but that method.
Consider it, look at it! The widow is gathering nettles for her
children’s dinner; a perfumed Seigneur, delicately lounging in the
Oeil-de-Boeuf, has an alchemy whereby he will extract from her the third
nettle, and name it Rent and Law such an arrangement must end. Ought it?
But, O most fearful is such an ending! Let those, to whom God, in His
great mercy, has granted time and space, prepare another and milder
one.[*]

We shall now give a still more striking scene; the opening of the
“Insurrection of Women.”[†]

If Voltaire once, in splenetic humour, asked his countrymen. “But you,
Gualches, what have you invented?”[‡] they can now answer: the Art of
Insurrection. It was an art needed in these last singular times, an art,
for which the French nature, so full of vehemence, so free from depth,
was perhaps of all others the fittest.

Accordingly, to what a height, one may well say of perfection, has this
branch of human industry been carried by France, within the last half
century! Insurrection, which, Lafayette thought, might be “the most
sacred of duties,”[§] ranks now, for the French people, among the duties
which they can perform. Other mobs are dull masses, which roll onwards
with a dull fierce tenacity, a dull fierce heat, but emit no
light-flashes of genius as they go. The French mob, again, is among the
liveliest phenomena of our world. So rapid, audacious; so clear-sighted,
inventive, prompt to seize the moment; instinct with life to its
finger-ends! That talent, were there no other, of spontaneously standing
in queue, distinguishes, as we said, the French People from all Peoples,
ancient and modern.

Let the reader confess too that, taking one thing with another, perhaps
few terrestrial Appearances are better worth considering than mobs. Your
mob is a genuine outburst of Nature, issuing from, or communicating
with, the deepest deep of Nature. When so much goes grinning and
grimacing as a lifeless Formality, and under the stiff buckram no heart
can be felt beating, here once more, if nowhere else, is a Sincerity and
Reality. Shudder at it, or even shriek over it, if thou must;
nevertheless consider it. Such a Complex of human Forces and
Individualities hurled forth, in their transcendental mood, to act and
react, on circumstances and on one another; to work out what it is in
them to work. The thing they will do is known to no man; least of all to
themselves. It is the inflammablest immeasurable Edition: current; Page:
[151] Fire-work, generating, consuming itself. With what phases, to what
extent, with what results it will burn off, Philosophy and Perspicacity
conjecture in vain.

“Man,” as has been written, “is for ever interesting to man; nay,
properly there is nothing else interesting.”[*] In which light also, may
we not discern why most Battles have become so wearisome? Battles, in
these ages, are transacted by mechanism, with the slightest possible
development of human individuality or spontaneity, men now even die, and
kill one another, in an artificial manner. Battles ever since Homer’s
time, when they were Fighting Mobs, have mostly ceased to be worth
looking at, worth reading of, or remembering. How many wearisome bloody
Battles does History strive to represent; or even, in a husky way, to
sing,—and she would omit or carelessly slur-over this one Insurrection
of Women?

A thought, or dim raw-material of a thought, was fermenting all night,
universally in the female head, and might explode. In squalid garret, on
Monday morning, Maternity awakes, to hear children weeping for bread.
Maternity must forth to the streets, to the herb-markets and
Bakers’-queues, meets there with hunger-stricken Maternity, sympathetic,
exasperative. O we unhappy women! But, instead of Bakers’-queues, why
not to Aristocrats’ palaces, the root of the matter? Allons! Let us
assemble. To the Hôtel-de-Ville; to Versailles; to the Lanterne!

In one of the Guardhouses of the Quartier Saint-Eustache, “a young
woman” seizes a drum,—for how shall National Guards give fire on women,
on a young woman? The young woman seizes the drum; sets forth, beating
it, “uttering cries relative to the dearth of grains.” Descend, O
mothers, descend, ye Judiths, to food and revenge!—All women gather and
go, crowds storm all stairs, force out all women the female
Insurrectionary Force, according to Camille, resembles the English Naval
one; there is a universal “Press of women.”[†] Robust Dames of the
Halle, slim mantua-makers, assiduous, risen with the dawn, ancient
Virginity tripping to matins, the Housemaid, with early broom; all must
go. Rouse ye, O women, the laggard men will not act; they say, we
ourselves may act!

And so, like snowbreak from the mountains, for every staircase is a
melted brook, it storms, tumultuous, wild-shrilling, towards the
Hôtel-de-Ville. Tumultuous, with or without drum-music, for the Faubourg
Saint-Antoine also has tucked up its gown, and, with besom-staves,
fire-irons, and even rusty pistols (void of ammunition), is flowing on.
Sound of it flies, with a velocity of sound, to the utmost Barriers. By
seven o’clock, on this raw October morning, fifth of the month, the
Townhall will see wonders. Nay, as chance would have it, a male party
are already there; clustering tumultuously round some National Patrol,
and a Baker who has been seized with short weights. They are there; and
have even lowered the rope of the Lanterne. So that the official persons
have to smuggle forth the short-weighing Baker by back doors, and even
send “to all the Districts” for more force.

Grand it was, says Camille, to see so many Judiths, from eight to ten
thousand of them in all, rushing out to search into the root of the
matter! Not unfrightful it must have been, ludicro-terrific, and most
unmanageable. At such hour the overwatched Three Hundred are not yet
stirring, none but some Clerks, a company of National Guards, and M. de
Gouvion, the Major-General. Gouvion has fought in America for the cause
of civil Liberty, a man of no inconsiderable heart, but deficient in
head. He is, for the moment, in his back apartment, Edition: current;
Page: [152] assuaging Usher Maillard, the Bastille-serjeant, who has
come, as too many do, with “representations.” The assuagement is still
incomplete when our Judiths arrive.

The National Guards form on the outer stairs, with levelled bayonets,
the ten thousand Judiths press up, resistless, with obtestations, with
outspread hands,—merely to speak to the Mayor. The rear forces them;
nay, from male hands in the rear, stones already fly: the National Guard
must do one of two things; sweep the Place de Grève with cannon, or else
open to right and left. They open; the living deluge rushes in. Through
all rooms and cabinets, upwards to the topmost belfry; ravenous; seeking
arms, seeking Mayors, seeking justice;—while, again, the better-dressed
speak kindly to the Clerks; point out the misery of these poor women;
also their ailments, some even of an interesting sort.*

Poor M. de Gouvion is shiftless in this extremity;—a man shiftless,
perturbed, who will one day commit suicide. How happy for him that Usher
Maillard, the shifty, was there, at the moment, though making
representations! Fly back, thou shifty Maillard, seek the Bastille
Company; and O return fast with it; above all, with thy own shifty head!
For, behold, the Judiths can find no Mayor or Municipal; scarcely, in
the topmost belfry, can they find poor Abbé Lefevre the
Powder-distributor. Him, for want of a better, they suspend there; in
the pale morning light; over the top of all Paris, which swims in one’s
failing eyes:—a horrible end? Nay, the rope broke, as French ropes often
did, or else an Amazon cut it. Abbé Lefevre falls, some twenty feet,
rattling among the leads; and lives long years after, though always with
“a tremblement in the limbs.”†

And now doors fly under hatchets: the Judiths have broken the Armoury;
have seized guns and cannons, three money-bags, paper-heaps; torches
flare: in few minutes, our brave Hôtel-de-Ville which dates from the
Fourth Henry, will, with all that it holds, be in flames![*]

Here opens a new chapter.

In flames, truly,—were it not that Usher Maillard, swift of foot, shifty
of head, has returned!

Maillard, of his own motion, for Gouvion or the rest would not even
sanction him,—snatches a drum; descends the Porch-stairs, ran-tan,
beating sharp, with loud rolls, his Rogues’-march: to Versailles!
Allons, à Versailles! As men beat on kettle or warming-pan, when angry
she-bees, or say, flying desperate wasps, are to be hived; and the
desperate insects hear it, and cluster round it,—simply as round a
guidance, where there was none, so now these Menads round shifty
Maillard, Riding-Usher of the Châtelet. The axe pauses uplifted; Abbé
Lefevre is left half-hanged; from the belfry downwards all vomits
itself. What rub-a-dub is that? Stanislas Maillard, Bastille-hero, will
lead us to Versailles? Joy to thee, Maillard; blessed art thou above
Riding-Ushers! Away then, away!

The seized cannon are yoked with seized cart-horses, brownlocked
Demoiselle Théroigne, with pike and helmet, sits there as gunneress,
“with haughty eye and serene fair countenance;” comparable, some think,
to the Maid of Orleans, or even recalling “the idea of Pallas Athene.”‡
Maillard (for his drum still rolls) is, by heaven-rending acclamation,
admitted General. Maillard hastens the languid march. Maillard, beating
rhythmic, with sharp ran-tan, all along the Quais, leads forward, with
difficulty, his Menadic host. Such a host—marched not in silence! The
bargeman pauses on the river; all wagoners and Edition: current; Page:
[153] coach-drivers fly; men peer from windows,—not women, lest they be
pressed. Sight of sights: Bacchantes, in these ultimate Formalised Ages!
Bronze Henri looks on, from his Pont-Neuf; the Monarchic Louvre,
Medicean Tuileries see a day not theretofore seen.

And now Maillard has his Menads in the Champs Elysées (fields Tartarean
rather); and the Hôtel-de-Ville has suffered comparatively nothing.
Broken doors, an Abbé Lefevre, who shall never more distribute powder;
three sacks of money, most part of which (for Sansculottism, though
famishing, is not without honour) shall be returned:* this is all the
damage Great Maillard! A small nucleus of order is round his drum, but
his outskirts fluctuate like the mad ocean: for rascality male and
female is flowing in on him, from the four winds; guidance there is none
but in his single head and two drumsticks.

O Maillard, when, since war first was, had General of Force such a task
before him, as thou this day? Walter the Penniless still touches the
feeling heart but then Walter had sanction: had space to turn in, and
also his Crusaders were of the male sex. Thou, this day, disowned of
Heaven and Earth, art General of Menads. Their inarticulate frenzy thou
must, on the spur of the instant, render into articulate words, into
actions that are not frantic. Fail in it, this way or that! Pragmatical
Officiality, with its penalties and law-books, waits before thee, Menads
storm behind. If such hewed off the melodious head of Orpheus, and
hurled it into the Peneus waters, what may they not make of thee:—thee
rhythmic merely, with no music but a sheepskin drum!—Maillard did not
fail. Remarkable Maillard, if fame were not an accident, and history a
distillation of rumour, how remarkable wert thou!

Scarcely was Maillard gone, when M. de Gouvion’s message to all the
Districts, and such tocsin and drumming of the générale, began to take
effect. Armed National Guards from every District; especially the
Grenadiers of the Centre, who are our old Gardes Françaises, arrive, in
quick sequence, on the Place de Grève. An “immense people” is there;
Saint-Antoine, with pike and rusty firelock, is all crowding thither, be
it welcome or unwelcome. The Centre Grenadiers are received with
cheering: “it is not cheers that we want,” answer they gloomily; “the
nation has been insulted; to arms, and come with us for orders!” Ha,
sits the wind so? Patriotism and Patrollotism are now one!

The Three Hundred have assembled: “all the Committees are in activity,”
Lafayette is dictating despatches for Versailles, when a Deputation of
the Centre Grenadiers introduces itself to him. The Deputation makes
military obeisance, and thus speaks, not without a kind of thought in
it. “Mon Général, we are deputed by the Six Companies of Grenadiers. We
do not think you a traitor, but we think the Government betrays you, it
is time that this end. We cannot turn our bayonets against women crying
to us for bread. The people are miserable, the source of the mischief is
at Versailles we must go seek the King, and bring him to Paris. We must
exterminate (exterminer) the Regiment de Flandre and the
Gardes-du-Corps, who have dared to trample on the National Cockade. If
the King be too weak to wear his crown, let him lay it down. You will
crown his Son, you will name a Council of Regency, and all will go
better.”† Reproachful astonishment paints itself on the face of
Lafayette, speaks itself from his eloquent chivalrous lips: in vain. “My
General, we would shed the last drop of our blood for you; but the root
of the mischief is at Versailles, we must go and bring the King to
Paris; all the people wish it, tout le peuple le veut.”[*]

My General descends to the outer staircase, and harangues; once more in
vain. “To Versailles! To Versailles!” Mayor Bailly, sent for through
floods of Sansculottism, attempts academic oratory from his gilt
state-coach; realises nothing but infinite hoarse cries Edition:
current; Page: [154] of: “Bread! To Versailles!”[*]—and gladly shrinks
within doors. Lafayette mounts the white charger; and again harangues,
and reharangues: with eloquence, with firmness, indignant demonstration;
with all things but persuasion. “To Versailles! To Versailles!” So lasts
it, hour after hour;—for the space of half a day.

The great Scipio Americanus can do nothing; not so much as escape.
“Morbleu, mon Général,” cry the Grenadiers serrying their ranks as the
white charger makes a motion that way, “You will not leave us, you will
abide with us!”[†] A perilous juncture: Mayor Bailly and the Municipals
sit quaking within doors, My General is prisoner without: the Place de
Grève, with its thirty thousand Regulars, its whole irregular
Saint-Antoine and Saint-Marceau, is one minatory mass of clear or rusty
steel, all hearts set, with a moody fixedness, on one object. Moody,
fixed are all hearts, tranquil is no heart,—if it be not that of the
white charger, who paws there, with arched neck, composedly champing his
bit; as if no World, with its Dynasties and Eras, were now rushing down.
The drizzly day tends westward, the cry is still. “To Versailles!”

Nay now, borne from afar, come quite sinister cries, hoarse,
reverberating in longdrawn hollow murmurs, with syllables too like those
of Lanterne! Or else, irregular Sansculottism may be marching off, of
itself; with pikes, nay with cannon. The inflexible Scipio does at
length, by aide-de-camp, ask of the Municipals. Whether or not he may
go? A Letter is handed out to him, over armed heads; sixty thousand
faces flash fixedly on his, there is stillness and no bosom breathes,
till he have read. By Heaven, he grows suddenly pale! Do the Municipals
permit? “Permit and even order,”[‡]—since he can no other. Clangour of
approval rends the welkin. To your ranks, then; let us march!

It is, as we compute, towards three in the afternoon. Indignant National
Guards may dine for once from their haversack, dined or undined, they
march with one heart. Paris flings up her windows, claps hands, as the
Avengers, with their shrilling drums and shalms tramp by, she will then
sit pensive, apprehensive, and pass rather a sleepless night.* On the
white charger, Lafayette, in the slowest possible manner, going and
coming, and eloquently haranguing among the ranks, rolls onward with his
thirty thousand. Saint-Antoine, with pike and cannon, has preceded him,
a mixed multitude, of all and of no arms, hovers on his flanks and
skirts; the country once more pauses agape. Paris marche sur nous.[§]

We cannot stop here. See the beginning of the next chapter.

For indeed, about this same moment, Maillard has halted his draggled
Menads on the last hill-top; and now Versailles, and the Château of
Versailles, and far and wide the inheritance of Royalty opens to the
wondering eye. From far on the right, over Marly and
Saint-Germain-en-Lay; round towards Rambouillet, on the left beautiful
all; softly embosomed; as if in sadness, in the dim moist weather! and
near before us is Versailles, New and Old; with that broad frondent
Avenue de Versailles between,—stately-frondent, broad, 300 feet as men
reckon, with four rows of elms; and then the Château de Versailles,
ending in royal Parks and Pleasances, gleaming lakelets, arbours,
Labyrinths, the Ménagerie, and Great and Little Trianon. High-towered
dwellings, leafy pleasant places, where the gods of this lower world
abide: whence, nevertheless, black Care cannot be excluded; whither
Menadic Hunger is even now advancing, armed with pike-thyrsi!

Edition: current; Page: [155]
Yes, yonder, Mesdames, where our straight frondent Avenue, joined, as
you note, by Two frondent brother Avenues from this hand and from that,
spreads out into Place Royale and Palace Forecourt, yonder is the Salle
des Menus. Yonder an august Assembly sits regenerating France.
Forecourt, Grand Court, Court of Marble, Court narrowing into Court you
may discern next, or fancy, on the extreme verge of which that
glass-dome, visibly glittering like a star of hope, is
the—Oeil-de-Boeuf! Yonder, or nowhere in the world, is bread baked for
us. But, O Mesdames, were not one thing good: That our cannons, with
Demoiselle Théroigne and all show of war, be put to the rear? Submission
beseems petitioners of a National Assembly; we are strangers in
Versailles,—whence, too audibly, there comes even now sound as of tocsin
and générale! Also to put on, if possible, a cheerful countenance,
hiding our sorrows; and even to sing? Sorrow, pitied of the Heavens, is
hateful, suspicious to the Earth.—So counsels shifty Maillard,
haranguing his Menads, on the heights near Versailles.

Cunning Maillard’s dispositions are obeyed. The draggled
Insurrectionists advance up the Avenue, “in three columns” among the
four Elm-rows; “singing Henri Quatre,” with what melody they can; and
shouting Vive le Roi.[*] Versailles, though the Elm-rows are dripping
wet, crowds from both sides, with. “Vivent nos Parisiennes, Our Paris
ones for ever!”[†]

We skip 20 pages, and pass to a later part of the same incident.

Deep sleep has fallen promiscuously on the high and on the low,
suspending most things, even wrath and famine. Darkness covers the
Earth.[‡] But, far on the north-east. Paris flings up her great yellow
gleam, far into the wet black Night. For all is illuminated there, as in
the old July Nights; the streets deserted, for alarm of war, the
Municipals all wakeful, patrols hailing, with their hoarse Who-goes.
There, as we discover, our poor slim Louison Chabray, her poor nerves
all fluttered, is arriving about this very hour. There Usher Maillard
will arrive, about an hour hence, “towards four in the morning.” They
report, successively, to a wakeful Hôtel-de-Ville what comfort they can
report, which again, with early dawn, large comfortable placards, shall
impart to all men.[§]

Lafayette, in the Hôtel de Noailles, not far from the Château, having
now finished haranguing, sits with his officers consulting: at five
o’clock the unanimous best counsel is, that a man so tost and toiled for
twenty-four hours and more, fling himself on a bed, and seek some rest.
. .

The dull dawn of a new morning, drizzly and chill, had but broken over
Versailles, when it pleased Destiny that a Bodyguard should look out of
window, on the right wing of the Château, to see what prospect there was
in Heaven and in Earth. Rascality male and female is prowling in view of
him. His fasting stomach is, with good cause, sour, he perhaps cannot
forbear a passing malison on them, least of all can he forbear answering
such.

Ill words breed worse till the worst word came, and then the ill deed.
Did the maledicent Bodyguard, getting (as was too inevitable) better
malediction than he gave, load his musketoon, and threaten to fire, nay,
actually fire? Were wise who wist! It stands asserted, to us not
credibly. Be this as it may, menaced Rascality, in whinnying scorn, is
shaking at all Grates: the fastening of one (some write, it was a chain
merely) gives way. Rascality is in the Grand Court, whinnying louder
still.

The maledicent Bodyguard, more Bodyguards than he do now give fire, a
man’s arm is Edition: current; Page: [156] shattered. Lecointre will
depose that “the Sieur Cardaine, a National Guard without arms, was
stabbed.” But see, sure enough, poor Jerôme l’Heritier, an unarmed
National Guard he too, “cabinet maker, a saddler’s son, of Paris,”* with
the down of youthhood still on his chin,—he reels death-stricken; rushes
to the pavement, scattering it with his blood and brains!—Allelew!
Wilder than Irish wakes, rises the howl: of pity; of infinite revenge.
In few moments, the Grate of the inner and inmost Court, which they name
Court of Marble, this too is forced, or surprised, and bursts open: the
Court of Marble too is overflowed, up the Grand Staircase, up all stairs
and entrances rushes the living Deluge! Deshuttes and Varigny, the two
sentry Bodyguards, are trodden down, are massacred with a hundred pikes.
Women snatch their cutlasses, or any weapon, and storm-in Menadic:—other
women lift the corpse of shot Jerôme; lay it down on the marble steps;
there shall the livid face and smashed head, dumb for ever, speak.

Wo now to all Bodyguards, mercy is none for them! Miomandre de
Sainte-Marie pleads with soft words, on the Grand Staircase, “descending
four steps.”—to the roaring tornado.[*] His comrades snatch him up, by
the skirts and belts; literally, from the jaws of Destruction; and
slam-to their Door. This also will stand few instants; the panels
shivering in, like potsherds. Barricading serves not: fly fast, ye
Bodyguards; rabid Insurrection, like the hellhound Chase, uproaring at
your heels!

The terrorstruck Bodyguards fly, bolting and barricading; it follows.
Whitherward? Through hall on hall: wo, now! towards the Queen’s Suite of
Rooms, in the furthest room of which the Queen is now asleep. Five
sentinels rush through that long Suite; they are in the Anteroom
knocking loud: “Save the Queen!” Trembling women fall at their feet with
tears, are answered: “yes, we will die; save ye the Queen!”

Tremble not, women, but haste: for, lo, another voice shouts far through
the outermost door, “save the Queen!” and the door is shut. It is brave
Miomandre’s voice that shouts this second warning. He has stormed across
imminent death to do it; fronts imminent death, having done it. Brave
Tardivet du Repaire, bent on the same desperate service, was borne down
with pikes; his comrades hardly snatched him in again alive.[†]
Miomandre and Tardivet: let the names of those two Bodyguards, as the
names of brave men should, live long.

Trembling Maids of Honour, one of whom from afar caught glimpse of
Miomandre as well as heard him, hastily wrap the Queen; not in robes of
state. She flies for her life, across the Oeil-de-Boeuf; against the
main door of which too Insurrection batters. She is in the King’s
Apartment, in the King’s arms; she clasps her children amid a faithful
few. The Imperial-hearted bursts into mother’s tears: “O my friends,
save me and my children, O mes amis, sauvez-moi et mes enfans!”[‡] The
battering of Insurrectionary axes clangs audible across the
Oeil-de-Boeuf. What an hour!

Yes, friends: a hideous fearful hour; shameful alike to Governed and
Governor; wherein Governed and Governor ignominiously testify that their
relation is at an end. Rage, which had brewed itself in twenty thousand
hearts, for the last four-and-twenty hours, has taken fire: Jerôme’s
brained corpse lies there as live-coal. It is, as we said, the infinite
Element bursting in, wild-surging through all corridors and conduits.

Meanwhile, the poor Bodyguards have got hunted mostly into the
Oeil-de-Boeuf. They may die there, at the King’s threshold; they can do
little to defend it. They are heaping Edition: current; Page: [157]
tabourets (stools of honour), benches and all moveables, against the
door; at which the axe of Insurrection thunders. But did brave Miomandre
perish, then, at the Queen’s outer door? No, he was fractured, slashed,
lacerated, left for dead, he has nevertheless crawled hither; and shall
live, honoured of loyal France. Remark also, in flat contradiction to
much which has been said and sung, that Insurrection did not burst that
door he had defended, but hurried elsewhither, seeking new Bodyguards.*

Poor Bodyguards, with their Thyestes’ Opera-Repast! Well for them, that
Insurrection has only pikes and axes; no right sieging-tools! It shakes
and thunders. Must they all perish miserably, and Royalty with them?
Deshuttes and Varigny, massacred at the first inbreak, have been
beheaded in the marble court, a sacrifice to Jerôme’s manes. Jourdan
with the tile-beard did that duty willingly; and asked, If there were no
more? Another captive they are leading round the corpse, with
howl-chauntings: may not Jourdan again tuck up his sleeves?

And louder and louder rages Insurrection within, plundering if it cannot
kill; louder and louder it thunders at the Oeil-de-Boeuf, what can now
hinder its bursting in?—On a sudden it ceases; the battering has ceased!
Wild rushing: the cries grow fainter; there is silence, or the tramp of
regular steps; then a friendly knocking. “We are the Centre Grenadiers,
old Gardes Françaises; open to us, Messieurs of the Garde-du-Corps; we
have not forgotten how you saved us at Fontenoy!”† The door is opened;
enter Captain Gondran and the Centre Grenadiers, there are military
embracings; there is sudden deliverance from death into life.

Strange Sons of Adam! It was to “exterminate” these Gardes-du-Corps that
the Centre Grenadiers left home, and now they have rushed to save them
from extermination. The memory of common peril, of old help, melts the
rough heart; bosom is clasped to bosom, not in war. The King shews
himself, one moment, through the door of his apartment, with “Do not
hurt my Guards!”—“Soyons frères, let us be brothers!” cries Captain
Gondran;[*] and again dashes off, with levelled bayonets, to sweep the
Palace clear.

Now too Lafayette, suddenly roused, not from sleep (for his eyes had not
yet closed), arrives; with passionate popular eloquence, with prompt
military word of command. National Guards, suddenly roused, by sound of
trumpet and alarm-drum, are all arriving. The death-knell ceases: the
first sky-lambent blaze of Insurrection is got damped down: it burns
now, if unextinguished, yet flameless, as charred coals do, and not
inextinguishable.[†]

And what (it may be asked) are Mr. Carlyle’s opinions?

If this means, whether is he Tory, Whig, or Democrat; is he for things
as they are, or for things nearly as they are;[‡] or is he one who
thinks that subverting things as they are, and setting up Democracy is
the main thing needful? we answer, he is none of all these. We should
say that he has appropriated and made part of his own frame of thought,
nearly all that is good in all these several modes of thinking. Edition:
current; Page: [158] But it may be asked, what opinion has Mr. Carlyle
formed of the French Revolution, as an event in universal history; and
this question is entitled to an answer. It should be, however, premised,
that in a history upon the plan of Mr. Carlyle’s, the opinions of the
writer are a matter of secondary importance. In reading an ordinary
historian, we want to know his opinions, because it is mainly his
opinions of things, and not the things themselves, that he sets before
us; or if any features of the things themselves, those chiefly, which
his opinions lead him to consider as of importance. Our readers have
seen sufficient in the extracts we have made for them, to be satisfied
that this is not Mr. Carlyle’s method. Mr. Carlyle brings the thing
before us in the concrete—clothed, not indeed in all its properties and
circumstances, since these are infinite, but in as many of them as can
be authentically ascertained and imaginatively realized: not prejudging
that some of those properties and circumstances will prove instructive
and others not, a prejudgment which is the fertile source of
misrepresentation and one-sided historical delineation without end.
Every one knows, who has attended (for instance) to the sifting of a
complicated case by a court of justice, that as long as our image of the
fact remains in the slightest degree vague and hazy and undefined, we
cannot tell but that what we do not yet distinctly see may be precisely
that on which all turns. Mr. Carlyle, therefore, brings us acquainted
with persons, things, and events, before he suggests to us what to think
of them: nay, we see that this is the very process by which he arrives
at his own thoughts; he paints the thing to himself—he constructs a
picture of it in his own mind, and does not, till afterwards, make any
logical propositions about it at all. This done, his logical
propositions concerning the thing may be true, or may be false; the
thing is there, and any reader may find a totally different set of
propositions in it if he can; as he might in the reality, if that had
been before him.

We, for our part, do not always agree in Mr. Carlyle’s opinions either
on things or on men. But we hold it to be impossible that any person
should set before himself a perfectly true picture of a great historical
event, as it actually happened, and yet that his judgment of it should
be radically wrong. Differing partially from some of Mr. Carlyle’s
detached views, we hold his theory, or theorem, of the Revolution, to be
the true theory; true as far as it goes, and wanting little of being as
complete as any theory of so vast and complicated a phenomena can be.
Nay, we do not think that any rational creature, now that the thing can
be looked at calmly, now that we have nothing to hope or to fear from
it, can form any second theory on the matter.

Mr. Carlyle’s view of the Revolution is briefly this: That it was the
breaking down of a great Imposture: which had not always been an
Imposture, but had been becoming such for several centuries.

Two bodies—the King and Feudal Nobility, and the Clergy—held their
exalted stations, and received the obedience and allegiance which were
paid to them, by virtue solely of their affording guidance to the
people: the one, directing and Edition: current; Page: [159] keeping
order among them in their conjunct operations towards the pursuit of
their most important temporal interests; the other, ministering to their
spiritual teaching and culture. These are the grounds on which alone any
government either claims obedience or finds it: for the obedience of
twenty-five millions to a few hundred thousand never yet was yielded to
avowed tyranny.

Now, this guidance, the original ground of all obedience, the privileged
classes did for centuries give. The King and the Nobles led the people
in war, and protected and judged them in peace, being the fittest
persons to do so who then existed; and the Clergy did teach the best
doctrine, did inculcate and impress upon the people the best rule of
life then known, and did believe in the doctrine and in the rule of life
which they taught, and manifested their belief by their actions, and
believed that, in teaching it, they were doing the highest thing
appointed to mortals. So far as they did this, both spiritual and
temporal rulers deserved and obtained reverence, and willing loyal
obedience. But for centuries before the French Revolution, the sincerity
which once was in this scheme of society was gradually dying out. The
King and the Nobles afforded less and less of any real guidance, of any
real protection to the people; and even ceased more and more to fancy
that they afforded any. All the important business of society went on
without them, nay, mostly in spite of their hindrance. The appointed
spiritual teachers ceased to do their duty as teachers, ceased to
practise what they taught, ceased to believe it, but alas, not to cant
about it, or to receive wages as teachers of it. Thus the whole scheme
of society and government in France became one great Lie: the places of
honour and power being all occupied by persons whose sole claim to
occupy them was the pretence of being what they were not, of doing what
they did not, nor even for a single moment attempted to do. All other
vileness and profligacy in the rulers of a country were but the
inevitable consequences of this inherent vice in the condition of their
existence. And, this continuing for centuries, the government growing
ever more and more consciously a Lie, the people ever more and more
perceiving it to be such, the day of reckoning, which comes for all
impostures, came for this: the Good would no longer obey such rulers,
the Bad ceased to be in awe of them, and both together rose up and
hurled them into chaos.

Such is Mr. Carlyle’s idea of what the Revolution was. And now, as to
the melancholy turn it took, the horrors which accompanied it, the iron
despotism by which it was forced to wind itself up, and the smallness of
its positive results, compared with those which were hoped for by the
sanguine in its commencement.

Mr. Carlyle’s theory of these things is also a simple one: That the men,
most of them good, and many of them among the most instructed of their
generation, who attempted at that period to regenerate France, failed in
what it was impossible that any one should succeed in: namely, in
attempting to found a government, to create a new order of society, a
new set of institutions and habits, among a people having no convictions
to base such order of things upon. That the existing government, habits,
state of society, were bad, this the people were thoroughly convinced
of, Edition: current; Page: [160] and rose up as one man, to declare, in
every language of deed and word, that they would no more endure it. What
was, was bad; but what was good, nobody had determined; no opinion on
that subject had rooted itself in the people’s minds; nor was there even
any person, or any body of persons, deference for whom was rooted in
their minds and whose word they were willing to take for all the rest.
Suppose, then, that the twelve hundred members of the Constituent
Assembly had even been gifted with perfect knowledge what arrangement of
society was best:—how were they to get time to establish it? Or how were
they to hold the people in obedience to it when established? A people
with no preconceived reverence, either for it or for them; a people like
slaves broke from their fetters—with all man’s boundless desires let
loose in indefinite expectation, and all the influences of habit and
imagination which keep mankind patient under the denial of what they
crave for, annihilated for the time, never to be restored but in some
quite different shape?

Faith, doubtless, in representative institutions, there was, and of the
firmest kind; but unhappily this was not enough; for all that
representative institutions themselves can do, is to give practical
effect to the faith of the people in something else. What is a
representative constitution? Simply a set of contrivances for
ascertaining the convictions of the people; for enabling them to declare
what men they have faith in; or, failing such, what things the majority
of them will insist upon having done to them—by what rule they are
willing to be governed. But what if the majority have not faith in any
men, nor know even in the smallest degree what things they wish to have
done, in what manner they would be governed? This was the condition of
the French people. To have made it otherwise was possible, but required
time; and time, unhappily, in a Revolution, is not given. A great man,
indeed, may do it, by inspiring at least faith in himself, which may
last till the tree he has planted has taken root, and can stand alone;
such apparently was Solon,* and such perhaps, had he lived, might have
been Mirabeau: nay, in the absence of other greatness, even a great
quack may temporarily do it; as Napoleon, himself a mixture of great man
and great quack, did in some measure exemplify. Revolutions sweep much
away, but if any Revolution since the beginning of the world ever
founded anything, towards which the minds of the people had not been
growing for generations previous, it has been founded by some individual
man.

Much more must be added to what has now been said, to make the statement
of Mr. Carlyle’s opinions on the French Revolution anything like
complete; nor shall Edition: current; Page: [161] we any further set
forth, either such of those opinions as we agree in, or those, far less
numerous, from which we disagree. Nevertheless, we will not leave the
subject without pointing out what appears to us to be the most prominent
defect in our author’s general mode of thinking. His own method being
that of the artist, not of the man of science—working as he does by
figuring things to himself as wholes, not dissecting them into their
parts—he appears, though perhaps it is but appearance, to entertain
something like a contempt for the opposite method; and to go as much too
far in his distrust of analysis and generalization, as others (the
Constitutional party, for instance, in the French Revolution) went too
far in their reliance upon it.

Doubtless, in the infinite complexities of human affairs, any general
theorem which a wise man will form concerning them, must be regarded as
a mere approximation to truth; an approximation obtained by striking an
average of many cases, and consequently not exactly fitting any one
case. No wise man, therefore, will stand upon his theorem
only—neglecting to look into the specialties of the case in hand, and
see what features that may present which may take it out of any theorem,
or bring it within the compass of more theorems than one. But the far
greater number of people—when they have got a formula by rote, when they
can bring the matter in hand within some maxim “in that case made and
provided” by the traditions of the vulgar, by the doctrines of their
sect or school, or by some generalization of their own—do not think it
necessary to let their mind’s eye rest upon the thing itself at all; but
deliberate and act, not upon knowledge of the thing, but upon a hearsay
of it; being (to use a frequent illustration of our author) provided
with spectacles, they fancy it not needful to use their eyes.[*] It
should be understood that general principles are not intended to
dispense with thinking and examining, but to help us to think and
examine. When the object itself is out of our reach, and we cannot
examine into it, we must follow general principles, because, by doing
so, we are not so likely to go wrong, and almost certain not to go so
far wrong, as if we floated on the boundless ocean of mere conjecture;
but when we are not driven to guess, when we have means and
appliances[†] for observing, general principles are nothing more or
other than helps towards a better use of those means and appliances.

Thus far we and Mr. Carlyle travel harmoniously together; but here we
apparently diverge. For, having admitted that general principles (or
formulae, as our author calls them, after old Mirabeau, the crabbed ami
des hommes)[‡] are helps to observation, not substitutes for it, we must
add, that they are necessary Edition: current; Page: [162] helps, and
that without general principles no one ever observed a particular case
to any purpose. For, except by general principles, how do we bring the
light of past experience to bear upon the new case? The essence of past
experience lies embodied in those logical, abstract propositions, which
our author makes so light of:—there, and no where else. From them we
learn what has ordinarily been found true, or even recal what we
ourselves have found true, in innumerable unnamed and unremembered
cases, more or less resembling the present. We are hence taught, at the
least, what we shall probably find true in the present case; and
although this, which is only a probability, may be lazily acquiesced in
and acted upon without further inquiry as a certainty, the risk even so
is infinitely less than if we began without a theory, or even a probable
hypothesis. Granting that all the facts of the particular instance are
within the reach of observation, how difficult is the work of observing,
how almost impossible that of disentangling a complicated case, if, when
we begin, no one view of it appears to us more probable than another.
Without a hypothesis to commence with, we do not even know what end to
begin at, what points to enquire into. Nearly every thing that has ever
been ascertained by scientific observers, was brought to light in the
attempt to test and verify some theory. To start from a theory, but not
to see the object through the theory; to bring light with us, but also
to receive other light from whencesoever it comes; such is the part of
the philosopher, of the true practical seer or person of insight.

Connected with the tendency which we fancy we perceive in our author, to
undervalue general principles, is another tendency which we think is
perceptible in him, to set too low a value on what constitutions and
forms of government can do. Be it admitted once for all, that no form of
government will enable you, as our author has elsewhere said, “given a
world of rogues, to produce an honesty by their united action;”[*] nor
when a people are wholly without faith either in man or creed, has any
representative constitution a charm to render them governable well, or
even governable at all. On the other hand, Mr. Carlyle must no less
admit, that when a nation has faith in any men, or any set of
principles, representative institutions furnish the only regular and
peaceable mode in which that faith can quietly declare itself, and those
men, or those principles, obtain the predominance. It is surely no
trifling matter to have a legalized means whereby the guidance will
always be in the hands of the Acknowledged Wisest, who, if not always
the really wisest, are at least those whose wisdom, such as it may be,
is the most available for the purpose. Doubtless it is the natural law
of representative governments that the power is shared, in varying
proportions, between the really skilfullest and the skilfullest quacks;
with a tendency, in easy times, towards the preponderance of Edition:
current; Page: [163] the quacks, in the “times which try men’s
souls,”[*] towards that of the true men. Improvements enough may be
expected as mankind improve, but that the best and wisest shall always
be accounted such, that we need not expect; because the quack can always
steal, and vend for his own profit, as much of the good ware as is
marketable. But is not all this to the full as likely to happen in every
other kind of government as in a representative one? with these
differences in favour of representative government, which will be found
perhaps to be its only real and universal pre-eminence: That it alone is
government by consent—government by mutual compromise and compact; while
all others are, in one form or another, governments by constraint: That
it alone proceeds by quiet muster of opposing strengths, when that which
is really weakest sees itself to be such, and peaceably gives way; a
benefit never yet realized but in countries inured to a representative
government; elsewhere nothing but actual blows can show who is
strongest, and every great dissension of opinion must break out into a
civil war.

We have thus briefly touched upon the two principal points on which we
take exception, not so much to any opinion of the author, as to the tone
of sentiment which runs through the book; a tone of sentiment which
otherwise, for justness and nobleness, stands almost unrivalled in the
writings of our time. A deep catholic sympathy with human nature, with
all natural human feelings, looks out from every page of these volumes;
justice administered in love, to all kind of human beings, bad and good;
the most earnest exalted feeling of moral distinctions, with the most
generous allowances for whatever partial confounding of these
distinctions, either natural weakness or perverse circumstances can
excuse. No greatness, no strength, no goodness or lovingness, passes
unrecognized or unhonoured by him. All the sublimity of “the
simultaneous death-defiance of twenty-five millions”[†] speaks itself
forth in his pages—not the less impressively, because the unspeakable
folly and incoherency, which always in real life are not one step from,
but actually pervade, the sublimities of so large a body (and did so
most notably in this instance) are no less perceptible to his keen sense
of the ludicrous. We presume it is this which has caused the book to be
accused, even in print, of “flippancy,” a term which appears to us
singularly misapplied.[‡] For is not this mixture and confused
entanglement of the great and the contemptible, precisely what we meet
with in nature? and would not a history, which did not make us not only
see this, but feel it, be deceptive; and give an impression which would
be the more false, the greater the general vivacity and vigour of the
delineation? And indeed the capacity to see and feel what is loveable,
admirable, Edition: current; Page: [164] in a thing, and what is
laughable in it, at the same time, constitutes humour; the quality to
which we owe a Falstaff, a Parson Adams, an Uncle Toby, and Mause
Headriggs and Barons of Bradwardine without end.[*] You meet in this
book with passages of grave drollery (drollery unsought for, arising
from the simple statement of facts, and a true natural feeling of them)
not inferior to the best in Mr. Peacock’s novels; and immediately or
soon after comes a soft note as of dirge music, or solemn choral song of
old Greek tragedy, which makes the heart too full for endurance, and
forces you to close the book and rest for a while.

Again, there are aphorisms which deserve to live for ever; characters
drawn with a few touches, and indicating a very remarkable insight into
many of the obscurest regions of human nature; much genuine philosophy,
disguised though it often be in a poetico-metaphysical vesture of a most
questionable kind; and, in short, new and singular but not therefore
absurd or unpractical views taken of many important things. A most
original book; original not least in its complete sincerity, its
disregard of the merely conventional: every idea and sentiment is given
out exactly as it is thought and felt, fresh from the soul of the
writer, and in such language (conformable to precedent or not) as is
most capable of representing it in the form in which it exists there.
And hence the critics have begun to call the style “affected;”[†] a term
which conventional people, whether in literature or society, invariably
bestow upon the unreservedly natural.*

In truth, every book which is eminently original, either in matter or
style, has a hard battle to fight before it can obtain even pardon for
its originality, much less applause. Well, therefore, may this be the
case when a book is original, not in matter only or in style only, but
in both; and, moreover, written in prose, with a Edition: current; Page:
[165] fervour and exaltation of feeling which is only tolerated in
verse, if even there. And when we consider that Wordsworth, Coleridge,
and others of their time, whose deviation from the beaten track was but
a stone’s throw compared with Mr. Carlyle, were ignominiously hooted out
of court by the wise tribunals which in those days dispensed justice in
such matters, and had to wait for a second generation before the
sentence could be reversed, and their names placed among the great names
of our literature, we might well imagine that the same or a worse fate
awaits Mr. Carlyle; did we not believe that those very writers, aided by
circumstances, have made straight the way[*] for Mr. Carlyle and for
much else. This very phenomenon, of the different estimation of
Wordsworth and Coleridge, now, and thirty years ago, is among the
indications of one of the most conspicuous new elements which have
sprung up in the European mind during those years: an insatiable demand
for realities, come of conventionalities and formalities what may; of
which desire the literary phasis is, a large tolerance for every feeling
which is natural and not got-up, for every picture taken from the life
and not from other pictures, however it may clash with traditionary
notions of elegance or congruity. The book before us needs to be read
with this catholic spirit; if we read it captiously, we shall never have
done finding fault. But no true poet, writing sincerely and following
the promptings of his own genius, can fail to be contemptible to any who
desire to find him so; and if even Milton’s Areopagitica,[†] of which
now, it would seem, no one dares speak with only moderate praise, were
now first to issue from the press, it would be turned from with contempt
by every one who will think or speak disparagingly of this work of Mr.
Carlyle.

We add one short extract more from near the end of the book; a summing
up, as it were, of the morality of the great catastrophe:

The Convention, now grown Anti-Jacobin, did, with an eye to justify and
fortify itself, publish lists of what the Reign of Terror had
perpetrated—lists of persons guillotined. The lists, cries splenetic
Abbé Montgaillard, were not complete. They contain the names of—how many
persons thinks the reader?—Two Thousand all but a few. There were above
four thousand, cries Montgaillard, so many were guillotined, fusilladed,
noyaded, done to dire death; of whom nine hundred were women.[‡] It is a
horrible sum of human lives, M. l’Abbé; some ten times as many shot
rightly on a field of battle, and one might have had his
Glorious-Victory with Te Deum. It is not far from the two-hundredth part
of what perished in the entire Seven Years’ War. By which Seven Years’
War, did not the great Fritz wrench Silesia from the great Theresa; and
a Pompadour, stung by epigrams, satisfy herself that she could not be an
Agnes Sorel? The head of man is a strange vacant sounding-shell, M.
l’Abbé, and studies Cocker to small purpose.[§]

Edition: current; Page: [166]
But what if History, somewhere on this planet, were to hear of a Nation,
the third soul of whom had not, for thirty weeks each year, as many
third-rate potatoes as would sustain him? History, in that case, feels
bound to consider that starvation is starvation: that starvation from
age to age presupposes much: History ventures to assert that the French
Sansculotte of ninety-three, who, roused from long death-sleep, could
rush at once to the frontiers and die fighting for an immortal Hope and
Faith of Deliverance for him and his, was but the second-miserablest of
men! The Irish Sans-potato, had he not senses then; nay, a soul? In his
frozen darkness, it was bitter for him to die famishing; bitter to see
his children famish. It was bitter for him to be a beggar, a liar, and a
knave. Nay, if that dreary Greenland-wind of benighted Want, perennial
from sire to son, had frozen him into a kind of torpor and numb
callosity, so that he saw not, felt not, was this, for a creature with a
soul in it, some assuagement, or the cruellest wretchedness of all?

Such things were—such things are: and they go on in silence peaceably,
and Sansculottisms follow them. History, looking back over this France
through long times, back to Turgot’s time, for instance, when dumb
Drudgery staggered up to its King’s Palace, and in wide expanse of
sallow faces, squalor and winged raggedness, presented,
hieroglyphically, its Petition of Grievances, and for answer got hanged
on a “new gallows forty feet high,”[*]—confesses, mournfully, that there
is no period to be met with, in which the general twenty-five millions
of France suffered less than in this period which they name Reign of
Terror! But it was not the Dumb Millions that suffered here; it was the
Speaking Thousands, and Hundreds, and Units, who shrieked, and
published, and made the world ring with their wail, as they could and
should that is the grand peculiarity. The frightfullest Births of Time
are never the loud speaking ones, for these soon die, they are the
silent ones which can live from century to century! Anarchy, hateful as
Death, is abhorrent to the whole nature of man, and so must itself soon
die.

Wherefore let all men know what of depth and of height is still revealed
in man, and, with fear and wonder, with just sympathy and just
antipathy, with clear eye and open heart, contemplate it and appropriate
it; and draw innumerable inferences from it. This inference, for
example, among the first.—That “if the gods of this lower world will sit
on their glittering thrones, indolent as Epicurus’ gods, with the living
Chaos of Ignorance and Hunger weltering uncared for at their feet, and
smooth Parasites preaching Peace, peace, when there is no peace,” then
the dark chaos, it seems, will rise. . . . That there be no second
Sansculottism in our earth for a thousand years, let us understand well
what the first was: and let Rich and Poor of us go and do otherwise.[†]


Armand Carrel

athese little works area the tribute paid by btwob distinguished
cwritersc to one whose memory, though he was but shown to the world, the
world will not, and must not be suffered to let die.[*] Cut off at the
age of thirty-six by that union of misfortune and fault (Schicksal und
eigene Schuld)[†] to which it has been asserted that all human
miscarriages are imputable, he lived long enough to show that he was one
of the few, never dso few as in these latter timesd, who seem raised up
to turn the balance of events at some trying moment in the history of
nations, and to have or to want whom, at critical periods, is the
salvation or the destruction of an era.

eWe seize fthef opportunity to contribute what we can, as well from our
own knowledge as from the materials supplied by MM. Nisard and Littré,
towards a true picture of a man, more worthy to be known, and more fit
to be imitated, than any who has occupied a position in European
politics for many years. It has not been given to those who knew Carrel,
to see him in any of those situations of outward power and honour, to
which he would certainly have forced his way, and which, instead of
being honours to ghimg, it was reserved for him perhaps to rescue from
ignominy. The man whom not only his friends but his enemies, and all
France, would have proclaimed President or Prime Minister with one
voice, if any of the changes of this changeable time had again given
ascendancy to the people’s side, is goneh; and his place is not likely
to be again filled in our time. But there iarei left to us his memory,
and his example jWe can stillj remember and meditate Edition: current;
Page: [170] on what he was, how much and under how great disadvantages
he accomplished, and what he would have been. We can learn from the
study of him, what we all, but especially those of kindred principles
and aspirations, must be, if we would make those principles effectual
for good, those aspirations realities, and not the mere dreams of an
idle and self-conceited imagination.

Who, then, and what was Armand Carrel? “An editor of a republican
newspaper,” exclaims some English Tory, in a voice kbyk which it is
doubtful whether the word “republican” or “newspaper” is uttered linl
the most scornful intonation. Carrel was the editor of a republican
newspaper: his glory consists precisely in this, that being that, and by
being that, he was mthe greatest political leader of his timem. And we
do not mean by a political leader one who can create and keep together a
political party, or who can give it importance in the State, or nevenn
who can make it deserve importance, but who can do any and every one of
all these, and do them with an easy superiority of genius and character,
which renders competition hopeless. Such was Carrel, Ripened by years
and favoured by opportunity, he might have been the Mirabeau or the
Washington of his age, or both in one.

The life of Carrel may be written in a few sentences. “Armand Carrel,”
says M. Littré,

was a sub-lieutenant and a journalist: in that narrow circle was
included the life of a man who, dying in the flower of youth, leaves a
name known to all France, and lamented even by his political enemies.
His celebrity came not from the favour of governments, nor from those
elevated functions which give an easy opportunity of acquiring
distinction, or, at the least, notoriety. Implicated in the conspiracies
against the Restoration, an officer in the service of the Spanish
Constitution, taken prisoner in Catalonia and condemned to death; bold
in the opposition before the July Revolution, still bolder after it; he
was always left to his own resources, so as never to pass for more than
his intrinsic worth: no borrowed lustre was ever shed on him; he had no
station but that which he created for himself. Fortune, the inexplicable
chance which distributes cannon-balls in a battle, and which has so
large a dominion in human affairs, did little or nothing for him, he had
no “star,” no “run of luck;” and no one ever was less the product of
favourable circumstances: he sought them not, and they came not. Force
of character in difficult times, admirable talents as a writer at all
times, nobleness of soul towards friends and enemies; these were what
sustained him, and gave him in all quarters and in all times, not only
an elevated place in the esteem of men, but an ascendancy over them.[*]

Thus far M. Littré, a man who does not cast his words at random—a
witness, whose opinions indeed are those of Carrel, but whose life is
devoted to other pursuits than politics, and whose simplicity and purity
of character, esteemed by Edition: current; Page: [171] men who do not
share his opinions, peculiarly qualified him to declare of Carrel that
which othe besto men in France, of whatever party or shade of opinion,
feel, M. Nisard, the representative of a much fainter shade of
liberalism than M. Littré, does but fill up the same outline with
greater richness of detail, with the addition of many interesting traits
of personal character, and with a more analytical philosophy. From the
two together we have learned the facts of the early life of Carrel, and
many particulars of his habits and disposition, which could be known
only to familiar companions. On the great features which make up a
character, they show us almost nothing in Carrel which we had not
ourselves seen in him: but, in what they have communicated, we find all
those details which justify our general idea; and their recollections
bear to our own the natural relation between likenesses of the same
figure taken from different points. We can therefore, with increased
confidence, attempt to describe what Carrel was; what the world has lost
in him, and in what it mayp profit by his example.

The circumstance most worthy of commemoration in Carrel is not that he
was an unblemished patriot in a time of general political corruption;
others have been that, others are so even at present. Nor is it that he
was the first political writer of his time: he could not have been this,
if he had not been something to which his character as a writer was
merely subsidiary. There are no great writers but those whose qualities
as writers are built upon their qualities as human beings—are the mere
manifestation and expression of those qualities: all besides is hollow
and meretricious, and if a writer who assumes a stile for the sake of
stile, ever acquires a place in literature, it is in so far as he
qassumesq the stile of those rwhose stile is not assumedr; of those to
whom language altogether is but the utterance of stheir feelings, or the
means to their practical endss.

Carrel was one of these; and it may even be said that tbeing a writer
was to him merely an accident. He was neither by character nor by
preference a man of speculation and discussion, for whom the press, if
still but a means, is the best and often the sole means of fulfilling
his vocation. The career of an administrator or that of a umilitary
commanderu would have been more to Carrel’s taste, and in either of them
he would vprobablyv have excelled. The true idea of Carrel is not that
of a literary man, but of a man of action, using the press as his
instrument; and in no other aspect does his character deserve more to be
studied by those of all countries, whow are qualified to resemble him.

Edition: current; Page: [172]
He was a man called to take an active part in the government of mankind,
and needing an engine with which to move them. Had his lot been cast in
the cabinet or in the camp, of the cabinet or of the camp he would have
made his instrument. Fortune did not give him such a destiny, and his
xprinciplesx did not permit him the means by which he could have
acquired it. Thus excluded from the region of deeds, he had still that
of words; and words are deeds, and the cause of deeds. Carrel was not
the first to see, but he was the first practically to realize, the new
destination of the political press in modern times. It is now beginning
to be felt that journalism is to modern Europe what political oratory
was to Athens and Rome, and that, to become what it ought, it should be
wielded by the same sort of men: Carrel seized the sceptre of
journalism, and with that, as with the ybatony of a general-in-chief,z
ruled amidst innumerable difficulties and reverses that “fierce
democracy,”[*] which he perhaps alone of all men living, trampled upon
and irritated as it has been, could have rendered at once gentle and
apowerfula.

Such a position did Carrel occupy, for a few short years in the history
of his time. A brief survey of the incidents of his career and the
circumstances of his country, will show how he bacquittedb himself in
this situation. That he committed no mistakes in it, we are nowise
concerned to prove. We may even, with the cmodestyc befitting a distant
observer, express our opinion as to what his mistakes were. But we have
neither known nor read of any man of whom dit could be saidd with
assurance that, in Carrel’s circumstances and at his years, he would
have committed fewer; and we are certain that there ehavee been none
whose achievements would have been greater, for whosef errors nobler or
more nobly redeemed.

Carrel was the son of a merchant of Rouen. He was intended for business,
but his early passion for a military career induced his father (a
decided royalist) to send him to the Ecole Militaire of St. Cyr. “His
literary studies,” says M. Nisard,

were much neglected. He himself has told me that, although one of the
best scholars in capacity, he was one of the most moderate in
attainment. His military predilections showed themselves, even at
school, in the choice of his reading. His favourite authors were the
Edition: current; Page: [173] historians, especially where they treated
of military events.g All other studies he was impatient of, and they
profited him little. I have heard him say, however, that Virgil made an
impression on him, and he has sometimes repeated verses to me which his
memory had retained unforgotten, though never again read. . . . After
leaving school, and while preparing for St. Cyr, he directed his studies
exclusively to history and the strategic art. At St. Cyr he devoted to
the same occupation all the time which the duties of the place allowed
him.[*]

On leaving St. Cyr he entered the army as a sub-lieutenant, the grade
answering in the French army to that of an ensign in the English.

In this early direction of the tastes and pursuits of Carrel, we may
trace the cause of almost his only defects, and of his greatest
qualities. From it he doubtless derived the practicalness (if the word
may be pardoned) in which the more purely speculative Frenchmen of the
present day (constituting a large proportion of the most accomplished
minds of our age) it may be said without disrespect to them, are
generally deficient; and of which in England we have too much, with but
little of the nobler quality which in Carrel it served to temper and
rein in. It is easy to be practical, in a society all practical: there
is a practicalness which comes by nature, to those who know hlittleh and
aspire to nothing, exactly this is the sort which the vulgar form of the
English mind exemplifies, and which all the English institutions of
education, whatever else they may teach, are studiously conservative of,
but the atmosphere which kills so much thought, sobers what it spares,
and the English who think at all, speculating under the restraining
influence of such a medium, are guided more often than the thinkers of
other countries into the practicalness which, instead of chaining up the
spirit of speculation, lights its path and makes safe its footsteps.

What is done for the best English thinkers by the influences of the
society in which they igrow upi, was done for Carrel by the inestimable
advantage of an education and pursuits which had for their object not
thinking or talking, but doing. jHe who thinks without any experience in
action, or without having action perpetually in view; whose mind has
never had anything to do but to form conceptions, without ever measuring
itself or them with realities,j may be a great man; thoughts may
originate with him, for which the world may bless him to the latest
generationsk. There ought to be such men, for they see many things which
Edition: current; Page: [174] even wise and strong minds, which are
engrossed with active life, never can be the first to see. But the man
to lead his age is he who has been familiar with thought directed to the
accomplishment of immediate objects, and who has been accustomed to see
his theories brought early and promptly to the test of experiment; the
man who has seen at the end of every theorem to be investigated, a
problem to be solved; who has learned early to weigh the means which can
be exerted against the obstacles which are to be overcome, and to make
an estimate of means and of obstacles habitually a part of all his
theories that have for their object practice, either at the present or
at a more distant period. This was essentially Carrel’s distinguishing
character among lthe popular party in his own country;l and it is a side
of his character which, naturally perhaps, has hardly yet been enough
appreciated in France. In it he resembled Napoleon, who had learnt it in
the same school, and who by it mastered and ruled, as far as so selfish
a man could, his country and age. But Napoleon’s really narrow and
imperfectly cultivated mind, and his peremptory will, turned aside
contemptuously from all speculation, and all attempt to stand up for
speculation, as bavardagem. Carrel, born at a more fortunate time, and
belonging to a generation whose best heads and hearts war and the
guillotine had not swept away, had an intellect capacious enough to
appreciate and sympathize with whatever of truth nandn ultimate value to
mankind there might be in all theories, together with a rootedly
practical turn of mind, which seized and appropriated to itself such
part only of them as might be realized, or at least might be hoped to be
realized, in his own day. As with all generous spirits, his hopes
sometimes deceived him as to what his country was ripe for; but a short
experience always corrected his mistake, and warned him to point his
efforts towards some more attainable end.

Carrel entered into life, and into a military life, at a peculiar
period. By foreign force, and under circumstances humiliating to the
military pride of the nation, the Bourbons had been brought back. With
them had returned the emigrants with their feudal prejudices, the
ultra-Catholics with their bigotry and pretensions to priestly
domination. Louis XVIII, taking the advice of Fouché, though in a
different sense from that in which it was given, had lain down in the
bed of Napoleon, “s’était couché dans les draps de Napoléon”—had
preserved that vast net-work of administrative tyranny which did not
exist under the old French government, which the Convention created for
a temporary purpose, and which Napoleon made permanent;[*] that system
of obureaucracyo, which leaves no free agent in all Edition: current;
Page: [175] France, except the man at Paris who pulls the wires; which
regulates from a distance of several hundred miles, the repairing of a
shed or the cutting down of a tree, and allows not the people to stir a
finger even in their local affairs, except indeed by such writing and
printing as a host of restrictive laws permitted to them, and (if they
paid 300 francs or upwards in direct taxes) by electing and sending to
Paris the two-hundredth or three-hundredth pfractionalp part of a
representative, there to vote such things as the Charter of Louis XVIII
placed within the competency of the national council.[*] That Charter,
extorted from the prudence of Louis by the necessities of the times, and
“broken ere its ink was dried,” alone stood between France and a dark,
soul-stifling and mind-stifling despotism, combining qsome ofq the worst
of the evils which the Revolution and Napoleon had cleared away, with
the worst of those which they had brought.

By a combination of good sense and rfollyr, of which it is difficult to
say which swass most profitable to the cause of freedom, the Bourbons
saw the necessity of giving a representative constitution, but not that
of allying themselves with the class in whose hands that constitution
had placed so formidable a power. They would have found them tractable
enough; witness the present ruler of France,[†] who has “lain down in
the sheets of Napoleon” with considerably more effect. The Constitution
of 1814, like that of 1830 which followed it, gave a share of the
governing power exclusively to the rich:[‡] if the Bourbons would but
have allied themselves with the majority of the rich instead of the
minority, they would have been on the throne now, and with as absolute a
power as any of their predecessors, so long as they conformed to that
condition. But they would not do it: they would not see that the only
aristocracy possible in a wealthy community, is an aristocracy of
wealth: Louis during the greater part of his reign, and Charles during
the whole of his, bestowed exclusively upon the classes which had been
powerful once, those favours which, had they been tsharedt with the
classes which were powerful unowu, would have rendered the majority of
those classes the most devoted adherents of the throne. For the sake of
classes who had no longer vthe principalv weight in the country, and
whose power was associated with the recollections of Edition: current;
Page: [176] wallw which the country xmostx detested, the Bourbons not
only slighted the new aristocracy, but kept both them and the people in
perpetual alarm, both for ywhatevery was dearest to them in the
institutions which the Revolution had given, and which had been cheaply
purchased by the sacrifice of a whole generation, and even for the
“material interests”[*] (such as those of the possessors of national
property) which had grown out of the Revolution, and were identified
with it. The Chamber of Deputies, therefore, or, as it might have been
called, the new Estate of the Rich, worked like the Comitia Centuriata
of the Roman Commonwealth, which, in this respect, it resembled. Like
the Comitia Centuriata, it was, from the principle of its constitution,
the organ of the rich; and like that, it served as an organ for popular
purposes so long as the predominant section of the rich, being excluded
from a direct share in the government, had a common interest with the
people. This result might have been foreseen; but the Bourbons either
did not foresee it, or thought themselves strong enough to prevent it.

At the time, however, when Carrel first entered into life, any one might
have been excused for thinking that the Bourbons, if they had made a bad
calculation for the ultimate zdurationz of their dynasty, had made a
good one for aits present interestsa. They had bput down,b with
triumphant success, a first attempt at resistance by the new
aristocracy.

A Chamber of furious royalists, elected immediately after the second
restoration (afterwards with affectionate remembrance called the chambre
introuvable, from the impossibility of ever cagainc getting a similar
one), had sanctioned or tolerated excesses against the opposite party,
worthy only of the dmostd sanguinary times of the Revolution; and had
carried their enterprises in behalf of feudalism and bigotry to a pitch
of rashness by which Louis, who was no fanatic, was seriously alarmed:
and in September 1817, amidst the applauses of all France, he dissolved
the Chamber, and called to his councils a semi-liberal ministry. The
indignation and alarm excited by the conduct of the royalists, produced
a reaction among the classes possessed of property, in favour of
liberalism. By the law as it then stood, a fifth part of the Chamber
went out every year:[†] the elections in 1818 produced Edition: current;
Page: [177] hardly any but liberals; those in 1819 did the same; and
those of 1820, it was evident, would give the liberal party a majority.
The electoral body too, as, fortunately, electoral bodies are wont, had
not confined its choice to men who represented exactly its own interests
and sentiments, but had mingled with them the ablest and most honoured
of its temporary allies, the defenders of the “good old cause.”[*] The
new aristocracy could still hear, and not repudiate, the doctrines of
1789, pronounced with the limitations dictated by experience, from the
eloquent lips of Foy, and Benjamin Constant, and Manuel. It could still
patronize a newspaper press, efree for the first time since 1792e, which
raised its voice for those doctrines, and for an interpretation of the
charter in the spirit of them. Even among the monied classes themselves
there arose, as in all aristocracies there will, some men whose talents
or sympathies make them the organs of a better cause than that off
aristocracy. Casimir Périer had not yet sunk the defender of the people
in the defender of his counting-house; and Laffitte was then what he is
still, and will be to the end of his disinterested and generous career.
Among the new members of the legislature there was even found the Abbé
Grégoire, one of the worthiest and most respected characters in France,
but a gconspicuous member of the Montagne party in the Conventiong.*

This rapid progress of the popular party to ascendancy was not what
Louis had intended: he wished to keep the liberals as a counterpoise to
the priestly party, but it never entered into his purposes that they
should predominate in the legislature. His “système de bascule”,
literally hsystem of see-sawh, of playing off one party against another,
and maintaining his influence by throwing it always into the scale of
the weakest, required that the next move should be to the royalist side.
Demonstrations were therefore made towards a modification of the
electoral law; to take effect while the anti-popular party had still a
majority, before the dreaded period of the next annual elections. At
this crisis, when the fate of parties hung trembling in the balance, the
Duc de Berri, heir presumptive to the throne, fell by the hand of an
assassin. This catastrophe, industriously imputed to the renewed
propagation of revolutionary principles, excited general horror and
alarm. The new aristocracy recoiled from their alliance with liberalism.
The crime of Louvel was as serviceable to the immediate objects of those
against whom it was Edition: current; Page: [178] perpetrated, as the
crime of Fieschi has been since. A change of ministry took place; laws
were passed restrictive of the press, and a law which, while it kept
within the letter of the charter by not disfranchising any of the
electors, created within the electoral body a smaller body returning an
additional number of representatives.[*] The elections which took place
in consequence, gave a decided majority to the feudal and priestly
party; an ultra-royalist ministry was appointed; and the triumph of the
iretrogradesi, the party of ancient privileges, seemed assured.

It is incident to a country accustomed to a state of revolution, that
the party which is defeated by peaceful means will try violent ones. The
popular party in France was now in a similar situation to the popular
party in England during the royalist reaction which followed the
dissolution of the last parliament of Charles II. Like them, they had
recourse to what Carrel afterwards, in his History of the
Counter-Revolution in England, called “the refuge of weak parties,”
conspiracy.[†] The military revolutions in Spain, Portugal, and Naples,
had jinspiredj many ardent spirits in France kwith a desire to follow
the examplek: from 1820 to 1822 lCarbonarol societies spread themselves
over France, and military conspiracies continually broke out and were
suppressed. It would have been surprising if Carrel, whose favourite
heroes even at school were Hoche, Marceau, and Kléber, whose democratic
opinions had attracted the notice of his superiors at St. Cyr, and to
whose youthful aspirations no glory attainable to him appeared equal to
that of the successful general of a liberating army, had not been
implicated in some of these conspiracies. Like almost all the bravest
and most patriotic of the young men in his rank of society entertaining
liberal opinions, he paid his tribute to the folly of the day; and he
had a narrow escape from discovery, of which M. Littré gives the
following narrative.

Carrel was a sub-lieutenant in the 29th of the line, in 1821, when
conspiracies were forming in every quarter against the Restoration. The
29th was in garrison at Béfort and New Brisach. Carrel was quartered in
the latter place. He was engaged in the plot since called the conspiracy
of Béfort. The officers at New Brisach who were in the secret, were
discouraged by repeated delays, and would not stir until the
insurrection should have exploded at Béfort. It was indispensable,
however, that they should move as soon as the blow should have been
successfully struck in the latter place. The Grand Lodge (of Edition:
current; Page: [179] Carbonari) had sent from Paris several
conspirators, one of them. M. Joubert, had come to New Brisach, to see
what was to be done; Carrel offered to go with him to Béfort, to join in
the movement, and bring back the news to New Brisach. Both set off, and
arrived at Béfort towards midnight. The plot had been discovered,
several persons had been arrested, the conspirators were dispersed.
Carrel rode back to New Brisach at full gallop, and arrived early in the
morning. He had time to return to his quarters, put on his uniform, and
attend the morning exercise, without any one’s suspecting that he had
been out all night. When an inquiry was set on foot to discover the
accomplices of the Béfort conspirators, and especially to find who it
was that had gone thither from New Brisach, nothing could be discovered,
and suspicion rested upon any one rather than Carrel, for his careless
levity of manner had made his superiors consider him a man quite
unlikely to be engaged in plots.[*]

Nine years later, M. Joubert was heading the party which stormed the
Louvre on the 29th of July, and Carrel had signed the protest of the
forty-two journalists, and given, by an article in the National, the
first signal of resistance.[†] This is not the only instance in the
recent history of France, when, as during the first French Revolution,
names lost sight of for a time, meet us again at the critical moments.

These attempts at insurrection did the Bourbons no damage, but caused
them some uneasiness with regard to the fidelity of the army. The
counter-revolutionary party, however, was now under the conduct of the
only man of judgment and sagacity who has appeared in that party since
the Revolution; M. de Villèle. This minister madopted (though, it is
said, with misgiving and reluctance)m the bold idea of conquering the
disaffection of the army by sending it to fight against its principles.
He knew that with men in the position and in the state of feeling in
which it was, all depended on the first step, and that if it could but
be induced to fire one shot for the drapeau blanc against the tricolore,
its implicit obedience might be reckoned on for a long time to come.n
Accordingly, constitutional France took the field against constitutional
government in Spain, as constitutional England had done before in
France—in order that Ferdinand, save the mark! might be restored to the
enjoyment of liberty: and the history of the campaign, by which he was
restored to it, ofurnisheso a curious picture of a victorious army
putting down by force those with whom it sympathized, and protecting
them against the vengeance of allies whom it despised and detested.

At this period, political refugees, and other ardent lovers of freedom,
especially military men, flocked to the Spanish standard; even England,
as it may be remembered, contributing her share, in the persons of Sir
Robert Wilson and others. Carrel, already obnoxious by his opinions to
his superior officers, and now placed between the dictates of his
conscience and those of military discipline, Edition: current; Page:
[180] acted like Major Cartwright at the opening of the American war: he
threw up his commission rather than fight in a cause he pabhorredp.
Having done this, he did what Major Cartwright did not: he joined the
opposite party, passed over to Barcelona in a Spanish fishing-boat, and
took service in the “foreign liberal legion,”[*] commanded by a
distinguished officer, Colonel Pachiarotti, an Italian exile.

We shall not trace Carrel through the vicissitudes of this campaign,
which was full of hardships, and abounded in incidents honourable to him
both as an officer and as a man. It is well known that in Catalonia the
invading army experienced from Mina, Milans, and their followers, almost
the only vigorous resistance it had to encounter; and in this resistance
the foreign legion, in which Carrel served, bore a conspicuous part.
Carrel himself has sketched the history of the contest in two articles
in the Revue Française, qmuch remarked at the timeq for their
impartiality and statesmanlike views, and which first established his
reputation as a writer.[†]

In September 1823, the gallant Pachiarotti had already fallen; supported
on horseback by Carrel during a long retreat after he was mortally
wounded, and recommending with his dying breath to the good offices of
the rpersons presentr, “ce brave et noble jeune homme.” What remained of
the legion, after having had, in an attempt to relieve Figueras, two
desperate encounters with superior force, at Llado and Llers, in which
it lost half its numbers, capitulated,* and Carrel became the prisoner
of his former commanding officer, the Baron de Damas. As a condition of
the surrender, M. de Damas pledged himself to use his utmost exertions
for obtaining the pardon of all the French who were included in the
capitulation. Though such a pledge was formally binding only on the
officer who gave it, no government could without sdishonours have
refused to fulfil its conditions; least of all the French cabinet, of
which M. de Damas almost immediately afterwards became a member. But the
rancour which felt itself restrained from greater acts of
vindictiveness, with characteristic littleness took refuge in smaller
ones. Contrary to the express promise of M. de Damas (on whose Edition:
current; Page: [181] individual honour, however, no imputation appears
to rest), and in disregard of the fact that Carrel had ceased to be a
member of the army before he committed any act contrary to its laws, the
prisoners, both officers and soldiers, were thrown into gaol, and Carrel
was among the first selected to be tried by military law before a
military tribunal. The first court-martial declared itself incompetent.
A second was appointed, and ordered to consider itself competent. By
this second court-martial he was found guilty, and sentenced to death.
He appealed to a superior court, which annulled the sentence, on purely
technical grounds. The desire of petty vengeance was now somewhat
appeased. After about nine months of rigorous and unwholesome
confinement, which he employed in diligent studies, chiefly historical,
Carrel was brought a third time to trial before a third court-martial,
and acquitted; and was once again, at the age of twenty-four, turned
loose upon the world.

After some hesitations, and a struggle between the wishes of his family,
which pointed to a counting-house, and his own consciousness of
faculties suited for a different sphere, he became secretary to M.
Augustin Thierry, one of that remarkable constellation of tcotemporaryt
authors who have placed France at the head of modern historical
literature. Carrel assisted M. Thierry (whose sight, since totally lost,
had already been weakened by his labours) in collecting the materials
for the concluding volume of his longest work, The History of the
Conquest of England by the Normans:[*] and it was by M. Thierry’s advice
that Carrel determined to make literature his profession. M. Nisard
gives an interesting account of the manner in which the doubts and
anxieties of Carrel’s mother gave way before the authority of M.
Thierry’s reputation.

During this period, Carrel’s mother made a journey to Paris M. Thierry’s
letters had not removed her uneasiness; the humble life of a man of
letters did not give her confidence, and did not seem to be particularly
flattering to her. She needed that M. Thierry should renew his former
assurances, and should, in a manner, stand surety for the literary
capacity and for the future success of her son. At two different
meetings with M. Thierry, she made a direct appeal to him to that effect
“Vous croyez donc, Monsieur, que mon fils fait bien, et qu’il aura une
carrière?” “Je réponds de lui,” answered M. Thierry, “comme de moi-même:
j’ai quelqu’expérience des vocations littéraires: votre fils a toutes
les qualités qui réussissent aujourd’hui.” While he thus spoke, Madame
Carrel fixed upon him a penetrating look, as if to distinguish what was
the prompting of truth, from what might be the effect of mere
politeness, and a desire to encourage. The young man himself listened in
respectful silence, submissive, and according to M. Thierry almost
timid, before his mother, whose decision and firmness of mind had great
sway over him. Carrel, in this, bowed only to his own qualities: what
awed him in his mother was the quality by which afterwards, as a public
man, he himself overawed others. The first meeting had left Madame
Carrel still doubtful. M. Thierry, pressed between two inflexible wills,
the mother requiring of him almost to Edition: current; Page: [182]
become personally responsible for her son, the son silently but in
intelligible language pledging himself that the guarantee should not be
forfeited, had doubtless at the second meeting expressed himself still
more positively. Madame Carrel returned to Rouen less uneasy and more
convinced.[*]

Here then closes the first period of the life of Carrel; and the second,
that of his strictly literary life, begins. This lasted till the
foundation of the National, a few months before the Revolution of July.

The period of six years, of which we have now to speak, formed the
culminating point of one of the most brilliant developments of the
French national mind: a development which for intensity and rapidity,
and if not for duration, for the importance of its durable consequences,
has not many parallels in history. A large income not being in France,
for persons in a certain rank of society, a necessary of life; and the
pursuit of money being therefore not so engrossing an object as it is
here, there is nothing to prevent the whole of the most gifted young men
of a generation from devoting themselves to literature or science, if
favourable circumstances combine to render it fashionable to do so. Such
a conjuncture of circumstances was presented by the state of France, at
the time when the Spanish war and its results seemed to have riveted on
the necks of the French people the yoke of the feudal and sacerdotal
party for many years to come. The Chamber was closed to all under the
age of forty; and besides, at this particular period, the law of partial
renewal had been abrogated, a septennial act had been passed,[†] and a
general election, at the height of the Spanish triumph, had left but
sixteen Liberals in the whole Chamber of Deputies. The army, in a time
of profound peace, officered too by the detested émigrés, held out no
attraction. Repelled from politics, in which little preferment could be
hoped for by a uroturieru, and that little at a price which a Frenchman
will least of all consent to pay—religious hypocrisy; the élite of the
educated youth of France precipitated themselves into literature and
philosophy, and remarkable results soon became evident.

The national intellect seemed to make a sudden stride, from the stage of
adolescence to that of early maturity. It had reached the era
corresponding to that in the history of an individual mind, when, after
having been taught to think (as every one is) by teachers of some
particular school, and having for a time exercised the power only in the
path shown to it by its first teachers, it begins, without abandoning
that, to tread also in other paths; learns to see with its naked eyes,
and Edition: current; Page: [183] not through the eye-glasses of its
teachers,[*] and, from being one-sided, becomes many-sided[†] and of no
school. The French nation had had two great epochs of intellectual
development. It had been taught to speak by the great writers of the
seventeenth century,—to think by the philosophers of the eighteenth. The
present became the era of reaction against the vnarrownessesv of the
eighteenth century, as well as against those narrownesses of another
sort which the eighteenth century had left. The stateliness and
conventional decorum of old French poetic and dramatic literature, gave
place to a licence which made free scope for genius and also for
absurdity, and let in new forms of the beautiful was well as manyw of
the hideous. Literature shook off its chains, and used its liberty like
a galley-slave broke loose; while painting and sculpture passed from one
unnatural extreme to xanotherx, and the stiff school was succeeded by
the spasmodic. This insurrection against the old traditions of
classicism was called romanticism: and now, when the mass of yrubbishy
to which it had given birth has produced another oscillation in opinion
the reverse way, one inestimable result seems to have survived it—that
life and human feeling may now, in France, be painted with as much
liberty as they may be discussed, and, when painted truly, with
approval: as by George Sand, and in the best writings of Balzac. While
this revolution was going on in the artistic departments of literature,
that in the scientific departments was still more important. There was
reaction against the metaphysics of Condillac and Helvetius; and some of
the most eloquent men in France imported Kantism from Germany, and
Reidism from Scotland, to oppose to it, and listening crowds applauded,
and an “eclectic philosophy” was formed. There was reaction against the
irreligion of Diderot and d’Holbach; and by the side of their
irreligious philosophy there grew up religious philosophies, and
philosophies prophesying a religion, and a general vague feeling of
religion, and a taste for religious ideas. There was reaction against
the premises, rather than against the conclusions, of the political
philosophy of the Constituent Assembly: men found out, that underneath
all political philosophy there must be a social philosophy—a study of
agencies lying deeper than forms of government, which, working through
forms of government, produce in the long run most of what these seem to
produce, and which sap and destroy all forms of Edition: current; Page:
[184] government that lie across their path. Thus arose the new
political philosophy of the present generation in France; which,
considered merely as a portion of science, may be pronounced zgreatlyz
in advance of all the other political philosophies which ahad yet
existed;a—a philosophy rather scattered among many minds than
concentrated in one, but furnishing a storehouse of ideas to bthoseb who
meditate on politics, such as all ages and nations could not furnish
previously; and inspiring at the same time more comprehensive, and
therefore more cautious views of the past and present, and far bolder
aspirations and anticipations for the future. It would be idle to hold
up any particular book as a complete specimen of this philosophy:
different minds, according to their capacities or their tendencies, have
struck out or appropriated to themselves different portions of it, which
as yet have only been partially harmonized and fitted into one another.
But if we were asked for the book which up to the present time embodies
the largest portion of the spirit, and is, in the French phrase, the
highest expression, of this new political philosophy, we should point to
the Democracy in America, by M. de Tocqueville.[*]

It was above all, however, in history, and historical disquisition, that
the new tendencies of the national mind made themselves way. And a fact
may be remarked, which strikingly illustrates the difference between the
French and the English mind, and the rapidity with which an idea, thrown
into French soil, takes root, and blossoms, and fructifies. Sir Walter
Scott’s romances have been read by every educated person in Great
Britain who has grown up to manhood or womanhood in the last twenty
years; and, except the memory of much pleasure, and a few mediocre
imitations, forgotten as soon as read, they have left no traces that we
know of in the national mind. But it was otherwise in France. Just as
Byron, and the cast-off boyish cextravagancesc of Goethe and Schiller
which Byron did but follow, have been the origin of all the sentimental
ruffians, the Lacenaires in imagination and in action, with which the
Continent swarms, but have produced little fruit of that description,
comparatively speaking, in these islands; so, to compare good influences
with badd, did Scott’s romances, and especially Ivanhoe,[†] which in
England were only the amusement of an idle hour, give birth e(or at
least nourishment)e to one of the principal intellectual products of
Edition: current; Page: [185] our time, the modern French school of
history. M. Thierry, whose Letters on the History of France gave the
first impulse, proclaims the fact.[*] Seeing, in these fictions, past
events for the first time brought home to them as realities, not mere
abstractions; startled by finding, what they had not dreamed of, Saxons
and Normans in the reign of Richard I;f thinking men felt flash upon
them for the first time the meaning of that philosophical history, that
history of human life, and not of kings and battles, which Voltaire
talked of,[†] but, writing history for polemical purposes, could not
succeed in realizing. Immediately the annals of France, England, and
other countries, began to be systematically searched; the characteristic
features of society and life at each period were gathered out, and
exhibited in histories, and speculations on history, and historical
fictions. All works of imagination were now expected to have a couleur
locale; and the dramatic scenes and romances of Vitet, Mérimée, and
Alfred de Vigny, among the best productions of the romantic school gin
those yearsg, are evidences of the degree in which they attained it. M.
de Barante wrote the history of two of the most important centuries hinh
his country’s annals, ifrom the materials, and often in the words,i of
Froissart and Comines.[‡] M. Thierry’s researches into the early history
of the town-communities, brought to light some of the most important
facts of the progress of society in France and in all Europe.[§] While
Mignet and Thiers, in a style worthy of the ancient models, but with
only the common ideas of their time, recounted the recent glories and
sufferings of their country, other writers, among whom Auguste Comte jin
his commencements,j and the founders of the St. Simonian school were
conspicuous, following in the steps of kVico, Herder, and Condorcetk,
analyzed the facts of universal history, and connected them by
generalizations, which, if unsatisfactory in lsomel respects, explained
much, and placed much in a new and striking light; and M. Guizot, a man
of a greater range of ideas and greater historical impartiality than
mmost ofm these, gave to the world Edition: current; Page: [186] those
immortal Essays and Lectures,[*] for which posterity will forgive him
nthe grave faults of hisn political career.

In the midst of an age thus teeming with valuable products of thought,
himself without any more active career to engross his faculties, the
mind of Carrel could not remain unproductive. “In a bookseller’s
back-shop,” says M. Nisard (for the young author, in his struggle for
subsistence, for a short time entered seriously into the views of his
family, and embarked some money supplied by them in an unsuccessful
bookselling speculation), “on a desk to which was fastened a great
Newfoundland dog, Carrel, one moment absorbed in English memoirs and
papers, another moment caressing his favourite animal, conceived and
wrote his History of the Counter-Revolution in England.”[†] It was
published in February 1827; and though the age has produced historical
works of profounder philosophical investigation, yet in its kind, and
for what it aims at, it deserves to be considered one of the most
finished productions of that remarkable era.

It is a history of the two last Stuarts, of their attempts to
re-establish Popery and arbitrary power, their temporary success, and
ultimate overthrow by the Revolution of 1688. Their situation and
conduct presented so close a parallel to that which the two last
Bourbons at that time exhibited in France, that the subject was a
favourite one with the French writers of the period. There could not
have been a more natural occasion for violent republicanism, or any kind
of revolutionary violence, to display itself, if Carrel had been the
fanatic which it is often supposed that all odemocratico reformers must
be. But we find no republicanism in this book, no partisanship of any
kind; the book is almost too favourable to the Stuarts; there is hardly
anything in it which might not have been written by a clear-sighted and
reflecting person of any of the political parties which divide the
present day. But we find instead, in every page, distinct evidence of a
thoroughly practical mind: a mind which looks out, in every situation,
for the causes which were actually operating, discerns them with
sagacity, sees what they must have produced, what could have been done
to modify them, and how far they were practically misunderstood: a
statesman, judging of statesmen by placing himself in their
circumstances, and seeing what they could have done; not by the rule and
square of some immutable theory of mutable things, nor by that most
fallacious test for estimating men’s actions, the rightness or wrongness
of their Edition: current; Page: [187] speculative views. If Carrel had
done nothing else, he would have shown by this book thatp, like
Mirabeau, he was not a slave top formulas;[*] no pre-established
doctrine as to how things qmust beq, ever prevented him from seeing them
as they rwerer. “Everywhere and at all times,” says he, “it is the wants
of the time which have created the conventions called political
principles, and those principles have always been pushed aside by those
wants.”[†] “All questions as to forms of government,” he says in another
place, “have their sdatas in the condition of society, and nowhere
else.”[‡] The whole spirit of the new historical school is in these two
sentences. The great character by which Carrel’s book differs from all
other histories of the time, with which we are acquainted, is, that in
it alone are we led to understand and account for all the vicissitudes
of the time, from the ebb and flow of public opinion; the causes of
which, his own practical sagacity, and a Frenchman’s experience of
turbulent times, enabled Carrel to perceive and interpret with a truth
and power that must strike every competent judge who compares his short
book with the long books of other people. And we may here notice, as an
example of the superiority of French historical literature to ours,
that, of the most interesting period in the English annals, the period
of the Stuarts, France has produced, within a very few years too, the
best, the second-best, and the third-best history. The best is this of
Carrel; the second-best is the unfinished work* of M. Guizot, his
History of the English Revolutiont;[§] the third in merit is M. Mazure’s
History of the Revolution of 1688, a work ofu greater detail, and less
extensive views, but which has brought much new information from
Barillon’s papers and elsewhere, is unexceptionable as to impartiality,
and on the whole a highly valuable accession to the literature of
English history.[¶]

The style of the Histoire de la Contre-Révolution, according to M.
Nisard, did not give Carrel the reputation he afterwards acquired as a
master of expression. But Edition: current; Page: [188] we agree with M.
Nisard, a most competent judge, and a severe critic of his
vcotemporariesv, in thinking this judgment of the French public
erroneous. We already recognise in this early performance, the pen which
was afterwards compared to a sword’s point (il semblait écrire avec une
pointe d’acier).[*] It goes clean and sharp to the very heart of the
thing to be said, says it without ornament or periphrasis, or phrases of
any kind, and in nearly the fewest words in which so much could be told.
The style cuts the meaning into the mind as with an edge of steel. It
wants the fertility of fancy which Carrel afterwards displayed; an
indispensable quality to a writer of the first rank, but one which, in
spite of the authority of wCicero andw Quintilian,[†] we believe to be,
oftener than is supposed, the last rather than the first quality which
such writers acquire. The grand requisite of good writing is, to have
something to say: to attain this, is becoming more and more the grand
effort of all minds of any power, which embark in literature; and
important truths, at least in human nature and life, seldom reveal
themselves but to minds which are found equal to the secondary task of
ornamenting those truths, when they have leisure to attend to it. A mind
which has all natural human feelings, which draws its ideas fresh from
realities, and, like all first-rate minds, varies and multiplies its
points of view, gathers as it goes illustrations and analogies from all
nature. So was it with Carrel. The fashion of the day, when he began,
was picturesqueness of style, and that was what the imitative minds were
all straining for. Carrel, who wrote from himself and not from
imitation, put into his style first what was in himself first, the
intellect of a great writer. The other half of the character, the
imaginative xpartx, came to maturity somewhat later, and was first
decidedly recognised in the Essays on the War in Spain, which, as we
have already said, were published in the Revue Française, a periodical
on the plan of the English reviews, to which nearly all the most
philosophical minds in France contributed, and which was carried on for
several years with first-rate ability.

The editor of this review was M. Guizot. That Guizot and Carrel should
for a time be found not only fighting under the same banner, but
publishing in the same periodical organ, is a fact characteristic of the
fusion of parties and opinions which had by this time taken place to
oppose the progress of the counter-revolution.

Edition: current; Page: [189]
The victory in Spain had put the royalists in complete possession of the
powers of government. The elections of 1824 had given them, and their
septennial act secured to them for a period, their chambre des trois
cents, so called from the 300 feudalists, or creatures of the
feudalists, who, with about 100 more moderate royalists, and sixteen
liberals of different shades, made up the whole Chamber. It is for
history, already familiar with the frantic follies of this most
unteachable party, to relate all they did, or attempted; the forty
millions sterling which they voted into their own pockets under the name
of compensation to the emigrants, their law of sacrilege, worthy of the
bigotry of the middle ages; the reestablishment of the Jesuits, the
putting down of the Lancasterian schools, and throwing all the minor
institutions of education (they did not yet openly venture upon the
yUniversityy) into the hands of the priests.[*] The madmen thought they
could force back Catholicism upon a people, of whom the educated
classes, though not, as they are sometimes represented, hostile to
religion, but zeither simply indifferent orz decidedly disposed to a
religion of some sort or other, had for ever bidden adieu to that form
of it, and could as easily have been made Hindoos or Mussulmans as Roman
Catholics. All that bribery could do was to make hypocrites, and of
these (some act of hypocrisy being a condition of preferment) there were
many edifying examples; among others, M. Dupin, asincea President of the
Chamber of Deputies, who, soon after the accession of Charles X,
devoutly followed the Host in a procession to St. Acheul.* If our memory
deceive us not, Marshal Soult was another of these illustrious converts;
he became one of Charles X’s peers, and wanted only to have been his
minister too, to have made him the Sunderland of the French 1688.

In the meantime, laws were prepared against the remaining liberties of
France, Edition: current; Page: [190] and against the institutions
dearest to the people, of those which the Revolution had given. Not
content with an almost cconstantc censorship on the newspaper press, the
faction proposed rigid restraints upon the publication even of books
below a certain size. A law also was framed to re-establish
primogeniture and entails, among a nation which universally believes
that the family affections, on the strength of which it justly values
itself, depend upon the observance of equal justice in families, and
would not survive the revival of the unnatural preference for the eldest
son. These laws passed the Chamber of Deputies amidst the most violent
storm of public opinion which had been known in France since the
Revolution. The Chamber of Peers, faithful to its mission as the
Conservative branch of the Constitution, rejected them.[*] M. de Villèle
felt the danger, but a will more impetuous and a judgment weaker than
his own, compelled him to advance. He created (ord the King created) a
batch of sixty-six peers, and dissolved the Chamber.

But affairs had greatly altered since the elections of 1824. By the
progress, not only of disgust at the conduct of the faction, but of a
presentiment of the terrible crisis to which it was about to lead, the
whole of the new aristocracy had now gone over to the people. Not only
they, but the more reasonable portion of the old aristocracy, the
moderate royalist party, headed by Chateaubriand, and represented by the
Journal des Débats, had early separated themselves from the
counter-revolutionary faction of which M. de Villèle was the unwilling
instrument. Both these bodies, and the popular party, now greatly
increased in strength even among the electors, knit themselves in one
compact mass to overthrow the Villèle Ministry. The eAide-toi Societye,
in which even M. Guizot acted a conspicuous part, fbut which was mainly
composedf of the most energetic young men of the popular party,
conducted the correspondence and organized the machinery for the
elections. A large majority was returned hostile to the ministry: they
were forced to retire, and the King had to submit to a ministry of
moderate royalists, commonly called, from its most influential member,
the Martignac Ministry.

The short interval of eighteen months, during which this ministry
lasted, was the brightest period which France has known since the
Revolution; for a reason which well merits attention; those who had the
real power in the country, the men of Edition: current; Page: [191]
property and the men of talent, had not the power at the Tuileries, nor
any near prospect of having it. It is the grievous misfortune of France,
that being still new to constitutional ideas and institutions, she has
never known what it gisg to have a fair government,h in which there iisi
not one law for the party in power, and another law for its opponents.
The French government is not a constitutional government—it is a
despotism limited by a parliament; whatever party can get the executive
into its hands, and induce a majority of the Chamber to support it, does
practically whatever it pleases; hardly anything that it can be guilty
of towards its opponents alienates its supporters, unless they fear that
they are themselves marked out to be the next victims; and even the
trampled-on minority fixes its hopes not upon limiting arbitrary power,
but upon becoming the stronger party and tyrannizing in its turn. It is
to the eternal honour of Carrel that he, and he almost alone, in a
subsequent period far less favourable than that of which we are
speaking, recognised the great principle of which all parties had more
than ever lost sight;—saw that this, above all, was what his country
wanted; unfurled the banner of equal justice and equal protection to all
opinions, bore it bravely aloft in weal and woe over the stormy seas on
which he was cast, and when he jsank, sankj with it flying. It was too
late. A revolution had intervened; and even those who suffered from
tyranny, had learnt to hope for relief from revolution, and not from law
or opinion. But during the Martignac Ministry, all parties were equally
afraid of, and would have made equal sacrifices to avert, a convulsion.
The idea gained ground, and appeared to be becoming general, of building
up in France for the first time a government of law. It was known that
the King was wedded to the counter-revolutionary party, and that without
a revolution the powers of the executive would never be at the disposal
of the new aristocracy of wealth, or of the men of talent who had put
themselves at the head of it. But they had the command of the
legislature, and they used the power which they had, to reduce within
bounds that which kby peaceable meansk they could not hope to have. For
the first time it became the object of the first speculative and
practical politicians in France, to limit the lpowerl of the executive;
to erect barriers of opinion, and barriers of law, which it should not
be able to overpass, and which should give the citizen that protection
which he had never yet had in France, against the tyranny of the
magistrate: to form, as it was often expressed, les moeurs
constitutionnelles, the habits and feelings of a free government, and
establish in France, what is the greatest political blessing menjoyedm
in England, the national feeling of respect and obedience to the law.

Edition: current; Page: [192]
Nothing could seem more hopeful than the progress which France was
making, under the Martignac Ministry, towards this great improvement.
The discussions of the press, and the teachings of the able men who
headed the Opposition, especially the Doctrinaires (as they were
called), M. Royer Collard, the Duc de Broglie, M. Guizot, and their
followers, who then occupied the front rank of the popular party, were
by degrees working the salutary feelings of a constitutional government
into the public mind. But they had barely time to penetrate the surface.
The same madness which hurled James II from his throne, was now fatal to
Charles X. In an evil hour for France, unless England one day repay her
the debt which she unquestionably owes her for the Reform Bill,[*] the
promise of this auspicious moment was blighted; the Martignac Ministry
was dismissed, a set of furious émigrés were appointed, and a new
general election having brought a majority still more hostile to them,
the famous Ordonnances were issued,[†] and the Bourbon Monarchy was
swept from the face of the earth.

We have called the event which necessitated the Revolution of July, a
misfortune to France. We wish earnestly to think it otherwise. But if in
some forms that Revolution has brought nconsiderablen good to France, in
many it has brought oseriouso ill. Among the evils which it has done we
select two of the greatestp: it stopped the progress of the French
people towards recognising the necessity of equal law, and a strict
definition of the powers of the magistrate; and it qchecked, and for a
time almost suspended,q the literary and philosophic movement which had
commenced.

On the fall of the old aristocracy, the new oligarchy came at once into
power. They did not all get places, only because there were not places
for all. But there was a large abundance, and they rushed upon them like
tigers upon their prey. No precaution was taken by the people against
this new enemy. The discussions of the press in the years preceding,
confined as they had been both by public opinion and by severe legal
penalties, strictly within the limits of the Charter,[‡] had not made
familiar to the public mind the necessity of an extended suffrage; and
the minds Edition: current; Page: [193] even of enlightened men, as we
can rpersonally testifyr, at the time of the formation of the new
government, were in a state of the utmost obtuseness on the subject. The
eighty thousand electors had hitherto been on the side of the people,
and nobody seemed to see any reason why this should not continue to be
the case. The oligarchy of wealth was thus allowed quietly to instal
itself; its leaders, and the men of literary talent who were its writers
and orators, became ministers, or expectant ministers, and no longer
sought to limit the power which was henceforth to be their own; by
degrees, even, as others attempted to limit it, they violated in its
defence, one after another, every salutary principle of freedom which
they had themselves laboured to implant in the popular mind. They
reckoned, and the event shows that they could safely reckon, upon the
King whom they had set up; that he would see his interest in keeping a
strict alliance with them. There was no longer any rival power
interested in limiting that of the party in office. There were the
people; but the people could not make themselves felt in the
legislature; and attempts at insurrection, until the resistance becomes
thoroughly national, a government is always strong enough to put down.
There was the aristocracy of talent: and the course was adopted of
buying off sthiss with a portion of the spoil. One of the most
deplorable effects of the new government of France, is the profligate
immorality which it is industriously spreading among the ablest and most
accomplished of the youth. All the arts of corruption which Napoleon
exercised towards the dregs of the Revolution, are put in practice by
the present ruler upon the élite of France: and few are they that
resist. Some rushed headlong from the first, and met the bribers half
way; others held out for a time, but their virtue failed them as things
grew more desperate, and as they grew more hungry. Every man of literary
reputation who will sell himself to the government, is gorged with
places and loaded with decorations. Every rising young man, of the least
promise, is lured and courted to the same dishonourable distinction.
Those who resist the seduction must be proof against every temptation
which is strongest on a French mind: for the vanity, which is the bad
side of the national sociability and love of sympathy, makes the French,
of all others, the people who are the most eager for distinction, and as
there is no national respect for birth, and but little for wealth,
almost the only adventitious distinctions are those which the government
can confer. Accordingly the pursuits of intellect, but lately so
ardently engaged in, are almost abandoned; no enthusiastic crowds now
throng the lecture-room; M. Guizot has left his professor’s chair and
his historical speculations, and would fain be the Sir Robert Peel of
France; M. Thiers is trying to be the Canning; M. Cousin and M.
Villemain have ceased to lecture, have ceased even to publish; M. de
Barante is an ambassador; Tanneguy Duchâtel, instead of expounding
Ricardo, and making his profound speculations known where they are more
needed than in Edition: current; Page: [194] any other country in
Europe, tbecamet a Minister of Commerce who dared not act upon his own
principles, and is waiting to be so again; the press, which so lately
teemed with books of history and philosophy, now scarcely produces one,
and the young men who could have written them are either placemen, or
gaping place-hunters, disgusting the well-disposed of all parties by
their avidity, and their open defiance of even the pretence of
principle.u

Carrel was exposed to the same temptations with other young men of
talent, but we claim no especial merit for him in having resisted them.
Immediately after the Revolution, in which, as already observed, he took
a distinguished part, he was sent by the government on an important
mission to the West: on his return he found himself gazetted for a
prefecture; which at that time he might honestly have accepted, as many
others did whom the conduct of the government afterwards forced to
retire. Carrel used sportively to say that if he had been offered a
regiment, he perhaps could not have found in his heart to refuse. But he
declined the prefecture, and took his post as editor and chief writer of
the National, which he had founded a few months before the Revolution,
in conjunction with MM. Mignet and Thiers, but which M. Thiers had
conducted until he and M. Mignet got into place. Carrel now assumed the
management: and from this time his rise was rapid to that place in the
eye of the public, which made him, at one period, the most conspicuous
vprivatev person in France. Never was there an eminence better merited;
and we have now to tell how he acquired it, and how he used it.

It was by no trick, no compliance with any prevailing fashion or
prejudice, that Carrel became the leading figure in politics on the
popular side. It was by the ascendancy of character and talents,
legitimately exercised, in a position for which he was more fitted than
any other man of his age, and of which he at once entered into the true
character, and applied it to its practical use. From this time we are to
consider Carrel not as a literary man, but as a politician, and his
writings are to be judged by the laws of popular oratory. “Carrel,” says
M. Nisard,

was a writer, only for want of having an active career fit to occupy all
his faculties. He never sought to make himself a name in literature.
Writing was to him a means of impressing, under the form of doctrines,
his own practical aims upon the minds of those whom he addressed. In his
view, the model of a writer was a man of action relating his acts.
Caesar in his Commentaries, Bonaparte in his Memoirs, he held that one
ought to write either after having acted, or as a mode of action, when
there is no other mode effectual or allowable. At a later period his
notion was modified, or rather enlarged;[*]

Edition: current; Page: [195]
and he recognised, that there is not only action upon the outward world,
there is also action upon the spiritual world of thought and feeling,
the action of the artist, the preacher, and the philosopher. “Thus
completed,” says M. Nisard, “Carrel’s idea is the best theory of the art
of composition:”[*] as indeed it is; and it was the secret of Carrel’s
success.

He who has a passion stronger than the love of literary reputation, and
who writes only to inspire others with the same; such a man, proceeding
upon the simple idea that the pen should be a mere instrument, will
write well from the commencement; and if he has instinct, which only
means, a turn of mind conformable to the genius of his nation, he may
become a writer of the first rank, without even considering himself to
be a writer.[†]

Of his eminence as a writer, there is but one opinion in France, there
can be but one among competent judges in any country. Already, from the
time of his Essays on the War in Spain, “nothing mediocre had issued
from his pen.”[‡] In the various papers, literary or political, which he
published in different periodical works,

that quality of painting by words, which had been seen almost with
surprise in his articles on Spain, shines forth in nearly every
sentence. But let there be no mistake. It was not some art or mystery of
effect in which Carrel had grown more dexterous; his expression had
become more graphic, only because his thoughts had become clearer, of a
loftier order, and more completely his own. wLike all great writers,w he
proportions his style to his ideas, and can be simple and unpretending
in his language when his thoughts are of a kind which do not require
that Reason, to express them, should call in the aid of Imagination. To
apply to all things indiscriminately a certain gift of brilliancy which
one is conscious of, and for which one has been praised, is not genius,
any more than flinging epigrams about on all occasions is wit.

“All the qualities,” continues M. Nisard,

which Carrel possessed from his first taking up the pen, with this
additional gift, which came the last, only because there had not xbefore
beenx any sufficient occasion to call it out, burst forth in the
ypolemicsy of the National, with a splendour which to any candid person
it must appear hardly possible to exaggerate. For who can be ungrateful
to a talent which even those who feared, admired, whether they really
feared it less than they pretended, or that in France, people are never
so much afraid of talent as to forego the pleasure of admiring it. I
shall not hesitate to affirm that from 1831 to 1834, the National,
considered merely as a monument of political literature, is the most
original production of the nineteenth century.[§]

Edition: current; Page: [196]
This from so sober a judge, and in an age and country which has produced
Paul Louis Courier, is, we may hope, sufficient.

Both M. Littré and M. Nisard[*] compare Carrel’s political writings, as
literary productions, to the letters of Junius;[†] though M. Nisard
gives greatly the superiority to Carrel. But the comparison itself is an
injustice to him. There never was anything less like popular oratory,
than those polished but stiff and unnatural productions; where every
cadence seems pre-determined, and the writer zknewz the place of every
subsequent word in the sentence, before he finally aresolveda on the
first. The Orations of Demosthenes, though even Demosthenes could not
have extemporized them, are but the ideal and unattainable perfection of
extemporaneous speaking: but Apollo himself could not have spoken the
Letters of Junius, without pausing at the end of every sentence to
arrange the next. A piece of mere painting, like any other work of art,
may be finished by a succession of touches: but when spirit speaks to
spirit, not in order to please but to incite, everything must seem to
come from one impulse, from a soul engrossed for the moment with one
feeling. It seemed so with Carrel, because it bwasb so. “Unlike Paul
Louis Courier,” says M. Littré, “who hesitated at a word, Carrel never
hesitated at a sentence;”[‡] and he could speak, whenever called upon,
in the same style in which he wrote. His style has that cbreadthc,
which, in literature, as in other works of art, shows that the artist
has a dcharacterd—that some conceptions and some feelings predominate in
his mind over others. Its fundamental quality is that which M. Littré
has well characterized, la sûreté de l’expression;[§] it goes straight
home; the right word is always found, and never seems to be sought:
words are never wanting to his thoughts, and never pass before them.
“L’expression” (we will not spoil by translation M. Littré’s finely
chosen phraseology) “arrivait toujours abondante comme la pensée, si
pleine et si abondante elle-même;” “and if one is not conscious of the
labour of a writer retouching carefully every passage, one is conscious
of a vigorous inspiration, which endows everything with movement, form,
and colour, and casts in one and the same mould the style and the
thought.”[¶]

It would have been ein complete contradiction toe Carrel’s idea of
journalism, Edition: current; Page: [197] for the writer to remain
behind a curtain. The English idea of a newspaper, as a sort of
impersonal thing, coming from nobody knows where, the readers never
thinking of the writer, nor caring whether he thinks what he writes, as
long as they think what he writes;—this would not have done for Carrel,
nor been consistent with his objects. The opposite idea already to some
extent prevailed in France: newspapers were often written in, and had
occasionally been edited, by political characters, but no political
character f(since the first Revolution) hadf made itself by a newspaper.
Carrel did so. To say that during the years of his management Carrel
conducted the National, would give an insufficient idea. The National
was Carrel; it was as much himself as was his conversation, as could
have been his speeches in the Chamber, or his acts as a public
functionary. “The National,” says M. Littré, “was a personification of
Armand Carrel; and, if the journal gave expression to the thoughts, the
impulses, the passions of the writer, the writer in his turn was always
on the breach, prepared to defend, at the peril of his life or of his
liberty, what he had said in the journal.”[*]

He never separated himself from his newspaper. He never considered the
newspaper one thing and himself another. What was said by a newspaper to
a newspaper, he considered as said by a man to a man, and acted
accordingly. He never said anything in his paper, to or of any man,
which he would not have both dared, and thought it right, to say
personally and in his presence. He insisted upon being treated in the
same way; and generally was so; though the necessity in which he thought
himself of repelling insult, had involved him in two duels before his
last fatal one. Where danger was to be incurred in resisting arbitrary
power, he was always the first to seek it: he never hesitated to throw
down the gauntlet to the government, challenging it to try upon him any
outrage which it was meditating against the liberty or the safety of the
citizen. Nor was this a mere bravado: no one will think it so, who knows
how unscrupulous are all French governments, how prone to act from
irritated vanity more than from calculation, and how likely to commit an
imprudence rather than acknowledge a defeat. Carrel thwarted a nefarious
attempt of the Périer Ministry to establish the practice of
incarcerating writers previously to trial. The thing had been already
done in several instances, when Carrel, in a calm and well-reasoned
article, which he signed with his name, demonstrated its illegality, and
declared that if it was attempted in his own case he would, at the peril
of his life, oppose force to force.[†] This produced its effect: the
illegality was not repeated; Carrel was prosecuted for his article,
pleaded his own cause, and was acquitted; as on every subsequent
occasion when the paper was prosecuted and he defended it in person
before a jury. The National, often Edition: current; Page: [198]
prosecuted, was never condemned but once, when, by a miserable quibble,
the cause was taken from the jury to be tried by the court alone; and
once again before the Chamber of Peers, an occasion which was made
memorable by the spirit with which Carrel spoke out in the face of the
tribunal which was sitting to judge him, what all France thinks of one
of the most celebrated of its proceedings, the trial and condemnation of
Marshal Ney.[*] Nothing on this occasion could have saved Carrel from a
heavy fine or a long imprisonment, had not a member of the Chamber
itself, General Excelmans, hurried awayg by an irresistible impulse,
risenh in his place, acknowledged the sentiment, and repeated it.[†]

Without these manifestations of spirit and intrepidity, Carrel, however
he might have been admired as a writer, could not have acquired his
great influence as a man; nor been enabled without imputation on his
courage, to keep aloof from the more violent proceedings of his party,
and discountenance, as he steadily did, all premature attempts to carry
their point by physical force.

Whatever may have been Carrel’s individual opinions, he did not, in the
National, begin by being a republican; he was willing to give the new
chief magistrate a fair trial; nor was it until that personage had
quarrelled with Lafayette, driven Dupont de l’Eure and Laffitte from
office, and called Casimir Périer to his councils for the avowed purpose
of turning back the movement, that Carrel hoisted republican colours.
Long before this the symptoms of what was coming had been so evident, as
to embitter the last moments of Benjamin Constant, if not, as was
generally believed, to shorten his existence. The new oligarchy had
declared, both by their words and their deeds, that they had conquered
for themselves, and not for the people: and the King had shown his
determination that through them he would govern, that he would make
himself necessary to them, and be a despot, using them and rewarding
them as his tools. It was the position which the King assumed as the
head of the oligarchy, which made Carrel a republican. He was no
fanatic, to care about a name, andi was too essentially practical in his
turn of mind to fight for a mere abstract principle. The object of his
declaration of republicanism was a thoroughly practical one—to strike at
the ringleader of the opposite party; and, if it were impossible to
overthrow him, to do what was possible—to deprive him of the support of
opinion.

Events have decided against Carrel, and it is easy, judging after the
fact, to pronounce that the position he took up was not a wise one. We
do not contend that Edition: current; Page: [199] it was so; but we do
contend, that he might think it so, with very little disparagement to
his judgment.

On what ground is it that some of the best writers and thinkers, in free
countries, have recommended kingly government—have stood up for
constitutional royalty as the best form of a free constitution, or at
least one which, where it exists, no rational person would wish to
disturb? On one ground only, and on one condition:—that a constitutional
monarch does not himself govern, does not exercise his own will in
governing, but confines himself to appointing responsible ministers, and
even in that, does but ascertain and give effect to the national will.
When this condition is observed—and it is, on the whole, faithfully
observed in our own country—it is asked, and very reasonably, what more
could be expected from a republic? and where is the benefit which would
be gained by opening the highest office in the State, the only place
which carries with it the most tempting part j(to common minds)j of
power, the show of it, as a prize to be scrambled for by every ambitious
and turbulent spirit, who is willing to keep the community, for his
benefit, in the mean turmoil of a perpetual canvass? These are the
arguments used: they are, in the present state of society, unanswerable;
and we should not say a word for Carrel, if the French government bore,
or ever had borne, the most distant resemblance to this idea of
constitutional royalty. But it never did: no French king ever confined
himself within the limits which the best friends of constitutional
monarchy allow to be indispensable to its innocuousness: it is always
the king, and not his ministers, that governs; and the power of an
English king would appear to Louis Philippe a mere mockery of royalty
Now, if the kchief functionaryk was to be his own minister, it appeared
to Carrel absolutely necessary that he should be a responsible one. The
principle of a responsible executive appeared to him too all-important
to be sacrificed. As the king would not content himself with being king,
there must, instead of a king, be a removable and accountable
magistrate.

As for the dangers of a republic, we should carry back our minds to the
period which followed the Three Days, and to the impression made on all
Europe by the lbraveryl, the mintegritym, the gentleness and chivalrous
generosity, displayed at that time by the populace of Paris—and ask
ourselves whether it was inexcusable to have hoped everything from a
people, of whom the very lowest ranks could thus act? a people, too,
among whom, out of a few large towns, there is little indigence; where
almost every npeasantn has his piece of land, where othe number of
landed proprietors is more than half the number ofo grown-up men in the
country, and where, by a natural consequence, the respect for the right
of property amounts to a Edition: current; Page: [200] superstition? If
among such a people there could be danger in republicanism, Carrel saw
greater dangers, which could only be averted by republicanism. He saw
the whole Continent armed, and ready at a moment’s notice to pour into
France from all sides. He thought, and it was the principal mistake
which he committed, that this collision could not be averted; and he
thought, which was no mistake, that if it came, nothing would enable
France to bear the brunt of it but that which had carried her through it
before, intense popular enthusiasm. This was impossible with Louis
Philippe: and if a levy en masse was to be again required of all
citizens, it must be in a cause which should be worth fighting for, a
cause in which all should feel that they had an equal stake.

These were the reasons which made Carrel declare for a republic. pTheyp
are, no doubt, refuted by the fact, that the public mind was not ripe
for a republic, and would not have it. It would have been better,
qprobablyq, instead of the republican standard, to have raised, as
Carrel afterwards did, that of a large parliamentary reform. But the
public as yet were still less prepared to join in this demand than in
the other. A republic would have brought this among other things, and
although, by professing republicanism, there was danger of alarming the
timid, there was the advantage of being able to appeal to a feeling
already general and deeply rooted, the national aversion to the
principle of hereditary privileges. The force of this aversion was
clearly seen, when it extorted even from Louis Philippe the abolition of
the hereditary peerage: and in choosing a point of attack which put this
feeling on his side, Carrel did not show himself a bad tactician.

Nor was it so clear at that time that the public mind was not ripe.
Opinion advances quickly in times of revolution; at the time of which we
speak, it had set in rapidly in the direction of what was called “the
movement;” and the manifestation of public feeling at the funeral of
General Lamarque, in June 1832, was such, that many competent judges
think it must have been yielded to, and the King must have changed his
policy, but for the unfortunate collision which occurred on that day
between the people and the troops, which produced a conflict that lasted
two days, and led to the memorable ordonnance placing Paris under
martial law.[*] On this occasion the responsible editor of the
National[†] was tried on a capital charge for an article of Carrel’s,[‡]
published just before the conflict, and construed as an instigation to
rebellion. He was acquitted not only of the capital, but of the minor
offence; and it was proved on the trial, from an official report of
General Pajol,[§] Edition: current; Page: [201] the officer in command,
that the conflict began on the side of the military, who attacked the
people because r(as at the funeral of our Queen Caroline)r an attempt
was made to change the course of the procession, and carry Lamarque’s
remains to the Pantheon. But, the battle once begun, many known
republicans had joined in it; they had fought with desperation, and the
blame was generally thrown upon them; from this time the fear of émeutes
spread among the trading classes, and they rallied round the throne of
Louis Philippe.

Though the tide now decidedly turned in favour of the party of
resistance, and the moderate opposition headed by M. Odilon Barrot and
M. Mauguin lost sthe greater part ofs its supporters, the republican
opposition continued for some time longer to increase in strength: and
Carrel, becoming more and more indisputably at the head of it, rose in
influence, and became more and more an object of popular attention.

It was in the autumn of 1833 that we first saw Carrel. He was then at
the height of his reputation, and prosperity had shed upon him, as it
oftenest does upon the strongest minds, only its best influences. An
extract from a letter written tnot longt after will convey in its
freshness the impression which he then communicated to an English
observer.

I knew Carrel as the most powerful journalist in France, sole manager of
a paper which, while it keeps aloof from all ucoterieu influence, and
from the actively revolutionary part of the republican body, has for
some time been avowedly republican, and I knew that he was considered a
vigorous, energetic man of action, who would always have courage and
conduct in an emergency. Knowing thus much of him, I was ushered into
the National office, where I found six or seven of the innumerable
redacteurs who belong to a French paper, tall, dark-haired men, with
formidable vmoustachesv, and looking fiercely republican. Carrel was not
there; and after waiting some time, I was introduced to a slight young
man, with extremely polished manners, no wmoustachesw at all, and
apparently fitter for a drawing-room than a camp; this was the
commander-in-chief of those formidable-looking champions. But it was
impossible to be five minutes in his company without perceiving that he
was accustomed to xascendancyx, and so accustomed as not to feel yit.
Insteady of zthez eagerness and impetuosity which one finds in most
Frenchmen, his manner is extremely deliberate, without any affectation,
he speaks in a sort of measured cadence, and in a manner of which aMr.
Carlyle’sa words, “quiet emphasis,”[*] are more Edition: current; Page:
[202] characteristic than of any man I know; there is the same quiet
emphasis in his writings:—a man singularly free, if we may trust
appearances, from self-consciousness, simple, graceful, bat timesb
almost cinfantinelyc playfuld, and combining perfect self-reliance with
the most unaffected modesty; always pursuing a path of his own (“Je
n’aime pas,” said he to me one day, “à marcher en troupeau”), occupying
a midway position, facing one way towards the supporters of monarchy and
an aristocratic limitation of the suffrage, with whom he will have no
compromise, on the other towards the extreme republicans, who have
anti-property doctrines, and instead of his United States republic, want
a republic eafter the fashion of the Conventione, with something like a
dictatorship in their own fhands. Hef calls himself a Conservative
Republican (l’opinion républicaine conservatrice), not but that he sees
plainly that the present constitution of gsocietyg admits of many
improvements, but he thinks they can only take place gradually, or at
least that philosophy has not yet matured them; and he would rather hold
back than accelerate the hpoliticalh revolution which he thinks
inevitable, in order to leave time for ripening those great questions,
chiefly affecting the constitution of property and the condition of the
working classes, which would press for a solution if a revolution were
to take place. As for himself, he says that he is not un homme spécial,
that his métier de journaliste engrosses him too much to enable him to
study, and that he is profoundly ignorant of much upon which he would
have to decide if he were in power; and could do nothing but bring
together a body igenuinelyi representative of the people, and assist in
carrying into execution the dictates of their united wisdom. This is
modest enough in the man who would certainly be President of the
Republic, if there were a republic within five years, and the extreme
party did not get the upper hand. He seems to know well what he does
know: I have met with no such views of the French Revolution in any
book, asj I have heard from him.[*]

This is a first impression, but it kwask confirmed by all that we
afterwards saw and learnt. Of all distinguished Frenchmen whom we have
known, Carrel, in manner, answered most to Coleridge’s definition of the
manner of a gentleman, that which shows respect to others in such a way
as implies an equally habitual and secure reliance on their respect to
lhimselfl.[†] Carrel’s manner was not of the self-asserting kind, like
that of many of the most high-bred Frenchmen, who succeed perfectly in
producing the effect they desire, but who seem to be desiring it: Carrel
seemed never to concern himself about it, but to trust to what he was,
for what he would appear to be. This had not always been the case; and
we learn from M. Nisard, that in the time of his youth and obscurity he
was sensitive as to the Edition: current; Page: [203] consideration
shown him, and susceptible of offence. It was not in this only that he
was made better by being better appreciated. Unlike vulgar minds, whose
faults, says M. Nisard, “augment in proportion as their talents obtain
them indulgence, it was evident to all his friends that his faults
diminished, in proportion as his brilliant qualities, and the celebrity
they gave him, increased.”[*]

One of the qualities which we were most struck with in Carrel was his
modesty. It was not that common modesty, which is but the negation of
arrogance and overweening pretension. It was the higher mqualitym, of
which that is but a small part. It was the modesty of one who knows
accurately what he is, and what he is equal to, never attempts anything
which requires qualities that he has not, and admires and values no
less, and more if it be reasonable to do so, the things which he cannot
do, than those which he can. It was most unaffectedly that he disclaimed
all mastery of the details of politics. I understand, he said, the
principles of a representative government. But he said, and we believe
him to have sincerely thought, that when once a genuinely representative
legislature should have been assembled, his function would be at an end.
It would belong to more instructed men, he thought, to make laws for
France; he could at most be of use in defending her from attack, and in
making her laws obeyed. In this Carrel did himself less than justice,
for though he was not, as he truly said, un homme spécial, though he had
not nprofoundlyn studied political economy or jurisprudence, no man ever
had a greater gift of attaching to himself men of special acquirements,
or could discern more surely what man was fit for what thing. And that
is the exact quality wanted in the head of an administration. Like
Mirabeau, Carrel had a natural gift for being Prime Minister; like
Mirabeau, he could make men of all sorts, even foreigners, and men who
did not think themselves inferior to him but only different, feel that
they could have been loyal to him—that they could have servedo and
followed him in life and death, and marched under his orders wherever he
chose to lead: sure, with him, of being held worth whatever they were
worth, of having their counsels listened to by an ear capable of
appreciating them, of having the post assigned to them for which they
were fittest, and a commander to whom they could trust for bringing them
off in any embarrassment in which he could ever engage them.

Shortly after we first knew Carrel, we had an opportunity of judging him
in one of the most trying situations in which the leading organ of a
movement party could be placed; and the manner in which he conducted
himself in it, gave us the exalted idea which we never afterwards lost,
both of his nobleness of character, and of his eminent talents as a
political leader.

A small and extreme section of the republican body, composed of men,
some of Edition: current; Page: [204] them highly accomplished, many of
them pure in purpose and full of courage and enthusiasm, but without
that practicalness which distinguished Carrel,—more highly endowed with
talent for action, than with judgment for it,—had formed themselves into
a society, which placed itself in communication with the discontented of
the labouring classes, and got under their command the greater part of
the insurrectionary strength of the party.* These men raised the cry of
social Edition: current; Page: [205] reform, and a modification of the
constitution of property,—ideas which the St. Simonians had set afloat,
in connexion with a definite scheme, and with speculative views the most
aenlarged, and in several respects the most just,a that had ever been
connected with Utopianismb. Butb these republicans had no definite plan;
the ideas were comparatively vague and indeterminate in their minds, yet
were sincerely entertained, and did not, whatever ignorant or cowardly
persons might suppose, mean plunder for themselves and their associates.
The Society published a manifesto, in which these aspirations were dimly
visible, and in which they reprinted, with their adhesion, a Declaration
of the Rights of Man, proposed by Robespierre in the National
Convention,[*] and by that body rejected. This document was harmless
enough, and we could not see in it any of the anti-property doctrines
that appeared to be seen by everybody else, for Paris was convulsed with
apprehension on the subject. But whether it was the name of Robespierre,
or the kind of superstition which attaches to the idea of property in
France, or that the manifesto was considered a preliminary to worse
things supposed to be meditated by its authors, the alarm of the middle
classes was now thoroughly excited: they became willing to join with any
men and any measures, in order to put down not only this, but every
other kind of republicanism; and from this time, in reality, dates the
passionate resistance to the democratic movement, which, with the
assistance of Fieschi, was improved into the laws of September 1835,[†]
by which laws, and by the imprisonment and exile of its most active
members, the republican party has been for the present silenced.

The conduct by which the prospects of the popular party were thus
compromised, Carrel had from the first disapproved. The constitution of
property appeared to him a subject for speculative philosophers,c not
for the mass: he did not think that the present idea of property, and
the present arrangements of it, would last for ever unchanged, through
the progressive changes of society and civilization; but he believed
that any improvement of them would be the work of a generation, and
Edition: current; Page: [206] not of an hour. Against the other peculiar
views of this revolutionary party he had combated both in private and in
the National. He had taken no part in their projects for arriving at a
republic by an insurrection. He had set his face against their notion of
governing by an active minority, for the good of the majority, but if
necessary in opposition to ditsd will, and by a provisional despotism
that was to terminate some day in a free government. A free, full, and
fair representation of the people was his object; full opportunity to
the nation to declare its will—the perfect submission of individual
crotchets to that will. And without condemning the Republic of the
Convention eunder the extraordinary circumstances which accompanied its
brief careere, he preferred to cite as an example the Republic of the
United States; not that he thought it perfect, nor even faf model which
France ought gin all respectsg to imitate, but because it presentedh to
France an example of what she most wanted—protection to all parties
alike, limitation of the power of the magistrate, and fairness as
between the majority and the minority.

In the newspaper warfare, of an unusually vehement character, stirred up
by the manifesto of the revolutionary republicans, Carrel was the last
of the journalists to declare himself. He took some days to consider
what position it most became him to assume. He did not agree in the
conclusions of this party, while he had just enough of their premises in
common with them, to expose him to misrepresentation. It was incumbent
on him to rescue himself, and the great majority of the popular party,
from responsibility for opinions which they did not share, and the
imputation of which was calculated to do them so much injury. On the
other hand, the party could not afford to lose these able and
ienergetici men, and the support of that portion of the working classes
who had given their confidence to them. The men, too, were many of them
his friends; he knew them to be good men, superior men, men who were an
honour to their opinions, and he could not brook the cowardice of
letting them be run down by a popular cry. After mature deliberation, he
published in the National a series of articles, admirable for their
nobleness of feeling and delicacy and dexterity in expression: in which,
without a single subterfuge, without deviating in a word from the most
open and straightforward sincerity, he probed the question to the
bottom, and contrived with the most jexquisitej address, completely to
separate himself from all that was objectionable in the opinions of the
manifesto, and at the same time to present both the opinions and the men
in the most advantageous light, in which, without disguising his
Edition: current; Page: [207] disagreement, it was possible to place
them.[*] These were triumphs which belonged only to Carrel; it was on
such occasions that he showed, though in a bloodless field, the
qualities of a consummate general.

In the deliberations of the republican party among themselves, Carrel
was more explicit. The society which issued the manifesto, and which was
called the Society of the Rights of Man, made an overture to a larger
society, that for the Protection of the Liberty of the Press, which
represented all the shades of republicanism, and invited them to adopt
the manifesto. The committee or council of the association kwask
convened to take the proposal into consideration: and Carrel, though on
ordinary occasions he absented himself from the proceedings of such
bodies, attended. At this deliberation we had the good fortune to be
present, and we shall never forget the impression we received of the
talents both of Carrel and of the leader of the more extreme party, M.
Cavaignac. Carrel displayed the same powerful good sense, and the same
spirit of conciliation, in discussing with that party his differences
from them, which he had shown in his apology for them to the public.
With the superiority of a really comprehensive mind, he placed himself
at their point of view; laid down in more express and bolder terms than
they had done themselves, and in a manner which startled men who were
esteemed to go much lfartherl than Carrel, the portion of mphilosophicm
truth which there was in the premises from which they had drawn their
erroneous conclusions; and left them less dissatisfied than pleased,
that one who differed from them so widely, agreed with them in so much
more than they expected, and could so powerfully advocate a portion of
their views. The result was that Carrel was chosen to draw up a report
to the society, on the manifesto, and on the invitation to adopt it. His
report, in which he utters his whole mind on the new ideas of social
reform considered in reference to practice, remained unpublished: Carrel
did not proclaim unnecessarily to the world the differences in his own
party, but preferred the prudent maxim of Napoleon, il faut laver notre
linge sale chez nous.[†] But at a later period, when the chiefs of the
extreme party were in prison or in banishment, the republican cause for
the present manifestly lost, himself publicly calumniated (for from what
calumny is he sacred whom a government ndetests?n) as having indirectly
Edition: current; Page: [208] instigated the Fieschi atrocity, and his
house searched for papers on pretence of ascertaining if he was
concerned in it, which the cowardly hypocrites who sought to involve him
in the odium never themselves even in imagination conceived to be
possible; at this time, when no one could any longer be injured by
setting his past conduct in its true light, Carrel published his Report
on the Robespierre Manifesto: and under the title of Extrait du dossier
d’un prévenu de complicité morale dans l’attentat du 28 Juillet,[*] it
subsists for any one to read, a monument at once of the far-sighted
intellect of Carrel, and of his admirable skill in expression.

During the rapid decline of the republican party, we know little of what
passed in Carrel’s mind; but our knowledge of him would have oled us to
surmiseo what M. Nisard states to be the fact, that he became sensible
of the hopelessness of the cause, and only did not abandon the advocacy
of it as an immediate object, from a sense of what was due to the
consistency which a public man is bound to maintain before the public,
when it is the sacrifice of his interest only, and not of his honesty,
that it requires of him; and of what was due to the simple-minded men
whom he had helped to compromise, and whose whole stay and support, the
faith which kept them honest men, and which saved them from despair,
would have expired within them if Carrel had deserted them. As is
beautifully said by M. Nisard,

to resist your better judgment; never to give way, nor allow your
misgivings to become visible; to stand firm to principles proclaimed at
some critical moment, though they were no more than sudden impressions
or rash hopes which impatience converted into principles; not to abandon
simple and ardent minds in the path in which you have yourself engaged
them, and to whom it is all in all; purposely to repress your doubts and
hesitations, and coldly to call down upon your own head fruitless and
premature perils, in a cause in which you are no longer enthusiastic, in
order to keep up the confidence of your followers: such is the price
which must be paid for being the acknowledged chief of an opinion at war
with an established government:—to do this, and to do it so gracefully
and punostentatiouslyp, that those who recognise you as their chief
shall pardon you your superiority to them; and with a talent so out of
comparison, that no self-love in the party you represent, can conceive
qtheq idea of equalling you. During more than four years, such was the
task Carrel had to fulfil—and he fulfilled it: never for a single moment
did he fall below his position. He never incited those whom he was not
resolved to follow; and in many cases where the impulse had been given
not by him, but against his judgment, he placed himself at the head of
those whom he had not instigated. The same man whose modesty in ordinary
circumstances allowed the title of chief of the republican opinion to be
disputed to him, seized upon it in time of danger as a sign by which the
stroke of the enemy might be directed to him. He was like a general who,
having by his courage and talents advanced to the first rank of the
army, allows his merits to be contested in the jealousies and gossipings
of the barrack, but in a Edition: current; Page: [209] desperate affair
assumes the command in chief by the right of the bravest andr most
able.[*]

sThe doubts and misgivings, however, which Carrel is stated to have so
painfully experienced, never affected the truth of his republican
principles, but at most their immediate applicability. The very
foundation of Carrel’s character was sincerity and singleness of
purpose; and nothing would have induced him to continue professing to
others, convictions which he had ceased to entertain.

tWhilet Carrel never abandoned republicanism, it necessarily, after the
laws of September, ceased to be so prominent as before in his journal.
He felt the necessity of rallying under one standard all who were agreed
in the essential point, opposition to the oligarchy; and he was one of
the most earnest in demanding an extension of the suffrage; that vital
point, the all-importance of which France has been so slow to recognise,
and which it is so much to be regretted that he had not chosen from the
first, instead of republicanism, to be the uimmediateu aim of his
political life.s

But the greatest disappointment which Carrel suffered was the defeat not
of republicanism, but of what M. Nisard calls his “théorie du droit
commun;”[†] those ideas of moderation in victory, of respect for the
law, and for the rights of the weaker party, so much more wanted in
France than any political improvements which are possible where those
ideas are not.

“I affirm,” says M. Nisard,

that I have never seen him in real bitterness of heart, but for what he
had to suffer on this point, and on this subject alone his
disenchantment was distressing. His good sense, the years he had before
him, the chapter of accidents, would have given him patience as to his
own prospects, but nothing could console him for seeing that noble
scheme of reciprocal forbearance compromised, and thrown back into the
class of doctrines for ever disputable—by all parties equally; by the
government, by the country, and by his own friends. There, in fact, was
the highest and truest inspiration of his good sense, the most genuine
instinct of his generous nature. All Carrel was in that doctrine. Never
would he have proved false to that noble emanation of his intellect and
of his heartv. The Revolution of July, so extraordinary among
revolutions from the spectacle of a people leaving the vanquished at
full liberty to inveigh against and even to ridicule the victory, gave
ground to hope for a striking and definitive return to the principle of
equal law. Carrel made Edition: current; Page: [210] himself the organ
of this hope, and the theorist of this doctrine. He treated the question
with the vigour and clearness which were usual with him. He opposed to
the examples, so numerous in the last fifty years, of governments which
successively perished by overstraining their powers, the idea of a
government offering securities to all parties against its own lawful and
necessary instinct of self-preservation. He invoked practical reasons
exclusively, denying himself rigidly the innocent aid of all the
language of passion, not to expose his noble theory to the ironical
designation of Utopianism. It was these views which wgavew Carrel so
many friends in all parts of France, and in all places where the
National penetrated. There is, apart from all political parties, a party
composed of all those who are either kept by circumstances out of the
active sphere of politics, or who are too enlightened to fling
themselves into it in the train of a leader who is only recommended by
successes in parliament or in the press. How many men, weary of disputes
about forms of government—incredulous even to Carrel’s admirable
apologies for the American system—quitting the shadow for the substance,
ranged themselves under that banner of equal justice which Carrel had
raised, and to which he would have adhered at the expense, if necessary,
even of his individual opinions. Testimonies of adhesion came in to him
from all quarters, which for a moment satisfied his utmost wishes; and I
saw him resigning himself to be, for an indeterminate period, the first
speculative writer of his country. But errors in which all parties had
their share, soon cooled him. It was a severe shock. Carrel had faith in
these generous views; he had adopted them with stronger conviction
perhaps than his republican theories, to which he had committed himself
hastily, and under the influence of temporary events rather than of
quiet and deliberate meditations.x . . . It is more painful surely to a
generous mind to doubt the possibility of a generous policy, than to the
leader of a party to doubt that his opinions have a chance of prevailing
Carrel had both disappointments at once.

The affliction of Carrel was irreparable from the moment when he
remained the sole defender of the common rights of all, between the
nation which from fear made a sacrifice of them to the government, and
his own party, which cherished secretly thoughts inconsistent with them.
We had a long conversation on the subject a few months before his death,
in a walk in the Bois de Boulogne. I perceived that he had almost
renounced his doctrine as a principle capable of present application: he
at most adhered to it as a Utopia, from pure generosity, and perhaps
also from the feeling of his own strength. Carrel believed that if his
party came into power, he would have the force to resist the temptation
of arbitrary authority, and not to accept it even from the hands of a
majority offering it to him in the name of his country. But a cause
deferred was to him a lost cause. His doubts were equivalent to a
defeat. Though this principle was the most disinterested conviction of
his mind and the best impulse of his heart, the theories of men of
action always imply in their own minds the hope of a prompt reduction to
practice. From the moment when his doctrine failed as a practicable
policy, it could no longer be a doctrine for him. Towards the end of his
life he spoke of it only as a result of the progress of improvement,
which it would not be his fate to live to see, and which perhaps would
never be arrived at.[*]

We can conceive few things more melancholy than the spectacle of one of
the noblest men in France, if not the noblest, dying convinced against
his will, that his Edition: current; Page: [211] country is incapable of
freedom; and under whatsoever institutions, has only the choice, what
man or what party it will be under the despotism of. But we have not
Carrel’s deliberate opinion; we have but his feelings in the first agony
of his disenchantment. That multitude of impartial men in all quarters
of France, who responded for a short time so cordially to his voice,
will again claim the liberties which, in a moment of panic, they have
surrendered to a government they neither love nor respect, and which
they submit to and even support against its enemies, solely in despair
of a better.

But Carrel was not one of those whom disappointment paralyzes;
unsuccessful in one worthy object, he always found another. The
newspaper press, gagged by the September laws, no longer afforded him
the same instrument of power, and he meditated a total or partial
retirement from it, either to recruit himself by study, se retremper par
l’étude, for which, even at an earlier period, he had expressed to us an
earnest longing, or to write what he had for some time had in view, the
History of Napoleon. But he would have been called from these pursuits
into a more active life; at the impending general election, he would
have been chosen a deputy, having already been once put up without his
knowledge, and defeated only by one vote. What course he would have
struck out for himself in the Chamber, we shall never know, but it is
not possible to doubt that it would have been an original one, and that
it would have been brilliant, and most beneficial to his country. So
immensely the superior of all his rivals in the qualities which create
influence, he would probably have drawn round him by degrees all the
sections of the popular party; would have given, if any one could,
unity, decision, and definiteness to their vague plans and divided
counsels; and the destiny which he could not yconquery for himself as
President of a Republic, he might one day have gloriously fulfilled as
minister under a reformed legislature, if any such reform could in
France (which he regarded as impossible) render royalty compatible with
the prevalence of the popular interest. These are vain dreams now, but
the time was, when it was not foolish to indulge in them. Such dreams
were the comfort of those who knew him, and who knew how ill his country
can supply his place. zHe was at once the Achilles and the Ulysses of
the democratic partyz and the star of hope for France in any new
convulsions, was extinguished when Carrel died.

It is bitter to lose such a man; bitterest of all to lose him in a
miserable duela. But ill shall it fare with the government which bcan
rejoice in the death of such an enemyb, and the time may come when it
would give its cmost precious treasuresc to recal from the grave the
victim whom, whether intentionally on its part or not, its Edition:
current; Page: [212] enmity has sent thither. The heir to the French
throne[*] is reported d to have said of Carrel’s death, that it was a
loss to all parties; he, at least, will probably live to find it so.
Such a government as that now existing in France cannot last; and
whether it end peacefully or violently, whether the return tide of
public opinion shall bear the present reigning family aloft on its
surface, or whelm them in its depths, bitterly will that man be missed,
who alone, perhaps, would have been capable of saying to that tremendous
power. Thus far shalt thou go, and no efarthere.[†] There are in France
philosophers superior to Carrel, but no man known by such past services,
equal like him to the great practical questions which are coming, and
whose whole nature and character speak out like his, to the best
qualities and noblest sympathies of the French mind. He had all that was
necessary to give him an advocate in every French breast, and to make
all young and ardent Frenchmen see in him the ideal of their own
aspirations, the expression of what in their best moments they would
wish to be.

His death is not to be confounded with the vulgar deaths of those who,
hemmed in between two cowardices, can resist the fear of death, but not
thef meaner fear of the tongues of their fellow-creatures. His duel was
a consequence of the system which he adopted for repelling the insults
to which, as a journalist identifying himself with his journal, he was
peculiarly exposed; and which, not only for his influence as a public
man, but for the respectability of the press, and for preserving that
high tone of public discussion from which he himself never swerved, he
thought it necessary not to pass unpunished. His system, alas! is
sufficiently refuted by its having cost so precious a life, but it was
his system. “He often repeated,” says M. Littré,

that the National had no procureur du roi to defend it, and that it must
be its own defender. He was persuaded, too, that nothing gives more food
to political genmitiesg, or renders them more capable of reaching the
last excesses, than the impunity of calumny: he contended that the men
of the Revolution had prepared their own scaffold by not imposing
silence on their defamers, and had it been necessary for him to expose
himself even more than he did, he never would have suffered, in whatever
situation he might have been placed, that his name and character should
with impunity be trifled with. This was his answer when he was blamed
for risking his life too readily; and now, when he has fallen, it is
fit, in defending his memory from a reproach which grief has wrung from
persons who loved him, to recal the words he uttered on his death-bed.
“The standard-bearer of the regiment is always the most exposed.”[‡]

He died a martyr to the morality and dignity of public discussion: and
though Edition: current; Page: [213] even that cause would have been far
better served by his life than by such a death, he was the victim of his
virtues, and of that low state of our civilization, after all our
boasting, which has not yet hcontrivedh the means of giving itoi a man
whose reputation is important to him, jprotectionj against insult, but
kleavesk him to seek reparation sword in hand, as in the barbarous ages.
While he lived, he did keep up in the press generally, something of that
elevation of tone which distinguished it under the Restoration, but
which in the débordement of political and literary profligacy since the
Revolution lof 1830l, it had become difficult to preserve: and all we
mknowm of the state of newspaper discussion since his death, exalts our
sense of the moral influence which Carrel exercised over the press of
France.

Carrel was of middle height, slightly made, and very graceful. Like
nmostn persons of really fine faculties, he carried those faculties with
him into the smallest things; and did not disdain to excel, being
qualified to do so, ino things which are great only to little men. Even
in the details of personal equipments, his taste was watched for and
followed by the amateurs of such matters. He was fond of all bodily
exercises, and had, says M. Nisard, un peu de tous les goûts vifs,[*]
more or less of all strong and natural inclinations; as might be
expected from his large and vigorous human nature, the foundation of
strength of will, and which, combined with intellect and with goodness,
constitutes greatness. He was a human being complete at all points, not
a fraction or frustum of one.

“The distinctive feature of his character,” says M. Nisard,

was his unbounded generosity. In whatever sense we understand that
word,p whether it mean the impulse of a man who devotes himself, or
merely pecuniary liberality, the life of Carrel gives occasion for
applying it in all its meanings. All the actions of his public life are
marked with the former kind of generosity. His errors were generally
acts of generosity ill-calculated. As for pecuniary generosity, no one
had it more, or of a better sort. Carrel could neither refuse, nor give
littleq[†]

Edition: current; Page: [214]
There are stories told of him like those told of Goldsmith, or any other
person of thoughtless generosity.r As is often the case with persons of
strong impulses, he was of a careless character when not under
excitement, and his inattention sometimes caused inconvenience to
himself, and made him give unintentional offence to others. But on
occasions which called into action his strong will, he had the eye of an
eagle: “he seized with a glance, as on a field of battle, the whole
terrain on which he was placed; and astonished above all by the sureness
of the instinct with which he divined the significance of small things.
Small things,” continues M. Littré, “are those which the vulgar do not
perceive; but when such things have produced serious effects, pause,
quite disconcerted, before the irrevocable event which might so easily
have been prevented.”s[*]

His conversation, especially on political subjects, M. Nisard, comparing
him with the best conversers in a country where the art of conversation
is tfart more cultivated than it is here, declares to be the most
perfect he ever heard: and we can add our testimony to his, that
Carrel’s writings in the National seemed but the continuation of his
conversation. He was fond of showing that he could do equal justice to
all sides of a question: and he would

take up a government newspaper, or one of a more moderate opposition
than his own, and reading the article of the day, he would adopt its
idea, and complete it or develop it in the spirit of the opinions which
had inspired it. At other times he would in the same way recompose the
speeches in the Chamber. “They have not given,” he would say, “the best
reasons for their opinions; this would have been more specious, and
would have embarrassed us more.” His facility was prodigious. And the
reasons he gave were not rhetorical fallacies, but just arguments. They
embodied all that could be said truly and honourably on that side of the
question. uBy this he demonstratedu two of his qualities, vastly
superior to mere facility in arguing for the sake of argument, on the
one hand, his knowledge of the interests of all parties; on the other,
his real esteem for what was just in the viewsv most opposite to his
own.

We have markedw these traits of character, because they help to complete
the picture of what Carrel was, and, while they give reality to our
conception of him, and bring him home to the feelings as a being of our
own flesh and blood, they all give additional insight into those great
qualities which it is the object of this paper to commemorate. The mind
needs such examples, to keep alive in it that faith in Edition: current;
Page: [215] good, without which nothing worthy the name of good can ever
be realized: it needs to be reminded by them that (asx is often repeated
by one of the ygreatest writersy of our time) man is still man.[*]
Whatever man has been, man may be; whatever of heroic the heroic ages,
whatever of chivalrous the romantic ages have produced, is still
possible, nay, still is, and a hero of Plutarch may exist amidst all the
pettinesses of modern civilization, and with all the cultivation and
refinement, andz the analyzing and questioning spirit of the modern
European mind. The lives of those are not lost, who have liveda enough
to be an example to the world; and though his country will not reap the
blessings his life might have conferred upon it, yet while the six years
following the Revolution of 1830 shall have a place in history, the
memory of Armand Carrel will not butterly perishb

Si quis piorum manibus locus, si, ut sapientibus placet, non cum corpore
extinguuntur magnae animae, placidè quiescas, nosque ab infirmo
desiderio et mulieribus lamentis ad contemplationem virtutum tuarum
voces, quas neque lugeri, neque plangi fas est. admiratione te potiùs,
et immortalibus laudibus, et si natura suppeditet, similitudine
decorabimus[†]



Michelet’s History of France

it has of late been a frequent remark among Continental thinkers, that
the tendencies of the age set strongly in the direction of historical
inquiry, and that history is destined to assume a new aspect from the
genius and labours of the minds now devoted to its improvement. The
anticipation must appear at least premature to an observer in England,
confining his observation to his own country. Whatever may be the
merits, in some subordinate respects, of such histories as the last
twenty years have produced among us, they are in general distinguished
by no essential character from the historical writings of the last
century. No signs of a new school have been manifested in them; they
will be affirmed by no one to constitute an era, or even prefigure the
era which is to come: save that the “shadow of its coming”[*] rested for
an instant on the lamented Dr. Arnold at the close of his career; while
Mr. Carlyle has shown a signal example, in his French Revolution,[†] of
the epic tone and pictorial colouring which may be given to literal
truth, when materials are copious, and when the writer combines the
laborious accuracy of a chronicler with the vivid imagination of a poet.

But whoever desires to know either the best which has been accomplished,
or what the most advanced minds think it possible to accomplish, for the
renovation of historical studies, must look to the Continent; and by the
Continent we mean, of course, in an intellectual sense, Germany and
France. That there are historians in Germany, our countrymen have at
last discovered. The first two volumes of Niebuhr’s unfinished work,
though the least attractive part to ordinary tastes, are said to have
had more readers, or at least more purchasers, in English than in their
native language. Of the remaining volume a translation has lately
appeared, by a different, but a highly competent hand.[‡] Schlosser, if
not read, has at least been Edition: current; Page: [220] heard of in
England;[*] and one of Ranke’s works has been twice translated:[†] we
would rather that two of them had been translated once. But, though
French books are supposed to be sufficiently legible in England without
translation, the English public is not aware, that both in historical
speculations, and in the importance of her historical writings, France,
in the present day, far surpasses Germany. What reason induces the
educated part of our countrymen to aignorea, in so determined a manner,
the more solid productions of the most active national mind in Europe,
and to limit their French readings to M. de Balzac and M. Eugène Sue,
there would be some difficulty in precisely determining. Perhaps it is
the ancient dread of French infidelity; perhaps the ancient contempt of
French frivolity and superficiality. If it be the former, we can assure
them that there is no longer ground for such a feeling; if the latter,
we must be permitted to doubt that there ever was. It is unnecessary to
discuss whether, as some affirm, a strong religious “revival” is taking
place in France, and whether such a phenomenon, if real, is likely to be
permanent. There is at least a decided reaction against the birreligionb
of the last age. The Voltairian philosophy is looked upon as a thing of
the past; one of its most celebrated assailants has been heard to lament
that it has no living representative sufficiently considerable to
perform the functions of a “constitutional opposition” against the
reigning philosophic doctrines. The present French thinkers, whether
receiving Christianity or not as a divine revelation, in no way feel
themselves called upon to be unjust to it as a fact in history. There
are men who, not disguising their own unbelief, have written deeper and
finer things in vindication of what religion has done for mankind, than
have sufficed to found the reputation of some of its most admired
defenders. If they have any historical prejudice on the subject, it is
in favour of the priesthood. They leave the opinions of David Hume on
ecclesiastical history[‡] to the exclusive patronage (we are sorry to
say) of Protestant writers in Great Britain.

With respect to the charge so often made against French historians, of
superficiality and want of research, it is a strange accusation against
the country which produced the Benedictines. France has at all times
possessed a class of Edition: current; Page: [221] studious and accurate
érudits, as numerous as any other country except Germany; and her
popular writers are not more superficial than our own. Voltaire gave
false views of history in many respects, but not falser than Hume’s;
Thiers is inaccurate, but less so than Sir Walter Scott. France has done
more for even English history than England has. The very first complete
history of England, and to this day not wholly superseded by any other,
was the production of a French emigrant, Rapin de Thoyras.[*]c The
histories and historical memoirs of the Commonwealth period, never yet
collected in our own country, have been translated and published at
Paris in an assembled form, under the superintendence of M. Guizot;[†]
to whom also we owe the best history, both in thought and in
composition, of the times of Charles I.[‡] The reigns of the last two
Stuarts have been written, with the mind of a statesman and the hand of
a vigorous writer, by Armand Carrel, in his Histoire de la
Contre-révolution en Angleterre;[§] and at greater length, with much
research and many new facts, by M. Mazure.[¶] To call these writings,
and numerous others which have lately appeared in France, superficial,
would only prove an entire unacquaintance with them.

Among the French writers now labouring in the historical field, we must
at present confine ourselves to those who have narrated as well as
philosophized; who have written history, as well as written about
history. Were we to include in our survey those general speculations
which aim at connecting together the facts of universal history, we
could point to some which we deem even more instructive, because of a
more comprehensive and far-reaching character, than any which will now
fall under our notice. Restricting ourselves, however, to historians in
the received sense of the word, and among them to those who have done
enough to be regarded as the chiefs and representatives of the new
tendency, we should say that the three great historical minds of France,
in our time, are Thierry, Guizot, and the Edition: current; Page: [222]
writer whose name, along with that of his most important production,
stands at the beginning of the present article.

To assist our appreciation of these writers, and of the improved ideas
on the use and study of history, which their writings exemplify and
diffuse, we may observe that there are three distinct stages in
historical inquiry.

The type of the first stage is Larcher, the translator of Herodotus,[*]
who, as remarked by Paul Louis Courier, carries with him to the durbar
of Darius the phraseology of the Court of Louis Quatorze;* and, nowise
behind him, an English translator of the Anabasis, who renders ἄνδρες
στρατιῶται by “gentleman of the Edition: current; Page: [223] army.”[*]
The character of this school is to transport present feelings and
notions back into the past, and refer all ages and forms of human life
to the standard of that in which the writer himself lives. Whatever
cannot be translated into the language of their own time, whatever they
cannot represent to themselves by some fancied modern equivalent, is
nothing to them, calls up no ideas in their minds at all. They cannot
imagine anything different from their own everyday experience. They
assume that words mean the same thing to a monkish chronicler as to a
modern member of parliament. If they find the term rex applied to Clovis
or Clotaire, they already talk of “the French monarchy,” or “the kingdom
of France.” If among a tribe of savages newly escaped from the woods,
they find mention of a council of leading men, or an assembled multitude
giving its sanction to some matter of general concernment, their
imagination jumps to a system of free institutions, and a wise
contrivance of constitutional balances and checks. If, at other times,
they find the chief killing and plundering without this sanction, they
just as promptly figure to themselves an acknowledged despotism. In this
manner they antedate not only modern ideas, but the essential characters
of the modern mind; and imagine their ancestors to be very like their
next neighbours, saving a few eccentricities, occasioned by being still
Pagans or Catholics, by having no habeas corpus act, and no Sunday
schools. If an historian of this stamp takes a side in controversy, and
Edition: current; Page: [224] passes judgment upon actions or personages
that have figured in history, he applies to them in the crudest form the
canons of some modern party or creed. If he is a Tory, and his subject
is Greece, everything Athenian must be cried down, and Philip and
Dionysius must be washed white as snow, lest Pericles and Demosthenes
should not be sufficiently black. If he be a Liberal, Caesar and
Cromwell, and all usurpers similar to them, are “damned to everlasting
fame.”[*] Is he da disbeliever of revelation? a short-sighted,d
narrow-minded Julian becomes his pattern of a prince, and the heroes and
martyrs of Christianity objects of scornful pity. If he is of the Church
of England, Gregory VII must be an ambitious impostor, because Leo X was
a self-indulgent voluptuary; John Knox nothing but a coarse-minded
fanatic, because the historian does not like John Wesley. Humble as our
estimate must be of this kind of writers, it would be unjust to forget
that even their mode of treating history is an improvement upon the
uninquiring credulity which contented itself with copying or translating
the ancient authorities, without ever bringing the writer’s own mind in
contact with the subject. It is better to conceive Demosthenes even
under the image of Anacharsis Clootz, than not as a living being at all,
but a figure in a puppet-show, of which Plutarch is the showman; and
Mitford, so far, is a better historian than Rollin. He does give a sort
of reality to historical personages: he ascribes to them passions and
purposes, which, though not those of their age or position, are still
human; and enables us to form a tolerably distinct, though in general an
exceedingly false notion of their qualities and circumstances. This is a
first step; and, that step made, the reader, once in motion, is not
likely to stop there.

Accordingly, the second stage of historical study attempts to regard
former ages not with the eye of a modern, but, as far as possible, with
that of a ecotemporarye; to realize a true and living picture of the
past time, clothed in its circumstances and peculiarities. This is not
an easy task: the knowledge of any amount of dry generalities, or even
of the practical life and business of his own time, goes a very little
way to qualify a writer for it. He needs some of the characteristics of
the poet. He has to “body forth the forms of things unknown.”[†] He must
have the faculty to see, in the ends and fragments which are preserved
of some element of the past, the consistent whole to which they once
belonged; to discern, in the individual fact which some monument hands
down or to which some chronicler testifies, the general, and for that
very reason unrecorded, facts which it presupposes. Such gifts of
imagination he must possess; and, what is rarer still, he must forbear
to Edition: current; Page: [225] abuse them. He must have the conscience
and self-command to faffirmf no more than can be vouched for, or deduced
by legitimate inference from what is vouched for. With the genius for
producing a great historical romance, he must have the virtue to add
nothing to what can be proved to be true. What wonder if so rare a
combination is not often realized?

Realized, of course, in its ideal perfection, it never is; but many now
aim at it, and some approach it, according to the measure of their
faculties. Of the sagacity which detects the meaning of small things,
and drags to light the forgotten elements of a gone-by state of society,
from scattered evidences which the writers themselves who recorded them
did not understand, the world has now, in Niebuhr, an imperishable
model. The reproduction of past events in the colours of life, and with
all the complexity and bustle of a real scene, can hardly be carried to
a higher pitch than by Mr. Carlyle. But to find a school of writers, and
among them several of the first rank, who systematically direct their
aims towards this ideal of history, we must look to the French
historians of the present day.

There is yet a third, and the highest stage of historical investigation,
in which the aim is not simply to compose histories, but to construct a
science of history. In this view, the whole of the events which have
befallen the human race, and the states through which it has passed, are
regarded as a series of phenomena, produced by causes, and susceptible
of explanation. All history is conceived as a progressive chain of
causes and effects; or (by an apter metaphor) as a gradually unfolding
web, in which every fresh part that comes to view is a prolongation of
the part previously unrolled, whether we can trace the separate threads
from the one into the other, or not. The facts of each generation are
looked upon as one complex phenomenon, caused by those of the generation
preceding, and causing, in its turn, those of the next in order. That
these states must follow one another according to some law, is
considered certain: how to read that law, is deemed the fundamental
problem of the science of history. To find on what principles, derived
from the nature of man and the glaws of the outward worldg, each state
of society and of the human mind produced that which came after it; and
whether there can be traced any order of production sufficiently
definite, to show what future states of society may be expected to
emanate from the circumstances which exist at present—is the aim of
historical philosophy in its third stage.

This ultimate and highest attempt, must, in the order of nature, follow,
not precede, that last described; for before we can trace the filiation
of states of society one from another, we must rightly understand and
clearly conceive them, each apart from the rest. Accordingly, this
greatest achievement is rather a possibility to be one day realized,
than an enterprise in which any great progress has yet been made. But of
the little yet done in hthish direction, by far the greater part has
Edition: current; Page: [226] hitherto been done by French writers. They
have made more hopeful attempts than any one else, and have more clearly
pointed out the path: they are the real harbingers of the dawn of
historical science.

Dr. Arnold, in his Historical Lectures[*]—which, (it should not be
forgotten,) though the latest production of his life, were the earliest
of his systematic meditations on general history—showed few and faint
symptoms of having conceived, with any distinctness, this third step in
historical study. But he had, as far as the nature of the work admitted,
completely realized the second stage; and to those who have not yet
attained that stage, there can scarcely be more instructive reading than
his Lectures. The same praise must be given, in an even higher sense, to
the earliest of the three great modern French historians, M. Augustin
Thierry.

It was from historical romances that M. Thierry learned to recognise the
worthlessness of what in those days were called histories;i
Chateaubriand and Sir Walter Scott were his early teachers. He has
himself described the effect produced upon him and others, by finding,
in Ivanhoe,[†] Saxons and Normans in the reign of Richard I.[‡] Why, he
asked himself, should the professed historians have left such a fact as
this to be brought to light by a novelist? and what else were such men
likely to have understood of the age, when so important and distinctive
a feature of it had escaped them? The study of the original sources of
French history, completed his conviction of the senselessness of the
modern compilers. He resolved “to plant the standard of historical
reform;”[§] and to this undertaking all his subsequent life has been
consecrated. His History of the Norman Conquest, though justly
chargeable with riding a favourite idea too hard, forms an era in
English history. In another of his works, the Lettres sur l’Histoire de
France, in which profound learning is combined with that clear practical
insight into the realities of life, which in France, more than in any
other country except Italy, accompanies speculative eminence, M. Thierry
gives a piquant exposure of the incapacity of historians to enter into
the spirit of the middle ages, and the ludicrously false impressions
they communicate of human life as it was in early times. Exemplifying
the right method as well as censuring the wrong, he, in the same work,
extracted from the records of the middle ages some portions, not large
but valuable, of the neglected facts which constitute the real history
of European society.[¶] Nowhere, however, is M. Thierry’s genius so
pleasingly displayed, as in his most recent publication, the work of his
premature old age, written under Edition: current; Page: [227] the
double affliction of blindness and paralysis—the Récits des Temps
Mérovingiens.[*] This book, the first series of which is all that hasj
been published, was destined to paint—what till that time he had only
discussed and described—that chaos of primitive barbarism and enervated
civilization, from which the present nations of Europe had their origin,
and which forms the transition from ancient to modern history. He makes
the age tell its own story; not drawing anything from invention, butk
adhering scrupulously to authentic facts. Asl the history of the three
centuries preceding Charlemagne was not worth writing throughout inm
fulness of detailn, he contents himself with portions of it, selecting
such as, while they are illustrative of the times, are also in
themselves complete stories, furnished with characters and personal
interest. The experiment is completely successful. The grace and beauty
of the narration makes these true histories as pleasant reading as if
they were a charming collection of fictitious tales; while the practical
feeling they impart of the form of human life from which they are
drawn—the familiar understanding they communicate of “la vie
barbare,”—is unexampled even in fiction, and unthought of heretofore in
any writing professedly historical. The narratives are preceded by an
improved résumé of the author’s previous labours in the theoretical
department of his subject, under the title of a Dissertation on the
Progress of Historical Studies in France.[†]

M. Guizot has a mind of a different cast from M. Thierry: the one is
especially a man of speculation and science, as the other is, more
emphatically, in the high European sense of the term, an artist; though
this is not to be understood of either in an exclusive sense, each
possessing a fair share of the qualities characteristic of the other. Of
all Continental historians of whom we are aware, M. Guizot is the one
best adapted to this country, and a familiarity with whose writings
would do most to traino and ripen among us the growing spirit of
historical speculation.

M. Guizot’s only narrative work is thep history, already referred to, of
what is called in France the English Revolution. His qotherq principal
productions are the Essais sur l’Histoire de France, published in 1822,
and the Lectures,[‡] which the Edition: current; Page: [228] whole
literary public of Paris thronged to hear, from 1828 to 1830, and to
whichr the political events of the last of those years put an abrupt
termination. The immense popularity of these writings in their own
country—a country not more patient of the “genre ennuyeux”[*] than its
neighbours—is a sufficient guarantee that their wearing the form of
dissertation, and not of narrative, is, in this instance, no detriment
to their attractiveness. Even the light reader will find in them no
resemblance to the chapters on “manners and customs,” which, with
pardonable impatience, he is accustomed to skip when turning over any of
the historians of the old school. For in them we find only that dullest
and most useless of all things, mere facts without ideas: M. Guizot
creates within those dry bones a living soul.[†]

M. Guizot does not, as in the main must be said of M. Thierry, remain in
what we have called the second region of historical inquiry: he makes
frequent and long incursions into the third. He not only inquires what
our ancestors were, but what made them so; what gave rise to the
peculiar state of society of the middle ages, and by what causes this
state was progressively transformed into what we see around us. His
success in this respect could not, in the almost nascent state of the
science of history, be perfect; but it is as great as was perhaps
compatible with the limits of his design. For (sas M. Comte hass well
remarked) in the study of history, we must proceed from the ensemble to
the details, and not conversely.[‡] We cannot explain the facts of any
age or nation, unless we have first traced out some connected view of
the main outline of history. The great universal results must be first
accounted for, not only because they are the most important, but because
they depend on the simplest laws. Taking place on so large a scale as to
neutralize the operation of local and partial agents, it is in them
alone that we see in undisguised action the inherent tendencies of the
human race. Those great results, therefore, may admit of a complete
theory; while it would be impossible to give a full analysis of the
innumerable causes which influenced the local or temporary development
of some section of mankind; and even a distant approximation to it
supposes a previous understanding of the general laws, to which these
local causes stand in the relation of modifying circumstances.

But before astronomy had its Newton, there was a place, and an
honourable one, for not only the observer Tycho, but the theorizer,
Kepler. M. Guizot is the Kepler, and something more, of his particular
subject. He has a real talent for the explanation and generalization of
historical facts. He unfolds at least the proximate Edition: current;
Page: [229] causes of social phenomena, with rare discernment, and much
knowledge of human nature. We recognise, moreover, in all his theories,
not only a solidity of acquirements, but a sobriety and impartiality,
which neither his countrymen, nor speculative thinkers in general, have
often manifested in so high a degree. He does not exaggerate the
influence of some one cause or agency, sacrificing all others to it. He
neither writes as if human affairs were absolutely moulded by the wisdom
and virtue or the vices and follies of rulers; nor as if the general
circumstances of society did all, and accident or eminent individuals
could do nothing. He neither attributes everything to political
institutions, nor everything to the ideas and convictions in men’s
minds; but shows how they both co-operate, and react upon one another.
He sees in European civilization the complex product of many conflicting
influences, Germanic, Roman, and Christian; and of the peculiar position
in which these different forces were brought to act upon one another. He
ascribes to each of them its share of influence. Whatever may be added
to his speculations in a more advanced state of historical science,
little that he has done, will, we think, require to be undone; his
conclusions are seldom likely to be found in contradiction with the
deeper or more extensive results that may, perhaps, hereafter be
obtained.

It speaks little for the intellectual tastes and the liberal curiosity
of our countrymen, that they remain ignorant or neglectful of such
writings. The Essays we have tseldomt met with an Englishman who had
read. Of the Lectures, one volume has been twice translated,[*] and has
had some readers, especially when M. Guizot’s arrival in England as the
representative of his country, obtruded (as Dr. Chalmers would say)[†] a
knowledge of his existence and character upon London society. But the
other five volumes are untranslated and unread, although they are the
work itself, to which the first volume is, in truth, only the
introduction. When the Villèle Ministry was overthrown, and the
interdict removed by which the Government of the Restoration had chained
up all independent speculation, M. Guizot reopened his lecture-room,
after a suspension of near ten years. Half the academic season having
then expired, he was compelled, not only to restrict his view of modern
history to the merest outline, but to leave out half the subject
altogether; treating only of the progress of Society, and reserving for
the more extended labours of subsequent years, the development of the
individual human being. Yet critics have been found in England, who, in
entire ignorance that the volume before them was a mere preface, visited
upon the author, as shortcomings Edition: current; Page: [230] in his
own udoctrinesu, the lacunae unavoidably left in his first year’s
lectures, and amply filled up in those of the succeeding
seasons;—charging upon him as a grave philosophical error, that he saw
in history only institutions and social relations, and altogether
overlooked human beings.[*]

What has obtained for the introductory volume the share of attention
with which it (and not the others) has been treated by the English
public, is perhaps that it bears as its second title, History of
Civilization in Europe; while the other volumes, after the words Cours
d’Histoire Moderne, bear the designation of “Histoire de la Civilisation
en France,” and as such may have been deemed not specially interesting
to England. But though this may avail in explanation, it is inadmissible
as an excuse. A person must need instruction in history very much, who
does not know that the history of civilization in France is that of
civilization in Europe. The main course of the stream of civilization is
identical in all the western nations; their origin was essentially
similar—they went through the same phases—and society in all of them, at
least until after the Reformation, consisted fundamentally of the same
elements. Any one country, therefore, may, in some measure, stand for
all the rest. But France is the best type, as representing best the
average circumstances of Europe. There is no country in which the
general tendencies of modern society have been so little interfered with
by secondary and modifying agencies. In England, for example, much is to
be ascribed to the peculiarity of a double conquest. While elsewhere
vonev race of barbarians overran an extensive region, and settled down
amidst a subject population greatly more numerous, as well as more
civilized, than themselves; the first invaders of England, instead of
enslaving, exterminated or expelled the former inhabitants; and after
growing up into a nation, were in their turn subdued by a race almost
exactly on a level with them in civilization. The Scandinavian
countries, on the other hand, and a great part of Germany, had never
been conquered at all; and in the latter, much depended upon the
elective character of the head of the empire, which prevented the
consolidation of a powerful central government. In Italy, the early
predominance of towns and town life; in Spain, the Moorish occupation
and its consequences, coexisted as modifying causes with the general
circumstances common to all. But in France, no disturbing forces, of
anything like equal potency, can be traced; and the universal
tendencies, having prevailed more completely, are more obviously
discernible.

To any European, therefore, the history of France is not a foreign
subject, butw part of his national history. Nor is there anything
partial or local in M. Guizot’s Edition: current; Page: [231] treatment
of it. He draws his details and exemplifications from France; but his
principles are universal. The social conditions and changes which he
delineates, were not French, but European. The intellectual progress
which he retraces, was the progress of the European mind.x

A similar remark applies to the History of France, by M. Michelet, the
third great French historian of the present era—a work which, even in
its unfinished state, is the most important that he has produced, and of
which it is now time that we should begin to give an account.

M. Michelet has, among the writers of European history, a position
peculiarly his own.

Were we to say that M. Michelet is altogether as safe a writer as M.
Thierry or M. Guizot—that his interpretations of history may be accepted
as actual history—that those who dislike to think or explore for
themselves, may sleep peacefully in the faith that M. Michelet has
thought and explored for them—we should give him a different kind of
praise from that which we consider his due, M. Michelet’s are not books
to save a reader the trouble of thinking, but to make him boil over with
thought. Their effect on the mind is not acquiescence, but stir and
ferment.

M. Michelet has opened a new vein in the history of the middle ages. A
pupil of M. Guizot, or at least an admiring auditor, who has learned
from him most of what he had to teach, M. Michelet, for this very
reason, has not followed in his wake, but consulted the bent of his own
faculties, which prompted him to undertake precisely what M. Guizot had
left undone. Of him it would be very unlikely to be said, even falsely,
that he thought only of society. Without overlooking society, man is his
especial subject. M. Guizot has neglected neither, but has treated them
both conformably to the character of his own mind. He is himself two
things—a statesman and a speculative thinker; and in his Lectures, when
he leaves the province of the statesman, it is for that of the
metaphysician. His history of the human mind is principally the history
of speculation. It is otherwise with M. Michelet. His peculiar element
is that of the poet, as his countrymen would say—of the religious man,
as would be said in a religious age—in reality, of both. Not the
intellectual life of intellectual men, not the social life of the
people, but their internal life; their thoughts and feelings in relation
to themselves and their destination; the habitual temper of their
minds—not overlooking, of course, their external circumstances. He
concerns himself more with masses than with literary individuals, except
as specimens, on a larger scale, of what was in the general heart of
their age. His chief interest is for the collective mind, the everyday
plebeian mind of humanity—its enthusiasms, its collapses, its strivings,
its Edition: current; Page: [232] attainments and failures. He makes us
feel with its sufferings, rejoice in its yhopes. Hey makes us identify
ourselves with the varying fortunes and feelings of human nature, as if
mankind or Christendom were one being, the single and indivisible hero
of a tale.

M. Michelet had afforded an earnest of these qualities in his former
writings. He has written a history of the Roman Republic,[*] in which he
availed himself largely, as all writers on Roman history now do, of the
new views opened by the profound sagacity of Niebuhr. One thing,
however, he has not drawn from Niebuhr; for Niebuhr had it not to
bestow. We have no right to require that an author, who has done in his
department great things which no one before him had done, or could do,
should have done all other good things likewise. But without meaning
disparagement to Niebuhr, it has always struck us as remarkable, that a
mind so fitted to throw light upon the dark places in the Roman manner
of existence, should have exhausted its efforts in clearing up and
rendering intelligible the merely civic life of the Roman people. By the
aid of Niebuhr, we now know, better than we had ever reckoned upon
knowing, what the Roman republic was. But what the Romans themselves
were, we scarcely know better than we did before. It is true that
citizenship, its ideas, feelings, and active duties, filled a larger
space in ancient, than in any form of modern life; but they did not
constitute the whole. A Roman citizen had a religion and gods, had a
religious morality, had domestic relations; there were women in Rome as
well as men; there were children, who were brought up and educated in a
certain manner; there were, even in the earliest period of the Roman
commonwealth, slaves. Of all this, one perceives hardly anything in
Niebuhr’s voluminous work. The central idea of the Roman religion and
polity, the family, scarcely shows itself, except in connexion with the
classification of the citizens; nor are we made to perceive in what the
beliefs and modes of conduct of the Romans, respecting things in
general, agreed, and in what disagreed, with those of the rest of the
ancient world. Yet the mystery of the Romans and of their fortunes must
lie there. Now, of many of these things, one does learn something from
the much smaller work of M. Michelet. In imaging to ourselves the
relation in which a Roman stood, not to his fellow-citizens as such, but
to the universe, we gain some help from Michelet—next to none from
Niebuhr. The work before us has, in a still greater degree, a similar
merit. Without neglecting the outward condition of mankind, but on the
contrary throwing much new light upon it, he tells us mainlyz their
inward mental workings. Others have taught us as much of how mankind
acted at each period, but no one makes us so well comprehend how they
felt. He is the subjective historian of the middle ages.

For his book, at least in the earlier volumes, is a history of the
middle ages, quite Edition: current; Page: [233] as much as of France;
and he has aimed at giving us, not the dry husk, but the spirit of those
ages. This had never been done before in the same degree, not even by
his eminent precursor, Thierry, except for the period of the Germanic
invasions. The great value of the book is, that it does, to some extent,
make us understand what was really passing in the collective mind of
each generation. For, in assuming distinctness, the life of the past
assumes also variety under M. Michelet’s hands. With him, each period
has a physiognomy and a character of its own. It is in reading him that
we are made to feel distinctly, how many successive conditions of
humanity, and states of the human mind, are habitually confounded under
the appellation of the Middle Ages. To common perception, those times
are like a distant range of mountains, all melted together into one
cloudlike barrier. To M. Michelet, they are like the same range on a
nearer approach, resolved into its separate mountain masses, with
sloping sides overlapping one another, and gorges opening between them.

The spirit of an age is a part of its history which cannot be extracted
literally from ancient records, but must be distilled from those arid
materials by the chemistry of the writer’s own mind; and whoever
attempts this, will expose himself to the imputation of substituting
aimaginationa for facts, writing history by divination, band the likeb.
These accusations have been often brought against M. Michelet, and we
will not take upon ourselves to say that they are never just; we think
he is not seldom the dupe of his own ingenuity. But it is a mistake to
suppose that a man of genius will be oftener wrong, in his views of
history, than a dull unimaginative proser. Not only are the very errors
of the one more instructive than the commonplaces of the other, but he
commits fewer of them. It by no means follows, that he who cannot see so
far as another, must, therefore, see more correctly. To be incapable of
discerning what is, gives no exemption from believing what is not; and
there is no perversion of history by persons who think, equal to those
daily committed by writers who never rise to the height of an original
idea.

It is true, a person of lively apprehension and fertile invention,
relying on his sagacity, may neglect the careful study of original
documents. But M. Michelet is a man of deep erudition, and extensive
research. He has a high reputation among the French learned for his
industry; while his official position, which connects him with the
archives of the kingdom, has given him access to a rich source of
unexplored authorities, of which he has made abundant use in his later
volumes, and which promise to be of still greater importance in those
yet to come. Even in its mere facts, therefore, this history is
considerably in advance of all previously written. That his accuracy is
not vulnerable in any material point, may be believed on the authority
of the sober and right-minded Thierry, who, in the Edition: current;
Page: [234] preface to the Récits, in a passage where, though Michelet
is not named, he is evidently pointed at, blames his method as a
dangerous one, but acquits M. Michelet himself as having been saved by
“conscientious studies” from the errors into which his example is likely
to betray young writers.[*] The carefulness of his investigations has
been impugned on minor points. An English Review has made a violent
attack upon his account of Boniface VIII;[†] and, from his references
(which are always copious) it does not appear that he had consulted the
Italian authorities on cwhomc the reviewer relies.[‡] But it is hard to
try an historian by the correctness of his details dond incidents only
collaterally connected with his subject. We ourselves perceive that he
sometimes trusts to memory, and is inaccurate in trifles; but the true
question is—Has he falsified the essential character of any of the
greater events of the time about which he writes? If he has not, but on
the contrary, has placed many of ethosee events in a truer light, and
rendered their character more intelligible, than any former historian,
to rectify his small mistakes will be a very fitting employment for
those who have the necessary information, and nothing more important to
do.

The History, though a real narrative, not a dissertation, is, in all its
earlier parts, a greatly abridged one. The writer dwells only on the
great facts which paint their period, or on things which it appears fto
himf necessary to present in a new light. As, in his progress, however,
he came into contact with his new materials, his design has extended;
and the fourth and fifth volumes, embracing the confused period of the
wars of Edward III and Henry V, contain, though in a most condensed
style, a tolerably minute recital of events. It is impossible for us to
make any approach to an abstract of the contents of so large a work. We
must be satisfied with touching cursorily upon some of the passages of
history, on which M. Michelet’s views are the most original, or
otherwise most deserving of notice.

In the first volume, he is on ground which had already been broken and
well turned over by M. Thierry. But some one was still wanting who
should write the history of the time, in a connected narrative, from M.
Thierry’s point of view. M. Michelet has done this, and more. He has not
only understood, like his predecessor, the character of the age of
transition, in which the various races, conquered and conquering, were
mixed on French soil without being blended; but Edition: current; Page:
[235] he has endeavoured to assign to the several elements of that
confused mixture, the share of influence which belongs to them over the
subsequent destinies of his country.

It was natural that a subjective historian, one who looks, above all, to
the internal moving forces of human affairs, should attach great
historical importance to the consideration of Races. This subject, on
British soil, has usually fallen into hands little competent to treat it
soberly, or on true principles of induction; but of the great influence
of Race in the production of national character, no reasonable inquirer
can now doubt. As far as history, and social circumstances generally,
are concerned, how little resemblance can be traced between the French
and the Irish—in national character, how much! The same ready
excitability; the same impetuosity when excited, yet the same readiness
under excitement to submit to the severest discipline—a quality which at
first might seem to contradict impetuosity, but which arises from that
very vehemence of character with which it appears to conflict, and is
equally conspicuous in Revolutions of Three Days, temperance movements,
and meetings on the Hill of Tara. The same sociability and
demonstrativeness—the same natural refinement of manners, down to the
lowest rank—in both, the characteristic weakness an inordinate vanity,
their more serious moral deficiency the absence of a sensitive regard
for truth. Their ready susceptibility to influences, while it makes them
less steady in right, makes them also less pertinacious in wrong, and
renders them, under favourable circumstances of culture, reclaimable and
improvable (especially through their more generous feelings) in a degree
to which the more obstinate races are strangers. To what, except their
Gaelic blood, can we ascribe all this similarity between populations,
the whole course of whose national history has been so different? We say
Gaelic, not Celtic, because the Kymri of Wales and gBretagneg, though
also called Celts, and notwithstanding a close affinity in language,
have evinced throughout history, in many respects, an opposite type of
character; more like the Spanish Iberians than either the French or
Irish: individual instead of gregarious, tough and obstinate instead of
impressible—instead of the most disciplinable, one of the most
intractable Races among mankind.

Historians who preceded M. Michelet had seen chiefly the Frankish, or
the Roman element, in the formation of modern France. M. Michelet calls
attention to the Gaelic element. “The foundation of the French people,”
he says, “is the youthful, soft, and mobile race of the Gaels, bruyante,
sensual, and légère; prompt to learn, prompt to despise, greedy of new
things.”* To the ready impressibility of this race, and the easy
reception it gave to foreign influences, he attributes the progress made
by France. “Such children require severe preceptors. They will meet with
such, both from the south and from the north. Their mobility will be
Edition: current; Page: [236] fixed, their softness hardened and
strengthened. Reason must be added to instinct, reflection to
impulse.”[*]

It is certain that no people, in a semi-barbarous state, ever received a
foreign civilization more rapidly than the French Celts. In a century
after Julius Caesar, not only the south, the Gallia Narbonensis, but the
whole east of Gaul, from Treves and Cologne southwards, were already
almost as Roman as Italy itself. The Roman institutions and ideas took a
deeper root in Gaul than in any other province of the Roman empire, and
remained long predominant, wherever no great change was effected in the
population by the ravages of the invaders. But, along with this capacity
of improvement, M. Michelet does not find in the Gauls that voluntary
loyalty of man to man, that free adherence, founded on confiding
attachment, which was characteristic of the Germanic tribes, and of
which, in his hopinionh, the feudal relation was the natural result. It
is to these qualities, to personal devotedness and faith in one another,
that he ascribes the universal success of the Germanic tribes in
overpowering the Celtic. He finds already in the latter the root of that
passion for equality which distinguishes modern France; and which, when
unbalanced by a strong principle of sympathetic union, has always, he
says, prevented the pure Celts from becoming a nation. Everywhere among
the Celts, he finds equal division of inheritances, while in the
Germanic races primogeniture easily established itself—an institution
which, in a rude state of society, he justly interprets as equivalent to
the permanence of the household, the non-separation of families.

We think that M. Michelet has here carried the influence of Race too
far, and that the difference is better explained by diversity of
position, than by diversity of character in the Races. The conquerors, a
small body scattered over a large territory, could not sever their
interests, could not relax the bonds which held them together. They were
for many generations encamped in the country, rather than settled in it;
they were a military band, requiring a military discipline, and the
separate members could not iventurei to detach themselves from each
other, or from their chief. Similar circumstances would have produced
similar results among the Gauls themselves. They were by no means
without something analogous to the German comitatus (as the voluntary
bond of adherence, of the most sacred kind, between followers and a
leader of their choice, is called by the Roman historians). The devoti
of the Gauls and Aquitanians, mentioned by M. Michelet himself, on the
authority of Caesar* and Edition: current; Page: [237] Athenaeus,[*]
were evidently not clansmen. Some such relation may be traced in many
other warlike tribes. We find it even among the most obstinately
personal of all the races of antiquity, the Iberians of Spain; witness
the Roman Sertorius and his Spanish body-guard, who slew themselves, to
the last man, before his funeral pile. “Ce principe d’attachement à un
chef, ce dévouement personnel, cette religion de l’homme envers
l’homme,”* is thus by no means peculiar to the Teutonic races. And our
author’s favourite idea of the “profonde impersonnalité”† inherent in
the Germanic genius, though we are far from saying that there is no
foundation for it, surely requires some limitation. It will hardly, for
example, be held true of the English, yet the English are a Germanic
people. They, indeed, have rather (or at least had) the characteristic
which M. Michelet predicates of the Celts (thinking apparently rather of
the Kymri than of the Gaels), “le génie de la personnalité libre;”[†] a
tendency to revolt against compulsion, to hold fast to their own, and
assert the claims of individuality against those of society and
authority. But though many of M. Michelet’s speculations on the
characteristics of Races appear to us contestable, they are always
suggestive of thought. The next thing to having a question solved, is to
have it well raised. M. Michelet’s are views by which a thinker, even if
he rejects them, seldom fails to profit.

From the Races, our author passes to the provinces, which, by their
successive aggregation, composed the French monarchy. France is, in the
main, peopled by a mixed race; but it contains several populations of
pure race at its remoter extremities. It includes several distinct
languages, and above all a great variety of climate, soil, and
situation. Next to hereditary organization j(if not beyond it)j,
geographical peculiarities have a more powerful influence than any other
natural agency, in the formation of national character. Any one, capable
of such speculations, will read with strong interest the review of the
various provinces of France, which occupies the first hundred and thirty
pages of our author’s second volume. In this brilliant sketch, he
surveys the local circumstances and national peculiarities of each
province, and compares them with the type of character which belongs to
its inhabitants, as shown in the history of each province, in the
eminent individuals who have sprung from it, and in the results of
intelligent personal observation even in the present day. We say even,
because M. Michelet is not Edition: current; Page: [238] unaware of the
tendency of provincial and local peculiarities to disappear. A strenuous
asserter of the power of mind over matter, of will over spontaneous
propensities, culture over nature, he holds that local characteristics
lose their importance as history advances. In a rude age the
“fatalities” of race and geographical position are absolute. In the
progress of society, human forethought and purpose, acting by means of
uniform institutions and modes of culture, tend more and more to efface
the pristine differences. And he attributes, in no small degree, the
greatness of France to the absence of any marked local peculiarities in
the predominant part of her population. Paris, and an extensive region
all round—from the borders of Brittany to kthe eastern limitsk of
Champagne, from the northern extremity of Picardy to the mountains of
Auvergne—is distinguished by no marked natural features; and its
inhabitants—a more mixed population than any other in France—have no
distinct, well-defined individuality of character. This very deficiency,
or what might seem so, makes them the ready recipients of ideas and
modes of action from all sides, and qualifies them to bind together
heterogeneous populations in harmonious union, by receiving the
influence and assuming the character of each, as far as may be, without
exclusion of the rest. In those different populations (on the other
hand), M. Michelet finds an abundant variety of provincial
characteristics, of all shades and degrees, up to those obstinate
individualities which cling with the tenacity of iron to their own
usages, and yield only after a long and dogged resistance to the general
movement of humanity. In these portraits of the provinces there is much
to admire, and occasionally something to startle. The form and vesture
are more poetical than philosophical; the sketch of Brittany wants only
verse to be a fine poem. But, though fancifully expressed, there is in
this survey of France much more which seems, than which is, fanciful.
There is, as we believe, for much, if not most of it, a foundation of
sober reason; and out of its poetry we could extract an excellent
treatise in unexceptionable prose, did not our limits admonish us to
hurry to those parts of the work which are of more universal interest.

From this place the book becomes a picture of the middle ages, in a
series of Tableaux. The facts are not delivered in the dry form of
chronological annals, but are grouped round a certain number of central
figures or leading events, selected so that each half century has at
least one Tableau belonging to it. The groups, we need scarcely add,
represent the mind of the age, not its mere outward physiognomy and
costume. The successive titles of the chapters will form an appropriate
catalogue to this new kind of historical picture gallery:

Chap. I. The year 1000—The French King and the French Pope, Robert and
Gerbert—Feudal France.—II. Eleventh Century—Gregory VII—Alliance between
the Normans and the Church—Conquests of Naples and England.—III. The
Crusade.—IV. Consequences of the Crusade—The Communes—Abailard—First
half of the Twelfth Edition: current; Page: [239] Century.—V. The King
of France and the King of England, Louis-le-Jeune and Henry
Plantagenet—Second Crusade—Humiliation of Louis—Thomas
Becket—Humiliation of Henry.—VI. The year 1200—Innocent III—The Pope, by
the arms of the Northern French, prevails over the King of England and
the Emperor of Germany, the Greek Empire and the Albigeois—Greatness of
the King of France.—VII. The last Chapter continued—Ruin of John—Defeat
of the Emperor—War of the Albigeois.—VIII. First half of the Thirteenth
Century—Mysticism—Louis IX—Sanctity of the King of France.—IX. Struggle
between the Mendicant Orders and the University—St. Thomas—Doubts of St.
Louis—The Passion as a principle of Art in the Middle Ages.

The next chapter, being the first of the third volume, is headed, “The
Sicilian Vespers;” the second, “Philippe le Bel and Boniface VIII.”

This arrangement of topics promises much; and the promise is well
redeemed. Every one of the chapters we have cited is full of interesting
aperçus, and fruitful in suggestions of thought.

Forced to make a selection, we shall choose among the features of the
middle age as here presented, one or two of the most interesting, and
the most imperfectly understood. Of the individual figures in our
author’s canvass, none is more impressive than Hildebrand. Of the moral
and social phenomena which he depicts, the greatest is the Papacy.

Respecting the Papal Church, and that, its greatest Pontiff, the
lopinionsl of our author are such as, from the greater number of English
readers, can scarcely hope for ready acceptance. They are far removed
from those either of our Protestant or of our sceptical historians. They
are so unlike Hume, that they stand a chance of being confounded with
Lingard. Such, however, as they are, we think them well worth knowing
and considering. They are, in substance, the opinions of almost every
historical inquirer in France, who has any pretensions to thought or
research, be he Catholic, Protestant, or Infidel. The time is past when
any French thinker, worthy the name, looked upon the Catholic Hierarchy
as having malwaysm been the base and tyrannical thing which, to a great
extent, it ultimately became. No one now confounds what the Church was,
when its prelates and clergy universally believed what they taught, with
what it was when they had ceased to believe. No one argues—from the
conduct which they even conscientiously pursued when the human
intellect, having got beyond the Church, became its most formidable
foe—that it must therefore have been equally an enemy to improvement
when it was at the head, instead of the rear, of civilization; when all
that was instructed in Europe was comprised within its pale, and it was
the authorized champion of intelligence and self-control, against
military and predatory violence. Even the fraud and craft by which it
often aided itself in its struggles with brute force; even the ambition
and selfishness by which, in its very best days, its nobler aims, like
those of all other classes or bodies, were continually tarnished—do not
disguise Edition: current; Page: [240] from impartial thinkers on the
Continent, the fact that it was the great improver and civilizer of
Europe.

That the clergy were the preservers of all letters and all culture, of
the writings and even the traditions of literary antiquity, is too
evident to have been ever disputed. But for them, there would have been
a complete break, in Western Europe, between the ancient and modern
world. Books would have disappeared, and even Christianity, if it
survived at all, would have existed merely as another form of the old
barbarous superstitions. Some, too, are aware of the services rendered
even to material civilization by the monastic associations of Italy and
France, after the great reform by St. Benedict. Unlike the useless
communities of contemplative ascetics in the East, they were diligent in
tilling the earth and fabricating useful products; they knew and taught
that temporal work may also be a spiritual exercise; and, protected by
their sacred character from depredation, they set the first example to
Europe of industry conducted on a large scale by free labour. But these
things are commonly regarded as good which came out of evil; incidental
benefits, arising casually, or providentially, from an institution
radically vicious. It would do many English thinkers much good to
acquaint themselves with the grounds on which the best Continental
minds, without disguising one particle of the evil which existed, openly
or latently, in the Romish Church, are on the whole convinced that it
was not only a beneficent institution, but the only means capable of
being now assigned, by which Europe could have been reclaimed from
barbarism.

It is, no doubt, the characteristic evil incident to a corporation of
priests, that the exaltation of their order becomes, in and for itself,
a primary object, to which the ends of the institution are often
sacrificed. That exaltation is the strongest interest of all its
members, the bad equally with the good; for it is the means by which
both hope to attain their ends. The maintenance of their influence is to
them what the maintenance of its revenue is to a temporal government—the
condition of its existence. The Romish Church, being more powerfully
organized and more thoroughly disciplined than any other, pursued this
end with inflexible energy and perseverance, and often by the most
culpable means. False miracles, forged donations, npersecution of
hereticsn—these things we have no desire to extenuate; but he must be
wretchedly ignorant of human nature, who believes that any great or
durable edifice of moral power was ever raised chiefly by such means. It
is in the decline, in the decrepitude of religious systems, that force
and artifice come into the first rank as expedients for maintaining a
little longer what is left of their dominion. Deep sincerity, entire
absorption of themselves in their task, were assuredly as indispensable
conditions, in the more eminent of the Popes, of the success which they
met with, as in the heroes of the Reformation. In such men the power of
the hierarchy might well become a passion; but the extension of that
Edition: current; Page: [241] power was a legitimate object, for the
sake of the great things which they had to accomplish by it.

Who, in the middle ages, were worthier of power, than the clergy? Did
they not need all, and more than all the influence they could acquire,
when they could not be kings or emperors, and when kings and emperors
were among those whose passion and arrogance they had to admonish and
govern? The great Ambrose, refusing absolution to Theodosius until he
performed penance for a massacre,[*] was a type of what these men had to
do. In an age of violence and brigandage, who but the Church could
insist on justice, and forbearance, and reconciliation? In an age when
the weak were prostrate at the feet of the strong, who was there but the
Church to plead to the strong for the weak? They were the depositaries
of the only moral power to which the great were amenable; they alone had
a right to remind kings and potentates of responsibility; to speak to
them of humility, charity, and peace. Even in the times of the first
ferocious invaders, the Récits of M. Thierry (though the least
favourable of the modern French historians to the Romish clergy) show,
at what peril to themselves, the prelates of the Church continually
stepped between the oppressor and his victim. Almost all the great
social improvements which took place, were accomplished under their
influence. They at all times took part with the kings against the feudal
anarchy. The enfranchisement of the mass of the people from personal
servitude, they not only favoured, but inculcated as a Christian duty.
They were the authors of the “Truce of God,” that well-known attempt to
mitigate the prevailing brutalities, by a forced suspension of acts of
vengeance and private war during four days and five nights of every
week. They could not succeed in enforcing this periodical armistice,
which was too much in advance of the time. Their worst offence was, that
they connived at acts of unjust acquisition by friends and supporters of
the Pope, and encouraged unprovoked aggressions, by orthodox princes,
against less obedient sons of the Church. We may add, that they were
seldom favourable to civil liberty; which, indeed, in the rude form in
which its first germs grew up, not as an institution, but as a principle
of resistance to institutions, found little favour with speculative men
in the middle ages, to whom, by a not unnatural prejudice at such a
time, peace and obedience seemed the oprimaryo pconditionsp of good.
But, in another sense, the Church was eminently a democratic
institution. To a temporal society in which all rank depended on birth,
it opposed a spiritual society in which the source of rank was personal
qualities; in which the distinctions of people and aristocracy, freeman
and bondman, disappeared—which recruited itself from all ranks—in which
a serf Edition: current; Page: [242] might rise to be a cardinal, or
even a pope; while to rise at all to any eminence, almost always
required talents, and at least a reputation for virtue. In one of the
earliest combinations made by the feudal nobles against the clergy, the
league of the French Seigneurs in 1246, it stands in the foremost rank
of accusation against them, that they were the “sons of serfs.”*

Now we say that the priesthood never could have stood their ground, in
such an age, against kings and their powerful vassals, as an independent
moral authority, entitled to advise, to reprimand, and, if need were, to
denounce, if they had not been bound together into an European body,
under a government of their own. They must otherwise have grovelled from
the first in that slavish subservience into which they sank at last. No
local, no merely national organization, would have sufficed. The State
has too strong a hold upon an exclusively national corporation. Nothing
but an authority recognised by many nations, and not essentially
dependent upon any one, could, in that age, have been adequate to the
post. It required a Pope to speak with authority to Kings and Emperors.
Had an individual priest qor prelateq had the courage to tell them that
they had violated the law of God, his voice, not being the voice of the
Church, would not have been heeded. That the Pope, when he pretended to
depose Kings, or made war upon them with temporal arms, went beyond his
province, needs hardly, in the present day, be insisted on. But when he
claimed the right of censuring and denouncing them, with whatever degree
of solemnity, in the name of the moral law which all recognised, he
assumed a function necessary at all times, and which, in those days, no
one except the Church could assume, or was in any degree qualified to
exercise. Time must show if the organ we now have for the performance of
this office—if the censure by newspapers and public meetings, which has
succeeded to censure by the Church—will be found in the end less liable
to perversion and abuse than that was. However this may be, the latter
form was the only one possible in those days.

Were the Popes, then, so entirely in the wrong, as historians have
deemed them, in their disputes with the Emperors, and with the Kings of
England and France? Doubtless they, no more than their antagonists, knew
where to stop short. Doubtless, in the ardour of the conflict, they laid
claim to powers not compatible with a purely spiritual authority, and
occasionally put forth pretensions, which, if completely successful,
would have plunged Europe into the torpor of an Egyptian hierarchy. But
there never was any danger lest they should succeed too far. The Church
was always the weaker party, and occupied essentially a defensive
position.

We cannot feel any doubt that Gregory VII, whatever errors he may have
committed, was right in the great objects which he proposed to himself.
His life is memorable by two things—his contest with the State, and the
reform in the Church Edition: current; Page: [243] itself, which
preceded it. The Church was rapidly becoming secularized. He checked the
evil, by enforcing the celibacy of the clergy. Protestant writers have
looked upon this ordinance of the Catholic Church, as the joint product
of pontifical ambition and popular fanaticism. We would not deny that
fanaticism, or rather religious asceticism, had much to do with the
popular feeling on the subject, and was perhaps the only lever by which
the work could possibly have been accomplished. But we believe that in
that age, without the institution of celibacy, the efficiency of the
Church as an instrument of human culture was gone. In the early vigorous
youth of the feudal system, when everything tended to become hereditary,
when every temporal function had already become so, the clerical office
was rapidly becoming hereditary too. The clergy were becoming a
Braminical caste; or worse—a mere appendage of the caste of soldiery.
Already the prelacies and abbacies were filled by the younger brothers
of the feudal nobility, who, like their elder brethren, spent the
greater part of their time in hunting and war. These had begun to
transmit their benefices to their sons, and give them in marriage with
their daughters. The smaller preferments would have become the prey of
their smaller retainers. Against this evil, what other remedy than that
which Gregory adopted did the age afford? Could it remain unremedied?

And what, when impartially considered, is the protracted dispute about
investitures, except a prolongation of the same struggle? For what end
did the princes of the middle ages desire the appointment of prelates?
To make their profit of the revenues by keeping the sees vacant; to
purchase tools, and reward adherents; at best, to keep the office in a
state of complete subservience. It was no immoderate pretension in the
spiritual authority to claim the free choice of its own instruments. The
emperors had previously asserted a right to nominate the Pope himself,
and had exercised that right in many instances. Had they succeeded, the
spiritual power would have become that mere instrument of despotism
which it became at Constantinople—which it is in Russia—which the Popes
of Avignon became in the hands of the French kings. And even had the
Pope maintained his own personal independence, the nomination of the
national clergy by their respective monarchs, with no effectual
concurrence of his, would have made the national clergy take part with
the kings against their own order; as a large section of them always
did, and as the whole clergy of France and England ended by doing,
because in those countries the kings, in the main, succeeded in keeping
possession of the appointment to benefices.

Even for what seems in the abstract a still more objectionable
pretension, the claim to the exemption of ecclesiastics from secular
jurisdiction, which has scandalized so grievously most of our English
historians, there is much more to be said than those historians were
aware of. What was it, after all, but the assertion, in behalf of the
clergy, of the received English principle of being tried by their peers?
The secular tribunals were the courts of a rival power, often in actual
conflict with the clergy, always jealous of them, always ready to make
use of its jurisdiction as a Edition: current; Page: [244] means of
wreaking its vengeance, or serving its ambition; and were stained
besides with the grossest corruption and tyranny. “These rights,” says
M. Michelet,

gave rise, no doubt, to great abuses; many crimes were committed by
priests, and committed with impunity, but when one reflects on the
frightful barbarity, the execrable fiscality, of the lay tribunals in
the twelfth century, one is forced to admit that the ecclesiastical
jurisdiction was then an anchor of safety. It spared, perhaps, the
guilty, but how often it saved the innocent! The Church was almost the
only road by which the despised races were able to recover any
ascendancy. We see this by the example of the two Saxons, Breakspear
(Adrian IV) and Becket. The liberties of the Church in that age were
those of mankind.*

On the other hand, Henry II, by the Constitutions of Clarendon, assumed
to himself and his great justiciary a veto on the purely spiritual act
of excommunication—the last resort of the Church—the ultimate sanction
on which she depended for her moral jurisdiction.[*] No one of the
king’s tenants was to be excommunicated without his consent. On which
side was here the usurpation? And in this pretension Henry was supported
by the great majority of his own rbishops. Sor little cause was there
really to dread any undue preponderance of popes over kings.

The Papacy was in the end defeated, even in its reasonable claims. It
had to give up, in the main, all the contested points. As the monarchies
of Europe were consolidated, and the Kings grew more powerful, the
Church became more dependent. The last Pope who dared to defy a bad
king, was made a prisoner in his palace, insulted and struck by the
emissary of the tyrant.[†] That Pope died broken-hearted; his immediate
successor died poisoned.[‡] The next was Clement V, in whom, for the
first time, the Church sank into the abject tool of secular tyranny.
With him commenced that new era of the Papacy, which made it the horror
and disgust of the then rapidly improving European mind, until the
Reformation and its consequences closed the period which we commonly
call the middle age.

We know it may be said that long before this time venality was a current
and merited accusation against the Papal court. We often find Rome
denounced, by the indignation of scotemporariess, as a market in which
everything might be bought. All periods of supposed purity in the tpastt
administration of human affairs are the Edition: current; Page: [245]
dreams of a golden age. We well know that there was only occasionally a
Pope who acted consistently on any high ideal of the pontifical
character; that many were sordid and vicious, and those who were not,
had often sordid and vicious persons around them. Who can estimate the
extent to which the power of the Church, for realizing the noble aims of
its more illustrious ornaments, was crippled and made infirm by these
shortcomings? But, to the time of Innocent III, if not of Boniface VIII,
we are unable to doubt that it was on the whole a source of good, and of
such good as could not have been provided, for that age, by any other
means with which we can conceive such an age to be compatible.

Among the Epochs in the progressive movement of middle-age history,
which M. Michelet has been the first to bring clearly and vividly before
us, there is none more interesting than the great awakening of the human
mind which immediately followed the period of the First Crusade. Others
before him had pointed out the influence of the Crusade in generating
the feeling of a common Christendom; in counteracting the localizing
influence of the feudal institutions, and raising up a kind of republic
of chivalry and Christianity; in drawing closer the ties between chiefs
and vassals, or even serfs, by the need which they mutually experienced
of each other’s uvoluntaryu services; in giving to the rude barons of
Western Europe a more varied range of ideas, and a taste for at least
the material civilization, which they beheld for the first time in the
dominions of the Greek Emperors and the Saracen Soldans. M. Michelet
remarks that the effect even upon the religion of the time, was to
soften its antipathies and weaken its superstitions. The hatred of
Mussulmans was far less intense after the Crusade than at the beginning
of it. The notion of a peculiar sanctity inherent in places, was greatly
weakened when Christians had become the masters of the Holy Sepulchre,
and found themselves neither better nor happier in consequence.

But these special results bear no proportion to the general start which
was taken, about this time, by the human mind, and which, though it
cannot be ascribed to the Crusade, was without doubt greatly favoured by
it. That remarkable expedition was the first great event of modern
times, which had an European and a Christian interest—an interest not of
nation, or place, or rank, but which the lowest serfs had in common, and
more than in common, with the loftiest barons. When the soil is moved,
all sorts of seeds fructify. The serfs now began to think themselves
human beings. The beginning of the great popular political movement of
the middle ages—the formation of the Communes—is almost coincident with
the First Crusade. Some fragments of the eminently dramatic history of
this movement are related in the concluding portion of M. Thierry’s
Letters on the History of France.[*] Contemporaneously with this
temporal enfranchisement, began the emanicipation of the human mind.
Formidable heresies broke out: it was the era of Edition: current; Page:
[246] Berengarius, who vdeniedv Transubstantiation—of Roscelinus, the
founder of Nominalism, and questioner of the received doctrine
respecting the Trinity.[*] The very answers of the orthodox to these
heretical writings, as may be seen in M. Michelet,* were lessons of
free-thinking. The principle of free speculation found a still more
remarkable representative, though clear of actual heresy, in the most
celebrated of the schoolmen, Abailard. The popularity and European
influence of his rationalizing metaphysics, as described by
wcontemporaryw authorities, must surprise those who conceive the age as
one of rare and difficult communications, and without interest in
letters. To silence this one man, required the eminent religious
ascendancy of the most illustrious churchman of the age, Bernard of
Clairvaux. The acquirements and talents of the noble-minded woman, whose
name is linked for all time with that of Abailard—a man, so far as we
have the means of judging, not her superior even in intellect, and in
every other respect unworthy of her—are illustrative of M. Michelet’s
views on the change which was taking place in the social condition and
estimation of women:

The restoration of woman, which had commenced with Christianity, took
place chiefly in the twelfth century. A slave in the East, even in the
Greek gynaeceum a recluse, emancipated by the jurisprudence of the Roman
Empire, she was recognised by the new religion as the equal of man.
Still, Christianity, but just escaped from the sensuality of Paganism,
dreaded woman, and distrusted her, or rather, men were conscious of
weakness, and endeavoured by hardness and scornfulness to fortify
themselves against their strongest temptation. . . . When Gregory VII
aimed at detaching the clergy from the ties of a worldly life, there was
a new outburst of feeling against that dangerous Eve, whose seductions
had ruined Adam, and still pursued him in his sons.

A movement in the contrary direction commenced in the twelfth century.
Free mysticism undertook to upraise what sacerdotal severity had dragged
in the mire. It was especially a Breton, Robert d’Arbrissel, who
fulfilled this mission of love. He re-opened to women the bosom of
Christ; he founded asylums for them; he built Fontevrault; and there
were soon other Fontevraults throughout Christendom. . . . There took
place insensibly a great religious revolution. The Virgin became the
deity of the world; she usurped almost all the temples andx altars.
Piety turned itself into an enthusiasm of chivalrous gallantry. The
mother of God was proclaimed pure and without taint. The Church of
Lyons, always mystical in its tendencies, celebrated, in 1134, the feast
of the Immaculate Conception—thus exalting woman in the character of
divine maternity, at the precise time when Heloise was giving
expression, in her letters, to the pure disinterestedness of love. Woman
reigned Edition: current; Page: [247] in heaven, and reigned on earth.
We see her taking a part, and a leading part, in the affairs of the
world. . . . Louis VII dates his acts from the coronation of his wife
Adela. Women sat as judges not only in poetical contests and courts of
love, but, with and on a par with their husbands, in serious affairs:
the King of France expressly recognised it as their right. . . .
Excluded up to that time from successions by the feudal barbarism, they
everywhere became admitted to them in the first half of the twelfth
century: in England, in Castile, in Aragon, at Jerusalem, in Burgundy,
Flanders, Hainault, Vermandois, Aquitaine, Provence, and the Lower
Languedoc. The rapid extinction of males, the softening of manners, and
the progress of equity, re-opened inheritances to women. They
transported sovereignties into foreign houses, accelerated the
agglomeration of states, and prepared the consolidation of great
monarchies.*

Half a century further on, the scene is changed. A new act of the great
drama is now transacting. The seeds scattered fifty years before, have
grown up and overshadow the world. We are no longer in the childhood,
but in the stormy youth of free speculation.

The face of the world was sombre at the close of the twelfth century.
The old order was in peril, and the new had not yet begun. It was no
longer the mere material struggle of the Pope and the Emperor, chasing
each other alternately from Rome, as in the days of Henry IV and Gregory
VII. In the eleventh century the evil was on the surface, in 1200, at
the core. A deep and terrible malady had seized upon Christendom. Gladly
would it have consented to return to the quarrel of investitures, and
have had to combat only on the question of the ring and crosier. In
Gregory’s time, the cause of the Church was the cause of liberty; it had
maintained that character to the time of Alexander III, the chief of the
Lombard league. But Alexander himself had not dared to support Thomas
Becket; he had defended the liberties of Italy, and betrayed those of
England. The Church was about to detach herself from the great movement
of the world. Instead of preceding and guiding it, as she had done
hitherto, she strove to fix it, to arrest time on its passage, to stop
the earth which was revolving under her feet. Innocent III seemed to
succeed in the attempt; Boniface VIII perished in it.

A solemn moment, and of infinite sadness. The hopes which inspired the
Crusade had abandoned the earth. Authority no longer seemed
unassailable, it had promised, and had deceived. Liberty began to dawn,
but in a hundred fantastical and repulsive shapes, confused and
convulsive, multiform, deformed. . . .

In this spiritual anarchy of the twelfth century, which the irritated
and trembling Church had to attempt to govern, one thing shone forth
above others—a prodigiously audacious sentiment of the moral power and
greatness of man. The hardy expression of the Pelagians—“Christ had
nothing more than I; I, too, by virtue, can raise myself to
divinity”[*]—is reproduced in the twelfth century in barbarous and
mystical forms. . . . Messiahs everywhere arise. . . . A Messiah appears
in Antwerp, and all the populace follow him; another, in Bretagne, seems
to revive the ancient gnosticism of Ireland. Amaury of Chartres, and his
Breton disciple, David of Dinan, teach that every Christian is
materially a member of Christ, in other words, that God is perpetually
incarnated in the human race. The Son, say they, has reigned long
enough; let the Holy Ghost now reign. . . . Nothing equals Edition:
current; Page: [248] the audacity of these doctors, who mostly teach in
the University of Paris (authorized by Philippe-Auguste in 1200).
Abailard, supposed to be crushed, lives and speaks in his disciple Peter
Lombard, who from Paris gives the law to European philosophy; they
reckon nearly five hundred commentators on this schoolman. The spirit of
innovation has now acquired two powerful auxiliaries. Jurisprudence is
growing up by the side of theology, which it undermines; the Popes
forbid the clergy to be professors of law, and, by so doing, merely open
public teaching to laymen. The metaphysics of Aristotle are brought from
Constantinople, while his commentators,[*] imported from Spain, will
presently be translated from the Arabic by order of the kings of
Castile, and the Italian princes of the house of Suabia, Frederic II,
and Manfred. This is no less than the invasion of Greece and the East
into Christian philosophy. Aristotle takes his place almost beside the
Saviour. At first prohibited by the Popes, afterwards tolerated, he
reigns in the professorial chairs; Aristotle publicly, secretly the
Arabs and the Jews, with the pantheism of Averroës and the subtleties of
the Cabala. Dialectics enters into possession of all subjects, and stirs
up all the boldest questions. Simon of Tournai teaches at pleasure the
pour and the contre. One day when he had delighted the school of Paris,
by proving marvellously the truth of the Christian religion, he suddenly
exclaimed, “O little Jesus, little Jesus! how I have glorified thy law!
If I chose, I could still more easily depreciate it.”*

He then vigorously sketches the religious enthusiasts of Flanders and
the Rhine, the Vaudois of the Alps, and the Albigeois of Southern
France, and proceeds:

What must not have been, in this danger of the Church, the trouble and
inquietude of its visible head! . . .

The Pope at that time was a Roman, Innocent III: a man fitted to the
time. A great lawyer, accustomed on all questions to consult established
right, he examined himself, and believed that the right was on his side.
And, in truth, the Church had still in her favour the immense
majority—the voice of the people, which is that of God.[†] She had
actual possession,y so ancient that it might be deemed prescriptive. The
Church was the defendant in the cause, the recognised proprietor, who
was in present occupancy, and had the title-deeds; the written law
seemed to speak for her. The plaintiff was human intellect; but it came
too late, and, in its inexperience, took the wrong road, chicaning on
texts instead of invoking principles. If asked what it would have, it
could make no intelligible answer. All sorts of confused voices called
for different things, and most of the assailants wished to retrograde
rather than to advance. In politics, their ideas were modelled on the
ancient republics; that is, town liberties, to the exclusion of the
country. In religion, some wished to suppress the externals of worship,
and revert, as they said, to the Apostles, others went further back, and
returned to the Asiatic spirit, contending for two gods, or preferring
the strict unity of Islamism.†

And, after describing the popular detestation which pursued these
heretics:

Edition: current; Page: [249]
Such appeared at that time the enemies of the Church—and the Church was
people—[l’eglise était peuple]. The prejudices of the people, the
sanguinary intoxication of their hatred and their terror, ascended
through all ranks of the clergy to the Pope himself. It would be too
unjust to human nature to deem that egoism or class interest alone
animated the chiefs of the Church. No—all indicates that in the
thirteenth century they were still convinced of their right. That right
admitted, all means seemed good to them for defending it. Not for a mere
human interest did St. Dominic traverse the regions of the south, alone
and unarmed, in the midst of a sectarian population whom he doomed to
death, courting martyrdom with the same avidity with which he inflicted
it; and, whatever may have been in the great and terrible Innocent III
the temptations of pride and vengeance, other motives animated him in
the crusade against the Albigeois and the foundation of the Dominican
Inquisition.*

The temporal means by which the Church obtained a brief respite from the
dangers which beset it, consisted in letting loose against the rich and
heretical South, the fanaticism and rapacity of the North. The spiritual
expedient, far the more potent of the two, was the foundation of the
Mendicant Orders.

We are too much accustomed to figure to ourselves what are called
religious revivals, as a feature peculiar to Protestantism and to recent
times. The phenomenon is universal. In no Christian church has the
religious spirit flowed like a perennial fountain; it had ever its flux
and reflux, like the tide. Its history is a series of alternations
between religious laxity and religious earnestness. Monkery itself, in
the organized form impressed upon it by St. Benedict, was one of the
incidents of a religious revival. We have already spoken of the great
revival under Hildebrand. Ranke has made us understand the religious
revival within the pale of Romanism itself, which turned back the
advancing torrent of the Reformation. As this was characterized by the
foundation of the order of Jesuits, so were the Franciscans and
Dominicans the result of a similar revival, and became its powerful
instrument.

The mendicant orders—especially the most popular of them, the
Franciscans—were the offspring of the freethinking which had already
taken strong root in the European mind; but the freedom which they
represented was freedom in alliance with the Church, rising up against
the freedom which was at enmity with the Church, and anathematizing it.
What is called, in France, mysticism—in England, religious
enthusiasm—consists essentially in looking within instead of without; in
relying on an internal revelation from God to the individual believer,
and receiving its principal inspirations from that, rather than from the
authority of priests and teachers. St. Francis of Assisi was such a man.
Disowned by the Church, he might have been a heresiarch instead of a
saint; but the Church needed men like him, and had the skill to make its
instrument of the spirit which was preparing its destruction. “In
proportion to the decline of authority,” says M. Michelet, “and the
diminution of the priestly influence on the popular mind, Edition:
current; Page: [250] religious feeling, being no longer under the
restraint of forms, expanded itself into mysticism.”* Making room for
these mystics in the ecclesiastical system itself, directing their
enthusiasm into the path for which it peculiarly qualified them, that of
popular preaching, and never parting with the power of repressing any
dangerous excess in those whom it retained in its allegiance, the Papacy
could afford to give them the rein, and indulge, within certain limits,
their most unsacerdotal preference of grace to the law.

The career and character of St. Francis and his early followers are
graphically delineated by M. Michelet.† As usual with devotees of his
class, his great practical precept was the love of God; love which
sought all means of demonstrating itself—now by ecstasies, now by
austerities like those of an Indian fakeer—but also by love and charity
to all creatures. In all things which had life, and in many which had
not, he recognised children of God: he invoked the birds to join in
gratitude and praise; he parted with his cloak to redeem a lamb from the
slaughter. His followers “wandered barefooted over Europe, always run
after by the crowd: in their sermons, they brought the sacred mysteries,
as it were, on the stage; laughing zinz Christmas, weeping on Good
Friday, developing, without reserve, all that Christianity possesses of
dramatic elements.”[*] The effect of such a band of missionaries must
have been great in rousing and feeding dormant devotional feelingsa.
Theya were not less influential in regulating those feelings, and
turning into the established Catholic channels those vagaries of private
enthusiasm, which might well endanger the Church, since they already
threatened society itself. The spirit of religious independence had
descended to the miserable, and was teaching them that God had not
commanded them to endure their misery. It was a lesson for which they
were not yet ripe. “Mysticism,” says our author, “had already produced
its most terrible fruit, hatred of the law; the wild enthusiasm of
religious and political liberty. This demagogic character of mysticism,
which so clearly manifested itself in the Jacqueries of the subsequent
ages, especially in the revolt of the Swabian peasants in 1525, and of
the Anabaptists in 1538, appeared already in the insurrection of the
Pastoureaux,” during the reign of St. Louis.‡ These unhappy people, who
were peasantry of the lowest class, and, like all other insurgents of
that class, perished miserably—dispersi sunt, et quasi canes rabidi
passim detruncati, are the words of Matthew Paris[†]—were avowed enemies
of the priests, whom they are said to have massacred, and administered
the sacraments themselves. They recognised as their chief, a man whom
they called Edition: current; Page: [251] the grand master of Hungary,
and who pretended to hold in his hand, which he kept constantly closed,
a written commission from the Virgin Mary. So contradictory to history
is that superficial notion of the middle ages, which looks upon the
popular mind as strictly orthodox, and implicitly obedient to the Pope.

Though the Papacy survived, in apparently undiminished splendour, the
crisis of which we have now spoken, the mental ascendancy of the
priesthood was never again what it had been before. The most orthodox of
the laity, even men whom the Church has canonized, were now
comparatively emancipated, they thought with the Church, but they no
longer let the Church think for them. This change in the times is
exemplified in the character of St. Louis—himself a lay brother of the
Franciscan order; perhaps of all kings the one whose religious
conscience was the most scrupulous, yet who learned his religious duty
from his own strong and upright judgment, not from his confessor, nor
from the Pope. He never shrank from resisting the Church when he had
right on his side; and was himself a better sample than any Pope
bcontemporaryb with him, of the religious character of his age. The
influences of the mystical spirit are easily discernible in his
remarkable freedom, so rare in that age, from the slavery of the letter;
which, as many anecdotes prove, he was always capable of sacrificing to
the spirit, when any conflict arose between them.*

We are obliged to pass rapidly over some other topics, which justice to
M. Michelet forbids us entirely to omit. We could extract many passages
more illustrative than those we have quoted of his powers as a writer
and an artist; such as the highly-finished sketch of the greatness and
run of the unfortunate house of Hohenstaufen.† We prefer to quote the
remarks of greater philosophical interest, with which he winds up one
great period of history, and introduces another

The Crusade of St. Louis was the last Crusade. The middle age had
produced its ideal, its flower, and its fruit, the time was come for it
to perish. In Philippe-le-Bel, grandson of St. Louis, modern times
commence, the middle age is insulted in Boniface VIII, the Crusade
burned at the stake in the persons of the Templars.

Crusades will be talked about for some time longer; the word will be
often repeated; it is a cwell-soundingc word, good for levying tenths
and taxes. But princes, nobles, and popes know well, among themselves,
what to think of it. In 1327, we find the Venetian, Sanuto, proposing to
the Pope a commercial crusade. “It is not enough,” he said, “to invade
Egypt,” he proposed “to ruin it.” The means he urged was to re-open to
the Indian trade the channel of Persia, so that merchandize might no
longer pass through Alexandria and Damietta. Thus does the modern spirit
announce its approach, trade, not religion, will soon become the moving
principle of great expeditions.‡

Edition: current; Page: [252]
And further on, after quoting the bitter denunciation of Dante[*]
against the dreigningd family of France—

This furious Ghibelline invective, full of truth and of calumny, is the
protest of the old perishing world against the ugly new world which
succeeds it. This new world begins towards 1300, it opens with France,
and with the odious figure of Philippe-le-Bel.

When the French monarchy, founded by Philippe-Auguste, became
extinguished in Louis XVI, at least it perished in the immense glory of
a young republic, which, at its first onset, vanquished and
revolutionized Europe. But the poor middle age, its Papacy, its
chivalry, its feudality, under what hands did they perish? Under those
of the attorney, the fraudulent bankrupt, the false coiner.

The bitterness of the poet is excusable; this new world is a repulsive
one. If it is more legitimate than that which it replaces, what eye,
even that of a Dante, could see this at the time? It is the offspring of
the decrepit Roman law, of the old imperial fiscality. It is born a
lawyer, a usurer, it is a born Gascon, Lombard, and Jew.

What is most revolting in this modern system, represented especially by
France, is its perpetual self-contradiction, its instinctive duplicity,
the naive hypocrisy, so to speak, with which it einvokese by turns its
two sets of principles, Roman and feudal. France looks like a lawyer in
a cuirass, an attorney clad in mail, she employs the feudal power to
execute the sentences of the Roman and canon law. If this obedient
daughter of the Church seizes upon Italy and chastises the Church, she
chastises her as a daughter, obliged in conscience to correct her
mother’s misconduct.*

Yet this revolting exterior is but the mask of a great and necessary
transformation; the substitution of legal authority, in the room of
feudal violence and the arbitrium of the seigneur; the formation, in
short, for the first time, of a government. This government could not be
carried on without money. The feudal jurisdictions, the feudal armies,
cost nothing to the treasury; the wages of all feudal services were the
land: but the king’s judges and administrators, of whom he has now a
host, mustf be paid.

It is not the fault of this government if it is greedy and ravenous.
Ravenousness is its nature, its necessity, the foundation of its
temperament. To satisfy this, it must alternately make use of cunning
and force: the prince must be at once the Reynard and Isegrim of the old
satire. To do him justice, he is not a lover of war, he prefers any
other means of acquisition—purchase, for instance, or usury. He
traffics, he buys, he exchanges; these are means by which the strong man
can honourably plunder his weaker friends.†

This need of money was, for several centuries, the primum mobile of
European history. In England, it is the hinge on which our
constitutional history has wholly turned; in France and elsewhere, it
was the source, from this time forward, of all Edition: current; Page:
[253] quarrels between the Kings and the Church. The clergy alone were
rich, and money must be had.

The confiscation of Church property was the idea of kings from the
thirteenth century. The only difference is, that the Protestants took,
and the Catholics made the Church give. Henry VIII had recourse to
schism—Francis I to the gConcordatg. Who, in the fourteenth century, the
King or the Church, was thenceforth to prey upon France?—that was the
question.*

To get money was the purpose of Philip’s quarrel with Boniface; to get
money, he destroyed the Templars.

The proceedings against this celebrated Society occupy two most
interesting chapters of M. Michelet’s work. His view of the subject
seems just and reasonable.

The suppression of the Order, if this had been all, was both inevitable
and justifiable. Since the Crusades had ceased, and the crusading spirit
died out, their existence and their vast wealth were grounded on false
pretences. Among the mass of calumnies which, in order to make out a
case for their destruction, their oppressor accumulated against them,
there were probably some truths. It is not in the members of rich and
powerful bodies which have outlived the ostensible purposes of their
existence, that high examples of virtue need be sought. But it was not
their private misconduct, real or imputed, that gave most aid to royal
rapacity in effecting their ruin. What roused opinion against them—what
gave something like a popular sanction to that atrocious trial in its
early stages, before the sufferings and constancy of the victims had
excited a general sympathy, was, according to our author, a mere
mistake—a mal-entendu, arising from a change in the spirit of the times.

The forms of reception into the Order were borrowed from the whimsical
dramatic rites, the mysteries, which the ancient Church did not dread to
connect with the most sacred doctrines and objects. The candidate for
admission was presented in the character of a sinner, a bad Christian, a
renegade. In imitation of St. Peter, he denied Christ,[*] the denial was
pantomimically represented by spitting on the cross. The Order undertook
to restore this renegade—to lift him to a height as great as the depth
to which he had fallen. Thus, in the Feast of Fools, man offered to the
Church which was to regenerate him, the homage even of his imbecility,
of his infamy. These religious comedies, every day less understood,
became more and more dangerous, more capable of scandalizing a prosaic
age, which saw only the letter, and lost the meaning of the symbol.†

This is not a mere fanciful hypothesis. M. Michelet has elsewhere shown
that the initiation into the Guilds of Artificers, in the middle ages,
was of this very character. The acolyte affected to be the most
worthless character upon earth, and was usually made to perform some act
symbolical of worthlessness: after which, Edition: current; Page: [254]
his admission into the fraternity was to have the merit and honour of
his reformation. Such forms were in complete harmony with the genius of
an age, in which a transfer of land was not binding without the delivery
of a clod—in which all things tended to express themselves in mute
symbols, rather than by the conventional expedient of verbal language.
It is the nature of all forms used on important occasions, to outlast,
for an indefinite period, the state of manners and society in which they
originated. The childlike character of the religious sentiment in a rude
people, who know terror but not awe, and are often on the most intimate
terms of familiarity with the objects of their adoration, makes it
easily conceivable that the ceremonies used on admission into the Order
were established without any irreverent feeling, in the purely
symbolical acceptation which some of the witnesses affirmed. The time,
however, had past, when such an explanation would be understood or
listened to.

What arrayed the whole people against them—what left them not a single
defender among so many noble families to which they were related—was
this monstrous accusation of denying and spitting on the cross. This was
precisely the accusation which was admitted by the greatest number of
the accused. The simple statement of the fact turned every one against
them; everybody hcrossedh himself, and refused to hear another word.
Thus the Order, which had represented in the most eminent degree the
symbolical genius of the middle age, died of a symbol misunderstood.*

From this time the history of France is not, except in a imuchi more
indirect manner, the history of Europe and of civilization. The
subordination of the Church to the State once fully established, the
next period was mainly characterized by the struggles between the king
and the barons, and jthej final victory of the crown. On this subject
France cannot represent English history, where the crown was ultimately
the defeated instead of the victorious party; and the incidents of the
contest are necessarily national, not European incidents. Here,
therefore, having regard also to our necessary limits, our extracts from
M. Michelet’s work may suitably close; although the succeeding volumes,
which come down nearly to Louis XI, are not inferior in merit to those
from which we have quoted; and are even, as we before remarked, superior
in the value of their materials—being grounded, in a great measure, on
the public documents of the period, and not, like previous histories,
almost exclusively on the chronicles.

In what we have said, we have been far more desirous to make the work
known, and recommend it to notice, than to criticise it. The latter
could only become a needful service after the former had been
accomplished. The faults, whether of matter or manner, of which M.
Michelet can be accused, are not such as require Edition: current; Page:
[255] being pointed out to English readers. There is much more danger
lest they should judge too strictly the speculations of such a man; and
turn impatiently from the germs of truth which often lurk even in the
errors of a man of genius. This is, indeed, the more to be apprehended,
as M. Michelet, apparently, has by no means the fear of an
unsympathizing audience before his eyes. Where we require thoughts, he
often gives us only allusions to thoughts. We continually come upon
sentences, and even single expressions, which take for granted a whole
train of previous speculation—often perfectly just, and perhaps familiar
to French readers; but which in England would certainly have required to
be set forth in terms, and cleared up by explanations.

His style cannot be fairly judged from the specimens we have exhibited.
Our extracts were selected as specimens of his ideas, not of his
literary merits; and none have been taken from the narrative part, which
is, of course, the principal part of the work, and the most decisive
test of powers of composition in a writer of history. We should say,
however, of the style generally, that it is sparkling rather than
flowing; full of expressiveness, but too continuously epigrammatic to
carry the reader easily along with it; and pushing that ordinary
artifice of modern French composition, the personification of
abstractions, to an almost startling extent. It is not, however, though
it is very likely to be taken for, an affected style; for affectation
cannot be justly imputed, where the words are chosen, as is evidently
the case here, for no purpose but to express ideas, and where,
consequently, the mode of expression, however peculiar, grows from, and
corresponds to, the peculiarities of the mode of thought.


Guizot’s Essays and Lectures on History

these two works are the contributions which the present Minister for
Foreign Affairs in France has hitherto made to the philosophy of general
history. They are but fragments: the earlier of the two is a collection
of detached Essays, anda therefore of necessity fragmentary; while the
later is all that the public possesses, or perhaps is destined to
possess, of a systematic work cut short in an early stage of its
progress. It would be unreasonable to lament that the exigencies or the
temptations of politics have called from authorship and the Professor’s
chair to the Chamber of Deputies and the Cabinet, the man to whom
perhaps more than to any other it is owing that Europe is now at peace.
Yet we cannot forbear wishing that this great service to the civilized
world had been the achievement of some other, and that M. Guizot had
been allowed to complete his Cours d’Histoire Moderne. For this a very
moderate amount of leisure would probably suffice. For though M. Guizot
has written only on a portion of his subject, he has done it in the
manner of one to whom the whole is familiar. There is a consistency, a
coherence, a comprehensiveness, and what the Germans would term
many-sidedness,[*] in his view of European history; together with a full
possession of the facts which have any important bearing upon his
conclusions, and a deliberateness, a matureness, an entire absence of
haste or crudity, in his explanations of historical phenomena; which we
never see in writers who form their theories as they go on—which give
evidence of a general scheme, so well wrought out and digested
beforehand, that the labours both of research and of thought necessary
for the whole work, seem to have been performed before any part was
committed to paper. Little beyond the mere operation of composition
seems to be requisite, to place before us, as a connected body of
thought, speculations which, even in their unfinished state, may be
ranked with the most valuable contributions yet made to universal
history.

Of these speculations no account, having any pretensions to
completeness, has ever, so far as we are aware, appeared in the English
language. We shall attempt to do something towards supplying the
deficiency. To suppose that this is no longer needful would be to
presume too much on the supposed universality of the French language
among our reading public; and on the acquaintance even of those to
Edition: current; Page: [260] whom the language opposes no difficulty,
with the names and reputation of the standard works of contemporaneous
French thought. We believe that a knowledge of M. Guizot’s writings is
even now not a common possession in this country, and that it is by no
means a superfluous service to inform English readers of what they may
expect to find there.

For it is not with speculations of this kind as it is with those for
which there exists in this country a confirmed and long-established
taste. What is done in France or elsewhere for the advancement of
Chemistry or of Mathematics, is immediately known and justly appreciated
by the mathematicians and chemists of Great Britain. For these are
recognised sciences, the chosen occupation of many instructed minds,
ever on the watch for any accession of facts or ideas in the department
which they cultivate. But the interest which historical studies in this
country inspire, is not as yet of a scientific character. History with
us has not passed that stage in which its cultivation is an affair of
mere literature or of erudition, not of science. It is studied for the
facts, not for the explanation of facts. It excites an imaginative, or a
biographical, or an antiquarian, but not a philosophical interest.
Historical facts are hardly yet felt to be, like other natural
phenomena, amenable to scientific laws. The characteristic distrust of
our countrymen for all ambitious efforts of intellect, of which the
success does not admit of being instantly tested by a decisive
application to practice, causes all widely extended views on the
explanation of history to be looked upon with a suspicion surpassing the
bounds of reasonable caution, and of which the natural result is
indifferenceb. Andb hence we remain in contented ignorance of the best
writings which the nations of the Continent have in our time produced;
because we have no faith in, and no curiosity about, the kind of
speculations to which the most philosophic minds of those nations have
lately devoted themselves; even when distinguished, as in the case
before us, by a sobriety and a judicious reserve, borrowed from the
safest and most cautious school of inductive inquirers.

In this particular, the difference between the English and the
Continental mind forces itself upon us in every province of their
respective literatures. Certain conceptions of history considered as a
whole, some notions of a progressive unfolding of the capabilities of
humanity—of a tendency of man and society towards some distant result—of
a destination, as it were, of humanity—pervade, in its whole extent, the
popular literature of France. Every newspaper, every literary review or
magazine, bears witness of such notions. They are always turning up
accidentally, when the writer is ostensibly engaged with something else;
or showing themselves as a background behind the opinions which he is
immediately maintaining. When the writer’s mind is not of a high order,
these notions are crude and vague; but they are evidentiary of a tone of
thought which has prevailed so long among the superior intellects, as to
have spread from them to Edition: current; Page: [261] others, and
become the general property of the nation. Nor is this true only of
France, and of the nations of Southern Europe which take their tone from
France, but almost equally, though under somewhat different forms, of
the Germanic nations. It was Lessing by whom cthe course ofc history was
styled “the education of the human race.”[*] Among the earliest of those
by whom the succession of historical events was conceived as a subject
of science, were Herder and Kant.[†] The latest school of German
metaphysicians, the Hegelians, are well known to treat of it as a
science which might even be constructed à priori. And as on other
subjects, so on this, the general literature of Germany borrows both its
ideas and its tone from the schools of the highest philosophy. We need
hardly say that in our own country nothing of all this is true. The
speculations of our thinkers, and the commonplaces of our mere writers
and talkers, are of quite another description.

Even insular England belongs, however, to the commonwealth of Europe,
and yields, though slowly and in a way of her own, to the general
impulse of the European mind. There are signs of a nascent tendency in
English thought to turn itself towards speculations on history. The
tendency first showed itself in some of the minds which had received
their earliest impulse from Mr. Coleridge; and an example has been given
in a quarter where many, perhaps, would have least expected it—by the
Oxford school of theologians. However little ambitious these writers may
be of the title of philosophers; however anxious to sink the character
of science in that of religion—they yet have, after their own fashion, a
philosophy of history. They haved a theory of the world[‡]—in our
opinion an erroneous one, but of which they recognise as an essential
condition that it shall explain history; and they do attempt to explain
history by it, and have constituted, on the basis of it, a kind of
historical system. By this we cannot but think that they have done much
good, if only in contributing to impose a similar necessity upon alle
theorizers of like pretensions. We believe the time must come when all
systems which aspire to direct either the consciences of mankind, or
their political and social arrangements, will be required to show not
only that they are consistent with universal history, but that they
afford a more reasonable fexplanationf of it than any other Edition:
current; Page: [262] system. In the philosophy of society, more
especially, we look upon history as an indispensable test and verifier
of all doctrines and creeds; and we regard with proportionate interest
all explanations, however partial, of any important part of the series
of historical phenomena—all attempts, which are in any measure
successful, to disentangle the complications of those phenomena, to
detect the order of their causation, and exhibit any portion of them in
an unbroken series, each link cemented by natural laws with those which
precede and follow it.

M. Guizot’s is one of the most successful of these partial efforts. His
subject is not history at large, but modern European history; the
formation and progress of the existing nations of Europe. Embracing,
therefore, only a part of the succession of historical events, he is
precluded from attempting to determine the law or laws which preside
over the entire evolution. If there be such laws; if the series of
states through which human nature and society are gdestinedg to pass,
have been determined more or less precisely by the original constitution
of mankind, and by the circumstances of the planet on which we live; the
order of their succession cannot be hdiscoveredh by modern or by
European experience alone: it must be ascertained by a conjunct
analysis, so far as possible, of the whole of history, and the whole of
human nature. M. Guizot stops short of this ambitious enterprise; but,
considered as preparatory studies for promoting and facilitating it, his
writings are most valuable. He seeks, not the ultimate, but the
proximate causes of the facts of modern history: he inquires in what
manner each successive condition of modern Europe grew out of that which
next preceded it; and how modern society altogether, and the modern
mind, shaped themselves from the elements which had been transmitted to
them from the ancient world. To have done this with any degree of
success, is no trifling achievement.

The Lectures, which are the principal foundation of M. Guizot’s literary
fame, were delivered by him in the years 1828, 1829, and 1830, at the
old Sorbonne, now the seat of the Faculté des Lettres of Paris, on
alternate days with MM. Cousin and Villemain; a triad of lecturers,
whose brilliant exhibitions, the crowds which thronged their
lecture-rooms, and the stir they excited in the active and aspiring
minds so numerous among the French youth, the future historian will
commemorate as among the remarkable appearances of that important era.
The Essays on the History of France are the substance of Lectures
delivered by M. Guizot many years earlier; before the Bourbons, in their
jealousy of all free speculation, had shut up his class-room and
abolished his professorship; which was re-established after seven years’
interval by the Martignac Ministry. In this earlier production some
topics are discussed at length, which, in the subsequent Lectures, are
either not touched upon, or much more summarily disposed of. Among these
is the highly interesting subject of the first Essay. The wide
difference between M. Edition: current; Page: [263] Guizot and preceding
historians is marked in the first words of his first book. A real
thinker is shown in nothing more certainly, than in the questions which
he asks. The fact which stands at the commencement of M. Guizot’s
subject—which is the origin and foundation of all subsequent history—the
fall of the Roman Empire—he found an unexplained phenomenon; unless a
few generalities about despotism and immorality and luxury can be called
explanation. His Essay opens as follows:

The fall of the Roman Empire of the West offers a singular phenomenon.
Not only the people fail to support the government in its struggle
against the Barbarians; but the nation, abandoned to itself, does not
attempt, even on its own account, any resistance. More than this—nothing
discloses that a nation exists; scarcely even is our attention called to
what it suffers, it undergoes all the horrors of war, pillage, famine, a
total change of its condition and destiny, without giving, either by
word or deed, any sign of life.

This phenomenon is not only singular, but unexampled. Despotism has
existed elsewhere than in the Roman Empire, more than once, after
countries had been long oppressed by it, foreign invasion and conquest
have spread destruction over them. Even when the nation has not
resisted, its existence is manifested in history, it suffers, complains,
and, in spite of its degradation, maintains some struggle against its
misery, narratives and monuments attest what it underwent, what became
of it, and if not its own acts, the acts of others in regard to it.

In the fifth century, the remnant of the Roman legions disputes with
hordes of barbarians the immense territory of the Empire, but it seems
as if that territory was a desert. The Imperial troops once driven out
or defeated, all seems over: one barbarous tribe wrests the province
from another; these excepted, the only existence which shows itself is
that of the bishops and clergy. If we had not the laws to testify to us
that a Roman population still occupied the soil, history would leave us
doubtful of it.

This total disappearance of the people is more especially observable in
the provinces most advanced in civilization, and longest subject to
Rome. The Letter called “The Groans of the Britons,” addressed to
Aetius,[*] and imploring, with bitter lamentations, the aid of a legion,
has been looked upon as a monument of the helplessness and meanness of
spirit into which the subjects of the Empire had fallen. This is unjust.
The Britons, less civilized, less Romanized than the other subjects of
Rome, did resist the Saxons, and their resistance has a history. At the
same epoch, in the same situation, the Italians, the Gauls, the
Spaniards, have none. The Empire withdrew from those countries, the
Barbarians occupied them, and the mass of the inhabitants took not the
slightest part, nor marked their place in any manner in the events which
gave them up to so great calamities.

And yet, Gaul, Italy, and Spain, were covered with towns, which but
lately had been rich and populous. Roads, aqueducts, amphitheatres,
schools, they possessed in abundance, they were wanting in nothing which
gives evidence of wealth, and procures for a people a brilliant and
animated existence. The Barbarians came to plunder these riches,
disperse these aggregations, destroy these pleasures. Never was the
existence of a nation more utterly subverted; never had individuals to
endure more evils in the present, more terrors for the future. Whence
came it that these nations were mute and lifeless? Why have so many
towns sacked, so many fortunes reversed, so many plans of life
overthrown, so many Edition: current; Page: [264] proprietors
dispossessed, left so few traces, not merely of the active resistance of
the people, but even of their sufferings?

The causes assigned are, the despotism of the Imperial government, the
degradation of the people, the profound apathy which had seized upon all
the governed. And this is true; such was really the main cause of so
extraordinary an effect. But it is not enough to enunciate, in these
general terms, a cause which has existed elsewhere without producing the
same results. We must penetrate deeper into the condition of Roman
society, such as despotism had made it. We must examine by what means
despotism had so completely stripped society of all coherence and all
life. Despotism has various forms and modes of proceeding, which give
very various degrees of energy to its action, and of extensiveness to
its consequences.[*]

Such a problem M. Guizot proposes to himself; and is it not remarkable
that this question not only was not iansweredi, but was not so much as
raised, by the celebrated writers who had treated this period of history
before him—one of those writers being Gibbon?[†] The difference between
what we learn from Gibbon on this subject, and what we learn from
Guizot, is a measure of the progress of historical inquiry in the
intervening period. Even the true sources of history, of all that is
most important in it, have never until the present generation been
really understood and freely resorted to. It is not in the chronicles,
but in the laws, that M. Guizot finds the clue to the immediate agency
in the “decline and fall” of the Roman empire. In the legislation of the
period M. Guizot discovers, under the name of curiales, the middle class
of the Empire, and the recorded evidences of its progressive
annihilation.[‡]

It is known that the free inhabitants of Roman Europe were almost
exclusively a town population: it isj, then,j in the institutions and
condition of the municipalities that the real state of the inhabitants
of the Roman empire must be studied.

kIn semblance, the constitution of the town communities was of a highly
popular character. The curiales, or the class liable to serve municipal
offices, consisted of all the inhabitants (not specially exempted) who
possessed landed property amounting to twenty-five jugera.l This class
formed a corporation for the management of local affairs. They
discharged their functions, partly as a collective body, partly by
electing, and filling in rotation, the various municipal magistracies.
Notwithstanding the apparent dignity and authority with which this body
was invested, the list of exemptions consisted of all the classes who
possessed any influence in the State, any real participation in the
governing power. It comprised, Edition: current; Page: [265] first, all
senatorial families, and all persons whom the Emperor had honoured with
the title of clarissimi, then, all the clergy, all the military, from
the praefectus praetorii down to the common legionary, and all the civil
functionaries of the State. When we look further, indications still more
significant make their appearance. We find that there was an unceasing
struggle between the government and the curiales—on their part to escape
from their condition, on the part of the government to retain them in
it. It was found necessary to circumscribe them by every species of
artificial restriction. They were interdicted from living mout of the
townm, from serving in the army, or holding any civil employment which
conferred exemption from municipal offices, until they had first served
all those offices, from the lowest to what was called the highest. Even
then, their emancipation was only personal, not extending to their
children. If they entered the Church, they must abandon their
possessions, either to the curia (the municipality), or to some
individual who would become a curialis in their room. Laws after laws
were enacted for detecting, and bringing back to the curia, those who
had secretly quitted it and entered surreptitiously into the army, the
clergy, or some public office. They could not absent themselves, even
for a time, without the permission of superior authority; and if they
succeeded in escaping, their property was forfeit to the curia. No
curialis, without leave from the governor of the province, could sell
the property which constituted him such. If his heirs were not members
of the curia, or if his widow or daughter married any one not a
curialis, one-fourth of their property must be relinquished. If he had
no children, only one-fourth could be bequeathed by will, the remainder
passing to the curia. The law looked forward to the case of properties
abandoned by the possessor, and made provision that they should devolve
upon the curia; and that the taxes to which they were liable should be
rateably charged upon the property of the other curiales.

What was it, in the situation of a curialis, which made his condition so
irksome, that nothing could keep men in it unless caged up as in a
dungeon—unless every hole or cranny by which they could creep out of it,
was tightly closed by the provident ingenuity of the legislator?

The explanation is this. Not only were the curiales burdened with all
the expenses of the local administration, beyond what could be defrayed
from the property of the curia itself—property continually encroached
upon, and often confiscated, by the general government; but they had
also to collect the revenue of the State; and their own property was
responsible for making up its amount. This it was which rendered the
condition of a curialis an object of dread, which progressively
impoverished and finally extinguished the class. In their fate, we see
what disease the Roman empire really died of; and how its destruction
had been consummated even before the occupation by the Barbarians. The
invasions were no new fact, unheard-of until the fifth century; such
attempts had been repeatedly Edition: current; Page: [266] made, and
never succeeded until the powers of resistance were destroyed by inward
decay. The Empire perished of misgovernment, in the form of
overtaxation. The burden, ever increasing through the necessities
occasioned by the impoverishment it had already produced, at last
reached this point, that none but those whom a legal exemption had
removed out of the class on which the weight principally fell, had
anything remaining to lose. The senatorial houses possessed that
privilege, and accordingly we still find, at the period of the
successful invasions, a certain number of families which had escaped the
general wreck of private fortunes;—opulent families, with large landed
possessions and numerous slaves. Between these and the mass of the
population there existed no tie of affection, no community of interest.
With this exception, and that of the Church, all was poverty. The middle
class had sunk under its burdens. “Hence,” says M. Guizot, “in the fifth
century, so much land lying waste, so many towns almost depopulated, or
filled only with a hungry and unoccupied rabble. The system of
government which I have described, contributed much more to this result
than the ravages of the Barbarians.”[*]

In this situation the northern invaders found the Roman empire. What
they made of it, is the next subject of M. Guizot’s investigations. The
Essays which follow are, “On the origin and establishment of the Franks
in Gaul”—“Causes of the fall of the Merovingians and
Carlovingians”—“Social state and political institutions of France, under
the Merovingians and Carlovingians”—“Political character of the feudal
régime.”[†] But on these subjects our author’s later and more mature
thoughts are found in his Lectures; and we shall therefore pass at once
to the more recent work, returning afterwards to the concluding Essay in
the earlier volume, which bears this interesting title: “Causes of the
establishment of a representative system in England.”[‡]

The subject of the Lectures being the history of European Civilization,
M. Guizot begins with a dissertation on the different meanings of that
indefinite term, and announces that he intends to use it as nann
equivalent to a state of improvement and progression, in the physical
condition and social relations of mankind, on the one hand, and in their
inward spiritual development on the other. We have not space to follow
him into this discussion, with which, were we disposed to criticize, we
might find some fault; but which ought, assuredly, to have exempted him
from the imputation of looking upon the improvement of mankind as
consisting in the progress of social institutions alone. We shall quote
a passage near the conclusion Edition: current; Page: [267] of the same
Lecture, as a specimen of the moral and philosophical spirit which
pervades the work, and because it contains a truth for which we are glad
to cite M. Guizot as an authority:

I think that in the course of our survey we shall speedily become
convinced that civilization is still very young; that the world is very
far from having measured the extent of the career which is before it.
Assuredly, human conception is far from being, as yet, all that it is
capable of becoming; we are far from being able to embrace in
imagination the whole future of humanity. Nevertheless, let each of us
descend into his own thoughts, let him question himself as to the
possible good which he comprehends and hopes for, and then confront his
idea with what is realized in the world; he will be satisfied that
society and civilization are in a very early stage of their progress;
that in spite of all they have accomplished, they have incomparably more
still to achieve.[*]

The second Lecture is devoted to a general speculation, which is very
characteristic of M. Guizot’s mode of thought, and, in our opinion,
worthy to be attentively weighed both by the philosophers and the
practical politicians of the age.

He observes, that one of the points of difference by which modern
civilization is most distinguished from ancient, is the complication,
the multiplicity, which characterizes it. In all previous forms of
society, Oriental, Greek, or Roman, there is a remarkable character of
unity and simplicity. Some one idea seems to have presided over the
construction of the social framework, and to have been carried out into
all its consequences, without encountering on the way any
counterbalancing or limiting principle. Some one element, some one power
in society, seems to have early attained predominance, and extinguished
all other agencies which could exercise an influence over society
capable of conflicting with its own. In Egypt, for example, the
theocratic principle absorbed everything. The temporal government was
grounded on the uncontrolled rule of a caste of priests, and the moral
life of the people was built upon the idea, that it belonged to the
interpreters of religion to direct the whole detail of human actions.
The dominion of an exclusive class, at once the ministers of religion
and the sole possessors of letters and secular learning, has impressed
its character on all which survives of Egyptian monuments—on all we know
of Egyptian life. Elsewhere, the dominant fact was the supremacy of a
military caste, or race of conquerors, the institutions and habits of
society were principally modelled by the necessity of maintaining this
supremacy. In other places, again, society was mainly the expression of
the democratic principle. The sovereignty of the majority, and the equal
participation of all male citizens in the administration of the State,
were the leading facts by which the aspect of those societies was
determined. This singleness in the governing principle had not, indeed,
always prevailed in those states. Their early history often presented a
conflict of forces.

Edition: current; Page: [268]
Among the Egyptians, the Etruscans, even among the Greeks, the caste of
warriors, for example, maintained a struggle with that of priests,
elsewhere [in ancient Gaul, for example] the spirit of clanship against
that of voluntary association: or the aristocratic against the popular
principle. But these contests were nearly confined to ante-historical
periods; a vague remembrance was all that survived of them. If at a
later period the struggle was renewed, it was almost always promptly
terminated; one of the rival powers achieved an early victory, and took
exclusive possession of society.[*]

This remarkable simplicity of most of the ancient civilizations, had, in
different places, different results. Sometimes, as in Greece, it
produced a most rapid development: never did any people unfold itself so
brilliantly in so short a time. But after this wonderful outburst,
Greece appeared to have become suddenly exhausted. Her decline, if not
so rapid as her elevation, was yet strangely prompt. It seemed as though
the creative force of the principle of Greek civilization had spent
itself, and no other principle came to its assistance.

Elsewhere, in Egypt and India for example, the unity of the dominant
principle had a different effect; society fell into a stationary state.
Simplicity produced monotony: the State did not fall into dissolution;
society continued to subsist, but immovable, and as it were
congealed.[†]

It was otherwise, says M. Guizot, with modern Europe.

Her civilization, [he continues,] is confused, diversified, stormy, all
forms, all principles of social organization co-exist; spiritual and
temporal authority, theocratic, monarchic, aristocratic, democratic
elements, every variety of classes and social conditions, are mixed and
crowded together; there are innumerable gradations of liberty, wealth,
and influence. And these forces are in a state of perpetual conflict,
nor has any of them ever been able to stifle the others, and establish
its own exclusive authority. Modern Europe offers examples of all
systems, of all attempts at social organization; monarchies pure and
mixed, theocracies, republics more or less aristocratic, have existed
simultaneously one beside another; and, in spite of their diversity,
they have all a certain homogeneity, a family likeness, not to be
mistaken.

In ideas and sentiments, the same variety, the same struggle.
Theocratic, monarchic, aristocratic, popular creeds, check, limit, and
modify one another. Even in the most audacious writings of the middle
ages, an idea is never followed to its ultimate consequences. The
partisans of absolute power unconsciously shrink from the results of
their doctrine; democrats are under similar restraints. One sees that
there are ideas and influences encompassing them, which do not suffer
them to go all lengths. There is none of that imperturbable hardihood,
that blindness of logic, which we find in the ancient world. In the
feelings of mankind, the same contrasts, the same multiplicity: a most
energetic love of independence, along with a great facility of
submission; a rare fidelity of man to man, and at the same time an
imperious impulse to follow each his own will, to resist restraint, to
live for himself, without taking account of others. A similar character
shows itself in modern literatures. In perfection of form and artistic
beauty, they are far inferior to the ancient; but richer and more
copious in respect of sentiments and ideas. One perceives that human
nature has been stirred up to a greater depth, and at a greater number
of points. The imperfections of form are an effect of this very cause.
The more abundant the materials, the more difficult it is to marshal
them into a symmetrical and harmonious shape.*

Edition: current; Page: [269]
Hence, he continues, the modern world, while inferior to many of the
ancient forms of human life in the characteristic excellence of each,
yet in all things taken together, is richer and more developed than any
of them. From the multitude of elements to be reconciled, each of which
during long ages spent the greater part of its strength in combating the
rest, the progress of modern civilization has necessarily been slower;
but it has lasted, and remained steadily progressive, through fifteen
centuries; which no other civilization has ever done.

There are some to whom this will appear a fanciful theory, a cobweb spun
from the brain of a doctrinaire. We are of a different opinion. There is
doubtless, in the historical statement, some of that pardonable
exaggeration, which in the exposition of large and commanding views, the
necessities of language render it so difficult entirely to avoid. The
assertion that the civilizations of the ancient world were each under
the complete ascendancy of some one exclusive principle, is not
admissible in the unqualified sense in which M. Guizot enunciates it;
the limitations which that assertion would require, on a nearer view,
are neither few nor inconsiderable. Still less is it maintainable, that
different societies, under different dominant principles, did not at
each epoch co-exist in the closest contact; as Athens, Sparta, and
Persia or Macedonia; Rome, Carthage, and the East. But after allowance
for over-statement, the substantial truth of the doctrine appears
unimpeachable. No one of the ancient forms of society contained in
itself that systematic antagonism, which we believe to be the only
condition under which stability and progressiveness can be permanently
reconciled to one another.

There are in society a number of distinct forces—of separate and
independent sources of power. There is the general power of knowledge
and cultivated intelligence. There is the power of religion; by which,
speaking politically, is to be understood that of religious teachers.
There is the power of military skill and discipline. There is the power
of wealth; the power of numbers and physical force; and several others
might be added. Each of these, by the influence it exercises over
society, is fruitful of certain kinds of beneficial results; none of
them is favourable to all kinds. There is no one of these powers which,
if it could make itself absolute, and deprive the others of all
influence except in aid of, and in subordination to, its own, would not
show itself the enemy of some of the essential constituents of human
well-being. Certain good results would be doubtless obtained, at least
for a time; some of the interests of society would be adequately cared
for; because, with certain of them, the natural tendency of each of
these powers spontaneously coincides. But there would be other
interests, in greater number, which the complete ascendancy of any one
of these social elements would leave unprovided for; and which must
depend for their protection on the influence which can be exercised by
other elements.

We believe with M. Guizot, that modern Europe presents the only example
in history, of the maintenance, through many ages, of this co-ordinate
action among rival powers naturally tending in different directions.
And, with him, we ascribe Edition: current; Page: [270] chiefly to this
cause the spirit of improvement, which has never ceased to exist, and
still makes progress, in the European nations. At no time has Europe
been free from a contest of rival powers for dominion over society. If
the clergy had succeeded, as ois supposed to have been the caseo in
Egypt, in making the kings subservient to them; if, as among the
Mussulmans of old, or the Russians now, the supreme religious authority
had merged in the attributes of the temporal ruler; if the military and
feudal nobility had reduced the clergy to be their tools, and retained
the burgesses as their serfs; if a commercial aristocracy, as at Tyre,
Carthage, and Venice, had got rid of kings, and governed by a military
force composed of foreign mercenaries; Europe would have arrived much
more rapidly at such kinds and degrees of national greatness and
well-being as those influences severally tended to promote; but from
that time would either have stagnated, like the great stationary
despotisms of the East, or have perished for lack of such other elements
of civilization as could sufficiently unfold themselves only under some
other patronage. Nor is this a danger existing only in the past; but one
which may be yet impending over the future. If the perpetual antagonism
which has kept the human mind alive, were to give place to the complete
preponderance of any, even the most salutary, element, we might yet find
that we have counted too confidently upon the progressiveness which we
are so often told is an inherent property of our species. Education, for
example—mental culture—would seem to have a better title than could be
derived from anything else, to rule the world with exclusive authority;
yet if the lettered and cultivated class, embodied and disciplined under
a central organ, could become in Europe, what it is in China, the
Government—unchecked by any power residing in the mass of citizens, and
permitted to assume a parental tutelage over all the operations of
life—the result would probably be a darker despotism, one more opposed
to improvement, than even the military monarchies and aristocracies have
in fact proved. And in like manner, if what pis thoughtp to be the
tendency of things in the United States should proceed for some
generations unrestrained; if the power of numbers—of the opinions and
instincts of the mass—should acquire and retain the absolute government
of society, and impose silence upon all voices which dissent from its
decisions or dispute its authority; we should expect that, in such
countries, the condition of human nature would become as stationary as
in China, and perhaps at qas low aq point of elevation in the scale.

However these things may be, and imperfectly as many of the elements
have yet unfolded themselves which are hereafter to compose the
civilization of the modern world; there is no doubt that it rhas always
possessedr, in comparison with the older forms of life and society, that
complex and manifold character which M. Guizot ascribes to it.

Edition: current; Page: [271]
He proceeds to inquire whether any explanation of this peculiarity of
the European nations can be traced in their origin; and he finds, in
fact, that origin to be extremely multifarious. The European world
shaped itself from a chaos, in which Roman, Christian, and Barbarian
ingredients were commingled. M. Guizot attempts to determine what
portion of the elements of modern life derived their beginning from each
of these sources.

From the Roman Empire, he finds that Europe derived both the fact and
the idea of municipal institutions; a thing unknown to the Germanic
conquerors. The Roman Empire was originally an aggregation of towns; the
life of the people, especially in sthe Western Empires, was a town life;
their institutions and social arrangements, except the system of
functionaries destined to maintain the authority of the sovereign, were
all grounded upon the towns. When the central power retired from the
Western Empire, town life and town institutions, though in an enfeebled
condition, were what remained. In Italy, where they were less enfeebled
than elsewhere, civilization revived not only earlier than in the rest
of Europe, but in forms more similar to those of the ancient world. The
South of France had, next to Italy, partaken most in the fruits of Roman
civilization; its towns had been the richest and most flourishing on
this side the Alps; and having, therefore, held out longer than those
farther north against the fiscal tyranny of the Empire, were not so
completely ruined when the conquest took place. Accordingly, their
municipal institutions were transmitted unbroken from the Roman period
to recent times. This, then, was one legacy which the Empire left to the
nations which were shaped out of its ruins. But it left also, though not
a central authority, the habit of requiring and looking for such an
authority. It left “the idea of the empire, the name of the emperor, the
conception of the imperial majesty, of a sacred power inherent in the
imperial name.”[*] This idea, at no time becoming extinct, resumed, as
society became more settled, a portion of its pristine power: towards
the close of the middle ages, we find it once more a really influential
element. Finally, Rome left a body of written law, constructed by and
for a wealthy and cultivated society; this served as a pattern of
civilization to the rude invaders, and assumed an ever-increasing
importance as they became more civilized.

In the field of intellect and purely mental development, Rome, and
through Rome, her predecessor Greece, left a still richer inheritance,
but one which did not come much into play until a later period.

Liberty of thought—reason taking herself for her own starting-point and
her own guide—is an idea essentially sprung from antiquity, an idea
which modern society owes to Greece and Rome. We evidently did not
receive it either from Christianity or from Germany, for in neither of
these elements of our civilization was it included. It was powerful on
the contrary, it predominated, in the Graeco-Roman civilization. That
was its Edition: current; Page: [272] true origin. It is the most
precious legacy which antiquity left to the modern world: a legacy which
was never quite suspended and valueless; for we see the fundamental
principle of all philosophy, the right of human reason to explore for
itself, animating the writings and the life of Scotus Erigena, and the
doctrine of freedom of thought still erect in the ninth century, in the
face of the principle of authority.*

Such, then, are the benefits which Europe has derived from the relics of
the ancient Imperial civilization. But along with this perishing
society, the barbarians found another and a rising society, in all the
freshness and vigour of youth—the Christian Church. In the debt which
modern society owes to this great institution, is tfirst to bet
included, in M. Guizot’s opinion, all which it owes to Christianity.

At that time none of the means were in existence by which, in our own
days, moral influences establish and maintain themselves independently
of institutions; none of the instruments whereby a pure truth, a mere
idea, acquires an empire over minds, governs actions, determines events.
In the fourth century nothing existed which could give to ideas, to mere
personal sentiments, such an authority. To make head against the
disasters, to come victoriously out of the tempests, of such a period,
there was needed a strongly organized and energetically governed
society. It is not too much to affirm that at the period in question,
the Christian Church saved Christianity. It was the Church, with its
institutions, its magistrates, its authority, which maintained itself
against the decay of the empire from within, and against barbarism from
without; which won over the barbarians, and became the civilizing
principle, the principle of fusion between the Roman and the barbaric
world.[*]

That, without its compact organization, the Christian hierarchy could
have so rapidly taken possession of the uncultivated minds of the
barbarians; that, before the conquest was completed, the conquerors
would have universally adopted the religion of the vanquished, if that
religion had been recommended to them by nothing but its intrinsic
superiority—we agree with M. Guizot in thinking incredible. We do not
find that other savages, at other eras, have yielded with similar
readiness to the same influences; nor did the minds or lives of the
invaders, for some centuries uafteru their conversion, give evidence
that the real merits of Christianity had made any deep impression upon
them. The true explanation is to be found in the power of intellectual
superiority. As the condition of secular society became more
discouraging, the Church had more and more engrossed to itself whatever
of real talents, as well as of sincere philanthropy existed in the Roman
world.

Among the Christians of that epoch, [says M. Guizot,] there were men who
had thought of everything—to whom all moral and political questions were
familiar; men who had on all subjects well-defined opinions, energetic
feelings, and an ardent desire to propagate them and make them
predominant. Never did any body of men make such efforts to act upon the
world and assimilate it to themselves, as did the Christian Church from
the fifth to the Edition: current; Page: [273] tenth century. She
attacked Barbarism at almost all points, striving to civilize it by her
ascendancy.[*]

In this, the Church was aided by the important temporal position, which,
in the general decay of other elements of society, it had assumed in the
Roman empire. Alone strong in the midst of weakness, alone possessing
natural sources of power within itself, it was the prop to which all
things clung which felt themselves in need of support. The clergy, and
especially the Prelacy, had become the most influential members of
temporal society. All that remained of the former wealth of the Empire
had for some time tended more and more in the direction of the Church.
At the time of the invasions, we find the bishops very generally
invested, under the title of defensor civitatis, with a high public
character—as the patrons, and towards all strangers the representatives,
of the town communities. It was they who treated with the invaders in
the name of the natives; it was their adhesion which guaranteed the
general obedience; and after the conversion of the conquerors, it was to
their sacred character that the conquered were indebted for whatever
mitigation they experienced of the fury of conquest.

Thus salutary, and even indispensable, was the influence of the
Christian clergy during the confused period of the invasions. M. Guizot
has not overlooked, but impartially analysed, the mixed character of
good and evil which belonged even in that age, and still more in the
succeeding ages, to the power of the Church. One beneficial consequence
which he ascribes to it is worthy of especial notice, the separation
(unknown to antiquity) between temporal and spiritual authority. He, in
common with the best thinkers of our time, attributes to this fact the
happiest influence on European civilization. It was the parent, he says,
of liberty of conscience. “The separation of temporal and spiritual is
founded on the idea, that material force has no right, no hold, over the
mind, over conviction, over truth.”[†] Enormous as have been the sins of
the Catholic Church in the way of religious intolerance, her assertion
of this principle has done more for human freedom, than all the fires
she ever kindled have done to destroy it. Toleration cannot exist, or
exists only as a consequence of contempt, where, Church and State being
virtually the same body, disaffection to the national worship is treason
to the State; as is sufficiently evidenced by Grecian and Roman history,
notwithstanding the fallacious appearance of liberality inherent in
Polytheism, which did not prevent, as long as the national religion
continued in vigour, almost every really free thinker of any ability in
the freest city of Greece, from being either banished or put to death
for blasphemy.* In more recent times, where the chief of the State has
been also the supreme pontiff, not, as in England, only nominally, but
substantially (as in the case of China, Russia, the Caliphs, and the
Sultans of Edition: current; Page: [274] Constantinople,) the result has
been a perfection of despotism, and a voluntary abasement under its
yoke, which have no parallel elsewhere except among the most besotted
barbarians.

It remains to assign, in the elemental chaos from which the modern
nations arose, the Germanic or barbaric element. What has Europe derived
from the barbarian invaders? M. Guizot answers—the spirit of liberty.
That spirit, as it exists in the modern world, is something which had
never before been found in company with civilization. The liberty of the
ancient commonwealths did not mean individual freedom of action; it
meant a certain form of political organization; and instead of asserting
the private freedom of each citizen, it was compatible with a more
vcompletev subjection of every individual to the State, and a more
active interference of the ruling powers with private conduct, than is
the practice of what are now deemed the most despotic governments. The
modern spirit of liberty, on the contrary, is the love of individual
independence; the claim for freedom of action, with as little
interference as is compatible with the necessities of society, from any
authority other than the conscience of the individual. It is in fact the
self-will of the savage, moderated and limited by the demands of
civilized life; and M. Guizot is not mistaken in believing that it came
to us, not from ancient civilization, but from the savage element
infused into that enervated civilization by its barbarous conquerors. He
adds, that together with this spirit of liberty, the invaders brought
also the spirit of voluntary association; the institution of military
patronage, the bond between followers and a leader of their own choice,
which afterwards ripened into feudality. This voluntary dependence of
man upon man, this relation of protection and service, this spontaneous
loyalty to a superior not deriving his authority from law or from the
constitution of society, but from the voluntary election of the
dependent himself, was unknown to the civilized nations of antiquity;
though frequent among savages, and so customary in the Germanic race, as
to have been deemed, though erroneously, characteristic of it.

To reconcile, in any moderate degree, these jarring elements; to produce
even an endurable state of society, not to say a prosperous and
improving one, by the amalgamation of savages and slaves, was a work of
many centuries. M. Guizot’s Lectures are chiefly occupied in tracing the
progress of this work, and showing by what agencies it was accomplished.
The history of the European nations consists of three periods; the
period of confusion, the feudal period, and the modern period. The
Lectures of 1828 include, though on a very compressed scale, all the
three; but only in relation to the history of society, omitting that of
thought, and of the human mind. In the following year, the Professor
took a wider range. The three volumes which contain the Lectures of
1829, are a complete historical analysis of the period of confusion;
expounding, with sufficient fulness of detail, both the state of
political society in each successive stage of that prolonged anarchy,
and the state of Edition: current; Page: [275] intellect, as evidenced
by literature and speculation. In these volumes, M. Guizot is the
philosopher of the period of which M. Augustin Thierry is the painter.
In the Lectures of 1830—which, having been prematurely broken off by the
political events of that year, occupy (with the Pièces Justificatives)
only two volumes—he commenced a similar analysis of the feudal period;
but did not quite complete the political and social part of the subject:
the examination of the intellectual products of the period was not even
commenced. In this state this great unfinished monument still remains.
Imperfect, however, as it is, it contains much more than we can attempt
to bring under even the most cursory review within our narrow limits. We
can only pause and dwell upon the important epochs, and upon
speculations which involve some great and fertile idea, or throw a
strong light upon some interesting portion of the history. Among these
last we must include the passage in which M. Guizot describes the manner
in which the civilization of the conquered impressed the imagination of
the victors.

We have just passed in review the closing age of the Roman civilization,
and we found it in full décadence, without force, without fecundity,
incapable almost of keeping itself alive. We now behold it vanquished
and ruined by the barbarians, when on a sudden it reappears fruitful and
powerful: it assumes over the institutions and manners which are brought
newly into contact with it, a prodigious empire, it impresses on them
more and more its own character, it governs and metamorphoses its
conquerors.

Among many causes, there were two which principally contributed to this
result, the power of a systematic and comprehensive body of civil law;
and the natural ascendancy of civilization over barbarism.

In fixing themselves to a single abode, and becoming landed proprietors,
the barbarians contracted, both with the Roman population and with each
other, relations more various and durable than any they had previously
known; their civil existence assumed greater breadth and stability. The
Roman law was alone fit to regulate this new existence; it alone could
deal adequately with such a multitude of relations. The barbarians,
however they might strive to preserve their own customs, were caught, as
it were, in the wmeshesw of this scientific legislation, and were
obliged to bring the new social order, in a great measure, into
subjection to it, not politically indeed, but civilly.

Further, the spectacle itself of Roman civilization exercised a great
empire over their minds. What strikes our modern fancy, what we greedily
seek for in history, in poems, travels, romances, is the picture of a
state of society unlike the regularity of our own, savage life, with its
independence, its novelty, and its adventure. Quite different were the
impressions of the barbarians. What to them was striking, what appeared
to them great and wonderful, was civilization; the monuments of Roman
industry, the cities, roads, aqueducts, amphitheatres; that society so
orderly, so provident, so full of variety in its fixity—this was the
object of their admiration and their astonishment. Though conquerors,
they were sensible of inferiority to the conquered. The barbarian might
despise the Roman as an individual being, but the Roman world in its
ensemble appeared to him something above his level, and all the great
men of the age of the conquests, Alaric, Ataulph, Theodoric, and so many
others, while destroying and trampling upon Roman society, used all
their efforts to copy it.*

Edition: current; Page: [276]
But their attempt was fruitless. It was not by merely seating themselves
in the throne of the Emperors, that the chiefs of the barbarians could
reinfuse life into a social order to which, when already perishing by
its own infirmities, they had dealt the final blow. Nor was it in that
old form that peaceful and regular government could be restored to
Europe. The confusion was too chaotic to admit of so easy a
disentanglement. Before fixed institutions could become possible, it was
necessary to have a fixed population; and this primary condition was
long unattained. Bands of barbarians, of various races, with no bond of
national union, overran the Empire, without mutual concert, and occupied
the country as much as a people so migratory and vagabond could be said
to occupy it; but even the loose ties which held together each tribe or
band, became relaxed by the consequences of spreading themselves over an
extensive territory; fresh hordes, too, were ever pressing on xfromx
behind; and the very first requisite of order, permanent territorial
limits, could not establish itself, either between properties or
sovereignties, for nearly three centuries. The annals of the conquered
countries during the intermediate period, but chronicle the desultory
warfare of the invaders with one another; the effect of which, to the
conquered, was a perpetual renewal of suffering, and increase of
impoverishment.

M. Guizot dates the termination of this downward period from the reign
of Charlemagne; others (for example, M. de Sismondi)[*] have placed it
later. We are inclined to agree with M. Guizot; no part of whose work
seems to us more admirable than that in which he fixes the place in
history of that remarkable man.*

The name of Charlemagne, says M. Guizot, has come down to us as one of
the greatest in history. Though not the founder of his dynasty, he has
given his name both to his race and to the age.

The homage paid to him is often blind and undistinguishing; his genius
and glory are extolled without discrimination or measure; yet at the
same time, persons repeat, one after another, that he founded nothing,
accomplished nothing; that his empire, his laws, all his works, perished
with him. And this historical commonplace introduces a crowd of moral
commonplaces, on the ineffectualness and uselessness of great men, the
vanity of their projects, the little trace which they leave in the world
after having troubled it in all directions. Is this true? Is it the
destiny of great men to be merely a burden and a useless wonder to
mankind? . . .

At the first glance, the commonplace might be supposed to be a truth.
The victories, conquests, institutions, reforms, projects, all the
greatness and glory of Charlemagne, vanished with him; he seemed a
meteor suddenly emerging from the darkness of barbarism, to be as
suddenly lost and extinguished in the shadow of feudality. There are
other such examples in history. . . .

But we must beware of trusting these appearances. To understand the
meaning of great Edition: current; Page: [277] events, and measure the
agency and influence of great men, we need to look far deeper into the
matter.

The activity of a great man is of two kinds; he performs two parts, two
epochs may generally be distinguished in his career. First, he
understands better than other people the wants of his time; its real,
present exigencies, what, in the age he lives in, society needs, to
enable it to subsist, and attain its natural development. He understands
these wants better than any other person of the time, and knows better
than any other how to wield the powers of society, and direct them
skilfully towards the realization of this end. Hence proceed his power
and glory; it is in virtue of this, that as soon as he appears, he is
understood, accepted, followed—that all give their willing aid to the
work, which he is performing for the benefit of all.

But he does not stop here. When the real wants of his time are in some
degree satisfied, the ideas and the will of the great man proceed
further. He quits the region of present facts and exigencies, he gives
himself up to views in some measure personal to himself; he indulges in
combinations more or less vast and specious, but which are not, like his
previous labours, founded on the actual state, the common instincts, the
determinate wishes of society, but are remote and arbitrary. He aspires
to extend his activity and influence indefinitely, and to possess the
future as he has possessed the present.

Here egoism and illusion commence. For some time, on the faith of what
he has already done, the great man is followed in this new career; he is
believed in, and obeyed; men lend themselves to his fancies; his
flatterers and his dupes even admire and vaunt them as his sublimest
conceptions. The public, however, in whom a mere delusion is never of
any long continuance, soon discovers that it is impelled in a direction
in which it has no desire to move. At first the great man had enlisted
his high intelligence and powerful will in the service of the general
feeling and wish, he now seeks to employ the public force in the service
of his individual ideas and desires; he is attempting things which he
alone wishes or understands. Hence disquietude first, and then
uneasiness, for a time he is still followed, but sluggishly and
reluctantly; next he is censured and complained of, finally, he is
abandoned, and falls, and all which he alone had planned and desired,
all the merely personal and arbitrary part of his works, perishes with
him.[*]

After briefly illustrating his remarks by the example of Napoleon—so
often, by his flatterers, represented as another Charlemagne, a
comparison which is the height of injustice to the earlier conqueror—M.
Guizot observes, that the wars of Charlemagne were of a totally
different character from those of the previous dynasty. “They were not
dissensions between tribe and tribe, or chief and chief, nor expeditions
engaged in for the purpose of settlement or of pillage; they were
systematic wars, inspired by a political purpose, and commanded by a
public necessity.”[†] Their purpose was no other than that of putting an
end to the invasions. He repelled the Saracens: the Saxons and
Sclavonians, against whom merely defensive arrangements were not
sufficient, he attacked and subjugated in their native forests.

At the death of Charlemagne, the conquests cease, the unity disappears,
the empire is dismembered and falls to pieces; but is it true that
nothing remained, that the warlike Edition: current; Page: [278]
exploits of Charlemagne were absolutely sterile, that he achieved
nothing, founded nothing?

There is but one way to resolve this question: it is, to ask ourselves
if, after Charlemagne, the countries which he had governed found
themselves in the same situation as before; if the twofold invasions
which, on the north and on the south, menaced their territory, their
religion, and their race, recommenced after being thus suspended, if the
Saxons, Sclavonians, Avars, Arabs, still kept the possessors of the
Roman empire in perpetual disturbance and anxiety. Evidently it was not
so. True, the empire of Charlemagne was broken up, but into separate
states, which arose as so many barriers at all points where there was
still danger. To the time of Charlemagne, the frontiers of Germany,
Spain, and Italy were in continual fluctuation; no constituted public
force had attained a permanent shape, he was compelled to be constantly
transporting himself from one end to the other of his dominions, in
order to oppose to the invaders the moveable and temporary force of his
armies. After him, the scene is changed; real political barriers, states
more or less organized, but real and durable, arose; the kingdoms of
Lorraine, of Germany, Italy, the two Burgundies, Navarre, date from that
time; and in spite of the vicissitudes of their destiny, they subsist,
and suffice to oppose effectual resistance to the invading movement.
Accordingly that movement ceases, or continues only in the form of
maritime expeditions, most desolating at the points which they reach,
but which cannot be made with great masses of men, nor produce great
results.

Although, therefore, the vast dominion of Charlemagne perished with him,
it is not true that he founded nothing; he founded all the states which
sprung from the dismemberment of his empire. His conquests entered into
new combinations, but his wars attained their end. The foundation of the
work subsisted, though its form was changed.[*]

In the character of an administrator and a legislator, the career of
Charlemagne is still more remarkable than as a conqueror. His long reign
was one struggle against the universal insecurity and disorder. He was
one of the sort of men described by M. Guizot, “whom the spectacle of
anarchy or of social immobility strikes and revolts; whom it shocks
intellectually, as a fact which ought not to exist; and who are
possessed with the desire to correct it, to introduce some rule, some
principle of regularity and permanence, into the world which is before
ythemy.”[†] Gifted with an unresting activity unequalled perhaps by any
other sovereign, Charlemagne passed his life in attempting to convert a
chaos into an orderly and regular government: to create a general system
of administration, under an efficient central authority. In this attempt
he was very imperfectly successful. The government of an extensive
country from a central point was too complicated, too difficult; it
required the co-operation of too many agents, and of intelligences too
much developed, to be capable of being carried on by barbarians. “The
disorder around him was immense, invincible; he repressed it for a
moment on a single point, but the evil reigned wherever his terrible
will had not penetrated; and even where he had passed, it recommenced as
soon as he had departed.”[‡]

Edition: current; Page: [279]
Nevertheless, his efforts were not lost—not wholly unfruitful. His
instrument of government was composed of two sets of functionaries,
local and central. The local portion consisted of the resident
governors, the dukes, counts, &c., together with the vassals or
beneficiarii, afterwards called feudatories, to whom when lands had been
granted, a more or less indefinite share had been delegated of the
authority and jurisdiction of the sovereign. The central machinery
consisted of missi dominici—temporary agents sent into the provinces,
and from one province to another, as the sovereign’s own
representatives; to inspect, control, report, and even reform what was
amiss, either in act or negligence, on the part of the local
functionaries. Over all these the prince held, with a firm hand, the
reins of government; aided by a national assembly or convocation of
chiefs, when he chose to summon it, either because he desired their
counsel or needed their moral support.

Is it possible that of this government, so active and vigorous, nothing
remained—that all disappeared with Charlemagne, that he founded nothing
for the internal consolidation of society?

What fell with Charlemagne, what rested upon him alone, and could not
survive him, was the central government. After continuing some time
under Louis le Débonnaire and Charles le Chauve, but with less and less
energy and influence, the general assemblies, the missi dominici, the
whole machinery of the central and sovereign administration,
disappeared. Not so the local government, the dukes, counts, vicaires,
centeniers, beneficiarii, vassals who held authority in their several
neighbourhoods under the rule of Charlemagne. Before his time, the
disorder had been as great in each locality as in the commonwealth
generally, landed properties, magistracies, were incessantly changing
hands, no local positions or influences possessed any steadiness or
permanence. During the forty-six years of his government, these
influences had time to become rooted in the same soil, in the same
families; they had acquired stability, the first condition of the
progress which was destined to render them independent and hereditary,
and make them the elements of the feudal régime. Nothing, certainly,
less resembles feudalism than the sovereign unity which Charlemagne
aspired to establish; yet he is the true founder of feudal society, it
was he who, by arresting the external invasions, and repressing to a
certain extent the intestine disorders, gave to situations, to fortunes,
to local influences, sufficient time to take real possession of the
country. After him, his general government perished like his conquests,
his unity of authority like his extended empire; but as the empire was
broken into separate states, which acquired a vigorous and durable life,
so the central sovereignty of Charlemagne resolved itself into a
multitude of local sovereignties, to which a portion of the strength of
his government had been imparted, and which had acquired under its
shelter the conditions requisite for reality and durability. So that in
this second point of view, in his civil as well as military capacity, if
we look beyond first appearances, he accomplished and founded much.[*]

Thus does a more accurate knowledge correct the two contrary errors, one
or other of which is next to universal among superficial thinkers,
respecting the influence of great men upon society. A great ruler cannot
shape the world after his own pattern; he is condemned to work in the
direction of existing and spontaneous tendencies, and has only the
discretion of singling out the most beneficial of these. Edition:
current; Page: [280] Yet the difference is great between a skilful pilot
and none at all, though a pilot cannot steer zin oppositionz to wind and
tide. Improvements of the very first order, and for which society is
completely prepared, which lie in the natural course and tendency of
human events, and are the next stage through which mankind will pass,
may be retarded indefinitely for want of a great man, to throw the
weight of his individual will and faculties into the trembling scale.
Without Charlemagne, who can say for how many centuries longer the
period of confusion might have been protracted? Yet in this same example
it equally appears what a great ruler can not do. Like Ataulph,
Theodoric, Clovis, all the ablest chiefs of the invaders, Charlemagne
dreamed of restoring the Roman Empire.

This was, in him, the portion of egoism and illusion; and in this it was
that he failed. The Roman imperium, and its unity, were invincibly
repugnant to the new distribution of the population, the new relations,
the new moral condition of mankind. Roman civilization could only enter
as a transformed element into the new world which was preparing. This
idea, this aspiration of Charlemagne, was not a public idea, nor a
public want: all that he did for its accomplishment perished with him.

Yet even of this vain endeavour, something remained. The name of the
Western Empire, revived by him, and the rights which were thought to be
attached to the title of Emperor, resumed their place among the elements
of history, and were for several centuries longer an object of ambition,
an influencing principle of events. Even, therefore, in the purely
egotistical and ephemeral portion of his operations, it cannot be said
that the ideas of Charlemagne were absolutely sterile, nor totally
devoid of duration.[*]

M. Guizot, we think, is scarcely just to Charlemagne in this implied
censure upon his attempt to reconstruct civilized society on the only
model familiar to him. The most intelligent acotemporariesa shared his
error, and saw in the dismemberment of his Empire, and the fall of his
despotic authority, a return to chaos. Though it is easy for us to see,
it was difficult for them to foresee, that European society, such as the
invasions had made it, admitted of no return to order but through
something resembling the feudal system. By the writers who have come
down to us from the age in which that system arose, it was looked upon
as nothing less than universal anarchy and dissolution. “Consult the
poets of the time, consult the chroniclers; they all thought that the
world was coming to an end.”[†] M. Guizot quotes one of the monuments of
the time, a poem by Florus, a deacon of the church at Lyons, which
displays with equal naïveté the chagrin of the instructed few at the
breaking up of the great unsolid structure which Charlemagne had raised,
and the satisfaction which the same fact caused to the people at
large;[‡] not the only Edition: current; Page: [281] instance in history
in which the instinct of the people has been nearer the truth than the
considerate judgment of bthose who clung to historical precedentb. That
renewal of the onward movement, which even a Charlemagne could not
effect by means repugnant to the natural tendencies of the times, took
place through the operation of ordinary causes, as soon as society had
assumed the form which alone could give rise to fixed expectations and
positions, and produce a sort of security.

The moral and the social state of the people at this epoch equally
resisted all association, all government of a single and extended
character. Mankind had few ideas, and did not look far around. Social
relations were rare and restricted. The horizon of thought and of life
was exceedingly limited. Under such conditions, a great society is
impossible. What are the natural and necessary bonds of political union?
On the one hand, the number and extent of the social relations; on the
other, of the ideas, whereby men communicate and are held together.
Where neither of these are numerous or extensive, the bonds of a great
society or state are non-existent. Such were the times of which we now
speak. Small societies, local governments, cut, as it were, to the
measure of existing ideas and relations, were alone possible; and these
alone succeeded in establishing themselves. The elements of these little
societies and little governments were ready-made. The possessors of
benefices by grant from the king, or of domains occupied by conquest,
the counts, dukes, governors of provinces, were disseminated throughout
the country. These became the natural centres of associations
co-extensive with them. Round these was agglomerated, voluntarily or by
force, the neighbouring population, whether free or in bondage. Thus
were formed the petty states called fiefs; and this was the real cause
of the dissolution of the empire of Charlemagne.*

We have now, therefore, arrived at the opening of the feudal period; and
have to attempt to appreciate what the feudal society was, and what was
the influence of that society and of its institutions, on the fortunes
of the human race; what new elements it introduced; what new tendencies
it impressed upon human nature; or to which of the existing tendencies
it imparted additional strength.

M. Guizot’s estimate of feudalism is among the most interesting, and con
the whole, the mostc satisfactory, of his speculations. He observes,
that sufficient importance is seldom attached to the effects produced
upon the mental nature of mankind by mere changes in their outward mode
of living.

Every one is aware of the notice which has been taken of the influence
of climate, and the importance attached to it by Montesquieu.[*] If we
confine ourselves to the direct influence of diversity of climate upon
mankind, it is perhaps less than has been supposed, the appreciation of
it is, at all events, difficult and vague. But the indirect effects,
those for instance which result from the fact, that in a warm climated
people live in the open air, while in cold countries they shut
themselves up in their houses—that they subsist upon different kinds of
food, and the like—are highly important, and, merely by their influence
on the Edition: current; Page: [282] details of material existence, act
powerfully on civilization. Every great revolution produces in the state
of society some changes of this sort, and these ought to be carefully
observed.

The introduction of the feudal régime occasioned one such change, of
which the importance cannot be overlooked; it altered the distribution
of the population over the face of the country. Till that time, the
masters of the soil, the sovereign class, lived collected in masses more
or less numerous—either sedentary in the towns, or wandering in bands
over the country. In the feudal state these same persons lived
insulated, each in his own habitation, at great distances from one
another. It is obvious how great an influence this change must have
exercised over the character and progress of civilization. Social
preponderance and political power passed from the towns to the country,
private property and private life assumed pre-eminence over public. This
first effect of the triumph of the feudal principle, appears more
fruitful in consequences, the longer we consider it.

Let us examine feudal society as it is in its own nature, looking at it
first of all in its simple and fundamental element. Let us figure to
ourselves a single possessor of a fief in his own domain; and consider
what will be the character of the little association which groups itself
around him.

He establishes himself in a retired and defensible place, which he takes
care to render safe and strong; he there erects what he terms his
castle. With whom does he establish himself there? With his wife and his
children: probably also some few freemen who have not become landed
proprietors, have attached themselves to his person, and remain
domesticated with him. These are all the inmates of the castle itself.
Around it, and under its protection, collects a small population of
labourers—of serfs, who cultivate the domain of the seigneur. Amidst
this inferior population religion comes, builds a church and establishes
a priest. In the early times of feudality, this priest is at once the
chaplain of the castle and the parish clergyman of the village; at a
later period the two characters are separated. This, then, is the
organic molecule, the unit, if we may so speak, of feudal society. This
we have to summon before us, and demand an answer to the two questions
which should be addressed to every fact in history—what was it
calculated to do towards the development, first of man, and next of
society?*

The first of its peculiarities, he continues, is the prodigious
importance which the head of this little association must assume in his
own eyes, and eine those of all around him. To the liberty of the man
and the warrior, the sentiment of personality and individual
independence, which predominated in savage life, is now added the
importance of the master, the landed proprietor, the head of a family.
No feeling of self-importance comparable to this, is habitually
generated in any other known form of civilization. A Roman patrician,
for example, “was the head of a family, was a master, a superior; he
was, besides, a religious magistrate, a pontiff in the interior of his
family.” But the importance of a religious magistrate is not personal;
it is borrowed from the divinity whom he serves. In civil life the
patrician

was a member of the senate—of a corporation which lived united in one
place. This again was an importance derived from without; borrowed and
reflected from that of his corporation. The grandeur of the ancient
aristocracies was associated with religious and Edition: current; Page:
[283] political functions; it belonged to the situation, to the
corporation at large, more than to the individual. That of the possessor
of a fief is, on the contrary, purely personal. He receives nothing from
any one; his rights, his powers, come from himself alone. He is not a
religious magistrate, nor a member of a senate; all his importance
centres in his own person, whatever he is, he is by his own right, and
in his own name. Above him, no superior of whom he is the representative
and the interpreter; around him, no equals; no rigorous universal law to
curb him; no external force habitually controlling his will; he knows no
restraint but the limits of his strength, or the presence of an
immediate danger. With what intensity must not such a situation act upon
the mind of the man who occupies fit!f What boundless pride, what
haughtiness—to speak plainly, what insolence—must arise in his
gsoul!g[*]

We pass to the influence of this new state of society upon the
development of domestic feelings and family life.

History exhibits to us the family in several different shapes. First,
the patriarchal family, as seen in the Bible and hinh the various
monuments of the East. The family is here numerous, and amounts to a
tribe. The chief, or patriarch, lives in a state of community with his
children, his kindred (of whom all the various generations are grouped
around him), and his domestics. Not only does he live with them, but his
interests and occupations are the same with theirs; he leads the same
life. This is the situation of Abraham, of the patriarchs, of the chiefs
of Arab tribes, who are in our own days a faithful image of patriarchal
society.

Another form of the family is the clan—that little association, the type
of which must be sought in Scotland and Ireland, and through which,
probably a great part of the European world has at some time passed.
This is no longer iai patriarchal family. Between the chief and the rest
of the people there is now a great difference of condition. He does not
lead the same life with his followers, they mostly cultivate and serve;
he takes his ease, and has no occupation save that of a warrior. But he
and they have a common origin, they bear the same name; their
relationship, their ancient traditions, and their community of
affections and recollections establish among all the members of the clan
a moral union, a kind of equality.

Does the feudal family resemble either of these types? Evidently not. At
first sight it has some apparent resemblance to the clan; but the
difference is immense. The population which surrounds the possessor of
the fief are perfect strangers to him; they do not bear his name; they
have no relationship to him, are connected with him by no tie,
historical or moral. Neither does he, as in the patriarchal family, lead
the same life and carry on the same labour as those about him: he has no
occupation but war, they are tillers of the ground. The feudal family is
not numerous; it does not constitute a tribe, it is confined to the
family in the most restricted sense, the wife and children, it lives
apart from the rest of the people, in the interior of the castle. Five
or six persons, in a position at once alien from, and superior to, all
others, constitute the feudal family. . . . Internal life, domestic
society, are certain here to acquire a great preponderance. I grant that
the rudeness and violent passions of the chief, and his habit of passing
his time in war and in the chase, must obstruct and retard the formation
of domestic habits; but that obstacle will be overcome. The chief must
return habitually to his own home; there he always finds his wife, his
children, and them alone, or almost alone; they, and no others, compose
his permanent society—they alone always Edition: current; Page: [284]
partake his interest, his destiny. It is impossible that domestic life
should not acquire a great ascendancy. The proofs are abundant. Was it
not in the feudal family that the importance of women took its rise? In
all the societies of antiquity, not only where no family spirit existed,
but where that spirit was powerful, for instance in the patriarchal
societies, women did not occupy anything like the place which they
acquired in Europe under the feudal polity. The cause of this has been
looked for in the peculiar manners of the ancient Germans; in a
characteristic respect which it is affirmed that, in the midst of their
forests, they paid to women. German patriotism has built upon one
sentence of Tacitus a fancied superiority, a primitive and ineffaceable
purity of German manners in the relations of the sexes to each other.[*]
Mere chimeras! Expressions similar to those of Tacitus, sentiments and
usages analogous to those of the ancient Germans, are found in the
recitals of many observers of barbarous tribes. There is nothing
peculiar in the matter, nothing characteristic of any particular race.
The importance of women in Europe arose from the progress and
preponderance of domestic manners; and that preponderance became, at an
early period, an essential character of feudal life.[†]

In corroboration of these remarks, he observes in another place, that in
the feudal form of society (unlike all those which preceded it) the
representative of the chief’s person and the delegate of his authority,
during his frequent absences, was the châtelaine. In his warlike
expeditions and hunting excursions, his crusadings and his captivities,
she directed his affairs, and governed his people with a power equal to
his own.[‡] No importance comparable to this, no position equally
calculated to call forth the human faculties, had fallen to the lot of
women, before, nor, it may be added, since. And the fruits are seen in
the many examples of heroic women which the feudal annals present to us;
women who fully equalled, in every masculine virtue, the bravest of the
men with whom they were associated; often greatly surpassed them in
prudence, and fell short of them only in ferocity.

M. Guizot now turns from the seigneurial abode to the dependent
population surrounding it. Here all things present a far worse aspect.

In any social situation which lasts a certain length of time, there
inevitably arises between those whom it brings into contact, under
whatever conditions, a certain moral tie—certain feelings of protection,
of benevolence, of affection. It was thus in the feudal society, one
cannot doubt, that in process of time there were formed between the
cultivators and their seigneur some moral relations, some habits of
sympathy. But this happened in spite of their relative position, and
nowise from its influence. Considered in itself, the situation was
radically vicious. There was nothing morally in common between the
feudal superior and the cultivators; they were part of his domain, they
were his property. . . . Between the seigneur and those who tilled the
ground which belonged to him, there were (as far as this can ever be
said when human beings are brought together) no laws, no protection, no
society. Hence, I conceive, that truly prodigious and invincible
detestation which the rural population has entertained in all ages for
the feudal régime. . . . Theocratic and monarchical despotism have more
than once obtained the acquiescence, and almost the affection, of the
Edition: current; Page: [285] population subject to them. The reason is,
theocracy and monarchy exercise their dominion in virtue of some belief
common to the master with his subjects, he is the representative and
minister of another power, superior to all human powers; he speaks and
acts in the name of the Deity, or of some general idea, not in the name
of the man himself, of a mere man. Feudal despotism is a different
thing, it is the mere power of one individual over another, the
domination and capricious will of a human being. . . . Such was the
real, the distinctive character of the feudal dominion, and such the
origin of the antipathy it never ceased to inspire.[*]

Leaving the contemplation of the elementary molecule (as M. Guizot calls
it) of feudal society—a single possessor of a fief with his family and
dependents—and proceeding to consider the nature of the larger society,
or state, which was formed by the aggregation of these small societies,
we find the feudal régime to be absolutely incompatible with any real
national existence. No doubt, the obligations of service on the one
hand, and protection on the other, theoretically attached to the
concession of a fief, kept alive some faint notions of a general
government, some feelings of social duty. But, in the whole duration of
the system, it was never found practicable to attach to these rights and
obligations any efficient sanction. A central government, with power
adequate to enforce even the recognised duties of the feudal relation,
or to keep the peace between the different members of the confederacy,
did not and could not exist consistently with feudalism. The very
essence of feudality was (to borrow M. Guizot’s definition) the fusion
of property and sovereignty. The lord of the soil was not only the
master of all who dwelt upon it, but he was their only superior, their
sovereign. Taxation, military protection, judicial administration, were
his alone; for all offices of a ruler, the people looked to him, and
could look to no other. The king was absolute, like all other feudal
lords, within his own domain, and only there. He could neither compel
obedience from his feudatories, nor impose his mediation as an
arbitrator between them. Among such petty potentates, the only union
compatible with the nature of the case was a federal union—the most
difficult to maintain of all political organizations; one which, resting
almost entirely on moral sanctions, and an enlightened sense of distant
interests, requires, more than any other social system, an advanced
state of civilization. The middle age was nowise ripe for it; the sword,
therefore, remained the universal umpire; all questions were decided
either by private war, or by that judicial combat which was the first
attempt of society (as the modern duel is the last) to subject the
prosecution of a quarrel by force of arms to the moderating influence of
fixed customs and ordinances.

The following is M. Guizot’s summary of the influences of feudalism on
the progress of the European nations.

Feudality must have exercised a considerable, and on the whole a
salutary, influence on the internal development of the individual; it
raised up in the human mind some moral Edition: current; Page: [286]
notions and moral wants, some energetic sentiments; it produced some
noble developments of character and passion. Considered in a social
point of view, it was not capable of establishing legal order or
political securities; but it was indispensable as a recommencement of
European society, which had been so broken up by barbarism as to be
unable to assume any more enlarged or more regular form. But the feudal
form, radically bad in itself, admitted neither of being expanded nor
regularized. The only political right which feudalism has planted deeply
in European society, is the right of resistance. I do not mean legal
resistance; that was out of the question in a society so little
advanced. The right of resistance which feudal society asserted and
exercised, was the right of personal resistance—a fearful, an
anti-social right, since it is an appeal to force, to war, the direct
antithesis of society; but a right which never ought to perish from the
breast of man, since its abrogation is simply equivalent to submission
to slavery. The sentiment of this right had been lost in the degeneracy
of Roman society, from the ruins of which it could not again arise; as
little, in my opinion, was it a natural emanation from the principles of
Christian society. Feudality re-introduced it into European life. It is
the glory of civilization to render this right for ever useless and
inactive; it is the glory of the feudal society to have constantly
asserted and held fast to it.[*]

There is yet another aspect, and far from an unimportant one, in which
feudal life has bequeathed, to the times which followed, a lesson worthy
to be studied. Imperfect as the world still remains in justice and
humanity, the feudal world was far inferior to it in those attributes,
but greatly superior in individual strength of will, and decision of
character.

No reasonable person will deny the immensity of the social reform which
has been accomplished in our times. Never have human relations been
regulated with more justice, nor produced a more general well-being as
the result. Not only this, but, I am convinced, a corresponding moral
reform has also been accomplished; at no epoch perhaps has there been,
all things considered, so much honesty in human life, so many human
beings living in an orderly manner; never has so small an amount of
public force been necessary to repress individual wrong-doing. But in
another respect we have, I think, much to gain. We have lived for half a
century under the empire of general ideas, more and more accredited and
powerful; under the pressure of formidable, almost irresistible events.
There has resulted a certain weakness, a certain effeminacy, in our
minds and characters. Individual convictions and will are wanting in
energy and confidence in themselves. Men assent to a prevailing opinion,
obey a general impulse, yield to an external necessity. Whether for
resistance or for action, each has but a mean idea of his own strength,
a feeble reliance on his own judgment. Individuality, the inward and
personal energy of man, is weak and timid. Amidst the progress of public
liberty, many seem to have lost the proud and invigorating sentiment of
their own personal liberty.

Such was not the Middle Age. The condition of society was deplorable,
the morality of mankind much inferior to what is often asserted, much
inferior to that of our own time. But in many persons, individuality was
strong, will was energetic. There were then few ideas which ruled all
minds, few outward forces which, in all situations and in all places,
weighed upon men’s characters. The individual unfolded himself in his
own way, with an irregular freedom: the moral nature of man shone forth
here and there in all its ambitious aspirations, with all its energy. A
contemplation not only dramatic and attaching, but instructive and
Edition: current; Page: [287] useful; which offers us nothing to regret,
nothing to imitate, but much to learn, were it only by awakening our
attention to what is wanting in ourselves—by showing to us of what a
human being is capable when he will.*

The third period of modern history, which is emphatically the modern
period, is more complex and more difficult to interpret than the two
preceding. Of this period, M. Guizot had only begun to treat; and we
must not expect to find his explanations as satisfactory as in the
earlier portions of his subject. The origin of feudalism, its character,
its place in the history of civilization, he has discussed, as has been
seen, in a manner which leaves little to be desired: but we cannot
extend the same praise to his account of its decline, which (it is but
fair to consider) is not completed, but which, so far as it has gone,
appears to us to bear few marks of that piercing insight into the heart
of a question, that determination not to be paid with a mere show of
explanation, which are the characteristic jexcellenciesj of the
speculations thus far brought to notice.

M. Guizot ascribes the fall of feudality mainly to its imperfections. It
did not, he says, contain in itself the elements of durability. It was a
first step out of barbarism, but too near the verge of the former
anarchy to admit of becoming a permanent social organization. The
independence of the possessors of fiefs was evidently excessive, and too
little removed from the savage state. “Accordingly, independently of all
foreign causes, feudal society, by its own nature and tendencies, was
always in question, always on the brink of dissolution; incapable at
least of subsisting regularly or of developing itself, without altering
its nature.”†

He then sets forth how, in the absence of any common superior, of any
central authority capable of protecting the feudal chiefs against one
another, they were content to seek protection where they could find
it—namely, from the most powerful among themselves; how, from this
natural tendency, those who were already strong, ever became stronger,
the larger fiefs went on aggrandizing themselves at the expense of the
weaker. “A prodigious inequality soon arose among the possessors of
fiefs,”[*] and inequality of strength led, as it usually does, to
inequality of claims, and at last, of recognised rights.

Thus, from the mere fact that social ties were wanting to feudality, the
feudal liberties themselves rapidly perished; the excesses of individual
independence were perpetually compromising society itself; it found in
the relations of the possessors of fiefs, neither the means of regular
maintenance, nor of ulterior development; it sought in other
institutions the conditions which were needful to it for becoming
permanent, regular, and progressive. The tendency towards
centralization, towards the formation of a power superior to the local
powers, was rapid. Long before the royal government had begun to
intervene at every point of the country, there had grown up, under the
name of duchies, counties, viscounties, &c. Edition: current; Page:
[288] many smaller royalties, invested with the central government of
this or that province, and to whom the rights of the possessors of
fiefs, that is, of the local sovereignties, became more and more
subordinate.*

This sketch of the progressive decomposition of the feudal organization,
is, no doubt, historically correct; but we desiderate in it any approach
to a scientific explanation of the phenomenon. That is an easy solution
which accounts for the destruction of institutions from their own
defects; but experience proves, that forms of government and social
arrangements do not fall, merely because they deserve to fall. The more
backward and the more degraded any form of society is, the stronger is
the tendency to remain stagnating in that state, simply because it is an
existing state. We are unable to recognise in this theory of the decay
of feudality, the philosopher who so clearly demonstrated its origin;
who pointed out that the feudal polity established itself not because it
was a good form of society, but because society was incapable of a
better; because the rarity of communications, the limited range of men’s
ideas and of their social relations, and their want of skill to work
political machinery of a delicate or complicated construction,
disqualified them from being either chiefs or members of kank organized
association extending beyond their immediate neighbourhood. If feudality
was a product of this condition of the human mind, and the only form of
polity which it admitted of, no evils inherent in feudality could have
hindered it from continuing so long as that cause subsisted. The anarchy
which existed as between one feudal chief and another—the inequality of
their talents, and the accidents of their perpetual warfare—would have
led to continual changes in the state of territorial possession, and
large governments would have been often formed by the agglomeration of
smaller ones, occasionally perhaps a great empire like that of
Charlemagne: but both the one and the other would have crumbled again to
fragments as that did, if the general situation of society had continued
to be what it was when the feudal system originated. Is not this the
very history of society in a great part of the East, from the earliest
record of events? Between the time when masses could not help dissolving
into particles, and the time when those particles spontaneously
reassembled themselves into masses, a great change must have taken place
in the molecular properties of the atoms. Inasmuch as the petty district
sovereignties of the first age of feudality coalesced into larger
provincial sovereignties, which, instead of obeying the original
tendency to decomposition, tended in the very contrary direction,
towards ultimate aggregation into one national government; it is clear
that the state of society had become compatible with extensive
governmentsl. Thel unfavourable circumstances which M. Guizot
commemorated in the former period, had in some manner ceased to exist; a
great Edition: current; Page: [289] progress in civilization had been
accomplished, under the dominion and auspices of the feudal system; and
the fall of the system was not really owing to its vices, but to its
good qualities—to the improvement which had been found possible under
it, and by which mankind had become desirous of obtaining, and capable
of realizing, a better form of society than it afforded.

What this change was, and how it came to pass, M. Guizot has left us to
seek. Considerable light is, no doubt, incidentally thrown upon it by
the course of his investigations, and the sequel of his work would
probably have illustrated it still more. At present, the philosophic
interpreter of historical phenomena is indebted to him, on this portion
of the subject, for little besides materials.

It was under the combined assaults of two powers—royalty from above, the
emancipated commons from below—that the independence of the great
vassals finally succumbed. M. Guizot has delineated with great force and
perspicuity the rise of both these powers. His review of the origin and
emancipation of the communes, and the growth of the tiers-état, is one
of the best executed portions of the book; and should be read with M.
Thierry’s Letters on the History of France,[*] as the moral of the tale.
In his fifth volume, M. Guizot traces, with considerable minuteness, the
progress of the royal authority, from its slumbering infancy in the time
of the earlier Capetians, through its successive stages of growth—now by
the energy and craft of Philippe Auguste, now by the justice and
enlightened policy of Saint Louis—to its attainment, not indeed of
recognised despotism, but of almost unlimited power of actual tyranny,
in the reign of Philippe le Bel. But on all these imputed causes of the
fall of feudalism, the question recurs, what caused the causes
themselves? Why was that possible to the successors of Capet, which had
been impossible to those of Charlemagne? How, under the detested feudal
tyranny, had a set of fugitive serfs, who congregated for mutual
protection at a few scattered points, and called them towns, become
industrious, rich, and powerful? There can be but one answer; the feudal
system, with all its deficiencies, was sufficiently a government,
contained within itself a sufficient mixture of authority and liberty,
afforded sufficient protection to industry, and encouragement and scope
to the development of the human faculties, to enable the natural causes
of social improvement to resume their course. What these causes were,
and why they have been so much more active in Europe than in parts of
the earth which were much earlier civilized, is far too difficult an
inquiry to be entered upon in this place. We have already seen what M.
Guizot has contributed to its elucidation in the way of general
reflection. About the matter of fact, in respect to the feudal period,
there can be no doubt. When the history of what are called the dark
ages, because they had not yet a vernacular literature, and did not
write a correct Latin style, shall be written as it deserves to be, that
will be Edition: current; Page: [290] seen by all, which is already
recognised by the great historical inquirers of the present time—that at
no period of history was human intellect more active, or society more
unmistakably in a state of rapid advancem, than during a great part of
the so much vilified feudal period.m

M. Guizot’s detailed analysis of the history of European life, is, as we
before remarked, only completed for the period preceding the feudal. For
the five centuries which extended from Clovis to the last of the
Carlovingians,[*] he has given a finished delineation, not only of
outward life and political society, but of the progress and vicissitudes
of what was then the chief refuge and hope of oppressed humanity, the
religious society—the Church. He makes his readers acquainted with the
legislation of the period, with the little it possessed of literature or
philosophy, and with that which formed, as ought to be remembered, the
real and serious occupation of its speculative faculties—its religious
labours, whether in the elaboration or in the propagation of the
Christian doctrine. His analysis and historical exposition of the
Pelagian controversy—his examination of the religious literature of the
period, its sermons and legends—are models of their kind; and he does
not, like the old school of historians, treat these things as matters
insulated and abstract, of no interest save what belongs to them
intrinsically, but invariably looks at them as component parts of the
general life of the age.

Of the feudal period, M. Guizot had not time to complete a similar
delineation. His analysis even of the political society of the period is
not concluded; and we are entirely without that review of its
ecclesiastical history, and its intellectual and moral life, whereby the
deficiency of explanation would probably have been in some degree
supplied, which we have complained of in regard to the remarkable
progress of human nature and nits wantsn during othoseo ages. For the
strictly modern period of history he has done still less. The rapid
sketch which occupies the concluding lectures of the first volume, does
little towards resolving any of the problems in which there is real
difficulty.

We shall therefore pass over the many topics on which he has touched
cursorily, and without doing justice to his own powers of thought; and
shall only further advert to one question, which is the subject of a
detailed examination in the Essay in his earlier volume, “the origin of
representative institutions in England”—a question not only of special
interest to an English reader, but of much moment in the estimation of
M. Guizot’s general theory of modern history. For if the natural course
of European events was such as that theory represents it, the history of
England is an anomalous deviation from that course; and the exception
must either Edition: current; Page: [291] prove, or go far to subvert,
the rule. In England as in other European countries, the basis of the
social arrangements was, for several centuries, the feudal system; in
England as elsewhere, that system perished by the growth of the Crown,
and of the emancipated commonalty. Whence came it, that amidst general
circumstances so similar, the immediate and apparent consequences were
so strikingly contrasted? How happened it, that in the Continental
nations absolute monarchy was at least the proximate result, while in
England representative institutions, and an aristocratic government with
an admixture of democratic elements, were the consequence?

M. Guizot’s explanation of the anomaly is just and conclusive. The
feudal polity in England was from the first a less barbarous thing—had
more in it of the elements from which a government might in time be
constructed—than in the other countries of Europe. We have seen M.
Guizot’s lively picture of the isolated position and solitary existence
of the seigneur, ruling from his inaccessible height, with sovereign
power, over a scanty population; having no superior above him, no equals
around him, no communion or co-operation with any, save his family and
dependents; absolute master within a small circle, and with hardly a
social tie, or any action or influence, beyond; everything, in short, in
one narrow spot, and nothing in any other place. Now, of this picture,
we look in vain for the original in our own history. English feudalism
knew nothing of this independence and isolation of the individual
feudatory in his fief. It could show no single vassal exempt from the
habitual control of government, no one so strong that the king’s arm
could not reach him. Early English history is made up of the acts of the
barons, not the acts of this and that and the other baron. The cause of
this is to be found in the circumstances of the Conquest. The Normans
did not, like the Goths and Franks, overrun and subdue an palmostp
unresisting population. They encamped in the midst of a people of spirit
and energy, many times more numerous, and almost as warlike as
themselves. That they prevailed over them at all was but the result of
superior union. That union once broken, they would have been lost. They
could not parcel out the country among them, spread themselves over it,
and be each king in his own little domain, with nothing to fear save
from the other petty kings who surrounded him. They were an army, and in
an enemy’s country; and an army supposes a commander, and military
discipline. Organization of any kind implies power in the chief who
presides over it and holds it together. Add to this, what various
writers have remarked—that the dispossession of the Saxon proprietors
being effected not at once, but gradually, and the spoils not being
seized upon by unconnected bands, but systematically portioned out by
the head of the conquering expedition among his followers—the
territorial possessions of even the most powerful Norman chief were not
concentrated in one place, but dispersed in various parts of the
kingdom; and, whatever might be their total extent, he was Edition:
current; Page: [292] never powerful enough in any given locality to make
head against the king. From these causes, royalty was from the beginning
much more powerful among the Anglo-Normans than it ever became in France
while feudality remained in vigour. But the same circumstances which
rendered it impossible for the barons to hold their ground against regal
encroachments except by combination, had kept up the power and the habit
of combination among them. In French history we never, until a late
period, hear of confederacies among the nobles; English history is full
of them. Instead of numerous unconnected petty potentates, one of whom
was called the King, there are two great figures in English history—a
powerful King, and a powerful body of Nobles. To give the needful
authority to any act of general government, the concurrence of both was
essential: and hence Parliaments, elsewhere only occasional, were in
England habitual. But the natural state of these rival powers was one of
conflict; and the weaker side, which was usually that of the barons,
soon found that it stood in need of assistance. Although the feudatory
class, to use M. Guizot’s expression, “had converted itself into a real
aristocratic corporation,”* the barons were not strong enough “to impose
at the same time on the king their liberty, and on the people their
tyranny. As they had been obliged to combine for the sake of their own
defence, so they found themselves under the necessity of calling in the
people in aid of their coalition.”†

The people, in England, were the Saxons—a vanquished race, but whose
spirit had never, like that of the other conquered populations, been
completely broken. Being a German, not a Latin people, they retained the
traditions, and some portion of the habits, of popular institutions and
personal liberty. When called, therefore, to aid the barons in
moderating the power of the Crown, they claimed those ancient liberties
as their part of the compact. French history abounds with charters of
incorporation, which the kings granted, generally for a pecuniary
consideration, to town communities which had cast off their seigneurs.
The charters which English history is full of, are concessions of
general liberties to the whole body of the nation; liberties which the
nobility and the commons either wrung from the king by their united
strength, or obtained from his voluntary policy as the purchase-money of
their obedience. The series of these treaties, for such they in reality
were, between the Crown and the nation, beginning with the first Henry,
and ending with the last renewal by Edward I of the Great Charter of
King John, are the principal incidents of English history during the
feudal period. And thus, as M. Guizot observes in his concluding
summary—

In France, from the foundation of the monarchy to the fourteenth
century, everything was individual—powers, liberties, oppression, and
the resistance to oppression. Unity, the principle of all
government—association of equals, the principle of all checks—were only
found in the narrow sphere of each seigneurie, or each city. Royalty was
nominal; the Edition: current; Page: [293] aristocracy did not form a
body; there were burgesses in the towns, but no commons in the State. In
England, on the contrary, from the Norman Conquest downwards, everything
was collective; similar powers, analogous situations, were compelled to
approach one another, to coalesce, to associate. From its origin,
royalty was real, while feudality ultimately grouped itself into two
masses, one of which became the high aristocracy, the other the body of
the commons. Who can mistake, in this first travail of the formation of
the two societies, in these so different characteristics of their early
age, the true origin of the prolonged difference in their institutions
and in their destinies?[*]

M. Guizot returns to this subject in a remarkable passage in the first
volume of his Lectures, which presents the different character of the
progress of civilization in England and in Continental Europe, in so new
and peculiar a light, that we cannot better conclude this article than
by quoting it.

When I endeavoured to define the peculiar character of European
civilization, compared with those of Asia and of antiquity, I showed
that it was superior in variety, richness, and complication; that it
never fell under the dominion of any exclusive principle; that the
different elements of society co-existed and modified one another, and
were always compelled to compromises and mutual toleration. This, which
is the general character of European, has been above all that of English
civilization. In England, civil and spiritual powers, aristocracy,
democracy, and royalty, local and central institutions, moral and
political development, have advanced together, if not always with equal
rapidity, yet at no great distance after one another. Under the Tudors,
for example, at the time of the most conspicuous advances of pure
monarchy, the democratic principle, the power of the people, was also
rising and gaining strength. The revolution of the seventeenth century
breaks out, it is at once a religious and a political one. The feudal
aristocracy appears in it, much weakened indeed, and with the signs of
qdeclineq, but still in a condition to take a part, to occupy a
position, and have its share in the results. It is thus with English
history throughout, no old element ever perishes entirely, nor is any
new one wholly triumphant—no partial principle ever obtains exclusive
ascendancy. There is always simultaneous development of the different
social powers, and a compromise among their pretensions and interests.

The march of Continental civilization has been less complex and less
complete. The several elements of society, religious and civil,
monarchical, aristocratic, and democratic, grew up and came to maturity
not simultaneously, but successively. Each system, each principle, has
in some degree had its turn. One age belongs, it would be too much to
say exclusively, but with a very marked predominance, to feudal
aristocracy, for example, another to the monarchical principle, another
to the democratic. Compare the middle age in France and in England, the
eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries of our history, with the
corresponding centuries north of the Channel. In France, you find, at
that epoch, feudality nearly absolute—the Crown and the democratic
principle almost null. In England, the feudal aristocracy no doubt
predominates, but the Crown and the democracy are not without strength
and importance. Royalty triumphs in England under Elizabeth, as in
France under Louis XIV, but how many ménagements it is compelled to
observe! How many restrictions, aristocratic and democratic, it has to
submit to! In England also, each system, each principle, has had its
turn of predominance, but never so completely, never so Edition:
current; Page: [294] exclusively, as on the Continent. The victorious
principle has always been constrained to tolerate the presence of its
rivals, and to concede to each a certain share of influence.*

The advantageous side of the effect of this more equable development is
evident enough.

There can be no doubt that this simultaneous unfolding of the different
social elements, has greatly contributed to make England attain earlier
than any of the Continental nations to the establishment of a government
at once orderly and free. It is the very business of government to
negotiate with all interests and all powers, to reconcile them with each
other, and make them live and prosper togetherr. Nowr this, from a
multitude of causes, was already in a peculiar degree the disposition,
and even the actual state, of the different elements of English society:
a general, and tolerably regular government had therefore less
difficulty in constituting itself. So, again, the essence of liberty is
the simultaneous manifestation and action of all interests, all rights,
all social elements and forces. England, therefore, was already nearer
to it than most other States. From the same causes, national good sense,
and intelligence of public affairs, formed itself at an earlier period.
Good sense in politics consists in taking account of all facts,
appreciating them, and giving to each its place: this, in England, was a
necessity of her social condition, a natural result of the course of her
civilization.[*]

But to a nation, as to an individual, the consequences of doing
everything by halves, of adopting compromise as the universal rule, of
never following out a general idea or principle to its utmost results,
are by no means exclusively favourable. Hear again M. Guizot.

In the Continental States, each system or principle having had its turn
of a more complete and exclusive predominance, they unfolded themselves
on a larger scale, with more grandeur and éclat. Royalty and feudal
aristocracy, for example, made their appearance on the Continental scene
of action with more boldness, more expansion, more freedom. All
political experiments, so to speak, have been fuller and more complete.
[This is still more strikingly true of the present age, and its great
popular revolutions.] And hence it has happened that political ideas and
doctrines (I mean those of an extended character, and not simple good
sense applied to the conduct of affairs,) have assumed a loftier
character, and unfolded themselves with greater intellectual vigour.
Each system having presented itself to observation in some sort alone,
and having remained long on the scene, it has been possible to survey it
as a whole; to ascend to its first principles, descend to its remotest
consequences; in short, fully to complete its theory. Whoever observes
attentively the genius of the English nation, will be struck with two
facts—the sureness of its common sense and practical ability; its
deficiency of general ideas and commanding intellect, as applied to
theoretical questions. If we open an English book of history,
jurisprudence, or any similar subject, we seldom find in it the real
foundation, the ultimate reason of things. In all matters, and
especially in politics, pure doctrine and philosophy—science properly so
called—have prospered far more on the Continent than in England, they
have at least soared higher, with greater vigour and boldness. Nor does
it admit of doubt, that the different character of the development of
the two civilizations has greatly contributed to this result.[†]



Duveyrier’s Political Views of French Affairs

there are several causes which make the Political Writings produced at
the present time in France, an instructive study to intelligent
observers in all countries of Europe.

In the first place, there is much truth in the boast of French writers,
that France marches in the van of the European movement. The fact is not
necessarily of the highly complimentary character with which those
writers generally choose to invest it. Movement is not always progress;
and progress itself may be in a downward, as well as in an upward
direction. To be foremost in the road which all are travelling, is not
of necessity the most honourable position; but it is a position
pre-eminently interesting to those who follow. And such, in the present
period of the world’s history, is the situation of France. The two
strongest tendencies of the world in these times are towards Democracy
and Revolution; meaning by Democracy—social equality, under whatever
form of government; and by Revolution—a general demolition of old
institutions and opinions, without reference to its being effected
peaceably or violently. In this twofold career, France is the furthest
advanced of the European nations. The feelings of her people are nearly
as democratic as in the United States; the passion for equality almost
as strong. Her institutions indeed infringe upon that equality, by
limiting to a narrow class the privilege of electing, or being elected
to the Chamber of Deputies. But even these privileges are not
hereditary, and carry with them no direct accession of personal rank. In
the eye of the law, and in that of private society, there is less
difference between man and man than in any other country in Europe. The
other European nations are steadily following in the direction of that
social equality which, as far as regards the male sex, France has in a
great measure realized. That England is undergoing this change as
rapidly as the rest, has long been clear to every Englishman who knows
any thing more of the world he lives in than the forms of it. Those
forms, indeed, subsist with less alteration than in some other
countries; but where are the feelings which gave meaning to them? Not
the intelligent mechanic only, but the stupidest clown, at heart thinks
himself as good as a nobleman; or rather (what is not exactly
equivalent) thinks that a nobleman is no better than he; and there are a
good many things which indicate, that the nobleman himself secretly
thinks much the same.

Not less is France ahead of the rest of Europe, in what may properly,
and independently of the specific consequences flowing from it, be
called Revolution. Other nations are gradually taking down their old
institutions: France, by the Edition: current; Page: [298] sacrifice of
a generation, made a clean sweep of hers; and left herself a fair stage,
clear of rubbish, for beginning to build anew. France has had her
Revolution; has cleansed her Augean stable. She has completed the
business of mere destruction; and has come into direct contact with the
positive, practical question of the Art of Politics—what is to be done
for the governed? Other nations, and England more than any, are in the
middle of their Revolution. The most energetic minds are still occupied
in thinking, less of benefits to be attained, than of nuisances to be
abated; and every question of things to be done, is entangled with
questions of things which have first to be undone; or of things which
must not be undone, lest worse should follow.

It would be absurd to deny, that a nation whose institutions have no
historical basis, and are not surrounded by that reverential attachment
which mankind so much more easily accord to what is made for them, than
to what they themselves have made, lies under some serious practical
disadvantages; on which this is not the occasion to expatiate, no more
than on the advantages by which they are more or less completely
compensated. But whatever may be the inconvenience, in point of
practical working, of what has been called a “geometrical polity,”[*] in
political discussion its effects are wholly beneficial. It makes
disputation turn on the real merits of the matter in dispute. Under it,
measures are attacked and defended much less on the ground of precedent
and practice, or of analogy to the institutions, and conformity to the
traditions of the particular nation; and much more on adaptation to the
exigencies of human nature and life, either generally, or at the
particular time and place. The discussion, therefore, has an interest
reaching beyond those who are immediately affected by its result; and
French writers say, hitherto not unjustly, that while the voice of the
English Journals and Legislative Assemblies has little echo beyond the
bounds of the British Empire, the controversies of their Tribune, and of
their Periodical Press, are watched for and studied all over Europe.

The writings, then, in which intelligent and instructed Frenchmen
promulgate their opinions, on the principal topics of public discussion
in France, have a twofold interest to foreigners; because the questions
discussed are such as either already are, or will soon become, to them
also, of great practical moment; and because the principles and premises
appealed to are not peculiarly French, but universal.

In both these points of view, the Lettres Politiques, named at the head
of this article, have a claim to attention. Originally published as a
series of Weekly Pamphlets, and since reprinted in two octavo volumes,
they form a collection of Dissertations on the topics, present or
probable future, of French Politics, to which recent English discussion
has produced nothing in its kind comparable. Not, certainly, that among
our public writers there are not several with abilities fully Edition:
current; Page: [299] equal to M. Duveyrier, but because their abilities
are otherwise employed; because they have not yet turned to consider
systematically how the institutions of the country may be worked for the
benefit of the country; because in England there is still too much to be
undone, for the question, “what is to be done,” to assume its due
importance; and the ablest thinkers, when they descend from the height
of purely abstract science, find sufficient scope for their practical
energies, in the war still raging around the shattered bulwarks of the
great practical abuses; and small chance of followers, or even of
spectators, for any other enterprise.

Among many things in these volumes, significant of the character which
French political discussion of the higher order has of late assumed, two
are specially remarkable to an English reader. One is, the total
absence, through the twenty-five Letters, of discussion on any
constitutional subject. There are no disquisitions in favour of, or even
in deprecation of, organic changes. All such questions are assumed to be
settled, and treated as not requiring notice. The other is, that with
the most passive acquiescence in the structure of the government, as
circumstances have made it, is combined the strongest and most active
spirit of political reform. This is a conjunction which of late has
occasionally been heard of in England, but we cannot say we ever saw it
realized. We are promised indeed a “new generation”[*] of
Church-and-King philanthropists, by whom every institution grounded upon
contempt of the people, is to be worked for every purpose of kindness to
them. But we see no very brilliant embodiment of this vision in half a
dozen dreaming young men, whose ideal is Laud. For England the day of
Conservative reformers is yet to come.

We know not whether M. Duveyrier is expressing his sincere opinion, or
adapting his tone to the audience whom he desires to influence; but he
professes himself satisfied with the existing constitution of France. He
designates all discussions of its defects as old quarrels, “which divert
the public mind from the real business of the country, and statesmen
from the transaction of that business.”* Short-sighted as this view of
things would be, if applied to such questions considered generally,
there must be something in it which adapts itself well to the existing
state of feeling in France.† It is certain that this avowed contentment
with “things as they are,”[†] in respect to the distribution of power,
is connected with no optimism as to the mode in which power is employed.
The question, who shall Edition: current; Page: [300] govern? may be for
the present in abeyance; but there is the liveliest interest in the
question, how?—not by what hands, but for what purposes, and according
to what maxims and rules, the powers of government shall be wielded.

In England also, it has been easy to perceive, for some years past,
especially since the advent of the Peel Ministry, that a similar change
of feeling and tone is in progress, both in the public and in the more
thinking minds; though it has not reached by any means so advanced a
stage. The interest in constitutional questions has much abated,—in
part, from the hopelessness, for the present, of any further organic
changes; and, partly, from a growing scepticism, even among ardent
supporters of popular institutions, as to their being, after all, the
panacea which they were supposed to be for the evils that beset our
social system. Sincere Democrats are beginning to doubt whether the
desideratum is so much an increased influence of popular opinion, as a
more enlightened use of the power which it already possesses. But in
this new tendency of opinion, France is as much ahead of England as she
was in the previous democratic movement. We do not hesitate to express
our conviction, that in France at least this change has taken place
prematurely. Not that opinion could be too soon, or too earnestly,
directed to the ends of government; but it may be, and we think has
been, too soon averted from the means. The theory of Representative
Government and Constitutional rights, which guided the public mind
during the fifteen years’ struggle against the Bourbons, has been
discarded before it had finished its work. France is still a country
where twenty persons cannot form an association, or hold a meeting,
without permission from the Police;[*] where the personal freedom of the
citizen is hardly better secured than in the most despotic monarchies of
the Continent; where no agent of government can be legally prosecuted
for the most enormous offence, without permission from the government by
whose directions that offence may have been committed; and where the
election of the representative branch of the Legislature, for a
population of thirty-four millions, resides in about two hundred
thousand persons,—distributed mostly in bodies of from one to three
hundred each; enabling the separate interests of particular localities
and of influential electors to decide the fortunes of Cabinets and the
course of Legislation. In these things, however, France has for the
present acquiesced. In what manner her government should be constituted,
and in what manner checked, are not the questions which just now
interest her. But it is not because she is blind to the disgraceful
manner in which her constitution works, and which throughout these
volumes is incessantly adverted to, as the most undeniable and the most
familiar of daily phenomena.

Constitutional Government—Government in which the support of a majority
in a representative assembly is necessary to office—has only had a real
existence in Edition: current; Page: [301] France since 1830; and in
this short period it has rivalled the worst corruptions of the English
rotten boroughs. Bribery, indeed, in its coarser forms is comparatively
unknown; because the electors are in a rank of life which commands
hypocrisy. But a majority of the electors in a majority of the electoral
colleges, is not too numerous a body to be bought; and bought it is, by
distributing all public employments among the electors and their
protégés; and by succumbing to the pretensions of every locally
influential class interest; or, rather, the nominal government is but
their instrument—they are not so much bought, as they are themselves the
governing body, and claim to themselves in this shape the profits of
power. Their position is not that of the voters in our small boroughs;
it more resembles that of the borough holders. The gratification of
their cupidity is the condition they are able to impose on any set of
men whom they permit to be a Ministry.

When a place, great or small, becomes vacant, what happens? Of the four
hundred and fifty deputies who are au courant of every thing, because
they have the right to penetrate each day and every hour into the
bureaux of the ministry, there are twenty or thirty who begin the siege.
Their tactics are simple: They say to the Minister, “You will appoint
such and such a relation or an elector of mine, or I withdraw my
support.” What can the Minister do? He temporizes; opposes one set of
pretensions and demands to another, gives hopes to all, and puts off his
decision until some new vacancy occurs, to give the hope of an
equivalent to the unsuccessful applicants. Happy the Departments, like
that of the navy, of l’enregistrement et les domaines, of the army,
where the modes of admission and of promotion have been fixed beforehand
by general rules! And even there, what latitude is allowed to favour;
and in the Execution, too often, what contempt of justice! Favour is the
moral ulcer, the chronic malady of the government. The delegates of the
bourgeoisie finding the privileged class swept away, instead of
abolishing privileges, seized on them for themselves, and the electors,
instead of being indignant and finding fault with their deputies for
usurping the privilege of the greater offices, found it simpler and more
advantageous to possess themselves of the smaller.

([Translated from] Lettres Politiques, Vol. I, pp. 168-70.)

What else could be expected? There are but 200,000 electors, and 130,000
places* (without reckoning the army) in the gift of the government.
Again:

The grand distributor of favours now-a-days, is the electoral body;
which takes up the attention of its representatives solely with
interests of locality and relationship, and circumscribes their hopes of
re-election in an infinity of circles so different one from another, so
changing, so personal, that there is no Minister who can take in hand a
great enterprise of public utility with assurance of success; witness M.
Mole with the question of railways, M. Guizot with the customs union; M.
Cunin-Gridaine with the sugar laws,[*] &c. &c.

[Translated from ibid., pp. 170-1.]

With the keen sense which the author every where shows of this great
evil, by Edition: current; Page: [302] which the sacrifices that France
has made to obtain good government, are to so great a degree stultified
and rendered abortive, it may appear strange that he should not contend
for a change in the constitution of the legislature. Such, however, is
not his expedient. We know not whether it is conviction or policy which
prevents him from being a Parliamentary Reformer; whether an enlargement
of the basis of the representative system appears to him, in the present
condition of France, not desirable, or merely not attainable. For
whatever reason, he affirms that agitation for this purpose does no
good, and only interferes mischievously with what he upholds as the true
corrective of the present vicious mode of government:—the formation of
an enlightened public opinion. He maintains that petty and selfish
interests predominate in the government only because there are no
recognised principles on which it can be conducted in any other manner:
That the public mind is uninformed, and has no fixed opinion on any
subject, connected with government, except the constitution of it: That
without clear and definite views, diffused and rooted among the public,
on the chief practical questions of government, there is nothing to
restrain petty intrigues and cabals, or to support an honest Minister in
resistance to the unjustifiable pretensions of classes and coteries.
That the men at the head of the government would be glad to have such a
support; that they are better than the system they administer, and that
it is not willingly that they succumb to it—he assumes as a thing of
course. We cannot doubt that he has reason to do so. It is not credible,
that men who are among the most instructed and enlightened in France,
who have enlarged the domain of thought, as well as contributed largely
to the diffusion of its results; that philosophers like Guizot,
Villemain, Duchatel, would not gladly wash their hands of turpitudes as
lowering to the personal dignity, as discreditable to the integrity of
those involved in them. They are men with convictions, and who wish
their convictions to prevail; and it cannot be agreeable to them to be
dependent, not on the steady adherence of a powerful party pledged to
their opinions, but on their success in bargaining for the local
influence of notabilités de clocher,—the oracles of this and that
distant and backward arrondissement. From this position M. Duveyrier
seeks to relieve them. It is ideas, he says, that are wanted;—principles
of government capable of inspiring attachment, and stirring the
imagination, principles sufficiently practical, and at the same time
sufficiently commanding and generous, to rally a large mass of opinion
around them. “Vous n’avez,” he says to M. Guizot—

Vous n’avez devant vous aucun de ces événemens irrémédiables, aucune de
ces positions fatales, qu’il ne soit pas dans la volonté de l’homme de
transformer. . . . Redoutez les petites choses, les petits moyens,
ennoblissez les débats, posez des principes dont la France soit fière,
et toutes ces questions dont on vous menace, loin d’augmenter vos
embarras, viendront à votre aide, et vous offriront, pour la
consolidation du cabinet, un appui inespéré.

Mais je prévois votre réponse; ce que vous me demandez, c’est une
politique grande, Edition: current; Page: [303] généreuse, Française!
Eh! que deviendrait-elle, mon Dieu! au milieu des intérêts ardens des
localités, de l’égoisme individuel, des intrigues, des cabales de
l’amour propre?

Je le reconnais; ces exigences secondaires sont aujourd’hui toutes
puissantes; elles frappent les regards! Ce sont les étoiles qui brillent
au ciel, la nuit, quand elles y règnent seules. Mais n’oubliez pas que
leur éclat pâlit aux approches du jour, et qu’à la place où elles sont
encore, l’oeil les cherche vainement quand le soleil a jeté dans
l’espace sa chaleur et sa clarté.

(Ibid., pp. 66-7.)

This doctrine, that the moral evils of the present political system of
France arise from an intellectual cause—from the absence of convictions
in the public mind—is dwelt upon by the author with a persistency and
iteration for which the periodical form of the Letters afforded great
advantages. In a letter to M. Chambolle, an opposition deputy, and
editor of a leading opposition Journal,[*] he combats the idea, that any
peculiar baseness is imputable to the electoral class. The press and the
public, he says, are not at all more immaculate. The very men who job
their electoral influence for places for their sons, are men of honour
in their private concerns.

Politics, say they, have changed their aspect; men’s minds are calmed,
affairs are no longer in the critical state in which grand principles,
strong passions, great public interests, come into play—of what
consequence is it that the candidate is a trifle more or a trifle less
with the opposition? it makes but the difference of a few words more or
less on one or the other side. Frankly, when one finds the statesmen
most opposed to each other declaring that they would govern in very much
the same manner, has not the elector a right to treat questions of
persons with indifference, and to transfer to his own private interest
the degree of solicitude which he would otherwise have granted to those
questions?

But this is terrible! the constitution is perverted in its first
principles; the very meaning of a representative government is one in
which the sincere opinions of the country are, above all,
represented.—Most true. But what if the country has no opinions? That is
an incident which the constitution has not provided for. . . Do not
wonder, then, if numbers of people are led away by this naïf
calculation:—Here is one candidate who is for the good of the country,
and another who is for the good of the country and for mine also, I
should be a fool to hesitate.

([Translated from] Lettres Politiques, Vol. II, pp. 171-2.)

Accordingly, so far as a determinate public opinion does exist,
questions are decided, and the government conducted not by this shameful
appeal to personal and local interests, but on grounds which, right or
wrong, are at least of a public character.

There have existed, since 1830, two different kinds of politics.

The one, which may be termed constitutional politics, [la politique
constituante,] was directed to founding the constitution, developing it,
and defending it against the attacks of parties and the repugnances of
Europe.

The other, which may be called the politics of business, [la politique
des affaires,] aimed at protecting and encouraging the interests and
labours of society, in the arts, the sciences, Edition: current; Page:
[304] religion, military and diplomatic organization, internal
administration, commerce, agriculture, and manufactures.

[Translated from La pairie, p. 3.]

In the former branch, in constitutional or organic politics, the
government has proceeded on fixed and determinate principles; and has
accordingly been able to carry the Chambers with it, by large and
certain majorities.

Unhappily it is not so with the politics of business. Statesmen have not
yet any programme for that department, any system of government
specially applicable to it. Accordingly, as soon as the existence of the
monarchy is no longer threatened, the fundamental principles of the
constitution no longer in question, what do we behold? The government
becomes feeble, uncertain, embarrassed; its majority breaks up into an
infinity of minute fractions. . . . Time has resolved most of the
questions of constitutional politics which were stirred up internally
and externally by the establishment of the new government, and the
politics of business have now, in France and in Europe, assumed the
ascendant. But there is not yet in France any system of government in
matters of business. The opposition, in this respect, is not more
advanced than the majority. . . Were the cabinet overthrown, its
successors would encounter the same attacks and the same embarrassments,
and would have even less strength to overcome them; for they would not
(like the present ministry) come into office to repair faults, and save
the country from a dangerous entraínement; no important situation would
connect itself with their ministerial existence.

Once suppose any general principles of government in the business
department, and the situation is changed. If the principles are accepted
by the most eminent minds of all sections of the majority, one of two
things must happen; either the ministry will adopt them, and will, in
that case, owe its safety to them; or it will disdain them, and the
system will become an instrument of opposition, from which will issue
sooner or later a durable cabinet.

Such, at bottom, is the true political situation of the country; its
difficulties, and its exigencies. The greatest service which could now
be rendered to the nation, would be to introduce into the midst of its
affairs, so languid, thorny, and complex, a general system of
government, capable of overmastering the intrigues and petty passions of
the coteries which have succeeded the factions of former days; and of
introducing into discussions a new public interest, sufficiently
considerable to impose on rival industries and rival localities, union
and agreement.

Twelve years of parliamentary omnipotence have proved this task to be
above the strength of the Chamber of Deputies. The greatest of the
embarrassments arise from its own composition. It is not from that
Chamber that we can expect a remedy

([Translated from] ibid., pp. 4-6.)

M. Duveyrier’s first pamphlet (from which this extract is taken) was on
the Chamber of Peers; being an attempt to persuade that body to consider
as theirs the task which the Chamber of Deputies appeared to have
abandoned. The circumstances which, in his opinion, mark out the less
popular branch of the French legislature, for the office of introducing
matured and systematic principles of government into the public affairs
of France, are, first, its independence of the partial and local
interests of constituencies, and secondly, the composition of its
personnel.

The Chamber of Peers, even when hereditary, was a body of a very
different character from the House of Lords. It consisted indeed, for
the most part, like that Edition: current; Page: [305] assembly, of the
wealthiest landed proprietors; but, in England, to represent these is to
represent the principal power in the state; while, in France, “the
monarchy of the middle class”—wealth, as such, has but little political
power, and landed wealth rather less than even Commercial: the Chamber
of Peers, therefore, was a body of exceedingly small importance. Once
and once only, for a short period, the accidental coincidence between
its tendencies and those of public opinion, invested it with a
popularity not its own; when, with the caution inherent in a body of old
and rich men, it withstood the counter-revolutionary madness of Charles
X, which at last cost him his throne. He swamped it by a large creation,
and it relapsed into insignificance. In 1831, its destruction, in its
pristine character, was completed by the abolition of its hereditary
privilege.[*] But, in losing this, it received what in our author’s view
was far more than an equivalent. In ceasing to represent the remains of
what had once been powerful, the noblesse and la grande propriété, it
became the representative of an existing power—of one of the leading
influences in society as at present constituted.

The King names the Peers for life; but he is only empowered to name them
from certain enumerated classes or “categories;” consisting chiefly
(members of the Institute being almost the sole exception) of persons
who have served the state for a certain number of years; either in the
Chamber of Deputies, or as functionaries in the different departments of
the government. The peerage, therefore, is naturally composed of the
most eminent public servants—those who combine talents with experience;
and it represents a class of great importance in existing society—the
administrative body.

aEvery people bcomprises, and probably will always comprise, two
societies, an administration and a public; the one, of which the general
interest is the supreme law, where positions are not hereditary, but the
principle is that of classing its members according to their merit, and
rewarding them according to their works, and where the moderation of
salaries is compensated by their fixity, and especially by honour and
consideration. The other, composed of landed proprietors, of
capitalists, of masters and workmen, among whom the supreme law is that
of inheritance, the principal rule of conduct is personal interest,
competition and struggle the favourite elements.

These two societies serve mutually as a counterpoise; they continually
act and react upon one another. The public tends to introduce into the
administration the stimulus naturally wanting to it, the principle of
emulation. The administration, conformably to its appointed purpose,
tends to introduce more and more into the mass of the public, elements
of order and forethought. In this twofold direction, the administration
and the public have rendered, and do render daily to each other,
reciprocal services

([Translated from] La Pairie, p. 12.)

Edition: current; Page: [306]
The Chamber of Deputies, (he proceeds to say,) represents the public and
its tendencies. The Chamber of Peers represents, or from its
constitution is fitted to represent, those who are or have been public
functionaries: whose appointed duty and occupation it has been to look
at questions from the point of view not of any mere local or sectional,
but of the general interest; and who have the judgment and knowledge
resulting from labour and experience. To a body like this, it naturally
belongs to take the initiative in all legislation, not of a
constitutional or organic character. If, in the natural course of
things, well-considered views of policy are any where to be looked for,
it must be among such a body. To no other acceptance can such views,
when originating elsewhere, be so appropriately submitted—through no
other organ so fitly introduced into the laws.

We shall not enter into the considerations by which the author attempts
to impress upon the Peers this elevated view of their function in the
commonwealth. On a new body, starting fresh as a senate, those
considerations might have influence. But the senate of France is not a
new body. It set out on the discredited foundation of the old hereditary
chamber; and its change of character only takes place gradually, as the
members die off. To redeem a lost position is more difficult than to
create a new one. The new members, joining a body of no weight, become
accustomed to political insignificance; they have mostly passed the age
of enterprise; and the Peerage is considered little else than an
honourable retirement for the invalids of the public service. M.
Duveyrier’s suggestion has made some impression upon the public; it has
gained him the public ear, and launched his doctrines into discussion;
but we do not find that the conduct of the Peers has been at all
affected by it. Energy is precisely that quality which, if men have it
not of themselves, cannot be breathed into them by other people’s advice
and exhortations. There are involved, however, in this speculation, some
ideas of a more general character; not unworthy of the attention of
those who concern themselves about the social changes which the future
must produce.

There are, we believe, few real thinkers, of whatever party, who have
not reflected with some anxiety upon the views which have become current
of late, respecting the irresistible tendency of modern society towards
democracy. The sure, and now no longer slow, advance, by which the
classes hitherto in the ascendant are merging into the common mass, and
all other forcesc giving way before the power of mere numbers, is well
calculated to inspire uneasiness, even in those to whom democracy per se
presents nothing alarming. It is not the uncontrolled ascendency of
popular power, but of any power, which is formidable. There is no one
power in society, or capable of being constituted in it, of which the
influences do not become mischievous as soon as it reigns
uncontrolled—as soon as it becomes exempted from any necessity of being
in the right, by being able to make its mere will prevail, without the
condition of a Edition: current; Page: [307] previous struggle. To
render its ascendency safe, it must be fitted with correctives and
counteractives, possessing the qualities opposite to its characteristic
defects. Now, the defects to which the government of numbers, whether in
the pure American, or in the mixed English form, is most liable, are
precisely those of a public, as compared with an administration. Want of
appreciation of distant objects and remote consequences; where an object
is desired, want both of an adequate sense of practical difficulties,
and of the sagacity necessary for eluding them; disregard of traditions,
and of maxims sanctioned by experience; an undervaluing of the
importance of fixed rules, when immediate purposes require a departure
from them—these are among the acknowledged dangers of popular
government; and there is the still greater, though less recognised,
danger, of being ruled by a spirit of suspicious and intolerant
mediocrity. Taking these things into consideration, and also the
progressive decline of the existing checks and counterpoises, and the
little probability there is that the influence of mere wealth, still
less of birth, will be sufficient hereafter to restrain the tendencies
of the growing power, by mere passive resistance; we do not think that a
nation whose historical dantécédensd give it any choice, could select a
fitter basis upon which to ground the counterbalancing power in the
State, than the principle of the French Upper House. The defects of
Representative Assemblies are, in substance, those of unskilled
politicians. The mode of raising a power most competent to their
correction, would be an organization and combination of the skilled.
History affords the example of a government carried on for centuries
with the greatest consistency of purpose, and the highest skill and
talent, ever realized in public affairs; and it was constituted on this
very principle. The Roman Senate was a Senate for life, composed of all
who had filled high offices in the State, and were not disqualified by a
public note of disgrace. The faults of the Roman policy were in its
ends; which, however, were those of all the States of the ancient world.
Its choice of means was consummate. This government, and others
distantly approaching to it, have given to aristocracy all the credit
which it has obtained for constancy and wisdom. A Senate of some such
description, composed of persons no longer young, and whose reputation
is already gained, will necessarily lean to the Conservative side; but
not with the blind, merely instinctive, spirit of conservatism,
generated by mere wealth or social importance, unearned by previous
labour. Such a body would secure a due hearing and a reasonable regard
for precedent and established rule. It would disarm jealousy by its
freedom from any class interest; and while it never could become the
really predominant power in the State, still, since its position would
be the consequence of recognised merit and actual services to the
public, it would have as much personal influence, and excite as little
hostility, as is compatible with resisting in any degree the tendencies
of the really strongest power.

Edition: current; Page: [308]
There is another class of considerations connected with Representative
Governments, to which we shall also briefly advert. In proportion as it
has been better understood what legislation is, and the unity of plan as
well as maturity of deliberation which are essential to it, thinking
persons have asked themselves the question—Whether a popular body of 658
or 459 members, not specially educated for the purpose, having served no
apprenticeship, and undergone no examination, and who transact business
in the forms and very much in the spirit of a debating society, can have
as its peculiarly appropriate office to make laws? Whether that is not a
work certain to be spoiled by putting such a superfluous number of hands
upon it? Whether it is not essentially a business for one, or a very
small number, of most carefully prepared and selected individuals? And
whether the proper office of a Representative Body, (in addition to
controlling the public expenditure, and deciding who shall hold office,)
be not that of discussing all national interests; of giving expression
to the wishes and feelings of the country; and granting or withholding
its consent to the laws which others make, rather than eofe themselves
framing, or even altering them? The law of this and most other nations
is already such a chaos, that the quality of what is yearly added, does
not materially affect the general mass; but in a country possessed of a
real Code or Digest, and desirous of retaining that advantage, who could
think without dismay of its being tampered with at the will of a body
like the House of Commons, or the Chamber of Deputies? Imperfect as is
the French Code, the inconveniences arising from this cause are already
strongly felt; and they afford an additional inducement for associating
with the popular body a skilled Senate, or Council of Legislation,
which, whatever might be its special constitution, must be grounded upon
some form of the principle which we have now considered.a

M. Duveyrier does not often return, except in the way of incidental
allusion, to his idea respecting the Peers; but the conception of the
administration, or corps of public functionaries, as the social element
to which France must look for improvements in her political system, is
carried through the whole series of Pamphlets; and he attempts to avail
himself of every side-current of opinion to steer into this harbour.
This is especially seen in his Letter to the Duke de Nemours, on The
State and Prospects of Aristocracy in France.[*] According to this
Letter, there is now a distinct acknowledged tendency in the French mind
towards aristocracy; a tendency hailed by some, dreaded and rejected by
others, but denied by no one. “The best and sincerest thinkers cannot
see without alarm the narrow interval which separates the two forces
between which the government is divided.” [Translated from Lettres
politiques, Vol. I, pp. 71-2.] Experience proves, that

when the popular and the royal power stand singly opposed to one
another, a struggle commences, and one inevitably overpowers the other.
Men ask themselves, were some Edition: current; Page: [309] unforeseen
circumstance to rekindle the conflict, on which side would be the
victory, and whether a Republic or an Absolute Monarchy is most to be
dreaded? And a Republic is not considered as the most imminent nor the
most formidable danger. The wisdom of the King, men say, has fortified
the regal power; but the precautions by which the popular power has
attempted to ensure its control, have turned to its confusion. The
bourgeoisie only uses its influence to break up, by intrigue, cabinets
which only maintain themselves by the distribution of favours. Thus
lowered in its own esteem, and in that of others, what salutary
restraint can it impose upon the executive power, which the interest of
the ministers lies in extending perpetually? France, therefore, marches
by a sort of fatality towards Despotism. But after Despotism come
revolutions, and in revolutions dynasties disappear.

[Translated from ibid., pp. 72, 71.]

Not only on these political, but also on moral grounds, M. Duveyrier
contends for the necessity of intermediate ranks, and a third power
interposed between the Royal and the Popular. We give these passages in
his own words:

La plaie que tout le monde signale, dont tout le monde souffre,
n’est-elle pas ce nivellement hors de nature, qui prétend s’imposer à
toutes les situations, à toutes les intelligences, à tous les intérêts;
cette personnalité brutale, ce démon de l’envie, cet amour effréné de
soi-même, qui s’empare de tout—familles, cités, industries?

[Ibid., p. 74.]

No degree of jealousy of natural superiorities, he continues, can
prevent them from existing; talents, riches, even historical descent,
are still instruments of power; but the social arrangements not being
such as to make these powers available for public uses, they work only
for the personal ends of the possessors.

Et pourquoi s’en étonner? Quand la grandeur et l’utilité des oeuvres ne
suffisent plus pour enrichir, pour ennoblir celui qui les produit, quand
on refuse les égards les plus légitimes aux dévoûmens, à la gloire, aux
services publics, pourquoi s’étonner que le talent se rende à lui-même
l’hommage qu’on lui refuse, et qu’il tourne en vil métier les plus
sublimes professions?

On a cru fonder le règne de l’égalité, vaine erreur! L’aristocratie
n’est plus, mais le monde est plein d’aristocrates. Toute la difference,
c’est que les privilégiés sont désunis, qu’ils ne forment plus corps,
qu’il n’existe plus entre eux de point d’honneur. Ils sont toujours
au-dessus de la foule; ils peuvent plus qu’elle; mais à cette
superiorité d’influence n’est attachée la pratique d’aucune vertu, ni
désintéressement, ni bravoure, ni magnificence, aucune obligation
morale, aucun service patriotique. La conscience d’une supériorité de
nature et de droits est toujours la même, le niveau n’a passé que sur
les devoirs.

[Ibid., pp. 75-6.]

These arguments for an Aristocracy have not so much novelty or
originality, as the views which our author promulgates respecting the
mode of supplying the desideratum. An aristocracy, he says, can never be
constituted but on the basis of a public function. Even the feudal
nobility

originated in the diversity of certain military functions, and in the
relations of subordination which arose between them. Dukes were
commanders of armies; Marquises were guardians of the frontiers, Counts,
governors of provinces; the Barons were the principal officers attached
to the person of the Monarch; Chevaliers were inferior officers. Most of
these Edition: current; Page: [310] functions were originally personal,
and the nobility which they conferred was so too.

[Translated from ibid., pp. 76-7.]

Nor was the title ever, during the vigour of the institution, dissevered
in the minds of men from the duties which it imposed.

Noblesse oblige! Such was the first lesson inculcated upon the heir of
the title. He was considered to be under the obligation of all generous
sentiments, of magnificence, of intrepidity; so universal was the
opinion that the title was only the sign of a function, and the
privileges conferred by it the just reward of public services, of duties
from which the titulaire could not withdraw himself without meanness and
dishonour.

[Translated from ibid., pp. 77-8.]

But although feudal dignities, as he justly says, were originally
symbols of services, he treats with deserved contempt the idea, that any
useful end could be answered by merely creating from the ranks of
personal merit, after the foolish example of Napoleon, Dukes, Counts,
and Barons.

The question is not about ennobling men by distributing among them the
titles of public functions which for the last eight or ten centuries
have ceased to exist. The question is of ennobling the functions and
public employments of modern times; of raising them gradually to such a
degree of honour, that their denominations may become, for future ages,
real titles of nobility.

The nobility, then, which we have now to create, is la noblesse
gouvernementale; and, to say the truth, there has never existed any
other. If there be understood by aristocracy a body of individuals
distinguished by titles and designations to which are not attached any
attributes of government, be assured that the nobility meant is a
nobility in its decline. At its origin, or in the time of its greatest
eminence, every aristocracy governs. What requires to be ennobled now,
is office, power, public trusts. We should desire to see the idea become
general, that every one who takes a share in the government of his
country is bound to show more virtue, more patriotism, more greatness of
soul than the vulgar. This was already the spirit of the old noblesse.
In the time of its splendour, there was one sort of people who might
postpone the interest of the state to that of their families; there were
others for whom it was a perpetual duty to sacrifice their families to
the state. The former, when the enemy invaded their native soil, might
without dishonour avoid the danger, shut themselves up in their houses,
preserve themselves for their wives and children—these were the
bourgeois and the “vilains, taillables et corvéables;” but the others
were obliged to quit every thing, wives, children, lands and manors, and
rush to meet the enemy—these were the nobles, who owed to their country
the impost of blood.

([Translated from] ibid., pp. 83-4.)

We are thus brought back, by a rather circuitous course, to our author’s
idea respecting the class of public functionaries, as the only material
from which a distinguished class,—a new Aristocracy,—can arise. Does he
propose, then, to make them an aristocracy? An aristocracy, according to
him, cannot be made. It must make itself. The Judicial Order, the
noblesse de robe, made itself an aristocracy by its own conduct. The new
aristocracy must do the same. He asks no privileges for it; least of
all, any hereditary privilege. He aims at investing the class with the
various conditions necessary to make them deserve, and, by deserving,
obtain, the respect and consideration of the public.

Edition: current; Page: [311]
Fixity, in the first place. Nothing is more adverse to the influence
which the administrator should possess over his administrés, than those
frequent changes of residence, which permit only a very small number to
familiarize themselves with the special wants of their localities, and
to acquire the confidence of the public.

Responsibility, in the second place. The excessive centralization which
keeps in the hands of the Ministers (who alone are responsible) the
decision of even the simplest questions, and the distribution of even
the most trifling employments, takes away from official station its
consideration and its authority. The influence which every employé in
the lower grades is able to exercise through some deputy, so as to
frustrate the just surveillance of his superiors, relaxes the ties of
offical connexion, and is a discouragement to zeal. How can you expect
earnestness and self-devotion from a functionary who can neither protect
talent, nor repress insolence, nor cashier laziness and incapacity?

([Translated from] ibid., p. 85.)

As a third condition, he insists on the necessity of increasing the
salaries of public offices; and doubtless not without reason. It is well
known that French governments are as parsimonious in remunerating their
employés, as prodigal in augmenting the number.

To this, and other considerations connected with the same subject, our
author returns in the first letter of the second volume; one of those in
which he expresses his opinion with greatest freedom on the system of
government now prevailing in France. The principle established by the
Revolution, the equal admissibility of all to public employment, has
become, he says, merely nominal; for

since the revolution of July two important classes have ceased to
furnish their quota to public offices; the great proprietors and the
non-proprietors.

On the one hand, the political services required from most of the
functionaries of the administration, the extra-official aid expected
from them in the management of elections and the formation of
majorities, have gradually diminished the consideration attached to
public employments; and have driven away from them the grands
propriétaires, the inheritors of illustrious names or considerable
fortunes.

On the other hand, the excessive reduction of salaries has rendered it
more and more impossible for persons who have no patrimony, to hold any
public function of importance. The absence of any examination or
concours for admission into most civil offices, and the influence
exercised over the Ministers (the distributors of place) by the deputies
and the electoral colleges, have banished, even from the smallest and
obscurest public employment, that numerous class from which the Republic
and the Empire had drawn so many of their most brilliant ornaments.

([Translated from] ibid., Vol. II, pp. 4-5.)

What is now remaining of the great effort of Napoleon to honour genius
and public services, and to create for them positions equal to the
loftiest stations of the European noblesse? Where is now that national
proverb, which then prevailed as a truth, through every branch of the
public administration—that the lowest conscript carried in his knapsack
the Baton of a Marshal of France? . . . The great positions created by
the Empire exist merely in memory. The class which the Restoration did
not create, but which it encouraged—to which it gave the greatest share
in the management of public affairs—the class of great proprietors,
lives isolated, dissatisfied, mistaking its own interests, and allying
itself, from mere pettishness, with its most dangerous enemies. The
agricultural and labouring classes are relegated to their farms and
workshops, and no solicitude, no effort of Edition: current; Page: [312]
the government, is exerted to recruit from their ranks, as in the great
days of the Republic and Empire, the most ardent and gifted minds. The
bourgeoisie alone governs; and, by a new form of levelling and equality,
claims to reduce every thing to mesquin proportions, and to concentrate
all rights in the middle regions of the petite propriété.

([Translated from] ibid., pp. 41-2.)

It has been said with truth, that the American does not believe in
poverty. The Frenchman does. . . . Every petty elector is inveterately
conservative of his patrimony, and, not choosing to risk any thing for
the establishment of his children, he is invincibly prompted to swell
the eternal overflow of the small places inscribed in the budget.

([Translated from] ibid., p. 170.)

For these several inconveniences he proposes remedies. In the first
place, the Government must cease to require from its agents degrading
services. All interference in elections by the official agents of
Government, must be peremptorily abolished. This might or might not
affect injuriously the interests of any existing Ministry. It might or
might not render the opposition triumphant, and produce parliamentary
reform. If these consequences happen, they must be submitted to. They
are not for a moment to be considered in comparison with the object.
But,

The Executive, interdicting all its agents from any official
interference, from any interference whatever, in the operations of the
electoral body, would immediately restore to public functions their
honour and their dignity. The real ability, intelligence, experience,
patriotism, and integrity of the servants of the state, would no longer
be at each instant brought into suspicion.

([Translated from] ibid., p. 34.)

And the greater respectability thus given to office, would again, he
says, attract to it the opulent classes;—a thing not in itself
undesirable, and indispensably necessary so long as a mistaken economy
keeps the salaries low.

But, while preventing placemen from jobbing in elections, it is also
needful to prevent electors from jobbing in places. For this and other
important purposes, the author’s expedient is, to make the conferring of
public employments not a matter of favour, but, as far as possible, a
Judicial Act. Admission into the public service should be granted only
to the candidates who are pronounced on a public competition the best
qualified. A certain proportion of all promotions should be given to
seniority. The remainder must be, and (incompetence having been provided
against by the initial arrangements) might safely be, dependent upon
choice. To secure an abundance of highly qualified candidates, he
proposes that there should be a public system of Education for each
leading department of the public service. There is already the
Polytechnic school, or College, as we should call it: English readers
often forget that Ecole, in French, means a College, and Collège a
School. There are the military and naval school, the school of
engineers, and the school of mines. To these should be added schools of
administration, of judicature, of diplomacy, and of finance. These
various suggestions, supported at considerable Edition: current; Page:
[313] length and in much detail, are the chief practical topic of the
book. From a system of arrangements thus combined, he anticipates that
the administrative body would be the élite of the practical talent and
wisdom of the country; and that not only the business of Government in
every department would be conducted with a skill and a purity beyond all
present experience, but that the class thus formed, surmounted by its
natural representatives, the Peerage for life, would become an
Aristocracy in the best sense of the word—an aristocracy unprivileged,
but real, and the only one with which the circumstances and social
elements of a country similar to France are, in the author’s opinion,
compatible.

In this speculation the reader has seen, we hope, not without interest,
a sample of the manner in which the ever active French intellect is
applying itself to the new questions, or old questions in new forms,
which the changed aspect of modern society is constantly bringing before
it; and of the abundant vein of far from worthless thought, portions of
which it is at all times throwing up. The present is no doubt a
favourable specimen of such speculations. But they almost all exemplify
in their degree, that combination of the theoretical and the practical
points of view, which is so happily characteristic of the better order
of French thinkers. In England the two modes of thought are kept too
much apart; the theories of political philosophers are too purely a
priori, the suggestions of practical reformers too empirical. In France
a foundation in general principles, the result of large views and a
philosophic mode of thought, is never dispensed with, but the choice of
principles for present application is guided by a systematic
appreciation of the state and exigencies of existing society. The
appreciation may be more or less successful, and is often, no doubt, a
total failure; but some such attempt is invariably made.

As is natural to a French political writer, M. Duveyrier devotes a large
part of his attention to external affairs. But he does so in a different
spirit from that of the writers and orators whose tone has lately
rekindled in foreign nations, against France, much of the jealousy and
suspicion of former years. Those who best know France, have been most
inclined to believe, that the spirit of these orators and writers was
far less widely diffused than superficial appearances indicated; and
that even in the assailants themselves it was of a less inveterate
character than it seemed to be.

M. Duveyrier has no notion of suppressing the national amour-propre; nor
would he deem himself at all complimented by being supposed exempt from
it. But he endeavours to divert it into a rational and a pacific
channel. It is not war, he says, it is not territorial extension, by
which national greatness and glory are now acquired. By the arts of
peace France must henceforth render herself famous. The sufferings and
struggles of half a century, and the social and mental advantages which
she has bought at so dear a price, have made it her part to assume the
initiative in perfecting the machinery and the principles of civil
government.

Edition: current; Page: [314]
Elle forme à cet égard comme un atelier d’essai au profit du globe
entier. . . . L’oeuvre caractéristique de la nation Française est le
perfectionnement, au profit d’elle-même et de toutes les autres, non
seulement des rouages adminstratifs et politiques, mais des bases mêmes
de la société et de la civilisation.

(Ibid., Vol. I, pp. 127, 129.)

The author is faithful to his Programme. He advises France to renounce,
once for all, the popular object of the Rhenish frontier. He calls it a
“misérable intérêt de vanité,” and tells her besides, that she cannot
have Algiers and the Rhine too. He exhorts her to set an example to
Turkey how to govern its Christian subjects, by the manner in which she,
in Algeria, can govern her Mussulmans. He recommends an alliance with
Germany for peaceful, rather than with Russia, for warlike purposes. To
acquire the respect of Europe, her Foreign policy, he says, must be not
war and aggrandizement, nor propagandism, but Arbitration and mediation.
He would have her combine with Prussia and Austria for the protection of
the secondary Powers. He would have international differences decided,
not by the coarse expedient of fighting, but by the impartial
intervention of friendly powers; nor does he despair of seeing the war
of Tariffs, which has succeeded to the war of Armies, terminated in a
similar manner; and the adjustment of commercial relations made a matter
of general arrangement by Congresses or Conferences among all the powers
of Europe. In none of these things does he see insuperable difficulties,
if a great nation, like France, would identify herself with them, and
make them the leading aim of her external policy.

These are worthy objects; but it may be doubted whether a nation, to
which it is necessary to recommend them as means of regaining that
importance in the world, which can no longer be successfully sought by
war and conquest, is the most likely to render them acceptable to other
nations. Plato says, that a people ought to search out and impress as
its Governors the persons who most dislike and avoid the office.[*] It
is certain, that those who eagerly thrust themselves into other people’s
disputes, though it be only as arbitrators, are seldom very cordially
welcomed; and that those are rarely the best managers of other people’s
affairs, who have most taste for the bustle and self-importance of
management. If, however, men have a taste for meddling, it is better
that they should meddle to befriend others, than to oppress and domineer
over them; and M. Duveyrier is doing a useful thing, in inculcating upon
his countrymen the superiority of the more philanthropic mode of
indulging the propensity.

In domestic policy he proclaims the same principle, of peaceful
arbitration; the adjustment of conflicting interests, with the least
possible hardship and disturbance to any one. His watchwords are,
justice and compromise. To postpone all partial interests to the general
interest, but to compensate liberally all from whom sacrifices of their
private interest are demanded; and to make up, as far as Edition:
current; Page: [315] circumstances permit, to the weaker and less
fortunate members of society, for whatever disadvantages they lie under
in their relations with the strong,—these are his maxims.

Under these different heads, he opens various subjects of discussion;
some of which are by no means ripe for a final opinion, and to which we
can only cursorily allude. That he is for a progressive reduction of
protecting duties, is a matter of course. He has, at the same time, much
to say in favour of alleviating the losses of those who suffer by
reforms in legislation; or even by improvements in production. These,
however, are minor topics compared with one from which no political
thinker of any importance can now avert his thoughts;—the improvement of
the existing relations between what is designated as the labouring
portion of the community, and their employers: the question known to
Continental thinkers under the technical appellation of the Organization
of Labour.

This is not a subject upon which to enter at the conclusion of an
article, nor is it in any sense a principal topic of M. Duveyrier’s
book. He contents himself with pointing to it in the distance, as a
problem waiting for a solution in the depths of futurity. It is possible
that, like most French philanthropists, he has in view, as an ultimate
possibility, a greater degree of authoritative intervention in contracts
relating to labour, than would conduce to the desired end, or be
consistent with the proper limits of the functions of government. But he
proposes for present adoption, nothing but what is reasonable and
useful. He bids the government encourage and favour what is voluntarily
done by employers of labour, to raise their labourers from the situation
of hired servants, to that of partners in the concern, having a
pecuniary interest in the profits. He recommends to honour and imitation
the example of M. Leclaire, (mentioned in a former number of this
Review,)[*] who has organized his business on the plan of allowing to
himself, as well as to each of his employés, a fixed salary; and sharing
the surplus among the whole body in rateable proportion to the salaries;
and who, it appears, has found this system even lucrative to himself, as
well as highly advantageous to his labourers.

We have exhibited, we think, enough of the contents of these volumes to
justify our favourable opinion of them. On the unfavourable side there
is little that we think it important to notice, except a degree of
flattery to some of the Chiefs of the ruling party, and especially to
the present King of the French;[†]—probably, however, in the author’s
eyes, not exceeding the courtesy due to persons in high Edition:
current; Page: [316] authority, from one of their own supporters, when
he volunteers important, and not always agreeable advice. The style is
easy and spirited, occasionally rising into eloquence; and not more
diffuse than belongs to the nature of modern periodical writing.




Vindication of the French Revolution of February 1848

that the transactions and the men of the late French Revolution should
find small favour in the eyes of the vulgar and selfish part of the
upper and middle classes, can surprise no one: and that the newspaper
press, which is the echo, or, as far as it is able, the anticipation, of
the opinions and prejudices of those classes, should endeavour to
recommend itself by malicious disparagement of that great event, is but
in the natural order of things. Justice to the men, and a due
appreciation of the event, demand that these unmerited attacks should
not remain unprotested against. But it is difficult to grapple with so
slippery an antagonist as the writer in a newspaper, and impossible to
follow the stream of calumny as it swells by a perpetual succession of
infinitesimal infusions from incessant newspaper articles. Unless
through some similar medium, in which the day’s falsehood can be
immediately met by the day’s contradiction, such assailants are fought
at too great a disadvantage. It is fortunate, therefore, when some one,
embodying the whole mass of accusation in one general bill of
indictment, puts the case upon the issue of a single battle, instead of
a multitude of skirmishes. It is an immense advantage to the defenders
of truth and justice, when all that falsehood and injustice have got to
say is brought together in a moderate compass, and in a form convenient
for exposure.

Such an advantage Lord Brougham has afforded by his outpouring of
desultory invective against the Revolution and its authors. Among the
multitude of performances, similar in intention and often superior in
skill, which have issued from the English press since February 1848,
ahis pamphleta is the only one which affects to embrace the whole
subject, and the only one which bears a known name. bShouldb it seem to
any one that more importance is attached to such a performance, than
properly belongs to a thing so slight and trivial, let it be considered
that the importance of a numerical amount does not so much depend upon
the unit which heads it, as upon the number of the figures which follow.

Lord Brougham

Thinks it a duty incumbent on him, as one who has at various times been
a leader in political movements, and had some hand in bringing about the
greatest constitutional Edition: current; Page: [320] change that ever
was effected without actual violence,[*] to enter calmly but fully upon
the consideration of the most extraordinary Revolution which ever
altered the face of affairs in a civilized country.[†]

It is very natural and commendable in any one (even though he may not
have had the advantage which Lord Brougham so often reminds the reader
that he once enjoyed, of being a fellow-minister with the Marquis of
Lansdowne)[‡] to endeavour to understand the remarkable event which is
the theme of his vituperation. Remarkable, it may justly be called;
though the commonplace hyperbole of “the most extraordinary Revolution
which ever altered the face of affairs in a civilized country” will
scarcely pass muster, even, as a rhetorical flourish. In one respect,
indeed, the Revolution of February must be allowed to be extraordinary,
if not unexampled. It stands almost alone among revolutions, in having
placed power in the hands of men who neither expected nor sought it, nor
used it for any personal purpose—not even for that of maintaining,
otherwise than by opinion and discussion, the ascendancy of their own
party; men whose every act proclaimed them to be that almost unheard-of
phenomenon—unselfish politicians; who did not, like the common run of
those who fancy themselves sincere, aim at doing a little for their
opinions and much for themselves, but, with a disinterested zeal, strove
to make their tenure of power produce as much good as their countrymen
were capable of receiving, and more than their countrymen had yet learnt
to desire. It was not, perhaps, to be expected that men of this stamp
should command much of Lord Brougham’s sympathy. Lord Brougham has
fought, cboth frequently and effectivelyc, on the people’s side; but few
will assert that he doften was muchd in advance of them, ore fought any
up-hill battle in their behalf. Even in the days of his fgreatestf
glory, it was remarked that he gseldomg joined any cause until its
hfirsth difficulties were over, and it had been brought near to the
point of success, by labourers iof deeper earnestnessi, and more willing
to content themselves without indiscriminate applause. If sympathy,
therefore, depends on similarity of character, it was not likely that
his lordship should feel any warm admiration for the members of the
Provisional Government. But he is probably the only man in Europe, of
his reputation and standing, who would have been capable of speaking of
them in such a strain as the following:

Edition: current; Page: [321]
The instantaneous disappearance of virtues, dominions, princedoms,
powers—of all the men who by their station, or their capacity, or their
habits of government, or even their habits of business, had a claim to
rule the affairs of their country, was succeeded by the sudden lifting
up to supreme power of men who, with the single exception of my
illustrious friend M. Arago, were either wholly unknown before in any
way, even to their very names and existence; or who were known as
authors of no great fame, or who were known as of so indifferent
reputation, that they had better have not been known at all: and M.
Arago, the solitary exception to this actual or desirable obscurity,
himself known in the world of science alone.[*]

Remembering that, of the body of men thus spoken of, M. de Lamartine is
one, it is difficult not to be amazed at so unbounded a reliance on the
ignorance of the public. The literary fame of M. de Lamartine in France
and in Europe, can afford to be ignored by Lord Brougham. There was not
a single obscure person among the Provisional Government. The seven
originally named were all distinguished members of the Chamber of
Deputies.[†] Their venerable President, one of the most honoured
characters in France, had even held office, if that be a recommendation;
he was a member of the first cabinet appointed in 1830, and left the
Government when Louis Philippe parted company with popular principles.
The “illustrious friend” known only “in the world of science,” had been
an active and influential politician for twenty years. Three others were
leading members of the Paris bar.[‡] The four whomj, in obedience to the
popular voice,j these seven kacceptedk as their colleagues, were the
acknowledged leaders of the republican press;[§] and who that had paid
the smallest attention to French affairs, was not familiar with the
names and reputation of Marrast and of Louis Blanc?

The first sin of the Revolution in the eyes of the pamphleteer is its
singularity. “The like of it never was before witnessed among men.” It
has “no parallel in the history of nations.” It is “wholly at variance
with every principle, as well as all experience.” If it could possibly
last, he would “feel bound to make the addition of a new head or
chapter” to “a very elaborate work, the Political Philosophy” of “our
Useful Knowledge Society.”[¶] If his account of it were true, one would
be unable to understand how the Revolution could possibly have happened.
It was “the sudden Edition: current; Page: [322] work of a moment—a
change prepared by no preceding plan—prompted by no felt
inconvenience—announced by no complaint;” “without ground, without
pretext, without one circumstance to justify or even to account for it,
except familiarity with change” and “proneness to violence.” It was the
“work of some half-dozen artisans, met in a printing-office;” “a handful
of armed ruffians, headed by a shoemaker and a sub-editor.”[*] Who is
meant by the sub-editor, his lordship best knows; the shoemaker, it must
be presumed, is M. Adolphe Chenu, whose word Lord Brougham takes for the
share he had in the transaction, though a bare reading of his
deposition[†] is enough to prove that he was already known to be, what
he is now admitted to have been, a police spy. To this “handful,” be it
of “artisans” or “ruffians,” everybody submitted, though everybody
disapproved. Half-a-dozen obscure men overthrew a government which
nobody disliked, and established one which nobody desired. This singular
incident, of a government which, so to speak, falls down of itself, does
not suggest to the writer that there must have been something faulty in
its foundations. It merely proves to him that foundations are of no use.
It reveals the “terrible truth,” that it is natural to buildings to fall
without a cause, and that henceforth none can be expected to stand. It
“for ever destroys our confidence in any system of political power which
may be reared,” not only in France, but on the face of the earth. “All
sense of security in any existing government” is gone. “None can now be
held safe for an hour.”[‡]

The explanation of the Revolution is, in short, that it is entirely
inexplicable; and this is intended, not as a confession of ignorance,
but as a sufficient theory.

Common sense, however little informed concerning the Revolution, has
been unable, from the first, to accept this notion of it. It appears to
Lord Brougham very unaccountable that the English journals did not at
once declare a determined enmity to the Revolution, but waited a few
weeks before assuming their present attitude of hostility.[§] It was
because they did not believe, as he professes to do, that the best and
wisest of governments had been overthrown by a touch—the mature opinion
of the whole country being in its favour. That, too, is the reason why
even now, while the grossest misrepresentations of the state of things
which the Revolution has produced are universally propagated and very
generally believed, hardly any one except the pamphleteer expresses
regret for what it swept away. “The illustrious prince, who, with
extraordinary ability and complete success, had, in times of foreign and
domestic difficulty, steered the vessel of the State in safety and in
peace during a period of seventeen years,” and who had invited Lord
Brougham to the Tuileries, and listened with apparent resignation to
Edition: current; Page: [323] his “earnest and zealous” counsels[*]—has
now Lord Brougham for his only, or almost only, regretter and admirer.
Why is this? Because everybody, whether acquainted with the facts or
not, is able to see that a government which, after seventeen years of
almost absolute power over a great country, can be overthrown in a
day—which, during that long period, a period too of peace and
prosperity, undisturbed by any public calamity, has so entirely failed
of creating anywhere a wish for its preservation, that “a capital of one
million souls, and a nation of five-and-thirty,” including an army of
several hundred thousand, look on quietly while “a shoemaker and a
sub-editor,” followed by “an armed mob of two or three thousand,”[†]
turn out the Chambers, and proclaim a totally different set of
institutions—that such a government, unless it was so lmuchl in advance
of the public intelligence as to be out of the reach of appreciation by
it, was so greatly in arrear of it as to deserve to fall.

This government, Lord Broughamm confesses, was not without its foibles.
The ministry had committed some blunders and indiscretions, and the
institutions of the country had a few remaining defects, which the
government showed no willingness to remove. There were too many placemen
in parliament, and the elective franchise was “too limited,”[‡] being
confined, in a nation of thirty-four millions, to about a quarter of a
million; distributed, it might have been added, so unequally, that a
majority of the constituencies did not exceed 200 or 300 voters. The
government should have looked to this. They should have given “votes to
all who were liable to serve on juries;” and also “enfranchised, without
regard to property, the classes connected with science, letters, and the
arts;”[§] which is the same thing twice over, for the jury-list
consisted precisely of the electors and of those classes. By this they
would have added to the 250,000 electors, and to the large
constituencies almost exclusively, some twenty or thirty thousand voters
more. The other improvements of which, in Lord Brougham’s judgment, the
French Constitution stood in need, were to make the peerage hereditary,
and allow land to be entailed.[¶] It would have been treating his
friends very hardly, to be severe upon them for not effecting these last
specimens of constitutional improvement, since they might, with as much
chance of success, have attempted to alter the solar system. Hereditary
legislation and entails are not things which a nation takes back, when
once it has rid itself of them. It certainly was not for this that the
government of Louis Philippe, in the moment of trial, was found to be
Edition: current; Page: [324] deserted by all mankind. Accordingly, Lord
Brougham can find no mode of accounting for the fact but the selfishness
and indifference of the National Guard, who “think only of their shops
and their brittle wares; and avoid acting, provided they see no risk of
pillage following the outbreak.”[*]

This specimen of philosophizing is not at all Baconian, and does no
credit to the political philosopher of the Useful Knowledge Society. The
National Guard acted vigorously enough in 1832, and again in 1834, when
they assisted the troops in putting down much more formidable
insurrections than that of 1848. Their conduct in June last was not, as
the pamphlet represents,[†] the exception, but the rule. Their horror of
l’émeute amounted to a passion: it was that, and not any attachment to
the throne of Louis Philippe, which made them tolerate him for seventeen
years. Why, then, in February, did they, for the first and only time,
not only not resist, but openly countenance the insurrection? Because
the time had come when disgust with the government had become a stronger
feeling than even that passionate horror. The ruler of France had made
the terror of the bourgeois at the idea of a new revolution, his sole
instrument of government, except personal corruption; and that support
now gave way under him.

The explanation of this result of seventeen years of power—the reason
why a government which, in the first years following its establishment,
the most determined and violent attacks had failed to shake, found
itself, in 1848, so feeble, that it fell at the first onset, and not a
hand was raised to stay its fall—will be found, we believe, principally
in two things.

First—it was a government wholly without the spirit of improvement. Not
only did it make an obstinate resistance to all and every organic
reform, even the most moderate; ton merely legislative or merely
administrative improvements it was, in practice, equally inimical: it
originated oscarcely anyo itself, and successfully resisted all which
were proposed by others. pThis had not always been, in the same degree,
its character: in its earlier years it gave to France two of the most
important legislative gifts she ever received—the law of Primary
Instruction and that of Vicinal (or local) Roads.[‡] But its love of
improvement, never strong, had long given place to a conservatism of the
worst sort.p There are few instances of a government, in a country
calling itself free, so completely sold to the support of all abuses: it
rested on a coalition of all the sinister interests[§] in France. Among
Edition: current; Page: [325] those who influenced the suffrages of the
bodies of 200 or 300 electors who returned the ministerial majority,
there were always some to whose interests improvement, be it in what it
might, would have been adverse. It made things worse, not better, that
the most conspicuous instruments of the system were men of knowledge and
cultivation, who had gained the greater part of their reputation as the
advocates of improvement. In some of these men it might be personal
interest, in others hatred of democracy; but neither scrupled, for the
sake of keeping their party together, to make themselves subservient to
the purposes of their worst supporters. In order to bind these together
in an united band to oppose democracy, they were allowed to have their
own way in resisting all other change. This was of itself fatal to the
durability of a government, in the present condition of the world. No
government can now expect to be permanent, unless it guarantees progress
as well as order; nor can it continue really to secure order, unless it
promotes progress. It can go on, as yet, with only a little of the
spirit of improvementq. Whileq reformers have even a remote hope of
effecting their objects through the existing system, they are generally
willing to bear with it. But when there is no hope at all; when the
institutions themselves seem to oppose an unyielding barrier to the
progress of improvement, the advancing tide heaps itself up behind them
till it bears them down.

This was one great characteristic of the government of Louis Philippe.
The other, equally discreditable, was the more fatal to that government,
because identified, still more than the first, in public opinion, with
the personal character and agency of the King himself. It wrought almost
exclusively through the meaner and more selfish impulses of mankind. Its
sole instrument of government consisted in a direct appeal to men’s
immediate personal interests or interested fears. It never appealed to,
or endeavoured to put on its side, any noble, elevated, or generous
principle of action. It repressed and discouraged all such, as being
dangerous to it. In the same manner in which Napoleon cultivated the
love of military distinction as his one means of action upon the
multitude, so did Louis Philippe strive to immerse all France in the
culte des intérêts matériels,[*] in the worship of the cash-box and of
the ledger. It is not, orr it has not hitherto been, in the character of
Frenchmen to be content with being thus governed. Some idea of grandeur,
at least some feeling of national self-importance, must be associated
with that which they will voluntarily follow and obey. The one
inducement by which Louis Philippe’s government recommended itself to
the middle classes, was that revolutions and riots sares bad for trade.
They are so, but that is a very small part of the considerations which
ought to determine our estimation of them. While classes were thus
appealed to through their class interest, every individual who, either
Edition: current; Page: [326] from station, reputation, or talent,
appeared worth gaining, was addressed through whatever personal
interest, either of money or vanity, he was thought most likely to be
accessible to. Many were attempted unsuccessfully, many successfully.
Corruption was carried to the utmost pitch that the resources at the
disposal of the government admitted of.

Accordingly, the best spirits in France had long felt, and felt each
year more and more, that the government of Louis Philippe was a
demoralizing government; that under its baneful influence all public
principle, or public spirit, or regard for political opinions, was
giving way more and more to selfish indifference in the propertied
classes generally, and, in many of the more conspicuous individuals, to
the shameless pursuit of personal gain.

It is almost superfluous to adduce testimonies to facts of such
universal notoriety; but it is worth while to refer to two documents,
which demonstrate, after all that has been said of the unexpectedness of
the events of February, how clearly it was seen by competent judges
that, from the principles on which the government had long been carried
on, such a termination of its career was almost certain to happen at
some time, and might happen at any time.

One of these documents is a speech of M. de Tocqueville, delivered in
the Chamber of Deputies on the 27th of January 1848, exactly four weeks
before the Revolution.[*] In this remarkable and almost prophetic
discourse, M. de Tocqueville said that in the class which possessed and
exercised political rights, “political morality is declining; it is
already deeply tainted, it becomes more deeply so from day to day. More
and more, opinions, sentiments, and ideas of a public character are
supplanted by personal interests, personal aims, points of view borrowed
from private interest and private life.”[†] He called the members of the
hostile majority themselves to witness, whether in the five, ten, or
fifteen years last elapsed, the number of those who voted for them from
private motives was not perpetually increasing, the number who did so
from political opinion constantly diminishing?

Let them tell me if around them, under their eyes, there is not
gradually establishing itself in public opinion a singular species of
tolerance for the facts I have been speaking of,—if, by little and
little, there is not forming itself a vulgar and low morality, according
to which the man who possesses political rights owes it to himself, owes
it to his children, to his wife, to his relations, to make a personal
use of those rights for their benefit—if this is not gradually raising
itself into a sort of duty of the father of a family?—if this new
morality, unknown in the great times of our history, unknown at the
commencement of our Revolution, is not developing itself more and more,
and making daily progress in the public mind.

Edition: current; Page: [327]
He described the acts by which the government of Louis Philippe had made
itself accessary to this decline of public spirit. In the first place,
by the gigantic strides which it was making towards despotism:

The government has re-possessed itself, especially in these last years,
of greater powers, a larger measure of influence, prerogatives more
manifold and more considerable, than it had possessed at any other
epoch. It has become infinitely more powerful than could have been
imagined, not only by those who conferred, but by those who accepted,
the reins of government in 1830.

The mischief was aggravated by the indirect and crafty manner in which
it was brought about.

It was by reclaiming old powers, which were thought to have been
abolished in t1830t, by reviving old rights, which were supposed to have
been annulled, by bringing again into activity old laws, which were
believed to have been abrogated, and applying new ones in a different
meaning from that in which they had been enacted. . . . Do you suppose
that this crooked and surreptitious manner of gradually regaining
ascendancy, as it were by surprise, through other means than those
granted by the constitution,—think you that this strange spectacle of
address and savoir-faire, publicly exhibited for several years on so
vast a theatre, to a whole nation looking on,—that this spectacle was of
a nature to improve public morals?

And supposing, by a great concession, that the men who wrought this evil
were themselves persuaded that it was good—

They have not the less effected it by means which morality disavows.
They have achieved it by taking men not by their honourable side, but by
their bad side—by their passions, their weaknesses, their personal
interests, often their vices. . . . And to accomplish these things, it
has been necessary for them to call to their assistance, to honour with
their favour, to introduce into their daily intercourse, men who wished
neither for honest ends nor honest means; who desired but the gross
satisfaction of their private interests, by the aid of the power
confided to them.

After citing one scandalous instance of a high office of trust conferred
on a person notoriously corrupt, M. de Tocqueville added: “I do not
regard this fact as a solitary one; I consider it the symptom of a
general evil, the most salient trait of an entire course of policy. In
the paths which you uhaveu chosen for yourselves, you had need of such
men.”

As a consequence of these things, he appealed to the whole body of his
hearers, whether it was not true that—

The sentiment, the instinct of instability, that sentiment, the
precursor of revolutions, which often presages them, and sometimes
causes them to take place—already exists to a most serious degree in the
country. . . . Is there not a breeze of revolution in the air? This
breeze, no one knows where it rises, whence it comes, nor (believe me)
whom it sweeps away. . . . It is my deep and deliberate conviction, that
public morals are degenerating, and Edition: current; Page: [328] that
the degeneracy of public morals will lead you in a short, perhaps a very
short time, to new revolutions. . . . Have you at this very hour the
certainty of a to-morrow? Do you know what may happen in France in a
year, in a month, perhaps even in a day? You do not, but this you know,
that the tempest is in the horizon, that it is marching towards you,
will you suffer yourselves to be overtaken by it?

Several changes in legislation have been talked of. I am much inclined
to believe that such changes are not only useful, but necessary. I
believe in the utility of electoral reform, in the urgency of excluding
placemen from parliament. But I am not so senseless as to be unaware,
that it is not the laws, in themselves, which make the destiny of
peoples, no, it is not the mechanism of the laws, which produces the
great events of the world; it is the spirit of the government. Keep your
laws if you will, though I think it a great error, keep them—keep even
the men, if you like, I for my part will be no obstacle, but, in
Heaven’s name, change the spirit of the government, for, I say it again,
that spirit is hurrying you to the abyss.[*]

The other document which shall be cited in proof that the natural
consequences of Louis Philippe’s system of government were foreseen by
near observers, is the evidence of M. Goudchaux, banker at Paris, and
for some months Minister of Finance to the Republic; delivered before
the Commission d’Enquête on the events of May and June last. M.
Goudchaux, who said in his place in the Assembly that the Revolution had
come too soon, nevertheless declared in his evidence, that he and some
of his political friends felt so convinced that it was impending, that,
a few days before it broke out, they held a meeting at his house, to
arrange a list of names for a Provisional Government; but disagreed on
the question whether to admit or to exclude from the number M. Louis
Blanc.[†]

The Revolution, therefore, which appears to Lord Brougham in the
singular character of an event without a cause, was so much the natural
result of known causes, as to be capable of being foreseen. And when
what had been foreseen by the more discerning, actually came to pass,
even the undiscerning recognised in it the legitimate consequence of a
just popular indignation. M. Garnier-Pagès was justified in his
apostrophe, in the National Assembly, on the 24th of last October:

I ask it of everybody:—Did not every one, in the first days, agree that
the Revolution which had been accomplished was moral, still more than
political? Did not every one agree that this great renovation had been
preceded by a real and terrible reaction against corruption, and
emanated from all that was honest and honourable in the hearts of the
French nation?*

Edition: current; Page: [329]
Contrast these representations of the state of the national mind
preceding the Revolution, by persons really acquainted with it, with the
following specimen from Lord Brougham’s pamphlet: “The lesson is taught
by the experience of February 1848, that to change” the form of
government of France “requires no long series of complaints, no
suffering from oppression, whether chronic or acute, no indignation at
abuses, no combination of parties to effect a change, no preparation for
converting the opposition to a ministry into a war with a dynasty.”[*]
The writer has not the most ordinary knowledge of the public events of
his own time. The war with the dynasty began as early as 1831, and was
first compelled to mask itself under opposition to a ministry, when the
laws of September had made it impossible to attack, through the press,
either the King or the monarchy, without the certainty of being ruined
and reduced to silence.[†] But public feeling, once sufficiently roused,
will force a way through all obstacles; and in spite of the gagging
laws, much of the opposition to the Government had latterly become
almost avowedly a war against the King. “There was little personal
disrespect shown,” says the pamphlet, “towards the illustrious
Prince.”[‡] The main political feature of the six months preceding
February was the reform banquets, and the most marked circumstance
attending these was the premeditated omission, in most of them, to drink
the King’s health. Lord Brougham reproaches the reformers with not
trusting to “repeated discussion and the exertion of the popular
influence”[§] for effecting a reform of the constitution by a vote of
parliament. They had little encouragement to rely on such means. The
very corruption which was ruining the government in the general opinion,
was strengthening it with the narrow and jobbing class who returned a
majority of the Chamber. A general election had occurred the summer
previous, and the ministerial majority had gained, not lost, in numbers
by it. Lord Brougham boasts, through many pages, of the feat performed
by Lord Grey’s ministry in effecting a great change in the constitution
(the first such change in history which was so accomplished) without an
insurrection.[¶] But was it without the fear of an Edition: current;
Page: [330] insurrection? If there had been no chance of a rising, would
the House of Lords have waved their opposition, or the Duke of
Wellington have thrown up the game in despair? If, in England, the mere
demonstration of popular force sufficed to effect what elsewhere
required its actual exertion, it was because the majority of even the
unreformed House of Commons was elected by constituencies sufficiently
large for a really powerful and unanimous popular determination to reach
it; and because the political usages and long-standing liberties of
England allowed of popular meetings and political unions without limit
or stint. To the French reformers these means of peaceful demonstration
were denied. The nearest approach to them allowed by French law, was the
reform dinners; and these, as soon as they began to produce an effect,
the government forbade; reviving for that purpose a decree passed in the
stormiest period of the first Revolution.[*] It was when this last
resource was denied, that popular indignation burst forth, and the
monarchy was destroyed.

There never was a greater blunder than to speak of the French Republic
as an “improvised government”—“struck out at a heat”—“the result of a
sudden thought”—“span new, untried, and even unthought of.”[†] The
Revolution, indeed, was unpremeditated, spontaneous; the republican
leaders had no more to do with effecting it, than the socialist leaders
had with the insurrection of June last. But the republicans, immediately
after the crisis, became the directors of the movement, because they
alone, of the various sections of the French people, had not to
improvise a political creed, but already possessed one. It would require
a degree of ignorance of French political discussion from 1830 to 1848,
which one would not willingly impute even to the author of the Letter to
the Marquess of Lansdowne, not to know that during those years,
republicanism, instead of being “unthought of,” had wboth beenw thought
of and talked of, in every variety of tone, by friends and enemies, in
all corners of France; that several formidable insurrections had broken
out in its name; that many well-known chiefs had been, xand somex still
were, in the prisons of Ham, Doullens, and Mont St. Michel, for acts
done in its behalf; and that, except the remaining adherents of the
elder branch, a republic entered into the calculations of all who
speculated either on the dethronement of Louis Philippe, or on the
minority of his successor.[‡] If William III had been dethroned for
following the example of James II, would the people of this country have
put a child on the throne, or sent for some other Prince of Orange
Edition: current; Page: [331] from beyond sea? Would they not, almost
certainly, have fallen back on the Commonwealth? What the English of the
seventeenth century would assuredly have done, the French might do in
the nineteenth without exciting surprise. And it was the more to be
expected that they would do so, since constitutional royalty is in
itself a thing as uncongenial to the character and habits of the French,
or any other people of the European Continent, as it is suited to the
tone of thought and feeling characteristic of England.

From causes which might be traced in the history and development of
English society and government, the general habit and practice of the
English mind is compromise. No idea is carried out to more than a small
portion of its legitimate consequences. Neither by the generality of our
speculative thinkers, nor in the practice of the nation, are the
principles which are professed ever thoroughly acted upon; something
always stops the application half way. This national habit has
consequences of very various character, of which the following is one.
It is natural to minds governed by habit (which is the character of the
English more than of any other civilized people) that their tastes and
inclinations become accommodated to their habitual practice; and as in
England no principle is ever fully carried out, discordance between
principles and practice has come to be regarded, not only as the
natural, but as the desirable state. This is not an epigram, or a
paradox, but a sober description of the tone of sentiment commonly found
in Englishmen. They never feel themselves safe unless they are living
under the shadow of some conventional fiction—y some agreement to say
one thing and mean another. Now, constitutional royalty is precisely an
arrangement of this description. The very essence of it is, that the
so-called sovereign does not govern, ought not to govern, is not
intended to govern; but yet must be held up to the nation, be addressed
by the nation, and even address the nation, as if he or she did govern.
This, which was originally a compromise between the friends of popular
liberty and those of absolute monarchy, has established itself as a
sincere feeling in the mind of the nation; who would be offended, and
think their liberties endangered, if a king or zaz queen meddled any
further in the government than to give a formal sanction to all acts of
parliament, and to appoint as ministry, or rather as minister, the
person whom the majority in parliament pointed out; and yet would be
unaffectedly shocked, if every considerable act of government did not
profess and pretend to be the act and mandate of the person on the
throne. The English are fond of boasting that they do not regard the
theory, but only the practice of institutions; but their boast stops
short of the truth; they actually prefer that their theory should be at
variance with their practice. If any one proposed to them to convert
their practice into a theory, he would be scouted. It appears to them
unnatural and unsafe, either to do the thing which they profess, or to
profess the thing which they do. A theory Edition: current; Page: [332]
which purports to be the very thing intended to be acted upon, fills
them with alarm; it seems to carry with it a boundless extent of
unforeseeable consequences. This disagreeable feeling they are only free
from, when the principles laid down are obviously matters of convention,
which, it is agreed on all parts, are not to be pressed home.

It is otherwise in France: so much so, that few Frenchmen can understand
this singular characteristic of the English mind; which, seen
imperfectly and by glimpses, is the origin of those accusations of
profound hypocrisy, mistakenly brought by many foreigners against the
English nation. Englishmen, on their part, can in general as little
understand the comparative simplicity and directness of Continental
notions. The French impatience of discrepancy between theory and
practice, seems to them fancifulness, and want of good sense. It was a
Frenchman, not an Englishman, who erected the English practice of
constitutional monarchy into a theory: but his maxim, “le roi règne et
ne gouverne pas,”[*] took no root on the other side of the Channel. The
French had no relish for a system, the forms of which were intended to
simulate something at variance with acknowledged afacta. Those who were
for a king at all, wanted one who was a substantial power in the State,
and not a cipher: while, if the will of the nation was to be the
government—if the king was to do nothing but register the nation’s
decrees—both the reason and the feelings of the French were in favour of
having those decrees pronounced directly by the people’s own delegates.

A constitutional monarchy, therefore, was likely in France, as it is
likely in every other country binb Continental Europe, to be but a brief
halt on the road from a despotism to a republic. But though a republic,
for France, was the most natural and congenial of all the forms of free
government, it had two great hindrances to contend with. One was, the
political indifference of the majority—the result of want of education,
and of the absence of habits of discussion and participation in public
business. The other was the dread inspired by the remembrance of 1793
and 1794; a dread which, though much weakened since 1830, did and does
in some measure subsist, notwithstanding what was so promptly done by
the Provisional Government to disconnect the new republic from whatever
was sanguinary in the recollections of the old. These two causes
prevented the French nation in general from demanding or wishing for a
republican government; and as long as those causes continue, they will
render its existence, even now when it is established, more or less
precarious.

The Provisional Government knew this. They had no illusions. They were
not blind to any of their difficulties. The generation of which they
were a part, has neither the ardent faith nor the boundless hope which
belonged to the era of its predecessors, and which made it easy for an
entire people to be transformed into Edition: current; Page: [333]
heroes. It has been publicly stated, that of the eleven members of the
Provisional Government, though all or nearly all were republicans, M.
Ledru-Rollin alone, before the 24th of February, thought that the time
had yet come for a republic: and even he, it would appear, in reliance
less on what the public sentiment already was, than on what it might in
his opinion be made. It will be the immortal glory of these men with
posterity, that they did not need the illusions of political
inexperience to make them heroes; that they could act out their opinions
with calm determination, without exaggerating to their own minds the
measure of success, the amount of valuable result, which probably
awaited them. They might regret that the nation was not better prepared
for the new régime; but when the old had perished, it was not for them
to decide that the institutions of their own preference were too good
for their countrymen, but to try whether a republican government,
administered by sincere republicans, if it did not find the French
people republicans, could make them so.

With this noble hope the members of the Provisional Government, if
intentions can be judged from acts, accepted the power which was thrust
upon them:[*] and whoever passes judgment on their proceedings according
to any other idea of the problem which lay before them, is an incapable
appreciator of the situation and its exigency, and grossly unjust to the
men.

Never had any man or set of men, suddenly raised to power, a more
complicated task before them. It was a more difficult achievement in
their case to govern at all, than in the case of almost any other
government to govern well. They were nominal dictators, without either
soldiers or police whom they could call to their assistance, without
even any organized body of adherents. They were absolute rulers, with no
means of enforcing obedience. And they actually did rule Paris, for two
whole months succeeding a revolution, by means of such obedience only as
was given voluntarily. This is the part of their conduct which, to a
certain extent, has had least injustice done to it, since it has
commonly been admitted to have been a difficult and a meritorious
achievement: but the unwilling acknowledgment of merit has stopped in
generals; there is hardly one of the acts by which this great feat was
accomplished, that has not since been made a subject of reproach to
them; though not until the emergency had passed away; and conduct of
which the whole benefit had been reaped, could now be criticised at
leisure. Lord Brougham, among others, cannot tolerate the speeches by
which they calmed the popular effervescence—speeches for which, at the
time when they were made, the speakers were worshipped almost as gods by
the frightened Parisian bourgeoisie.[†] One would have thought that men
whose almost sole engine of Edition: current; Page: [334] government,
for months, which in times of revolution are ages, was the effect which
they could produce by haranguing an armed populace—who had daily to
persuade that populace to forego its demands, at the peril of their
lives if it persisted in them—and who succeeded in that object, and kept
the frame of government in existence until things became quiet, and
authority resumed its course—might claim some indulgence as to the means
by which this truly wonderful success was attained. One hardly expected
to hear them taunted with fulsome flattery and mob-sycophancy, because
they gave fair words to those whose good-will was all they had to depend
on for preventing confusion. One would have thought, too, that a people,
or a populace if the term is preferred, who actually were induced, by
fair words alone, to make themselves a voluntary police, and preserve
such order in a great capital that the offences committed were fewer
than in ordinary times, deserved some praise from their temporary
rulers, and might receive it without subjecting these to any imputation
of time-serving. But Lord Brougham cannot admit that any praise can be
due to a people who make barricades, and turn out a government. One of
the most unworthy points in his pamphlet, is the abusive tone and
language into which he breaks out, every time that he has occasion to
speak of the working classes; of those among them at least who meddle in
insurrections, or think they have anything to do with the government
except to obey it.[*] “Rabble,” “dregs of the populace,” “armed
ruffians,”[†] are his expressions for the most intelligent and
cbest-conductedc labouring class, take it for all in all, to be found on
the earth’s surface—the artisans of Paris. His determination to refuse
them every particle of honour must be inveterate indeed, since he will
not allow them even courage; he will not so much as admit that they
actually fought!—the many hundreds of killed and wounded being, it must
be supposed, the product of accident.

Even fairer opponents than the pamphleteer, while giving deserved credit
to the Provisional Government for having overcome the tremendous
difficulty of governing and preserving order, have passed a severe
judgment upon the measures of legislation and administration which were
adopted by this temporary authority. Some of their acts are censured as
exceeding the legitimate powers of a Provisional Government, and
deciding questions which ought to have been reserved for the appointed
representatives of the nation. Others are condemned as ill-judged and
pernicious in themselves.[‡]

Edition: current; Page: [335]
How far these charges are merited it will be easier to judge, if we
place ourselves in the situation of these men, and endeavour to realize,
in imagination, the demands which their position made upon them.

What would have been the proper conduct of men who, believing a
democratic republic to be not only in itself the sole form of government
which secures due attention to the interests of the great body of the
community, but also calculated to work well in their own
country—believing, however, that the majority of their countrymen were
indifferent, and a great dportiond averse to it—found themselves
unexpectedly placed, by an insurrection of their own supporters, in a
position in which it seemed in their power to direct, for some time to
come, the current of events? Were they to attempt nothing in favour of
their own opinions? Were they to assume no initiative? Were they merely
to keep things quiet and in statu quo, until the apathetic majority
could come together and spontaneously determine whether they would have
what these, the leaders, thought the best institutions, or what they
regarded as the worst? Were the noblest spirits and most enlightened
minds in the country to employ an opportunity such as scarcely occurs
once in a thousand years, in simply waiting on the whims and prejudices
of the many? Were they who, even on the showing of this pamphlet, formed
the only party which had fixed principles and a strong public spirit, to
leave all to the decision of those who either had only mean and selfish
objects, or had not yet acquired any opinions? Had they done so, they
would have deserved to be stigmatized in history as the veriest cravens
who ever marred by irresolution the opening prospects of a people.

The democratic principles of these men forbade them to impose
despotically, even if they had the power, their political opinions upon
an unwilling majority; and compelled them to refer all their acts to the
ultimate ratification of a freely and fairly elected representative
assembly. But the sovereignty of the whole people does not mean the
passiveness of individuals—the negation of all impulse, of all guidance,
of all initiative, on the part of the better and wiser few. The more
firmly resolved were these men to stand by the government of the
majority even if it did not adopt their opinions, the more incumbent was
it on them to spare no pains for bringing over the majority to them.
Their great task was to republicanize the public mind; to strive by all
means, apart from coercion or deception, that the coming election should
produce an assembly of sincere republicans. And since this could not
but, at the best, be regarded as doubtful, they were bound, as far as
prudence permitted, to adopt provisionally as many valuable measures as
possible; such measures as the future assembly, though it might have
hesitated to pass, would not perhaps venture to abrogate. These two
things the Provisional Government did in some measure attempt; and
though the enemies of popular institutions have clamoured against them
as if they had carried both these courses of action to the most
abominable extremities, posterity will have more reason, not for
censure, but for regret, that they did not venture far enough in either.

Edition: current; Page: [336]
Among their proceedings which aimed at the first object, that of
republicanizing the nation, those which have been most commented on were
the sending of the much-talked-of commissioners to the departments, and
M. Ledru-Rollin’s and M. Carnot’s famous bulletins and circulars.[*]

The deputation of commissioners into all parts of France, to explain
what had taken place, to represent the new government, and supersede the
authorities appointed under the previous régime, seems so natural and
indispensable a proceeding, that the storm of disapprobation which it
encountered is only a proof of the blind suspicion and distrust with
which the provinces received all they did, and which was one of the
greatest difficulties of their situation. Much scandal was given by an
expression in M. Ledru-Rollin’s instructions to the commissioners,
telling them that their powers were unlimited.[†] Was it not the very
necessity of the case, that the authority of the Provisional Government
was for the time unlimited, that is, unfettered by any constitutional
restraints? and could they have gone on without imparting to their sole
representatives in the provinces, subject to responsibility to
themselves, the fulness of their own power? Not the power assumed, but
the use made of it, is, in a time of revolution, the criterion of right
or wrong. The Provisional Government knew that these commissioners, so
ridiculously compared to the terrible proconsuls of the Convention, were
in small danger of being tempted to any over-exertion of power. They
knew that their delegates, like themselves, depended on voluntary
obedience for being able to exercise any power at all. These formidable
despots, who are painted in as frightful colours as if they had carried
with them a guillotine en ambulance, were, more than once, simply taken
by the hand and led out of the town on their way back to Paris. The
selection of persons for these appointments has also been much cavilled
at. Lord Brougham revives the almost forgotten calumny, that “one of his
[M. Ledru-Rollin’s] commissioners had been a felon, condemned to the
galleys, and had undergone the punishment.”[‡] Any one who has taken as
much pains to be informed as is implied in merely reading the French
newspapers, knows that the person alluded to was not a delegate of the
government, or of M. Ledru-Rollin, but of the clubs. Mistakes no doubt
were made in the rapid selection of so great a number of persons, in
whom zeal for the principles of the Republic, being the most essential
requisite, excluded many persons in other respects eligible. But the
maligners of the Provisional Government may be challenged to deny, that
the great majority of the selections did honour both to the choosers and
to the chosen; that a Edition: current; Page: [337] large proportion
acquired, in the districts to which they were sent, great and
well-merited popularity, and contributed largely to rally those parts of
France to the cause of the Republic; that many are now (or were, up to
M. Léon Faucher’s recent ejection en masse) prefects, with general
approval, of the departments to which they were delegated; and that
where errors had been committed, they were at once corrected, as soon
ase brought to light.

As little ground is there for the embittered denunciationsf against the
circulars and proclamations. Two only of these documents gave cause for
just criticism: the famous sixteenth bulletin,[*] and M. Carnot’s
circular. The former was withdrawn on the very day of its appearance,
and was afterwards declared to have been published by the mistake of a
clerk, the draft never having been seen or approved by the minister or
by his secretary, M. Carnot, in his celebrated circular, though he
expressed himself unguardedly, could never, by any candid reader, be
supposed to mean anything but what he has always declared that he did
mean: to impress on those to whom the document was addressed, that it
was more important, at that particular juncture, that the assembly to be
selected should consist of sincere republicans, than that it should
contain the greatest possible number of lettered and instructed men;[†]
he knowing, as he had good reason to gknowg, that in the greater part of
France, most of those who had gained a reputation as men of letters and
acquirements under the old régime, like most others who had thriven
under that corrupt system, were not to be relied on by the new. It is
false that M. Carnot disparaged knowledge, or panegyrized ignorance. He
declared, on the contrary, that to make laws and a constitution was a
task for the intellectual élite of France.[‡] But were nine hundred men
of talent, nine hundred talkers, needed, or capable of being made
useful, for such a task? While thinking only of the exigencies of the
moment, M. Carnot gave expression, perhaps unwittingly, to a great
general truth. It is not the business of a numerous representative
assembly to make laws. Laws are never well made but by a few—often best
by only one. The office of a representative body is not to make the
laws, but to see that they are made by the right persons, and to be the
organ of the nation for giving or withholding its ratification of them.
For these functions, good sense, good intentions, and attachment to the
principles of free government, are the most important requisites. Highly
cultivated intellect is not hessentialh, even if we could expect to find
it, in more than a select few; and as for that superficial
cleverness—that command of words and skilful management of commonplaces,
Edition: current; Page: [338] which pass for talent and instruction on
the hustings, at public meetings, and in society—most really cultivated
persons, we believe, are agreed in opinion, that of this all legislative
assemblies have, and are likely to have, a much greater abundance than
at all conduces to the ends for which they purport to exist.

iWheni such are the worst things that can be charged against the
Provisional Government, their conduct must indeed be free from serious
reproach. In this particular matter, the management of the elections,
their behaviour, in all that is known of it, will bear comparison with
that of any government in any country. Probably no government that ever
existed, certainly no French government, practised so entire an
abstinence from illegitimate influence—from any employment whatever of
government influence to procure elections in their own favour. It is not
intended to claim merit for them on this account. Their principles
required it: but let it be said, that under great temptations they were
true to their principles. It is an unfortunate fact, that in many things
besides this, had they been less disinterested, less upright, less
determined to rely solely on the power of honesty, they would probably
have effected more both for themselves and for their cause. It is
because they persisted in their resolve to owe nothing to any other than
fair means, that they have been precipitated from power; and among many
varieties of calumny, have not escaped even those charges from which
their whole conduct had borne the stamp of the most evident
determination to keep free.

It would be astonishing (if the impudence of party calumny could
astonish any one) to observe what are the crimes of which the detractors
of this noble body of men have accused, and are not ashamed still to
continue accusing them. They are even now spoken of in newspapers, as if
their management of the elections had been something almost unexampled
in tyranny and turpitude; and all this time neither a bribe nor a
threat, either to an elector or to a body of electors, has been proved,
or it may almost be said alleged, against them. If the verdict of
history jwasj gathered from the assertions of cotemporaries, what
contempt would it inspire for the judgment of posterity on eminent
characters, when we find that these men have been charged individually
with embezzling money from the Treasury; that even M. kdek Lamartine has
thought it necessary to lay before the public the details of his private
fortune and pecuniary transactions, in order to extinguish the slander
beyond possibility of revival![*] Not without cause; for though
malignity itself is not shameless enough any longer to repeat the charge
against him personally, his exculpation has not liberated his
colleagues; and there have appeared within these few weeks, in more than
one English newspaper, Edition: current; Page: [339] articles in which
the financial administration of the Provisional Government has been
spoken of as one mass of profligate malversation. There is nothing which
the spirit that pursues these men would not dare to assert, when it can
venture on this. One member of the Provisional Government has been made
a mark for greater inveteracy of assault than the rest—M. Ledru-Rollin.
Everybody has heard scandalous stories concerning him; and in his case,
some of these were specific, and accompanied with names and
circumstances. If those which did not enter into particulars, had no
better foundation than those which did, M. Ledru-Rollin, as to pecuniary
integrity, is the statesman of most unimpeachable character in Europe;
for every accusation of the kind that we are acquainted with, which had
any tangible character, was investigated by the Commission d’Enquête,[*]
and disproved by the evidence of the persons alleged to have been
connected with it. In England, his assailants, and those of his
colleagues, seized the opportunity of the appearance of a mass of
evidence which they knew nobody would read,[†] to affirm (it must in
charity be supposed, without having read it themselves) that it
substantiated all the floating rumours of misconduct, and covered the
members of the government with indelible disgrace. In France, it was
felt even by their enemies to have entirely failed of eliciting the
disclosures which had been expected from it. M. Ledru-Rollin instantly
rose many degrees in public estimation, and has occupied, since those
documents appeared, a position of greater political importance than
before.

To speak now of those measures of the Provisional Government which
partook of a legislative character; for none of which Lord Brougham can
find any other purpose, than “to retain the people’s favour.”[‡]
Assuredly to retain that favour, at such a time, was as virtuous an
object, considering what depended on it, as any of those which influence
the lcoursel of legislation in ordinary times. Yet, if it is meant to be
said that for the sake of the people’s favour they performed one act,
issued one single edict, which did not, in and for itself, commend
itself to them as a thing fit to be done, the assertion is gratuitous,
and in opposition to all that is known of the case. Many things were
done hastily, to make sure of their being done at all: some were done,
which it has since been necessary to undo, but mnom one thing can they
be shown to have done, which was not such as, in their deliberate
opinion, ought to have been done.

Lord Brougham regards the immediate abolition of colonial slavery as a
hasty measure, and beyond the powers of a Provisional Government.[§]
Considering Edition: current; Page: [340] what proved to be the
character of the National Assembly, who can say, if this great act of
justice had been left for it to do, how long nan time would have passed
before it would have found the leisure or the will to perform it?
Financial difficulties, which have gathered so heavily round the infant
Republic, would have been enough of themselves to have caused the
postponement of emancipation, if it was to be preceded, not followed, by
compensation. The Government did at once what required to be so done;
they struck off the fetters of the slave, knowing, and because they
knew, that the act, once done, was irrevocable. By thus acting, they not
only made sure from the first, that, whatever else might happen, some
hundreds of thousands of human beings should have permanent cause to
bless the Revolution, but averted the chances of civil war and massacre
consequent on the indefinite withholding, in such circumstances, of so
clear a omoralo right. The indemnification of the owners they left to
the future Assembly; but committed the French nation, as far as it was
in the power of a government to commit them, to that act of justice.

Lord Brougham talks also of “their incredible decree making all judges
hold office during pleasure, and by popular election;” thus placing “the
administration of justice in the hands of the populace.”[*] After this
positive assertion, some persons may be surprised to be told that no
such decree ever existed. What the writer was confusedly thinking about,
must have been the act which removed about half-a-dozen judicial
functionaries from office, declaring in the preamble that the
inamovability of judges was inconsistent with republican principles.[†]
They may have beenp, and we think they were,p wrong in this; but the
opinion is one held by a large portion of the republican party; and
several of the best writers on judicial establishments, both in France
and in England, have sanctioned it by their authority.

A more important subject than this is M. de Lamartine’s circular to the
diplomatic agents of the French government, otherwise known as his
“Manifeste aux Puissances,” declaratory of the foreign policy of the new
Republic.[‡] This has been made by Lord Brougham the occasion of an
attack on M. de Lamartine, which surpasses, in its defiance of fact,
almost every other specimen of mis-statement in this most uncandid
pamphlet.

The Provisional Government, he alleges, by this manifesto—

Held out the hand of fellowship to the insurgents of all nations. . . .
M. Lamartine does not, and he cannot deny, that he assured the people of
all other countries of assistance from France in case they should fail
to work out by force their own emancipation; in other words, Edition:
current; Page: [341] he promised that France would help all insurgents
who might be defeated by their lawful rulers in their rebellion against
established authority. Beyond all question this is the very worst thing
that France has done; the most sinning against all principle, the most
hurtful to herself and to the world.[*]

In this style he continues for several pages, with the volume before
him, or (as the context proves) fresh in his recollection, which,
together with M. de Lamartine’s defence of his administration, contains
a reprint of every speech and every public document which proceeded from
him during his “three months in power.”[†] Not one of these contains
anything resembling what M. de Lamartine, as the organ of the French
government, is here charged with having said.

The “Manifeste aux Puissances” is, both in spirit and in letter, a
declaration of the intention of the French Republic to remain at peace.
The only passages which admit of any other construction shall be quoted
at length, to leave no excuse for those who may imagine that what is so
positively asserted, and if false may be so easily confuted, must be
true.

The treaties of 1815 no longer exist as obligatory, in the opinion of
the French Republic, but the territorial boundaries fixed by those
treaties are an existing fact, which the Republic admits as a basis and
a starting point in its relations with other countries.

But, while the treaties of 1815 no longer exist except as a fact, to be
modified by common agreement, and while the Republic openly declares
that it has a right and a mission to arrive regularly and pacifically at
such modifications—the good sense, the moderation, the conscience, the
prudence of the Republic exist, and are for Europe a better and more
honourable guarantee than the letter of those treaties which she herself
has so often violated or modified.

Apply yourself, sir, to make this emancipation of the Republic from the
treaties of 1815 understood and admitted, and to point out that this
liberation is in no respect irreconcileable with the repose of Europe.

We avow openly, that if the hour of reconstruction for certain oppressed
nationalities in Europe or elsewhere, appeared to us to have sounded in
the decrees of Providence: if Switzerland, our faithful ally since
Francis I, were constrained or menaced in the movement which is taking
place within her to lend an additional force to her band of democratic
governments; if the independent states of Italy were invaded, if the
attempt were made to impose limits or obstacles to their internal
transformations, or to contest by force of arms their right of allying
themselves with each other to consolidate a common country, the French
Republic would consider itself at liberty to take arms for the
protection of these legitimate movements of growth and of
nationality.[‡]

Does this promise “that France would help all insurgents who might be
defeated by their lawful rulers?”[§] Can the most perverse ingenuity
find in the preceding words one vestige of a suggestion of such an
intention? M. de Lamartine claimed Edition: current; Page: [342] for his
country the right, according to its own discretion and judgment, to
assist any nation which might be struggling to free itself from the yoke
of foreign conquerors. Assistance against foreigners, not against native
rulers, was the only assistance of which the smallest mention was made;
and the first of the supposed cases, that of an extinguished
nationality, was the only one which had anything to do with
“insurrection,”[*] even against foreigners. And in that there was not
only no promise, but an express reservation to the French government to
judge for itself whether the “hour of reconstruction” had arrived or
not.

But it is not necessary to rely solely on the words of the manifesto, M.
de Lamartine had the advantage, in this case, of being his own
commentator. The manifesto was issued on the 4th of March. On the 19th
of that month M. de Lamartine received a deputation of Poles, and a
deputation of Irish on the 3rd of the month following. Both these
deputations asked for the succour, which it is pretended that he had
promised to all who might be defeated in a “rebellion” against “their
lawful rulers.” To both all succour was refused. It is an abuse of the
privilege of short memory to have already forgotten declarations which
made no little sensation when delivered, and had no slight influence on
the subsequent course of events in Europe.

To the Poles, he said—

The Republic is not at war, either open or disguised, with any existing
governments, so long as those governments do not declare themselves at
war with France. The Republic will neither commit, nor voluntarily
suffer to be committed, any act of aggression and violence against the
Germanic nations. . . . The Provisional Government will not allow its
policy to be altered by a foreign nation, however greatly we sympathize
with it. We love Poland, Italy, all oppressed peoples, but above all we
love France, and we are responsible for its destinies, and perhaps for
those of Europe at the present moment. This responsibility we will
resign to no one but to the nation itself. The Republic must not, and
will not, act in contradiction to its professions; the credit of its
word is at stake, and shall never be forfeited. What have we said in our
manifeste aux puissances? We said, thinking particularly of you—Whenever
it shall appear to us that the time fixed by Providence for the
resurrection of a nationality unjustly blotted out from the map has
arrived, we shall fly to its assistance. But we have, with good right,
reserved to France what belongs to her alone,—the appreciation of the
hour, the moment, the justice, the cause, and the means by which it
would be fitting for us to intervene. The means which up to this time we
have chosen and resolved on, are pacific.[†]

To the Irish, after expressing a warm sympathy with Ireland as
identified with “liberty courageously defended against privilege,” that
is, with the conquests of peaceful agitation, he said,

Any other encouragements it would be improper for us to give, or for you
to receive. I have already said it à propos of Switzerland, of Germany,
of Belgium, and Italy. I repeat it Edition: current; Page: [343] in the
case of every nation which has disputes to adjust, either within itself
or with its government. Those whose own blood is not concerned in the
affairs of a people, are not free to intervene in its affairs. We are of
no party, in Ireland or elsewhere, except the party of justice, of
liberty, and of the people’s welfare.

We are at peace, and we desire to remain in friendly and equal
relations, not with this or the other portion of Great Britain, but with
Great Britain itself. We think this peace useful and honourable, not
only for Great Britain and the French Republic, but for the human race.
We will do no act, speak no word, utter no insinuation contradictory to
the principles of the reciprocal inviolability of nations, which we have
proclaimed, and of which the Continent is already reaping the fruits.
The monarchy had its treaties and its diplomatists; our diplomatists are
peoples, and their sympathies are our treaties. We must be senseless to
exchange this diplomacy in open daylight, for underhand and separate
alliances with parties, even the most legitimate, in the countries which
surround us. We have no title to judge them, nor to prefer one of them
to another. Declaring ourselves friends of one, would be proclaiming
ourselves enemies of another. We do not desire to be enemies of any of
your countrymen; we desire, on the contrary, to dissipate by the loyalty
of our republican word, the prepossessions and prejudices which may
exist between our neighbours and ourselves.[*]

Many will recollect (for much notice was taken of it at the time) the
passage which followed these last words: declaring that he never would
imitate the conduct of Pitt, when, even during an acknowledged war, he
abetted Frenchmen in carrying on in La Vendée an armed contest against
their own countrymen.

This contrast between what M. de Lamartine really said, on the subject
of affording aid to foreign insurrection, and what it suits the author
of the pamphlet to make him say, speaks for itself without further
comment.

What was really new and peculiar in M. de Lamartine’s manifesto,
consisted, as has been seen by the extracts, in two things. He
repudiated the treaties of 1815; and he asserted a right, though without
admitting an obligation, to afford military aid to nations attempting to
free themselves from a foreign yoke.

To discuss these fundamental points of M. de Lamartine’s declaration in
the manner which they deserve, would require much more space than can be
afforded to it. The topics are among the most delicate in political
ethics; they are concerned with that nice question, the line which
separates the highest right from the commencement of wrong; where one
person regards as heroic virtue, what another looks upon as breach of
faith, and criminal aggression. To one like Lord Brougham, who isq
ostentatiously and to his inmost core a man of the last century, M. de
Lamartine’s principles must naturally appear extremely scandalous.

M. de Lamartine repudiated certain treaties. He declared them no longer
binding on France. Treaties are national engagements; and engagements,
when in themselves allowable, and made by persons who have a right to
make them, should Edition: current; Page: [344] be kept: who ever denied
it? But another thing must be admitted also, and always has been
admitted by the morality and common sense of mankind. This is, that
engagements extorted by a certain kind and measure of external force,
are not binding. This doctrine is peculiarly applicable to national
engagements imposed by foreign armies. If a nation has, under
compulsion, surrendered its independence to a conqueror, or even
submitted to sacrifices of territory or dignity, greater than according
to general opinion could reasonably be imposed, the moral sentiment of
mankind has never held engagements of this sort to preclude the nation
from re-asserting its independence, or from again resorting to arms, in
order that what had been lost by force might be recovered by force. rOn
what other principle were Prussia and Austria justified in breaking
their treaties with Napoleon after his disasters in Russia?r This was
the situation of France with respect to the treaties of 1815. They were
imposed by conquest, and were agreed to and signed by an intrusive
government, while the territory of the nation was occupied by foreign
armies. The nation did not consent to them, for an equivalent advantage,
but submitted to them, because it was prostrate at the feet of the
invaders, and had no power to refuse anything which they might think fit
to demand. Such treaties are never understood to bind nations any longer
than they find it their interest to acquiesce in them. M. de Lamartine
had no need to rest on the fact that these same treaties have been
repeatedly remodelled, and in some cases actually violated, by others of
the contracting powers; as in the whole treatment of Poland, and
remarkably in the very recent instance of Cracow. Nor is it even
necessary to consider what the conditions of the treaties were, and to
what extent they were dishonourable or injurious to France. Into this
question M. de Lamartine did not profess to enter. He simply claimed the
right of deciding it, as inherent in, and never foregone by, France. He
denied any moral obligation to keep the treaties; but he disavowed any
intention of breaking them. He accepted their territorial and other
arrangements as existing facts, to be modified only by mutual consent,
or by any of those contingencies which in themselves he deemed
legitimate causes of war. If it was possible to have assumed any
attitude towards those treaties more just and legitimate, more moderate
and dignified, more wisely uniting the re-assertion of the nation’s own
proper freedom of action with the regard due to the just rights and
security of its neighbours, the world will be obliged to any one who
will point it out.

But the doctrine, that one government may make war upon another to
assist an oppressed nationality in delivering itself from the yoke! This
offends Lord Brougham more than everything else. Such a breach of
received principles, such defiance of the law of nations, he finds no
words too strong to designate. He can hardly think of anything bad
enough to compare it with. And it would be vain to deny, that in this he
is backed by a large body of English opinion. Men who profess Edition:
current; Page: [345] to be liberal, are shocked at the idea that the
King of Sardinia[*] should assist the Milanese in effecting their
emancipation. That they should assert their own liberty might be
endured; but that any one should help them to do it, is insupportable.
It is classed with any unprovoked invasion of a foreign country: the
Piedmontese, it would seem, not being fellow-countrymen of the people of
Venice and Milan, while the Croats and the Bohemians are.

May we venture, once for all, to deny the whole basis of this edifying
moral argumentation? To assist a people struggling for liberty is
contrary to the law of nations: Puffendorf perhaps does not approve of
it; Burlamaqui says nothing about it; it is not a casus belli set down
in Vattel.[†] So be it. But what is the law of nations? Something, which
to call a law at all, is a misapplication of terms. The law of nations
is simply the custom of nations. It is a set of international usages,
which have grown up like other usages, partly from a sense of justice,
partly from common interest or convenience, partly from mere opinion and
prejudice. Now, are international usages the only kind of customs which,
in an age of progress, are to be subject to no improvement? Are they
alone to continue fixed, while all around them is changeable? The
circumstances of Europe have so altered during the last century, that
the constitutions, the laws, the arrangements of property, the
distinctions of ranks, the modes of education, the opinions, the
manners—everything which affects the European nations separately and
within themselves, has changed so much, and is likely to change so much
more, than in no great lapse of time they will be scarcely recognisable;
and is it in their collective concerns, their modes of dealing with one
another, that their circumstances, their exigencies, their duties and
interests, are absolutely unchanged? What is called the law of nations
is as open to alteration, as properly and even necessarily subject to it
when circumstances change or opinions alter, as any other thing of human
institution.

And, mark, in the case of a real law, of anything properly called a law,
it is possible to maintain (however erroneous may be the opinion) that
there is never any necessity for disobeying it; that it should be
conformed to while it exists, the alternative being open of endeavouring
to get it altered. But in regard to that falsely-called law, the law of
nations, there is no such alternative; there is no ordinance or statute
to repeal; there is only a custom, and the sole way of altering that, is
to act in opposition to it. A legislature can repeal laws, but there is
no Congress of nations to set aside international customs, and no common
force by which to make the decisions of such a Congress binding. The
improvement of international morality can only take place by a series of
violations of existing rules; Edition: current; Page: [346] by a course
of conduct grounded on new principles, and tending to erect these into
customs in their turn.

Accordingly, new principles and practices are, and have been,
continually introduced into the conduct of nations towards one another.
To omit other instances, one entirely new principle was for the first
time established in Europe, amidst general approbation, within the last
thirty years. It is, that whenever two countries, or two parts of the
same country, are engaged in war, and the war either continues long
undecided, or threatens to be decided in a way involving consequences
repugnant to humanity or to the general interest, other countries have a
right to step in; to settle among themselves what they consider
reasonable terms of accommodation, and if these are not accepted, to
interfere by force, and compel the recusant party to submit to the
mandate. This new doctrine has been acted on by a combination of the
great powers of Europe, in three celebrated instances: the interference
between Greece and Turkey at Navarino; between Holland and Belgium at
Antwerp; and between Turkey and Egypt at St. Jean d’Acre. It is too late
in the day, after these precedents, to tell us that nations may not
forcibly interfere with one another for the sole purpose of stopping
mischief and benefiting humanity.

Can any exigency of this sort be stronger—is any motive to such
interference of a more binding character—than that of preventing the
liberty of a nation, which cares sufficiently for liberty to have risen
in arms for its assertion, from being crushed and trampled out by
tyrannical oppressors, and these not even of its own name and blood, but
foreign conquerors? The customs, or falsely called laws of nations, laid
down in the books, were made for an age like that of Louis XIV to
prevent powerful and ambitious despots from swallowing up the smaller
states. For this purpose they were well adapted. But the great interests
of civilized nations in the present age are not those of territorial
attack and defence, but of liberty, just government, and sympathy of
opinion. For this state of things what is called the law of nations was
not made; and in no state of things at all analogous to this, has that
so-called law ever been, in the smallest degree, attended to. There was
once in Europe a time when, as much as at present, the most important
interests of nations, both in their domestic and in their foreign
concerns, were interests of opinion: it was the era of the Reformation.
Did any one then pay the least regard to the pretended principle of
non-interference? Was not sympathy of religion held to be a perfectly
sufficient warrant for assisting anybody? Did not Protestants aid
Protestants, wherever they were in danger from their own governments?
Did not Catholics support all other Catholics in suppressing heresy?
What religious sympathies were then, political ones are now; and every
liberal government or people has a right to assist struggling
liberalism, by mediation, by money, or by arms, wherever it can
prudently do so; as every despotic government, when its aid is needed or
asked for, never scruples to aid despotic governments.

Edition: current; Page: [347]
A few observations may be permitted on the extreme contempt with which
Lord Brougham denounces what he calls

That new-fangled principle, that new speculation in the rights of
independent states, the security of neighbouring governments, and indeed
the happiness of all nations, which is termed Nationality, adopted as a
kind of rule for the distribution of dominion. It seems, [he says,] to
be the notion preached by the Paris school of the Law of Nations and
their foreign disciples, that one state has a right to attack another,
provided upon statistically or ethnologically examining the classes and
races of its subjects, these are found to vary. These sages of the
international law do not, like their predecessor Robespierre (of whom
they compose panegyrics), hold exactly that France may legally assail
any sovereign who refuses to abdicate, and bestow upon his people the
blessings of republican anarchy. But they hold that if any sovereign has
two dominions inhabited by different races. France has a right to assist
either in casting off his authority. She may intimate to him that he can
only continue to rule over the people who are his countrymen, or, if he
was born in neither territory, that he must be put to his election, and
choose which he will give up, but cannot be suffered to keep both.[*]

It is far from our intention to defend or apologise for the feelings
which make men reckless of, or at least indifferent to, the rights and
interests of any portion of the human species, save that which is called
by the same name and speaks the same language as themselves. These
feelings are characteristic of barbarians; in proportion as a nation is
nearer to barbarism it has them in a greater degree: and no one has seen
with deeper regret, not to say disgust, than ourselves, the evidence
which recent events have afforded, that in the backward parts of Europe,
and even (where better things might have been expected) in Germany, the
sentiment of nationality so far outweighs the love of liberty, that the
people are willing to abet their rulers in crushing the liberty and
independence of any people not of their own race and language. But
grievous as are these things, yet sso long as they exists, the question
of nationality is practically of the very first importance. When
portions of mankind, living under the same government, cherish these
barbarous feelings—when they feel ttowardst each otheru as enemies, or
as strangers,v indifferent to each other—they are scarcely capable of
merging into one and the same free people. They have not the
fellow-feeling which would enable them to unite in maintaining their
liberties, or in forming a paramount public opinion. The separation of
feeling which mere difference of language creates, is already a serious
hindrance to the establishment of a common freedom. When to this are
added national or provincial antipathies, the obstacle becomes almost
insuperable. The Government, being the only real link of union, is able,
by playing off one race Edition: current; Page: [348] and people against
another, to suppress the liberties of wallw. How can a free constitution
establish itself in the Austrian empire, when Bohemians are ready to
join in putting down the liberties of Viennese—when Croats and xSerbsx
are eager to crush Hungarians—and all unite in retaining Italy in
slavery to their common despot? Nationality is desirable, as a means to
the attainment of liberty; and this is reason enough for sympathizing in
the attempts of Italians to re-constitute an Italy, and in those of the
people of Posen to become a Poland. So long, indeed, as a people are
yincapable ofy self-government, it is often better for them to be under
the despotism of foreigners than of natives, when those foreigners are
more advanced in civilization and cultivation than themselves. But when
their hour of freedom, to use M. de Lamartine’s metaphor,[*] has struck,
without their having become merged and blended in the nationality of
their conquerors, the re-conquest of their own is often an indispensable
condition either to obtaining free institutions, or to the possibility,
were they even obtained, of working them in the spirit of freedom.

There remains another measure of the Provisional Government, which opens
a still wider field of difficult and important discussion than the
preceding: the recognition of the droit au travail; of an obligation on
society to find work and wages for all persons willing and able to work,
who cannot procure employment for themselves.[†]

This conduct of the Provisional Government will be judged differently,
according to the opinions of the person judging, on one of the most
controverted questions of the time. To one class of thinkers, the
acknowledgment of the droit au travail may very naturally appear a
portentous blunder; but it is curious to see who those are that most
loudly profess this opinion. It is singular that this act of the
Provisional Government should find its bitterest critics in the
journalists who dilate on the excellence of the Poor-law of
Elizabeth;[‡] and that the same thing should be so bad zinz France,
which is perfectly right, in the opinion of the same persons, for
England and Ireland. For the “droit au travail” is the Poor-law of
Elizabeth, and nothing more. Aid guaranteed to those who cannot work,
employment to those who can: this is the Act of Elizabeth, and this the
promise, which it is so inexcusable in the Provisional Government to
have made to France.

The Provisional Government not only offered no more than the promise
made by the Act of Elizabeth, but offered it in a manner, and on
conditions, far less objectionable. On the English parochial system, the
law gives to every pauper a Edition: current; Page: [349] right to
demand work, or support without work, for himself individually. The
French Government contemplated no such right. It contemplated action on
the general labour market, not alms to the individual. Its scheme was,
that when there was notoriously a deficiency of employment, the State
should disburse sufficient funds to create the amount of productive
employment which was wanting. But it gave no pledge that the State
should find work for A or B. It reserved in its own hands the choice of
its workpeople. It relieved no individual from the responsibility of
finding an employer, and proving his willingness to exert himself. What
it undertook was, that there should always be employment to be found. It
is needless to enlarge on the incomparably less injurious influence of
this intervention of the government in favour of the labourers
collectively, than of the intervention of the parish to find employment
individually for every able-bodied man who has not honesty or activity
to seek and find it for himself.

The droit au travail, as intended by the Provisional Government, is not
amenable to the commoner objections against a Poor-law. It is amenable
to the most fundamental of the objections; that which is grounded on the
principle of population. Except on that ground, no one is entitled to
find fault with it. From the point of view of every one who disregards
the principle of population, the droit au travail is the most manifest
of moral truths, the most imperative of political obligations.

It appeared to the Provisional Government, as it must appear to every
unselfish and open-minded person, that the earth belongs, firsta, toa
all, to the inhabitants of it; that every person alive ought to have a
subsistence, before any one has more; that whosoever works at any useful
thing, ought to be properly fed and clothed before any one able to work
is allowed to receive the bread of idleness. These are moral axioms. But
it is impossible to steer by the light of any single principle, without
taking into account other principles by which it is hemmed in. The
Provisional Government did not consider, what hardly any of their
critics have considered—that although every one of the living
brotherhood of humankind has a moral claim to a place at the table
provided by the collective exertions of the race, no one of them has a
right to invite additional strangers thither without the consent of the
rest. If they do, what is consumed by these strangers should be
subtracted from their own share. There is enough and to spare for all
who are born; but there is not and cannot be enough for all who might be
born; and if every person born is to have ban indefeasibleb claim to a
subsistence from the common fund, there will presently be no more than a
bare subsistence for anybody, and a little later there will not be even
that. The droit au travail, therefore, carried out according to the
meaning of the promise, would be a fatal gift even to those for whose
cespecialc Edition: current; Page: [350] benefit it is intended, unless
some new restraint were placed upon the capacity of increase, equivalent
to that which would be taken away.

The Provisional Government then were in the right; but those are also in
the right who condemn this act of the Provisional Government. Both have
truth on their side. A time will come when these two portions of truth
will meet together in harmony. The practical result of the whole truth
might possibly be, that all persons living should guarantee to each
other, through their organ the State, the ability to earn by labour an
adequate subsistence, but that they should abdicate the right of
propagating the species at their own discretion and without limit: that
all classes alike, and not the poor alone, should consent to exercise
that power in such measure only, and under such regulations, as society
might prescribe with a view to the common good. But before this solution
of the problem can cease to be visionary, an almost complete renovation
must take place in some of the most rooted opinions and feelings of the
present race of mankind. The majority both of the upholders of old
things and of the apostles of new, seem at present to agree in the
opinion, that one of the most important and responsible of moral acts,
that of giving existence to human beings, is a thing respecting which
there scarcely exists any moral obligation, and in which no person’s
discretion ought on any pretence to be interfered with: a superstition
which will one day be regarded with as much contempt, as any of the
idiotic notions and practices of savages.

The declaration of the droit au travail was followed by the creation of
ateliers nationaux;[*] which, indeed, was its necessary consequence;
since, in the great falling-off of employment through the industrial
stagnation consequent on the Revolution, it would neither have been
honourable nor safe to make no commencement of fulfilling the promise
given, and circumstances did not allow of improvising any better mode of
temporary employment for the destitute. Some such measure would have
been necessary after any revolution. In 1830, large sums were expended
in setting the unemployed to work. It was the misfortune, not the fault,
of the Provisional Government, that the numbers requiring employment
were so much greater than at any former period, and that the other
circumstances of the case were such as to render the creation of these
ateliers eventually the greatest calamity of the time; since it soon
became impossible to provide funds for continuing them, while the first
attempt to dissolve them was likely to produce, and did in fact produce,
the outbreak dind June.

It was not the fall of the monarchy, or the foundation of the republic,
that caused the complete temporary paralysis of industry and commerce;
it was the appearance on the stage, of the unexpected and indefinitely
dreaded phenomenon of Socialism. And it was owing to the diffusion of
Socialism among a portion of the labouring classes, that the first step
towards the abolition of the ateliers nationaux Edition: current; Page:
[351] became the signal for a determined attempt, by a large section of
the workmen of Paris, to follow up the republican revolution by a
Socialist one.

Let us here stop to consider what this new phenomenon termed Socialism
is, in itself, and in its consequences.

Socialism is the modern form of the protest, which has been raised, more
or less, in all ages of any mental activity, against the unjust
distribution of social advantages.

No rational person will maintain it to be abstractedly just, that a
small minority of mankind should be born to the enjoyment of all the
external advantages which life can give, without earning them by any
merit or acquiring them by any exertion of their own, while the immense
majority are condemned from their birth, to a life of never-ending,
never-intermitting toil, requited by a bare, and in general a
precarious, subsistence. It is impossible to contend that this is in
itself just. It is possible to contend that it is expedient; since,
unless persons were allowed, not only to retain for themselves, but to
transmit to their posterity, the accumulated fruits of their exertions
and of their favourable chances, they would not, it may be said,
produce; or if they did, they would not preserve and accumulate their
productions. It may also be said that to edeny to people the control of
what they havee thus produced and accumulated, and fcompel them to share
it withf those who, either through their fault or their misfortune,
ghaveg produced and accumulated nothing, would be a still greater
injustice than that of which the levellers complain; and that the path
of least injustice, is to recognise individual property and individual
rights of inheritance.

This is, in few words, the case which the existing order of society can
make out against levellers. The levellers of the present day, with few
exceptions, acknowledge the force of these arguments; and are by this
distinguished from all former opponents of the law of property, and
constituted, not levellers in the original sense of the word, but what
they term themselves—Socialists.

We grant (they say) that it would be unjust to take from individual
capitalists the fruits of their labour and of their frugality. Neither
do we propose to do so. But capital is useless without labour, and if
capital belongs to the capitalists, labour belongs, by at least as
sacred a right, to the labourers. We, the labourers, are at liberty to
refuse to work except on such terms as we please. Now, by a system of
co-operation among ourselves, we can do without capitalists. We could
also, if we had fair play from laws and institutions, carry on
productive operations with so much advantage, to our joint benefit, as
to make it the interest of capitalists to leave their capital in our
hands; because we could offer them a sufficient interest for its use;
and because, once able to work for themselves, no labourers of any worth
or efficiency would labour for a master, and capitalists would have no
means of Edition: current; Page: [352] deriving an income from their
capitals except by entrusting them to the associated workpeople.

The system of co-operative production, thus established, would cut up by
the root the present partial distribution of social advantages, and
would enable the produce of industry to be shared on whatever principle,
whether of equality or inequality (for on this point different schools
of Socialists have different opinions), might appear to the various
communities to be just and expedient. Such a plan would, in the opinion
of Socialists, be so vast an improvement on the present order of
society, that the government, which exists for the good of society, and
especially for that of the suffering majority, ought to favour its
introduction by every expedient in its power; ought, in particular, to
raise funds by taxation, and contribute them in aid of the formation of
industrial communities on the co-operative principle: which funds it is
not doubted that the success of the scheme would enable, in a few years,
to be paid back with interest.

This is Socialism; and it is not obvious what there is in this system of
thought, to hjustifyh the frantic terror with which everything bearing
that ominous name is usually received on both sides of the British
Channel.

It really seems a perfectly just demandi, in the present circumstances
of France,i that the government should aid with its funds, to a
reasonable extent, in bringing into operation industrial communities on
the Socialist principle. It ought to do so, even if it could be certain
beforehand that the attempt would fail; because the operatives
themselves cannot possibly be persuaded of this except by trial; because
they will not be persuaded of it until everything possible has been done
to make the trial successful; and because a national experiment of the
kind, by the high moral qualities that would be elicited in the
endeavour to make it succeed, and by the instruction that would radiate
from its failure, would be an equivalent for the expenditure of many
millions on any of the things which are commonly called popular
education.

At all events, this view of the subject was the only one which could be
practically taken by the Provisional Government. They had been made a
government, chiefly by the working classes of Paris. A majority of the
active members of those classes, including most of their leaders, were
deeply imbued with Socialist principles and feelings: to them a
republican revolution, which neither did nor attempted anything for
Socialism, would have been a disappointment and a deception, which they
would have resented with arms in their hands. The Provisional
Government, therefore, did what any government, situated as they were,
must have done. They associated with themselves, in the supreme
authority, two of the Socialist chiefs, M. Louis Blanc and M. Albert.
And, things not being ripe for the adoption of practical measures of a
Socialist character, they did the only thing which could be Edition:
current; Page: [353] done—they opened an arena for the public discussion
of the problem, and invited all competent persons, under the auspices of
the government, to contribute their ideas and suggestions towards its
solution.

This was the origin of the conferences at the Luxembourg; which, both in
themselves, and in respect of the connexion of the Provisional
Government with them, have been the subject of such boundless
misrepresentation. The prominent feature of those conferences consisted
of the Socialist speeches of M. Louis Blanc;[*] of whom Lord Brougham
asserts that he has fled to England “to avoid being judged by
enlightened freemen, for endeavouring to make his Republic more bloody
than it has been since 1794.”[†] The accusation is as devoid of truth as
his charge against the Montagne party jin the Assemblyj, of “panting for
the guillotine as an instrument of government.”[‡] M. Louis Blanc is not
even accused, officially, of being concerned in the insurrection of
June; the prosecution against him having reference solely to the affair
of May, in which, though the National Assembly was turbulently invaded,
“blood,” at all events, was neither shed nor thought of; and even as to
this, his defence before the Commission d’Enquête appears conclusive.[§]
But with regard to his speeches at the Luxembourg, so far as these have
been published (and kit has never been pretendedk that anything has been
kept back which would make a contrary impression), nothing could be less
inflammatory and provocative than his tone, nor more sober and
reasonable than every suggestion which he propounded for immediate
adoption. In fact, he proposed nothing more than that degree of aid by
government to the experimental establishment of the co-operative system
of industry, which, even if the failure were total, would be a cheap
price for setting the question at rest. Far from stirring up the people
to a Socialist insurrection, everything proves him to have felt that, of
all things that could happen, an insurrection like that of June would be
the most ruinous to the immediate prospects of his cause.

It was from no inherent tendency in the principles or teaching of the
Socialist chiefs, that this insurrection broke out. It arose from the
suddenness and unexpectedness of the Revolution of February, which,
being effected mainly by Socialists, brought Socialist opinions into a
position of apparent power, before the minds of the community generally
were prepared for the situation, or had begun seriously to consider this
great problem. Hence hopes were excited of an immediate practical
realization, when nothing was yet ripe—when discussion and Edition:
current; Page: [354] explanation had nearly all their work to do; and as
soon as the first inevitable retrograde steps were taken, the
frustration of premature hopes provoked a fatal collision.

If the Revolution of February should yet disappoint the glorious
expectations which it raised, this collision will be the cause. It has
divided the sincere Republicans, already a small minority, into two
parties at enmity with one another. It has alienated from the only
Republican party which has any elements of stability, the greater part
of the effective strength of the democracy; and it has filled the
bourgeoisie with such insane terror at the bare thought of great social
changes, that the most beneficent projects share the discredit of the
most perilous, and they are ready to throw themselves into the arms of
any government which will free them from the fear of a second Socialist
insurrection. These things are lamentable; but the fatality of
circumstances, more than the misconduct of individuals, is responsible
for them.

If we are now asked whether we agree in the anticipations of the
Socialists; whether we believe that their co-operative associationsl, at
all events in the present state of education,l would maintain their
ground against individual competition, and secure an adequate amount of
the fruits of industry, combined with a just repartition of them—our
answer must be, that we do not. It is highly probable that, among a
great number of such experiments, some would succeed, while under the
influence of the zeal and enthusiasm of the first founders. And, in the
face of the evidence which experience affords that mankind may be made
capable of almost anything by a persevering application of the power of
education in one direction, it would be too much to affirm that a time
can never come when the scheme of Owen and of Louis Blanc, of a world
governed by public spirit, without needing the vulgar incentives of
individual interest, mwillm possess a feasibility which cannot be
accorded to it now.

But, in proportion to our distrust of the means which Socialists propose
for correcting the unjust inequalities in the lot of mankind, do we deem
it incumbent on philosophers and politicians to use their utmost
endeavours for bringing about the same end by an adaptation of the
existing machinery of society. We hold with Bentham, that equality,
though not the sole end, is one of the ends of good social arrangements;
and that a system of institutions which does not make the scale turn in
favour of equality, whenever this can be done without impairing the
security of the property which is the product and reward of personal
exertion, is essentially a bad government—a government for the few, to
the injury of the many.[*] And the admiration and sympathy which we feel
for the glorious band who composed the Provisional Government, and for
the party which supported them, is grounded, Edition: current; Page:
[355] above all, on the fact that they stand openly identified with this
principle, and have in all ways proved their sincere devotion to it. As
an exemplification, we extract a few paragraphs from M. de Lamartine’s
History of the Girondists, written before the February Revolution was
thought of; paragraphs worthy of the noble conduct which has
immortalized their illustrious writer, andn to be taken as the creed of
an earnest and rational Social Reformer, on the questions connected with
property and the distribution of wealth:

An equal repartition of instruction, of faculties, and of the things
given by nature, is evidently the legitimate tendency of the human mind.
Founders of revealed religions, poets and sages, have eternally revolved
this idea in their souls, and have held it up in their Paradise, in
their dreams, or in their laws, as the ultimate prospect of humanity. It
is, then, an instinct of justice in the human mind. . . . Whatever tends
to constitute inequalities of instruction, of rank, of condition, of
fortune among mankind, is impious, whatever tends gradually to level
these inequalities, which are often injustices, and to share more
equitably the common heritage among mankind, is religious. All policy
may be judged by this test, as a tree by its fruits. The ideal is but
otruth ato a distance.

But the sublimer an pidealp, the more difficult it is to realize in
institutions on the earth. The difficulty up to this time has been, to
reconcile with equality of goods the inequalities of virtues, of
faculties, and of exertions, which distinguish mankind from one another.
Between the active and the inert, equality of goods is an injustice, for
the one produces and the other merely consumes. In order that this
community of goods may be just, we must suppose in all mankind the same
conscience, the same application to labour, the same virtue. This
supposition is chimerical. What social order can rest solidly upon such
a falsehood? Of two things, one society, everywhere present and every
where infallible, must be able to compel every individual to the same
labour and the same virtue, but then, what becomes of liberty? Society,
on this footing, would be universal slavery. Or else, society must
distribute daily with its own hands, to each according to his works, a
share exactly proportioned to the labour and the services of each in the
general association. But in that case, who is to be the judge?

Imperfect human wisdom has found it easier, wiser, and more just to say
to every one, “Be thy own judge; take to thyself thy own recompense by
thy riches or thy indigence.” Society has established property, has
proclaimed the freedom of labour, and has legalized competition.

But property, when established, does not feed those who possess nothing.
But freedom of labour does not give the same means of labour to him who
has only his hands, and to him who possesses millions of acres of the
earth’s surface. But competition is the code of qegoismq; a war to the
death between those who work and those who give work, those who sell,
and those who buy; those who revel in abundance, and those who starve.
Injustice on all hands! Incorrigible inequalities of nature and of law!
The wisdom of the legislator seems to lie in palliating them one by one,
generation by generation, law by law. He who seeks to correct everything
by one stroke, shatters everything. Possibility is the rnecessaryr
condition of spoor human wisdoms. Without pretending to resolve
complicated iniquities by Edition: current; Page: [356] a single
solution—to correct without intermission, to be always ameliorating, is
the justice of imperfect beings like us. . . . Time seems to be one of
the elements even of truth itself: to demand the ultimate truth from one
moment of time, is to demand from the nature of things more than it can
give. Impatience creates illusions and ruins instead of truths.
Delusions are truths gathered before their time. The Christian and
philosophic community of the good things of the earth, is the ultimate
social truth; the delusions are the violences and the systems by which
hitherto men have vainly imagined that they could establish this truth,
and organize it into institutions.[*]

Although not necessary for the main purpose of the present article—the
vindication of the Revolution of February and of its leading characters
against systematic misjudgment and misrepresentation—it is not
irrelevant to offer a few pages of comment on the advice tendered to
France in Lord Brougham’s pamphlet, respecting the formation of a
Constitution.

This advice is prefaced by a very plain intimation that it is
useless—grounded on the commonplace of essayists and reviewers, that a
Constitution cannot be made.[†] “Laws are made; codes and constitutions
grow. Those that grow have roots; they bear, they ripen, they endure.
Those that are fashioned are like painted sticks planted in the ground,
as I have seen trees of liberty: they strike no root, bear no fruit, and
swiftly decay.”[‡]

We have never been able to see in this trite dictum, anything more than
a truism exaggerated into a paradox. Stripped of its metaphorical
language, it amounts to this—that political institutions cannot work
well, or subsist durably, unless they have existed as customs before
they were enacted as laws. No one can be insensible to the advantage in
point of security for stability, possessed by laws which merely annex
positive sanctions to usages which the people had already adopted,
before the legislature recognised them; such as our mercantile law,
grounded on the customs of merchants, to which the courts of justice
gradually gave legal validity. But this, so far as it is true at all, is
as true of any other laws as of political institutions, and as true of a
single law as of a code. Why then confine it to codes and Constitutions?
Of codes and Constitutions, no more than of single laws, is this
pre-existence as custom, however advantageous to stability, a necessary
condition of it. What is necessary is, that they should not violently
shock the pre-existing habits and sentiments of the people; and that
they should not demand and presuppose qualities in the popular mind, and
a degree of interest in, and attachment to, the institutions themselves,
which the character of the people, and their state of civilization,
render unlikely to be really found in them. These two are the rocks on
which those usually split, who by means of a temporary Edition: current;
Page: [357] ascendancy establish institutions alien tfromt, or too much
in advance of, the condition of the public mind. The founders of the
English Commonwealth failed for the first reason. Their republicanism
offended the taste for kingship and old institutions, their religious
freedom and equality shocked the attachment to prelacy or
presbyterianism, which then were pervading principles in the majority of
the nation. Charlemagne’s attempt to construct a centralized monarchy
amidst the distraction and anarchy of the eighth century, failed for the
other of the two reasons specified. Its success would have required,
both in the governors and the governed, a more cultivated intelligence,
a greater comprehension of large views and extended interests, than
existed or was attainable in that age, save by eminently exceptional
individuals like Charlemagne himself. If the establishment of
republicanism in France should turn out to be premature, it will be for
the latter reason. Although no popular sentiment is shocked by it, the
event may prove that there is no sufficient attachment to it, or desire
to promote its success; but a readiness to sacrifice it to any trivial
convenience, personal engouement, or dream of increased security.

Lord Brougham cannot enter on the subject of the French Constitution,
without rebuking the Assembly for the indifference they have shown to
this their appointed work.

They seem only able to consider, with any interest, personal questions,
or party questions; or (if they deviate into more general views) social
questions, as the language of the day terms them. Such are the only
discussions in which the National Assembly appears to have taken a deep
interest. With the work of framing a Constitution they have as yet
troubled themselves but little, although their sittings have lasted well
nigh six months, at the cost to the people of a pound a-day to each of
the 900 members.[*]

These sentences uwere of courseu written before the public discussions
on the Constitution had commenced; but that does not excuse omission to
take notice of the fact, that the work of framing the Constitution was
going on uninterruptedly, and with still greater activity, in the five
months which preceded, than in the twov which were occupied by, those
public discussions. One of the earliest acts of the Assembly was the
nomination of a Committee of thirty of its ablest members, to frame the
draft of a Constitution. The draft, when framed, was the subject ofw
minute examination and discussion, with closed doors—but of which
reports reached the newspapers—in every one of the fifteen bureaux of
the Assembly; after which the bureaux elected another Committee, to be
associated with the first Committee in revising the original scheme, and
framing a second draft, with the lights derived from the discussion; so
that when the day arrived for taking this Edition: current; Page: [358]
second draft publicly into consideration, the work of framing the
Constitution was, in reality, finished. It had received the benefit of
the best light, of the best wisdom of the Assembly; it was well known
how the votes of the Assembly would go, on all disputable points of
considerable moment; and little remained for the public discussion to
do, except to send forth the arguments of the majority, and the
objections and protests of the minority, to their constituents and to
the world. Is not this the way in which a Constitution should be made?
Are not all Constitutions, and all laws of any value, the work of a few
select minds in the first instance, then discussed and canvassed with a
greater number, and finally ratified by the many?

The Constitution thus made, and now solemnly proclaimed and adopted,[*]
is such as the ideas and the degree of instruction of the age and nation
permitted it to be. Of all charges, that to which it is the least
obnoxious is the trivial one of introducing new “theoretical”
principles.[†] There is in it a remarkable absence of what, in Lord
Brougham’s eyes, is so great a fault in a political
Constitution—original ideas. There is not a principle or a provision in
it that is not familiar to the public mind. It is, in fact, a digest of
the elementary doctrines of representative democracy. To those who
disapprove of democracy, it is, of course, unacceptable: but, that being
granted as the indispensable datum, from which the framers of the
Constitution were not at liberty to depart—any fault which can be found
with their work, on the ground of a deficiency of checks to the
preponderance of popular will, must be set down to the account not of
new theories, but of the want of them. The presence of such checks, not
their absence, would have been the novelty in constitution-making. That
would really have been the introduction of a principle new in democratic
constitutions, and for which no foundation was laid in the national
mind.

Lord Brougham has condescended to bestow upon these unapt scholars, his
view of some of the essential requisites of a popular Constitution.
First among these, is the ancient device, or rather accident, of two
Legislative Chambers.[‡] How unsuited this contrivance would be to the
state of the French mind, may be known from the fact, that although
supported by some of the most individually influential of French orators
and politicans, it has been rejected by a larger majority than any of
the other conservative amendments that have been proposed; and has
numbered among its opponents the greater part of that large party in the
Assembly which calls itself Moderate, and is called by others
Anti-republican.

The arguments for a second Chamber, when looked at from one point of
view, are of great force; being no other than the irresistible arguments
for the necessity or expediency of a principle of antagonism in
society—of a counterpoise somewhere to the preponderant power in the
State. It seems hardly possible that there should Edition: current;
Page: [359] be permanently good government, or enlightened progress,
without such a counterpoise. xIt may, however, be maintained, with
considerable appearance of reason,x that the antagonism may be more
beneficially placed in society itself, than in the legislative organ
which gives effect to the will of society; that it should have its place
in the powers which form public opinion, rather than in that whose
proper function is to execute it; that, for example, in a democratic
State, the desired counterbalance to the impulses and will of the
comparatively uninstructed many, lies in a strong and independent
organization of the class whose special business is the cultivation of
knowledge; and will better embody itself in Universities, than in
Senates or Houses of Lords.

A second Chamber, howsoever composed, is a serious hindrance to
improvement. Suppose it constituted in the manner, of all others, least
calculated to render it an obstructive body; suppose that an Assembly of
y(say)y 600 persons, is elected by universal suffrage, and when elected
divides itself, as under the French Directorial Constitution,[*] into
two bodies, say of 300 each. Now, whereas if the whole body sat as one
Chamber, the opposition of 300 persons, or one-half of the
representatives of the people, would be required to throw out an
improvement; on the system of separate deliberation, 150, or one-fourth
only, would suffice. Without doubt, the division into two sections,
which would be a hindrance to useful changes, would be a hindrance also
to hurtful ones; and the arrangement therefore must be regarded as
beneficial, by those who think that a democratic Assembly is more likely
to make hurtful than useful changes. But this opinion, both historical
and daily experience contradicts. There cannot be a case more in point
than this very instance of France. The National Assembly was chosen in
the crisis of a revolution, by a suffrage including all the labouring
men of the community; the doctrines of a subversive character which were
afloat, were peculiarly favourable to the apparent interests of
labouring men; yet the Assembly elected was essentially a conservative
body; and it is the general opinion that the legislature now about to be
elected will be still more so. The great majority of mankind are, as a
general rule, tenacious of things existing: habit and custom predominate
with them, in almost all cases, over remote prospects of advantage; and
however popular may be the constitution, in the ordinary course of its
working the difficulty is not to prevent considerable changes, but to
accomplish them even when most essentially needful. Any systematic
provision in the Constitution to render changes difficult, is therefore
worse than superfluous—it is injurious.

It is true, that in the times which accompany or immediately follow a
revolution, this tendency of the human mind may be temporarily and
partially reversed; Edition: current; Page: [360] partially, we say—for
a people are as tenacious of old customs and ways of thinking in the
crisis of a revolution as at any other time, on all points except those
on which they have become strongly excited by a perception of evils or
grievances; those, in fact, on which the revolution itself turns. On
such points, indeed, there may easily arise, at those periods, an ardour
of ill-considered change; and it is at such times, if ever, that the
check afforded by a second or conservative Chamber might be beneficial.
But these are the times when the resistance of such a body is
practically null. The very arguments used by the supporters of the
institution, to make it endurable, assume that it cannot prolong its
resistance in excited times. A second Chamber which, during a
revolution, should resolutely oppose itself to the branch of the
legislature more directly representing the excited state of popular
feeling, would be infallibly swept away. It is the destiny of a second
Chamber to become inoperative in the zveryz cases, in which its
effective operation awould have the besta chance of producing less harm
than good.

If these observations are correct b(and we give them only for what they
are worth)b, there is no reason to regret the decision by which the
Constituent Assembly of the French Republic has rejected the principle
of a double legislature. The same considerations serve to justify their
adoption of what is termed universal suffrage. Lord Brougham himself
cadmitsc that the operation of universal suffrage has hitherto proved
very different from what its enemies had anticipated.[*] If a suffrage
extending to every adult male of the community produces, and is likely
to produce, a legislature more justly chargeable with too conservative
than with too innovative a spirit, what would it have been if, by a
taxpaying or other property qualification, the democracy of Paris,
Lyons, and other large towns, had been excluded from its share of
influence? Lord Brougham repeats, along with other trite and gone-by
observations on the social condition of France, that very commonplace
one, that Paris is France.[†] It is true that, from the political
passiveness of the majority of the French people, and the habit of
looking to the government as the sole arbiter of all political
interests, the provinces of France usually submit readily to any
existing government; but it is not now true, whatever it may have been
formerly, that the provinces follow blindly the opinion of Paris; they
might more truly be said to be unreasonably jealous of Parisian
influences. Paris, with a few of the larger towns, is almost the sole
element of progress which exists, politically speaking, in France;
instead of having too much power, it has far less than in proportion to
its immense superiority in political education and intelligence. Its
power is never preponderant but when its insurrectionary element
Edition: current; Page: [361] is brought into play; and this received a
blow in June last, which has laid it prostrate for some time at least.

The remainder of Lord Brougham’s advice to the French people on
constitutional subjects is, that they should have an efficient
executive, with power promptly to suppress any attempt at disturbance—a
point in which, in the present temper of the French, they are not likely
to be found deficient; and lastly, that the legislature should be
nothing but a legislature, and should not, by itself attempting to
administer, usurp the functions of the executive. On this last topic,
Lord Brougham’s observations, dasd far as they go, are just, and to the
point.

The legislative body, [he observes,] should be strictly confined to its
proper functions, of making the laws, and superintending the
administration both of the executive and of all other departments; but
excluded from all share in any of those branches. The office of
discussing legislative measures or of controlling the conduct of public
functionaries, may well be entrusted to a senate, however constituted,
as the imposition of public burthens upon the community may not only
with equal safety be placed in its hands, but ought almost exclusively
to rest there. A representative body, necessarily numerous, because
elected by a great people, can well and safely debate such matters; it
is peculiarly fitted for their discussion. Such a body is wholly unfit
to handle matters merely of an administrative kind, or of a judicial.
Its numbers at once pronounce this disqualification, its responsibility
to constituents confirms the sentence: its want of individual
responsibility precludes all appeal and all doubt. How can an assembly
of six or seven hundred persons conduct foreign negotiations, decide
questions of peace and war, or dispose of the national force, whether
with a view to internal police or foreign operations, offensive or
defensive? How can such a body be entrusted with the appointment to
places, civil or military, when each man will be quick to help his
fellow-member’s job, and none ever feel afraid of constituents who can
know little, and care less, about such nominations? Above everything,
the judicial office must never be exercised by an assembly like this;
and of all appointments from which it should be shut out, those
connected with judicial powers fall most certainly under the rule of
exclusion.[*]

The principle here contended for is of so much importance, that it
deserves to be carried efarthere than is done in this passage, or by any
existing school of politicians. fIn general,f if a public function is to
be discharged with honesty and skill, some one person, or a very small
number, should, if possible, be specifically entrusted with it. A few
persons, and still more, one person, will feel a moral responsibility,
an amenability to the bar of public opinion, which, even when they
cannot be made more directly responsible, will be a far stronger
security for fidelity and attention to their trust than can be provided
in the case of a numerous body. We dissent altogether from the common
opinion of democratic republicans, which tends to multiply the
conferring of offices by popular election. The sovereign Assembly, which
is the organ of the people for superintending and Edition: current;
Page: [362] controlling the government, must of necessity be so elected.
But with this exception, it appears to us certain (what even Bentham,
though in his earlier speculations he maintained a different opinion,
ultimately acknowledged),[*] that judges, administrators, functionaries
of all sorts, will be selected with a much more careful eye to their
qualifications, if some conspicuous public officer, a President or a
minister, has the choice of them imposed on him as part of his peculiar
business, and feels his official character and the gtenureg of his own
power to depend, not on what the people may now think of the choice
made, but on what they will think of it after trial. It seems equally
certain that the President, or prime minister, will be better selected
by the people’s representatives, than by the people themselves directly.
The example of the United States is a strong argument for this opinion.
If the President were elected by Congress, he would generally be the
leader, and acknowledged ablest man, of his party: elected by the
people, he is now always either an unknown mediocrity, or a man whose
reputation has been acquired in some other field than that of politics.
Nor is this likely to alter; for every politician who has attainedh
eminence has made a multitude of, at least political, enemies, which
renders him a less available candidate for his party to put forward,
than somebody of the same professed principles who is comparatively
obscure. It is to be feared that the appointment of a President by the
direct suffrages of the community, will prove to be the most serious
mistake which the framers of the French Constitution have made. They
have introduced by it into the still more fermentable elements of French
society, what even in America is felt to be so great an evil—the turmoil
of a perpetual canvass, and the baneful habit of making the decision of
all great public questions depend less upon their merits, than upon
their probable influence on the next presidential election. And, in
addition to this, it will probably be found, if their present
institutions last, that they have subjected themselves to a series of
much worse selections, and will have their Republic presided over by a
less able and less creditable succession of men, than if the chief
magistrate had been chosen by the legislature.

It is but just to acknowledge, that this very questionable provision was
introduced in obedience to the important principle of preventing the
legislature from encroaching on the province of the executive. The
object was, to make the President independent of the legislature. It was
feared that if he were appointed and could be turned out by them, he
would be their mere clerk—would exercise no judgment and assume no
responsibility of his own, but simply register the decrees of a body
unfit to conduct the business of government in detail. There was,
Edition: current; Page: [363] however, a means of avoiding this, which
would have been perfectly effectual. They might have given to the chief
of the executive the power of dissolving the legislature, and appealing
afresh to the people. With this safeguard, they might have left to the
Assembly the uncontrolled choice of the head of the executive, and the
power, by a vote of dismissal, of reducing him to the alternative of
either retiring or dissolving the Chamber. The check which, under this
arrangement, the legislature and the executive would exercise
reciprocally over one another, and the reluctance which each would feel
to proceed to an extremity which might end in their own downfall instead
of their rival’s, would ini, ordinary cases be jsufficient to restrain
each within the constitutional limits of its own authority. Instead of
this, it is to be feared that by placing face to face an Assembly and a
first magistrate—each emanating directly from popular suffrage, and each
elected for a term fixed, only capable of being abridged by death or
resignation—the Assembly have organized a perpetual hostility between
the two powers, replete with dangers to the stability of the
Constitution. For if the President and the National Assembly should
hereafter quarrel, there may for three whole years be no means by which
either can relieve itself from the hostility of the other, except a coup
d’état.

In addition to these considerations, an executive chosen by a select
body, and armed with the power of dissolving the legislature, would
probably be a more effectual check than any second Chamber upon the
conduct of an Assembly engaged in a course of hasty or unjust
legislation. An eminent politician, the leader of a great party, and
surrounded by the élite of that party as his ministers and advisers,
would have more at stake in the good conduct of public affairs, would be
more practised and skilful in judging of exigencies, would apply himself
to his task with a much deeper sense of permanent responsibility, and,
as a consequence of all this, would be likely to carry with him a
greater weight of opinion, than an assembly of two or three hundred
persons, whether composed of English lords, or of the elective
representatives of French or American democracy.

kTo correct misstatements is so much more tedious a process than to
commit them, that space fails us for pointing out, or even alluding to,
a tenth part of those which compose the main bulk of Lord Brougham’s
pamphlet. But we have exhibited a sample, and what we have exhibited is
a fair specimen of what remains behind. Let us hope that something has
been done towards the more important purpose of vindicating the
Revolution, and the Provisional Government, from as unjust aspersions as
ever clouded the reputation of great actions and eminent characters.

Edition: current; Page: [364] Edition: current; Page: [365]


APPENDICES

Edition: current; Page: [366] Edition: current; Page: [367]


Appendix A


Guizot’s Lectures on European Civilization (1836)

London Review, II (equivalent to Westminster Review, XXXI) (Jan., 1836),
306-36. Headed. “Art. II Cours d’Histoire Moderne, par M. [François
Pierre Guillaume] Guizot, Professeur d’Histoire à la Faculté des Lettres
de Paris—(consisting of) Histoire Générale de la Civilisation en Europe,
depuis la Chute de l’Empire Romain jusqu’à la Révolution Française, 1
vol. [Paris: Pichon and Didier, 1828.] Histoire de la Civilisation
Française depuis la Chute de l’Empire Romain jusqu’en 1789, only 5 vols.
published. [Paris: Pichon and Didier, 1829-32.]” Running titles as
title. Signed “W. and E.”; i.e., Joseph Blanco White and Editor.
Identified in Mill’s bibliography as “Part of the article on Guizot’s
Lectures on European Civilization, in the same number of the same work
[as ‘State of Society in America’]” (MacMinn, 46). No copy in Mill’s
library, Somerville College.

For comment, see lxxiv-lxxv and xcviii-xcix above.

it is not many years since an English nobleman, who long performed his
duties of hereditary legislator, under no apprehension of unfitness, on
his part, or distrust of his abilities, on that of the public, declared
to a brother Peer that he knew no more of the history of England than
what he had learnt in Shakspeare.[*] Since the period to which this fact
belongs there has been a considerable improvement in the education of
all classes. Yet if we could obtain equally unreserved confessions, it
is probable that the increase of historical knowledge, in any valuable
sense of the term, would be found still to be a rare acquirement among
our public men. Few indeed, who have been at a tolerably good school,
will not be able to repeat the list of English Sovereigns, with the
dates of their accession, and the principal events of their reigns, as
they are given in Goldsmith’s history,[†] or some more recent
abridgment. Most of our legislators will, besides, be found to have, at
some period, been moved by a certain degree of secret shame, to make
their way through the pages of Hume.[‡] But the Edition: current; Page:
[368] number of those who may have made a serious study of history, as
an indispensable preparation for an enlightened discharge of their
parliamentary duties, will, we fear, be found very small.

Statements of this kind are certainly difficult to be proved; but the
present is one not likely to be questioned. When, as it happens with the
regular branches of public education, the average of knowledge acquired
by the mass of those who have been trained under the system is in value
far below the expenditure of time and property which it occasions,
though there may exist a strong general conviction of the fact, the
assertion of that conviction is invidious, and exposed to a flat denial.
It is obvious indeed, but, when denied, not easily substantiated, that,
out of ten who have passed between twelve and thirteen years in the
study of Latin and Greek, nine can make scarcely any use of those two
languages for any purpose of utility or rational amusement. The case is,
however, very different in regard to the knowledge of which we are now
lamenting the scarcity. The difficulty here would be to prove the
existence: for it will not easily be supposed that men will generally
become well acquainted with any thing which is slightly thought of, if
not totally neglected, in the system of public education; and so it
unfortunately happens in regard to history.

The accidental connexion of ancient history with the study of Latin and
Greek, which makes up the main literary department cultivated in our
universities, gives an opportunity to some of the more zealous tutors to
oblige a few of their pupils to become acquainted with the historical
periods described by Herodotus and Thucydides. Roman history fares
generally worse; for very few undergraduates can take up the whole of
Livy for their examination, much less fill up the chasms of the
narrative from other sources.* The second Decad is the portion most
usually read. But even such an imperfect acquaintance with ancient
history as Edition: current; Page: [369] this incidental study (for
language is the immediate object) of two fragments of that history is
likely to produce is by no means a necessary condition for taking a
degree. From the circumstance that Herodotus presents little difficulty
to the student, though a portion of his work is very frequently chosen
for the examination required to obtain a common certificate from the
examiners, he is not among the Greek writers preferred for the display
of scholarship demanded from the young men who aim at honours. As the
being able to translate Livy cannot be considered a great feat of
scholarship—and as accurate knowledge of the historical narrative makes
no remarkable show in the schools (the place of examination), the
diligent and able students are disinclined to historical books, and take
the poets in preference. It may therefore be truly said that, in
general, ancient history forms no important part of the university
education. Dr. Cardwell, the public professor of ancient history at
Oxford, has for some years attracted a numerous audience to his terminal
lectures,* by the transient interest produced by the taste and talent
with which he treats detached subjects of classical antiquities. The
professor of modern history,[*] after having several times attempted, in
vain, to collect a class, was obliged to be silent. The truth is, that
no kind of knowledge whatever will be attended to at any place of
education, unless it is a means of distinction at the examinations; and
no kind of knowledge will be made a subject of examination in which the
examiners (who, during the time of our intimate acquaintance with
Oxford, were frequently not much older or much higher in the ranks of
literature than the examinees) cannot also distinguish themselves. Hence
the almost impossibility of enlarging the circle of studies which limits
the ground-work of education in a place which ought to compete with the
first universities of Europe. Some men of higher standing have of late
been appointed examiners at Oxford;[†] but though a few among these able
and learned individuals have contributed to raise the standard of public
honours, they have it not in their power to multiply the subjects of
examination. That could only be done if the university professors were
the regular instructors as well as examiners; enjoying, of course, the
privilege of appointing, at the beginning of every scholastic year, a
course of study for the whole body of undergraduates.

The general disregard of historical studies in English education becomes
a melancholy topic of reflection in the presence of the work which is
the subject of this article. But before we say a word on the book
itself, we must endeavour to Edition: current; Page: [370] obviate a
just prejudice which attaches itself to the name of M. Guizot. He is
known in England chiefly as one of the principal instruments of the
profoundly immoral, as well as despotic régime which France is now
enduring. One of the detestable arts of that system, as of the system of
Napoleon, of which it is an imitation, is to seek out, and place in
stations of eminence, all the most distinguished abilities in the
nation, provided they are willing to prostitute themselves to its
service. In the capacity of a tool of this system, though we believe him
to be greatly more sincere than most of the other tools, we have nothing
to say for M. Guizot. But in the more honourable character which he had
earned for himself as a professor and as a literary man, before
practical politics assailed him with their temptations and their
corrupting influences, he deserves to be regarded with very different
feelings. He is among the first, if not the very first, of a school of
writers on history, and the philosophy of history, which has arisen
within the last twenty years, and which, though to the infinite
discredit of our country it has scarcely been heard of here, is, in all
the other countries of civilised Europe, known and estimated as it
deserves.

The Histoire de la Civilisation en Europe (a work complete in itself),
and the five volumes which have appeared of the Histoire de la
Civilisation en France, may be cited as models of the manner in which
history should be studied—its facts made to elucidate one another, and
the workings of the great determining causes traced through the
complication of their multifarious effects. The character of M. Guizot’s
writings is besides so popular and attractive, that they may be said to
be addressed to every one who, being previously acquainted with a mere
outline of the history of Europe, from the decline of the Roman empire
to the end of the sixteenth century, has also the still more necessary
preparation of what might be called an ethical taste—that is, an
interest in the workings of external events upon man, and the reaction
of man’s mind upon the world that surrounds him. The applause with which
the lectures, which make up these two works, were heard at Paris, proves
that among the educated classes of that capital there exists far more of
the taste just mentioned than in the corresponding ranks of society
among us. Were any such taste alive in England, the works of M.
Guizot—(nay, the works of a constellation of French historical writers,
which may well excite the emulation of even the most advanced and
refined nations)*—would not be generally unknown on this side of the
Channel. Even a recent writer, who, though he began to print his work on
the English Commonwealth one year before the publication of M. Guizot’s
Civilization in Europe, seems to Edition: current; Page: [371] have kept
it on the anvil till 1832, takes no further notice of his illustrious
contemporary and fellow-labourer upon a much ampler scale, than a dry
controversy with him in a note near the end of his first volume, and a
“See Mably and Guizot” in the more interesting one, which contains his
“Proofs and Documents.”[*] One can easily understand why a writer who
chiefly cultivates the valuable but not very attractive erudition of the
mere antiquarian, should turn away from the pages of a more
philosophical historian. But that the mass of the reading public, among
whom few persons would not be ashamed to be found ignorant of the French
language, should remain unacquainted with Guizot’s historical Lectures,
betrays an evident misdirection in the process of their instruction. It
shows that French is cultivated as a mere accomplishment—for show; and
that for any of the more essential purposes of a liberal education, it
is not cultivated at all. Few, very few of the vast numbers who are
taught French at school, acquire the habit of reading that language with
ease; and this may account for the general ignorance of modern French
literature in England.* Yet, if the young mind were properly trained,
through English reading, so that among the multitude of purchasers in
the book-market there were but one-fourth who either wished for
instruction, or could derive amusement from anything requiring the
slightest expense of intellect or thought, the English booksellers would
not have omitted the publication of, at least, Guizot’s Civilization in
Europe, in English. That volume by itself is not only invaluable to the
philosopher, and Edition: current; Page: [372] most interesting to every
reader of cultivated intelligence, but is admirably suited to be put
into the hands of young people near the close of their pupillary
instruction, immediately after they have read Koch’s Tableau des
Révolutions de l’Europe.[*] Guizot’s lectures would unite and arrange in
the mind the dry facts of the Tableau;—would not only fix them in the
memory, but transform them into that practical wisdom which the ancients
expected from history, and which, considering the increased experience
of ages, and our greater wealth in historical documents, our own age has
an infinitely higher right to demand. It would, lastly, perform what, in
regard to Koch’s Abridgment,[†] as we have it, is of the highest
importance—for it would help a sensible teacher, and still more a
sensible learner, to correct the false and mischievous views which the
French continuator,[‡] one of the conservative sages (if we do not
mistake) of the restored Bourbons, has attached to the original work.

M. Guizot’s manner of treating history will be best exhibited by
specimens. Could we venture to give extracts in the author’s own
language, we should feel more sure of interesting our readers; but the
conviction which we have already expressed, that the number of those who
in this country can freely take in the meaning of philosophical French
writing is comparatively very small, absolutely prevents our indulging
ourselves in quotations. We cannot, on the other hand, feel satisfied
that we are able to do full justice to our author in our translations of
detached passages. He who, with a sufficient command of the two
languages, should undertake a version of these works, would be able
gradually to lead the English reader into a familiarity with a certain
phraseology—with a peculiar set of figurative or allusive expressions,
the philosophic significance of which is clear and determinate in the
author’s mind, and is seized at once by all educated Frenchmen, but
which imply combinations of ideas not equally familiar to the English
reader. The national mind of no two countries advances in exactly the
same track: every nation, which is rapidly progressive in intellect, has
innumerable meanings to express, which have not yet arisen in the
national mind of any other country; and possesses phrases which at once
summon up those meanings, and which other countries can only gradually
learn to understand. There is a way to translate, not words, but style,
by means of which, without destroying individuality, the translator
should render such works as have an European interest into an European
style. We are quite opposed to the abolition Edition: current; Page:
[373] of national forms of thought, which necessarily produce peculiar
forms of expression; but, like national dress, these should be allowed
to prevail at home, and when engaged in our domestic concerns. For the
concerns of the human mind, for the great interests of European
civilization, we should, by mutual consent, endeavour to modify such
forms of thought and expression as produce a feeling of strangeness;
and, whilst we carefully avoided all corruptions or distortions of
individual languages, we should strive after a general assimilation of
tone and manner. This may be done by means of able translations of
eminent works—such as those with which we are at present concerned; but
it is impracticable in the version of detached passages. A metaphor, a
sentiment, for instance, too French (we might say, too Continental) to
be verbally translated into English, must in such a case be omitted, or
something so different be substituted as must destroy the character of
the passage. In the translation of a long work, however, the outlandish
phrase may be half suppressed the first time it occurs, in the hope
that, by means of an imperfect version, the reader may on the next
occasion be ready to approach nearer to the original: in fact, the
translator of a long work has a constant opportunity to gain over the
national ear by means of the universal understanding. For let it be
observed, that what people object chiefly against are not words, but
combinations, figures, forms of thought;—and that, whilst they imagine
they dislike such expressions because they are not national, the true
source of the objection is their not understanding the meaning—or even
mistaking it.

In spite of the difficulty which we have attempted to describe, we will
introduce detached passages in English, begging the indulgence of our
readers, if in general we content ourselves with very imperfect
imitations. We have also to apologize for not attempting to give a
general abstract of the works before us, on the obvious ground that they
themselves are a very compressed abstract. Our purpose is to invite
readers to M. Guizot’s works, and encourage a taste for his manner of
treating history.

The subject of M. Guizot’s Lectures, as the titles of the two
collections express it, is Civilization. The course of 1828 comprehends
the history of European Civilization in general. In the subsequent
courses, the series of which was interrupted by the political events
which in an evil hour engaged the Professor in the vulgar career of
politics, he commenced filling up that general outline with facts and
illustrations taken from the history of his own country. The sources of
civilization being the same among the whole European family, the
philosophical historian may choose any of the nations where the growth
of civilization has been continuous and vigorous, as an example,
applicable to all the rest, under certain modifications which must be
learnt from the detailed history of each. It was natural that M. Guizot
should prefer France: yet it must be acknowledged that his reasons for
that choice justify it, independently of his national predilections, and
the peculiar interest of the subject to the audience he Edition:
current; Page: [374] was addressing. He considers the general progress
of European civilization to be more faithfully imaged in the history of
France than in that of any other country.

Two things (says M. Guizot) present themselves to the mind, when we
assert that a country is highly civilized: an organization of the
national body, which makes the advantages of union greatly preponderate
over the inconveniences and necessary evils of social restraints; and a
free and vigorous development of the mental powers and moral faculties
in individuals.[*]

When we say that a country advances in civilization, we may mean that
external life is becoming more secure and more agreeable—that mankind
are improving their physical condition, subduing the powers of nature
more and more to their use, and so improving their social arrangements,
that all the conjunct operations which constitute social life are better
performed than before: Or we may mean that the mental faculties of
mankind are unfolding themselves—that a higher spiritual culture is
introducing itself—that the individuals of whom society is made up, are
advancing more and more towards the perfection of their nature—that the
national mind is becoming wiser, nobler, more humane, or more refined,
and that more numerous or more admirable individual examples of genius,
talent, or heroism are manifesting themselves. When we use the word
civilization in its largest sense, we, according to M. Guizot, include
in it both these requisites: the improvement of society and outward
life, and that of the inward nature of man. If either improves, and the
other does not improve along with it, we have no confidence in the
reality, or in the durability of the improvement; we do not consider it
as a permanent advance in civilization. The two elements do not always
keep pace with each other; but when either of them advances, it surely
paves the way for the other. When either gets the start, it is soon
arrested till the other has overtaken it; and for the healthy and rapid
advancement of both, it is of great importance that their development
should take place pari passu.

M. Guizot is of opinion, that though other countries may have for a time
outstripped France in one or other of these two constituents of
civilization, there is no country in which the two have accompanied each
other so closely, and been developed so harmoniously together. This
opinion he substantiates by a critical survey of the civilization of all
the principal nations of Europe: the substance of which we will extract,
because, though it does not exemplify M. Guizot’s historical method, it
is a specimen of his general tone of thought, and is ingenious, and much
of it eminently just and important.

He begins with England. English civilization (we adopt M. Guizot’s
ideas, but do not bind ourselves by the laws of translation) has been
mainly directed to the improvement of the social arrangements, and of
everything relating to external life: its physical comfort—its
freedom—and even its morality; but still, external Edition: current;
Page: [375] well-being, and such inward culture only as has a direct and
evident bearing on external well-being, have engaged the greatest part
of the attention of the English national mind. Society, in England, has
developed itself more nobly and more brilliantly than man: immediate and
narrow applications have been more thought of than principles: the
nation makes a greater figure in history, than the individuals who
compose it. This eagerness for outward results—this comparative
indifference to truth for itself, and to the development and exercise of
the human faculties for themselves, M. Guizot considers to be
perceptible even in our most purely speculative philosophers—for
instance, our metaphysicians. With less questionable accuracy, he
affirms the absence of interest in general and commanding views, to have
been, at all periods, characteristic of the nation at large.

I turn my eyes to the period of the greatest intellectual activity of
England; to the epochs when ideas, when the workings of the national
intellect, have occupied the greatest place in her history—the political
and religious convulsions of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
Every one knows what a prodigious commotion took place at that period in
the English mind. Can any one tell me what great philosophical system,
what general doctrines, that have since spread themselves over Europe,
this commotion gave birth to? It produced immense and admirable
consequences; it created new and better institutions and manners; nor
did it act only upon the social life, but also upon the spiritual
condition of man; it gave rise to sects, and enthusiasts; but it did
little, directly at least, to enlarge the horizon of the human mind—it
did not kindle one of those great intellectual torches which illuminate
an epoch.[*]

The power of religion has been greater in England than in any country
whatever. The earnestness and concentration of the convictions which
have impelled the English religious parties have hardly a parallel in
history; and their convictions have acted largely on their outward
lives. But all their zeal has been spent practically. Leading and
luminous views have seldom, if ever, issued from among them. The
speculations of English divines have generally been confined by some
political aim—have been limited to the removal of some definite and
local evil, or to the mere refitting and patching up of old doctrines.
The spirit of England is practical. The nation has had, and still
possesses, great minds; but neither in number nor power (though the
latter is unquestionably great) do they bear a due proportion to the
colossal growth of the external, the social civilization of the country.

Germany presents a contrast to this picture. The social or external
progress has there been difficult and slow: the coarseness of German
manners has been proverbial till our own days. But how infinitely beyond
this progress of the social body has been that of the individual
intellect in that country! Compare the mental powers displayed by the
German reformers, Luther, Melancthon, Bucer, with the semi-barbarous
manners which they themselves betray, and which, considering Edition:
current; Page: [376] their circumstances, may be taken as samples of
those which prevailed in the nation. The existence of such minds, in
such a state of society, appears a paradox. If we pass on to the
seventeenth century, we find Leibnitz and the German Universities in the
first rank among the leaders of the mental progress of mankind; while
the Courts of Brandenburg and Bavaria, described as we find them in the
memoirs of the same period,[*] present the most shocking picture of
coarseness and sensuality. Even at this moment, when the good sense and
personal virtues of some of the German despots have made external
Germany advance, its social improvement bears only a very small
proportion to the dimensions of its collective mind.

No one is ignorant how great has been, for the last fifty years, in
Germany, the activity of the human mind: in all departments—in
philosophy, in history, in elegant literature, in poetry—it has made
great strides. The road which it has followed may not always have been
the best; some of the results which it has arrived at may be contested;
but the energy and universality of the development itself are
incontestable. Unquestionably, the arrangements of society, the
improvement of the outward condition of the people, have not kept pace
with it.[†]

Perhaps it is to this circumstance that we might trace the peculiarites
of German literature. The German mind appears to have grown without
communication with things external. Unsatisfied with the social
structure, which always confines, and not unfrequently galls it, if not
sufficiently aloof from it, the German mind has created a world for
itself, into which the possessors of power have generally had the good
sense not to intrude.

The country to which Beauty was given as a curse*—Italy—wants the two
characters just mentioned; its civilization is not essentially practical
like the English, nor almost exclusively speculative like the German. It
is most certain that individual Italians have reached to the highest
eminence of pure intelligence, and that the nation has exhibited a
degree of social activity and life not inferior in kind to that of any
other people. Man and society have there displayed themselves with
considerable lustre: the Italians have excelled, at once, in science,
arts, philosophy, and in the practical concerns of government and life.
Italy seems indeed to have now for a long time stood still: she advances
on neither of the two paths of civilization; both her social energies
and those of her Edition: current; Page: [377] individual minds seem to
have become enervated and paralyzed. But if we observe Italy more
closely, we shall find that this debility and faintness are not the
effect of her own incapacity, but of a foreign yoke: she suffers like a
flower struggling to expand its petals under the pressure of a callous,
cold hand. The intellectual and political capabilities of Italy are
undestroyed: what she wants, what she has ever wanted, is faith in
truth. It is not enough to have intellect for speculation and talent for
conduct; there must be a link to connect the two; there must be a deep
conviction that they who know, can and ought to act according to what
they know; that the truths which are known do not exist solely for
speculation, but have the power and the right to prevail in the
government of the outward world. To this faith Italy has always been a
stranger. She has been fertile in great minds, and has opened grand and
noble views to the intellect: she has also swarmed with practical
statesmen of the most surprising talents: but the two classes, and the
two pursuits, have always been strangers to each other. The
philosophers, the men of general ideas, have never conceived themselves
authorized to act; and strong as their conviction of the abstract truth
of some great principles may have been, they could never persuade
themselves that one atom of the external world might be moved out of its
place by the power of such principles. The practical men, on the other
hand, the arbiters of society, despised general notions, (the pen which
reports M. Guizot’s thoughts is irresistibly moved to add—except
generalized principles of deception,) and have never felt the least
desire to regulate the facts under their control, in conformity with any
great and comprehensive views. Both classes have acted as if truth was
only fit to be known, but not to be acted upon. This, even in the
fifteenth century, the principal period of Italian social activity, as
well as in subsequent times, has smitten with a kind of sterility both
the speculative genius and the practical talent of Italy, and must be
assigned as the principal cause of her present hopeless condition.

There is still a great country [says M. Guizot, in a noble passage]
which I certainly would not name, were it not out of respect for a
generous but unhappy people; else, in connexion with our subject, there
would be no necessity to make mention of Spain. Neither great minds, nor
great events, are wanting in her history; human intelligence and human
society show themselves now and then, in that history, in noble and
striking shapes. But they appear scattered and single, like the tall
palms of a sandy desert. That chief character of civilization—general,
continuous progress, has been denied in Spain, both to intellect and
society. If the solemn stillness is ever broken, our roused attention is
sure to be disappointed. In Spain nothing has a result. In vain should
we look for some great idea, some social improvement, some philosophical
system, some actively benevolent institution, for which Europe has to
thank Spain. She seems quite detached from Europe; she has accepted
little at its hands, and has returned still less. I should have
reproached myself [concludes M. Guizot] if I had passed the name of
Spain in silence; but she is certainly of little consequence in the
history of European civilization.[*]

Edition: current; Page: [378]
From these facts, compared with the general progress of civilization in
France, our author concludes in favour of that country as the best
suited to illustrate the general character and growth of European
civilization. In justice to M. Guizot, we are bound to repeat that this
preference is not the effect of national vanity. Highly as he estimates
French civilization (and who that is himself free from national
partialities will not agree with him?) he does not choose France on
account of absolute superiority above the three nations which might
illustrate the subject in hand; but because, in that remarkable country,
the advance of the two elements of civilization—the internal and the
external development—has always been more parallel and harmonious than
either in England, Germany, or Italy. Though inferior to England in
every thing relating to the organization, activity, and freedom of
action of the social body; though unable, in the development of the
individual mind, to contend with Germany or Italy, the combination and
mutual support of theory and practice is better seen in the progress of
French civilization, than in the more irregular, though partially more
vigorous and extensive growth of other countries.

Man, and Society, in France, have always moved forward, I will not say
simultaneously, but separated by a short interval. Side by side with
every great event, every revolution, every public improvement, we always
find in our history some idea, some general doctrine, corresponding to
them. No change has taken place in outward life, which intellect has not
promptly seized upon and converted into a source of new riches for her
own use; nor has any thing happened in the world of intellect which has
not made its influence felt, and generally very speedily, in the world
without. For the most part, indeed, the improvements in the social order
have been preceded, and in some degree caused, by general ideas; they
have been prepared in theory before they have been accomplished in
practice, and the intellectual progress has been a-head of the social
one. This twofold character, compounded of intellectual activity and
practical ability, of meditation and of application, is impressed upon
all the great events of French history, upon all the leading classes in
French society, and gives them a character and aspect which is found
nowhere else.[*]

This description, which, as applied to the present French character, is
strikingly just, M. Guizot proves to have been true in all former
periods, by a most able general view of his country’s history. The
historical sketch to which we allude cannot be further reduced than it
is in the original, and in that state it is too long for insertion: it
is contained in the first lecture on the civilization of France. The
whole course of lectures affords ample confirmation of M. Guizot’s
conclusion.

But whatever may have been the amount of benefit obtained by France
herself from the co-ordinate growth of the two civilizations within her
territory—the impulse which, evidently from the same cause, she has
imparted during the last two centuries to the rest of the European
family, both in the old and the new Edition: current; Page: [379] world,
is too manifest to be questioned. The spread of French speculations on
government, and on moral questions intimately connected with the
organization of society, was quite prodigious during the last century.
It is common to attribute the diffusive power of French ideas to a
peculiar power of the language. But whoever examines the subject with a
competent knowledge, will easily perceive that the charm of the French
writings does not belong to the language itself, but to the mental
habits which have fashioned it into its highly attractive forms. German
stands higher above French, as a language, than Greek above Latin. Yet
the great master of German poetry and eloquence was, in spite of his
anti-Gallican prejudices, obliged to confess that every educated mind
must owe a great and most important portion of its education to the
instrumentality of the French language.* This peculiar power has, in our
opinion, its source in the circumstance, that all French writers above
mediocrity have the peculiar art of imparting their speculative
principles in a manner which makes the reader feel that by means of them
he has acquired a command over a multitude of scattered details, and
increased not only his theoretical knowledge but his practical power.
They bring the speculative reader into contact with the external world,
and accustom the practical one to look to the light of principle for
guidance in the concerns of life. They, in fact, unite the two
characters which, according to M. Guizot, have always been equally
balanced in French civilization: their theory has a constant reference
to practice, and their practical maxims are the realization of their
theories. It is a common observation that French is a clear language,
though, as a language, its structure is by no means superior to its
sister-languages, Italian and Spanish, which are by no means celebrated
for clearness. But the clearness wrongly attributed to the French
language, belongs to the French habits of thinking: it arises from the
happy combination of theory and detail, which has existed in France as a
national habit. Thus, while the wants and concerns of life have, as they
must in all countries, moulded the language to express easily and
clearly the conceptions which relate to material objects, the taste for
generalization upon every subject has established and popularized modes
of expression well suited to convey the most abstract notions. Such is
the real foundation of that perspicuity, which has already established
French as the common language of the civilized world.

That the decided tendency of the present period of mankind is to
establish a similar alliance, and mutual interchange of beneficial
influence, between pure reason and experience, among the leading nations
of the world, must be evident to every unclouded mind. The natural right
of principles to direct human affairs is already perceived by such a
majority, even in this practical country, that its universal recognition
cannot be distant among us; and the blemish which M. Edition: current;
Page: [380] Guizot notices in our national habits of mind has, we
venture to hope, a tendency rapidly to disappear.

Modern civilization, (according to M. Guizot,) as compared with the
various civilization of antiquity, is distinguished by one remarkable
characteristic,—the multiplicity of the elements of which it is
compounded.[*] The European family of nations have grown up to their
present condition amidst the conflict of several influences struggling
for ascendency, none of which was ever able completely to subdue the
others. These warring elements, from which European society has been
moulded into shape, may be classed under three heads:—1st. Notions,
habits, and institutions, derived from the imperial sway of Rome: 2nd.
The sentiments and customs which the northern nations brought with them
when they overran the Roman empire: 3rd. The teaching and influence of
the Christian clergy—of the hierarchical association called the Church.
From each of these three sources some important feature of our modern
civilization has been derived; and that civilization would have been
wanting in some valuable quality which distinguishes it, if any one of
these three sets of influences had been completely put down and
annihilated.

All other civilizations, on the contrary, have been comparatively
one-sided. The various nations of antiquity, especially in the East,
grew up to maturity under the predominant influence of some one
civilizing principle, which opposed all tendencies, mental and social,
except such as might be made subservient to its exclusive end.

This unity must strike every philosophical reader of ancient history. In
Egypt, for instance, every thing proceeded from the notion of a
theocracy. A priesthood enjoyed supreme power in the name of the deity;
the king himself was a priest, and the extent of his power, supported by
the hierarchy, cannot be better expressed than in the words of one of
the Pharaohs, at the moment of appointing Joseph his vizier. “I am
Pharaoh, and without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all
the land of Egypt.” (Genesis, 41 [:44].) Not the smallest fraction of
Egyptian knowledge, or Egyptian polity, could be traced to any other
source but its priesthood. When that body of men had imparted as much
civilization as, in their opinion, might be given to the people with
safety to their hereditary power, Egyptian civilization stood still, and
acquired a permanency which might well be compared to that of the
mummies. The still older civilization of India may, at this moment, be
observed as possessing the same unity of character. In other cases, the
principle which was in the ascendant was the dominion of a conquering
race; and the sole end of society and education was to enable that race
to maintain its superiority. In other and most memorable instances,
every thing yielded to the democratic principle; or, in other words,
(for that was the meaning and purpose Edition: current; Page: [381] of
the ancient democracies,) the passion for political equality among the
free citizens of the state, was the influence which shaped all things
after its own guise. M. Guizot does not overlook the fact that, in
periods previous to that in which the civilization of these various
countries began regularly to advance, fierce struggles took place for
mastery, between the powers which represented the various principles,
theocracy, military aristocracy, and democracy. The warrior-race, for
instance, contended for ascendency with the priesthood among the
Egyptians, the Etruscans, and the Greeks: the clan or family system had
also its contests with that of purely democratical union. But when these
contests were decided, the conquering principle became completely
preponderant, if not entirely exclusive. This simplicity in the
civilizing principle naturally produced, in favourable circumstances, a
much more rapid progress than is observable in modern Europe. In Greece,
the democratic principle produced the most astonishing growth of
civilization which was ever recorded, or even conceived. But the unity
and simplicity of the animating force, which caused the rapid
development of Greece, seems to have been the cause of its quick
exhaustion. When the only source of Greek social life happened to be
dried up, the moral and civil death of that wonderful people was
inevitable. The unity of the civilizing principle had an opposite result
in Egypt and India. The civilizing influence spent itself; it did all
that its nature admitted, and then civilization stood still. To use our
author’s expressive language, in those two countries “unity produced
monotony: society continued to exist, but motionless, and, as it were,
frozen.”[*] Another result of this ancient unity was the intolerant and
jealous tyranny of each of the exclusive principles which happened to
gain the ascendency. The whole of every society of that kind was under
the sway of an active principle which could not endure the least
approach of any other. This exclusiveness and intolerance extended
itself to literature and the arts, especially among the Indian nations.
The monuments of Indian genius which, within a few years, have become
known among us, present the most surprising uniformity of spirit, of
views, of taste.

Let us compare with this unity the almost bewildering variety which
appears in our modern civilization. The history of Europe is the picture
of a stormy chaos, where the most opposite elements have been for ages
fermenting into a life ever new and varied.

All forms, all principles of social organization co-exist: spiritual
power and temporal power, theocracy, monarchy, aristocracy, democracy,
all contend for mastery. The classes and conditions of men are
infinitely varied, and every one is seen pressing upon the next: there
is an infinite number of degrees of liberty, of wealth, of influence,
and while all these various forces are in a constant struggle with one
another, no one of them has been able to establish its ascendency by the
complete suppression of the rest. Modern Europe offers examples of every
system—of every attempt at social organization, Edition: current; Page:
[382] monarchies pure and mixed, theocracies, republics more or less
aristocratic, have existed simultaneously side by side; and in spite of
their diversity all of them have a certain resemblance, a kind of family
likeness which it is impossible to mistake.

The same variety is apparent in ideas and sentiments. Theocratic,
monarchical, aristocratic, and popular opinions have constantly
co-existed, in a state of mutual conflict, and of mutual limitation and
modification. Even in the boldest writings of the middle ages, you never
find an idea followed out to its ultimate consequences. The partisans of
absolute power unconsciously shrink from the conclusions to which their
doctrine properly leads; we see that they were surrounded by ideas and
influences which overawed them, and would not let them carry out their
opinions consistently. Democratic writers are forced to be equally
guarded. No where do we see that imperturbable hardihood, that reckless
consistency, which are so striking in ancient times. The same variety
and the same contrasts offer themselves in feelings and characters: a
most energetic passion for independence, along with great readiness of
submission; a rare fidelity between man and man, and at the same time an
imperious self-will—a besoin of shaking off all control, and having no
guide but one’s own breast. The minds of mankind are as various and as
unsettled as the state of society.[*]

A civilization produced by the mutual action of so many principles in a
state of constant warfare, both in society and in the human breast, must
necessarily be of slow growth: it can only emerge very gradually from
chaos. Each of the contending powers is long and greatly counteracted in
the good which it has a tendency to produce, as well as in the evil. A
great part of the strength of each is exhausted in warring with the
others; and hence the slow progress of the modern, compared with the
best of the ancient civilizations. Long indeed was the period during
which the strongest faith in perfectibility might be shaken at the view
of the events which were daily taking place over the face of our portion
of the globe. The progress which Europe was making resembled that of a
ship in a storm, that threatens destruction at every movement. But the
same cause which made the development of our civilization slower, has
made it also richer—has introduced into it a great number and variety of
beneficent principles, and promises a grander and better ultimate
result.

If space permitted, we would transfer to our pages, in nearly its
original extent, that portion of the second lecture on the Civilization
of Europe, in which M. Guizot assigns to each of the three sets of
causes which were at work when modern European society issued from
chaos, the portion of influence which has actually belonged to it.[†]

The degenerate and perishing civilization of Rome, left, according to
him, three legacies to modern Europe. The first was, municipal
institutions, and the spirit of local association and local
self-government. The Roman empire was originally compounded of
city-communities, managing their own affairs: Rome itself was such a
community; and again in its decay the empire gradually resolved itself
into such communities—the municipalities being the only portion of
Edition: current; Page: [383] Roman institutions and Roman society which
had any vitality left, when the northern nations overran the western
world.

The second gift of ancient Rome to modern Europe was her written laws.
These laws had great imperfections; but they were a system, and
therefore could not have been formed by mere barbarians; they were
fashioned by a series of cultivated minds, with the assistance of the
experience of ages; they presented to the northern invaders an image of
a much higher state of civilization than existed among themselves—of a
state of established order and regular government, in which rights were
recognised and protected, and much consideration paid to the dictates of
justice and the feelings of humanity.

Finally, one great idea, originating in the Roman empire, survived its
dissolution, and exercised, as M. Guizot shows, a great influence in
modern history, by the aid it afforded to the consolidation of the regal
power. This was, the idea of unity in the sovereign authority;—that
notion of the majesty of the empire, round which such a host of
associations clustered in the mind of a Roman, and which alone could
have kept the empire together for ages after the imperial dignity had
become the prize of the most able or fortunate military leader of a
province.

To the Church, Europe is indebted for whatever it owes to Christianity,
and all its moral and religious convictions have bodied themselves forth
under that influence. M. Guizot is persuaded that, humanly speaking,
Christianity could not have maintained itself against the inroad of
Pagan barbarians merely by its intrinsic merits, and by the energy of
individual convictions. But its interests were under the special care of
a body of men, the most cultivated whom the age afforded, and the only
body who, in the general dissolution of all things round them, remained
compactly knit together, powerfully organized for a common object. The
influence which this body acquired over the barbarian invaders, and
which was so early manifested in their outward conversion to
Christianity, introduced among them the belief in an authority superior
to that of the sword, and in a law binding on the conscience, even in
the absence of any temporal sanction. The power of the Church—a power
exerted through men’s convictions, and by their voluntary
concurrence—was for ages the only counterpoise to the mere law of the
strongest. From this peculiar position arose the separation of spiritual
and temporal power: a fact peculiar to modern Europe, and to which M.
Guizot attributes a most salutary influence upon her civilization. It is
certain that wherever spiritual and temporal authority have been
concentrated in the same hands, civilization has stopped at an early
stage. And it is difficult to estimate in how much worse a condition we
should now have been, if the great struggle of the middle ages, between
the feudal monarchy and aristocracy, and the Romish hierarchy, had
terminated in the complete victory of either.

Lastly, to the northern invaders we are indebted for one of our greatest
peculiarities—the spirit of liberty, in the peculiar sense attached to
the term in Edition: current; Page: [384] modern times: the spirit of
personal independence, which repels the interference of the state with
the private concerns of the individual: as distinguished from the spirit
of liberty as understood in the ancient republics, which may be
characterized as the successive sacrifice of each to all. Greek and
Roman liberty did not mean that the power exercised by the community
over the persons composing it, should be no greater than was conducive
to their well-being; it meant that each of those persons should have an
equal chance with any other person, of exercising a share of that power.
The love of liberty, in the modern sense of the phrase, was repudiated
by the notions prevalent in those commonwealths respecting the duties of
a citizen. The imaginary being, the civitas, the πόλις, demanded the
annihilation of every individuality. Every citizen was a perfect slave
of the domineering principle, and of those who, for the time being, were
its living representatives.

It is manifestly impossible, in an article like the present, to convey
any but a most imperfect notion of the general character of M. Guizot’s
historical speculations. We cannot follow him through the various
periods of European history. At each period, his method is one and the
same—the only method which a philosopher will ever use. He begins by
familiarizing himself with the literature of the period, and any other
evidences which it has left of its state of society. From these, when he
has sufficiently imbued himself with their spirit, he learns what were
at each period the causes actually at work, and within what limits each
of those causes was operating. This being known, the general laws of
human nature suffice to show of what kind must have been the influence
exercised by each; and the conclusion is then tested by the history of
the succeeding ages. Unless studied in this way, history is indeed
nothing but an “old almanac,” and has neither any meaning of its own,
nor throws light upon anything else.

We shall extract one specimen—a part of the observations on the feudal
times, in the fourth lecture on the Civilization of Europe. Even when
abridged, those observations exceed the ordinary dimensions of an
extract; but the great interest of the subject, and the striking and
original manner in which it is treated, are an ample justification for
the space which our quotation occupies:

Sufficient importance has seldom been attached to the changes which a
new historical fact, a revolution, a change in the state of society,
occasion in the material condition of mankind—the physical state, and
outward mode of living, of the people. This class of considerations have
more influence than is commonly supposed over the general state of
civilization. Every one is aware of the notice that has been taken of
the influence of climate, and the importance attached to it by
Montesquieu.[*] If we confine ourselves to the direct influence of
diversity of climate upon mankind, it is perhaps less than has been
supposed; the appreciation of it is, at all events, difficult and vague.
But the indirect effects of climate—those, for instance, which result
from the fact, that in a warm climate Edition: current; Page: [385]
mankind live in the open air, while in cold countries they shut
themselves up in their houses—that they subsist upon different kinds of
food, and the like—are facts of great importance, and which, merely by
their influence on the details of material existence, act powerfully on
civilization. Every great revolution produces in the state of society
some changes of this sort, and these ought to be carefully attended to.

The introduction of the feudal régime occasioned one such change, of
which the importance cannot be overlooked: it altered the distribution
of the population over the face of the country. Till that time, the
masters of the country, the sovereign class, lived collected in masses
more or less numerous—either sedentary in the towns, or wandering in
bands over the country. In the feudal state, these same persons lived
insulated, each in his own habitation, at great distances from one
another. You perceive at once what an influence this change must have
exercised over the character and the progress of civilization. Social
preponderance and political power passed at once from the towns to the
country; private property, and private life, assumed the pre-eminence
over public. This first effect of the triumph of the feudal principle
appears more fruitful in consequences, the more we consider it.

Let us examine feudal society as it is in its own nature, looking at it
first of all in its simple and fundamental element. Let us figure to
ourselves a single possessor of a fief in his own domain, and consider
what will be the character of the little association which forms itself
round him.

He establishes himself in a retired and defensible place, which he takes
care to render safe and strong, he erects there what he terms his
castle. With whom does he establish himself there? With his wife and his
children, perhaps, too, some few freemen, who have not become landed
proprietors, have attached themselves to his person, and continue
domesticated with him. These are all the inmates of the castle itself.
Around it, and under its protection, collects a small population of
labourers—of serfs, who cultivate the domain of the seigneur. Amidst
this inferior population, Religion comes, builds a church, and
establishes a priest. In the early times of feudality, this priest is at
once the chaplain of the castle and the parish clergyman of the village
at a later period, the two characters are separated. Here then is the
elementary particle—the unit, if I may so speak, of feudal society. We
have now to call this element before us, and put the two questions to it
which should be addressed to every historical fact. What was it
calculated to do towards the development—first, of man; and next, of
society?

The first circumstance which strikes us, is the prodigious importance
which the possessor of the fief could not but asssume, in his own eyes,
and in those of all who surround him. The sentiment of personality and
individual independence was the predominant feeling in savage life, but
the feeling now generated goes beyond this, it is not merely the liberty
of the man and of the warrior, but the importance of the landed
proprietor, the head of a family, the master. From this position must
arise a sentiment of immense superiority—a superiority quite peculiar,
and unlike that which is found in any other civilization. Take, for
instance, in the ancient world, the position of a great aristocrat—a
Roman patrician, for example. Like the feudal lord, the Roman patrician
was the head of a family—was a master, a superior, he was, besides, a
religious magistrate, a pontiff in the interior of his family. But the
importance of a religious magistrate comes to him from without, it is
not an importance purely personal and individual; he receives it from
above, he is the delegate of the Divinity—the interpreter of the
religious belief which is connected with his office. In civil life,
again, the patrician was a member of the senate—of a corporation, which
lived united together in one place. This, again, was an importance
derived from without, borrowed and reflected from that of his
corporation. The grandeur of the ancient aristocrats was associated with
religious and Edition: current; Page: [386] political functions: it
belonged to the situation, to the corporation at large, more than to the
individual. That of the possessor of a fief is, on the contrary, purely
individual. He receives nothing from any one: all his rights, all his
powers, come from himself alone. He is not a religious magistrate; he is
not a member of a senate; his importance is all in his own person;
whatever he is, he is by his own right, and in his own name. With what
force must not such a situation act upon the mind of him who holds it!
What personal pride, what haughtiness—to speak plainly, what
insolence—must arise in his soul! Above him no superior of whom he is
the representative and the interpreter; around him no equals, no
vigorous, universal law to curb him; no external force habitually
controlling his will; he knows no restraint but the limits of his
strength, or the presence of an immediate danger. Such is the moral
result of the situation upon the character of the individual.

I pass to a second consequence, also important, and too little remarked,
the peculiar turn given to the family-spirit, by the feudal state of
society.

History exhibits to us the family in several distinct shapes. First, the
patriarchal family, as seen in the Bible, and the various monuments of
the East. The family, there, is numerous, and amounts to a tribe. The
chief, the patriarch, lives in a state of community with his children,
his kindred (all the various generations of whom are grouped round him),
and his servants. Not only does he live with them, but he has the same
interests and occupations with them, he leads the same life. Is not this
the situation of Abraham, of the patriarchs, of the chiefs of Arab
tribes, who are in our own days a faithful image of patriarchal life?

Another form of the family is the clan, that little association, the
type of which must be sought in Scotland and Ireland, and through which,
probably, a great part of the European world has passed. This is no
longer the patriarchal family. There is now a great difference of
condition between the chief and the rest of the population, he does not
lead the same life with his followers; they mostly cultivate and serve:
he takes his ease, and has no occupation but that of a warrior. But he
and they have a common origin; they bear the same name; their
relationship, their ancient traditions, and their community of
affections and of recollections, establish among all the members of the
clan a moral union, a kind of equality.

Does the feudal family resemble either of these types? Evidently not. At
first sight it has some apparent resemblance to the clan; but the
difference is immense. The population which surrounds the possessor of
the fief are perfect strangers to him, they do not bear his name; they
have no relationship to him, are connected with him by no tie,
historical or moral. Neither does he, as in the patriarchal family, lead
the same life, and carry on the same labours as those about him; he has
no occupation but war, they are tillers of the ground. The feudal family
is not numerous, it does not constitute a tribe; it is confined to the
family in the narrowest sense, the wife and children, it lives separated
from the rest of the people, in the interior of the castle. The
labourers, the serfs, are no part of it; their origin is different,
their inferiority of condition is profound. Five or six persons, in a
position at once alien from, and superior to, all others, constitute the
feudal family. Its character must therefore become peculiar. It lives
retired, concentrated within itself, constantly obliged to defend
itself, to distrust, or at least to keep aloof from all, even its
servants. Internal life, domestic society, are therefore certain to
acquire a great preponderance. I know that the rudeness and violence of
the chief’s passions, and his habit of passing his time in war or in the
chase, must obstruct and retard the formation of domestic habits. But
that obstacle will be overcome. It must necessarily happen that the
chief will return habitually to his own home: there he will always find
his wife, his children, and them alone, or nearly alone; they only will
compose his permanent society; they only will always partake his
interests, his destiny. It is impossible that domestic life Edition:
current; Page: [387] should not acquire a great ascendency. The proofs
are abundant. Was it not in the feudal family that the importance of
women at length arose? In all the societies of antiquity, not only where
no family-spirit existed, but where that spirit was powerful, for
instance in the patriarchal societies, women did not occupy any thing
like the place which they acquired in Europe under the feudal régime.
The cause of this has been looked for in the peculiar manners of the
ancient Germans, in a characteristic respect which it is affirmed that
in the midst of their forests they paid to women. German patriotism has
built upon a single sentence of Tacitus[*] a fancied superiority, a
primitive and ineffaceable purity of German manners in the relations of
the sexes to one another. Mere chimeras! Expressions similar to those of
Tacitus, sentiments and usages analogous to those of the ancient
Germans, are found in the recitals of many observers of barbarous
tribes. There is nothing peculiar in the matter, nothing characteristic
of a particular race. The importance of women in Europe arose from the
progress and preponderance of domestic manners; and that preponderance
became, at an early period, an essential character of feudal life.

A second fact, and another proof of the increased importance of domestic
life, is the spirit of hereditary succession, of perpetuity, which
evidently predominates in the feudal society. The hereditary spirit is
inherent in the spirit of family; but it has nowhere been so largely
developed as in feudal life. This arises from the nature of the property
with which the family was bound up. A fief was not like any other
property it perpetually needed a possessor to defend it, to fulfil the
obligations inherent in it, and maintain its rank in the general
association of the rulers of the country. Hence a kind of identification
of the actual possessor of the fief with the fief itself, and with the
whole series of its future possessors. This circumstance did much to
strengthen and draw closer the family ties, already so powerful from the
nature of the feudal family.

Let us now quit the seignorial abode, and descend amongst the little
population surrounding it. Here all things present a different aspect.
Human nature is so fertile in good, that in any social situation which
lasts a certain length of time, there inevitably arises between those
whom it brings into contact, under whatever conditions, a certain moral
tie—certain feelings of protection, of benevolence, of affection. It was
thus in the feudal society, one cannot doubt that, after some time,
there were formed between the cultivators and their seigneur, some moral
relations, some habits of sympathy. But this happened in spite of their
relative position, and nowise from its influence. Considered in itself,
the situation was radically vicious. There was nothing morally in common
between the feudal superior and the cultivators, they were part of his
domain, they were his property; and in that word property were included
all the rights now deemed to appertain to political sovereignty, as well
as those of private property, the right to give laws, to tax, to punish,
as well as to use and to sell. Between the seigneur and those who tilled
the ground which belonged to him, there were (as far as that can ever be
said, when human beings are brought together) no laws, no protection, no
society.

Hence, I conceive, that truly prodigious and invincible detestation
which the rural population have entertained in all ages for the feudal
régime, for its very name, and for every remembrance of it. Mankind have
endured and been reconciled to oppressive despotisms; they have even
voluntarily submitted to them. Theocratic and monarchical despotism have
more than once obtained the acquiescence, and almost the affection, of
the population subjected to them. Feudal despotism, on the contrary, was
always rejected, always odious: it weighed upon men’s destinies without
ever reigning over their souls. The reason is, that theocracy and
monarchy exercise their dominion in virtue of some belief, common to the
master with his subjects, he is the representative and minister of
Edition: current; Page: [388] another power, superior to all human
powers; he speaks and acts in the name of the Deity, or of some general
idea, not in the name of the man himself, of a mere man. Feudal
despotism is quite different: it is the power of one individual over
another, the domination of the personal and capricious will of a human
being. This is perhaps the only tyranny, which (to his honour be it
said) man never voluntarily resigns himself to. Wherever, in his master,
he sees nothing but a man—wherever the hand which presses him down is
but a human hand like his own, he is indignant, and if he bears the
yoke, bears it with resentment. Such was the real, the distinctive
character of the feudal dominion, and such the origin of the antipathy
it never ceased to inspire.

The religious element which was joined with it had little power to
alleviate its weight. I do not believe that the influence of the priest,
in the little society which I have described, was considerable, nor that
it had much success in infusing a moral character into the relations
between the subject population and their lord. The church has exercised
over European civilization a very great influence, but it was by
proceeding on a large scale, by changing the general dispositions of
mankind. In the details of the little feudal societies, properly so
called, the influence of the priest, as between the seigneur and the
cultivators, was next to nothing. He was generally himself rudely and
meanly educated, like a serf, and neither inclined nor in a condition to
contend against the arrogance of the lord. No doubt, being the only
person called upon to keep up and develop in the subject population
something of moral vitality, he was valuable and dear to them on that
account, he diffused among them some consolation, and some little
instruction; but he neither did, nor could do, I conceive, any thing
considerable to improve their condition.[*]

M. Guizot then examines the situation of the feudal landholders,
relatively to one another. He observes, that from their mutual relations
to each other, and to their liege lord, there naturally grew up in their
minds some notions of mutual obligation, of fidelity, of adherence to
engagements, of devotion to a common interest; but that the attempt to
convert these moral sentiments into legal obligations, and to create
national institutions and a regular government, always failed; and
failed inevitably: for it was an attempt to establish, in a rude state
of society, that kind of government, the existence of which is only
possible in high civilization,—a federal government. He then sums up the
general results of the feudal system as follows:

Feudality must have exercised a considerable, and, take it for all in
all, a salutary influence on the internal development of the individual:
it raised up in the human mind some moral notions and moral wants, some
energetic sentiments: it produced some noble developments of character
and of passion. Considered in the social point of view, it was not
capable of establishing legal order or political securities; but it was
indispensable as a recommencement of European society, which had been so
broken up by barbarism, that it was unable to assume any more enlarged
or more regular forms. But the feudal form, radically bad in itself,
admitted neither of being enlarged nor regularized. The only political
right which feudality has implanted strongly in European society, is the
right of resistance. I do not mean legal resistance; that was out of the
question in a society so little advanced. The right of resistance which
the feudal society asserted and exercised is the right of personal
resistance; a fearful, an unsocial right, since it is an appeal to
force, to war, the direct antithesis of society; but a right which ought
never to perish from the heart Edition: current; Page: [389] of man,
since its abrogation is simply submission to slavery. The sentiment of a
right of resistance had perished in the degeneracy of Roman societies,
from the ruins of which it could not again rise: as little, in my
opinion, was it a natural emanation from the principles of Christian
society. Feudality re-introduced it into European manners. It is the
glory of civilization to render this right for ever useless and
inactive, it is the glory of the feudal society to have constantly
maintained it and stood up for it.[*]

This is followed by further remarks, showing that the history of the
times confirms the view here taken of the influences of feudality.

Every one who reads these quotations must, if we mistake not, experience
the twofold sentiment most complimentary to a philosophic writer,
conviction that here is at length the true and commanding view of a
great subject; and astonishment that truths so simple and apparently
obvious should not have been as distinctly perceived and as prominently
brought forward by former writers. It is scarcely exaggeration to say
that M. Guizot’s work excites these feelings continually.

It ought not, however, to be suppressed, that while the work abounds in
such luminous views as those which we have been following up with
delight, the attentive reader will nevertheless perceive here and there
something like a half-suppressed or gently-breathed sigh of the author
for that very unity of society which he himself has so ably demonstrated
to be both injurious to the true interests of civilization in general,
and particularly opposed to the essential character of our own.

In the masterly picture which M. Guizot draws of the Church and its
civilizing influence, from the fourth to the thirteenth century, he
dwells with particular pleasure on the unity of that body. He calls that
unity a glorious and powerful fact.* The unity of the Church alone (he
proceeds) was the bond which kept together the various nations, which
lay like unconnected fragments of the fallen Roman empire. The notion of
this union contained the rudiments (though confused and greatly
distorted) not only of a vast and comprehensive sympathy, but (he says)
of the grandest and most enlarged conception which ever rallied human
beings round it—that of a spiritual human society: i.e., mankind reduced
to one vast family, united by means of the moral and intellectual
faculties. From the fifth to the thirteenth century (says M. Guizot)
this idea of the Church rendered great services to mankind:

What sense did the men of that period attach to the expression unity of
the church? How was it conceived and practised? Community of sentiment,
community of belief—whatsoever the sentiment or belief may be—constitute
the basis of a social state. It is only upon the truth, or what men
conceive to be the truth, that they can ground a society. It has been
truly said, that there is no society but between minds, in other words,
that an intellectual union is the only true society, and the basis of
all others; or, what is the same Edition: current; Page: [390] thing,
men cannot act together unless they have a clearly understood end in
view; and they cannot live together unless they all partake of one and
the same feeling, arising from one or more facts, so that the single
fact, or if there be many, each of them, may be agreed upon as truth by
all. As there is but one universal truth, so a society which has that
truth for its basis must be one. There cannot be two true spiritual
societies. This is the abstract notion of Church Unity. But how can
men’s minds be united in the truth, unless they themselves recognise it
as truth? This was sadly overlooked by Christians at all times.[*]

Were it not for a few of the concluding lines, the passage just quoted
might be supposed to be from the pen of the most mystical and
puzzle-headed divine on this side of the Channel. What could M. Guizot
mean by the assertion that “an intellectual union is the only true
society;” that “men cannot live together unless they all partake of one
and the same feeling, arising from one or more facts, so that the single
fact, or if there be many, each of them may be agreed upon as truth by
all?” Of what facts does he assert all this? Are they physical,
political, or historical facts? Does he maintain the notion of the
Church of Rome, and indeed of the Protestant churches which still
cherish an essential part of its spirit—the notion that Christianity, as
an historical belief, is the basis of true society? Does he forget the
testimony of universal history to the fact that the social nature of man
will avail itself of the merest trifles to form and maintain
associations for power and defence? There is an inaccuracy of language,
a confusion of ideas in all this, which betrays a mind under a paroxysm
of that weakness which is often occasioned by a temporary ascendency of
early habits and feelings over the convictions of the mind. It is a
curious fact, that our author was here inspired—will our readers believe
it?—by M. de la Mennais, from whom he borrows one of the mystical
principles asserted in the passage.* This was certainly not accidental.
There are other portions of M. Guizot’s lectures which have not a little
perplexed us during the considerable period which we have devoted to the
study of that excellent work; but which his political conduct, and,
above all, his share in the recent attempt to put down the freedom of
the press, has painfully explained.[†] M. Guizot is evidently one of
those men who, to a clear view of the soundest principles, join an
unconquerable attachment to institutions and practices which militate
against them. No writer ever pleaded the cause of intellectual freedom
with more power of argument; and yet, having done this, he can turn a
wistful eye to some of those nebulous spots which float in the Edition:
current; Page: [391] full light that surrounds us at the present day: he
can speak of the “limits and rights of authority in the intellectual and
spiritual world” . . . “a purely moral authority, whose whole power lies
in persuasion and example.” He complains that “in almost all Protestant
countries there is something wanting—something imperfect in the
organization of the intellectual society, so that the regular action of
the established and ancient opinions is impeded. The rights of tradition
have not been reconciled with those of liberty.”* What, in the name of
wonder, are the Rights of Tradition? How is the regular action of
established and ancient, opinions to be encouraged by any organization,
without encouraging the mischievous activity of established errors? Such
indeed are the contradictory wishes of men who see the truth, but cannot
make it part and parcel of their souls. This is what some men call
moderation—namely, the assertion of a principle, combined with practical
views and conduct in direct opposition to it. In this manner are the
people lulled from year to year, and made to wait for a period when
there shall be a constant succession of virtuous despots—a wealthy and
pampered hierarchy, exempt from intolerance and pride—and perhaps a
series of popes who will publish a jubilee with plenary indulgence, to
encourage the philosophers of Europe to hold a public meeting in the
Capitol. M. Guizot’s inconsistencies, admiring his works as we do, raise
more of regret than anger in our heart. He seems to have been fully
aware of the temptations to which he was exposed. We remember a passage,
which we shall lay before our readers in the original language, lest it
should lose part of its force in a translation: it is to be found at the
very opening of his first course of published lectures. In a most
eloquent conclusion to the first lecture he observes, that people
indulge an unlimited ambition in thought, demanding instantaneous
wonders, and nevertheless, when it comes to practice, content themselves
with the most imperfect means: fluctuating between the most exaggerated
sense of existing evils, and the most easy acquiescence in any supposed
remedy which first occurs.[*] Then he adds:

Nous nous rebutons avec une facilité qui égale presque l’impatience avec
laquelle nous désirons. . . . Nous semblons quelquefois tentés de nous
rattacher à des principes que nous attaquons, que nous méprisons, aux
principes et aux moyens de l’Europe barbare, la force, la violence, le
mensonge, pratiques habituelles il y a quatre ou cinq siècles.†

How lamentable that a man who has this clear view of his mental danger
should forget to apply this wise caution to himself when he most wanted
it! How unfortunate that he did not stumble on this passage when the
practice of stopping men’s mouths—when the laws for the suppression of
free thought on public concerns—when the principles of the deposed
Bourbons—when the policy of Edition: current; Page: [392] the most
abominable tyrants, were courting his support and official sanction!
Alas! we must say of M. Guizot, what he so feelingly and truly has
declared of Italy—“Il lui manque la foi, la foi dans la vérité!”*

We had prepared not a few observations on the civilizing power of the
Church, to which so large a part of M. Guizot’s lectures relate; but we
are obliged to put them aside until a better opportunity. In the present
state of things, when not only history, but facts which are taking place
before our eyes, are constantly distorted to serve the interest of the
hierarchy—a call to rectify the many false notions which the pious fraud
of some, and the pious ignorance of others, industriously propagate and
keep alive, for the honour of that imaginary being the Church, and the
substantial benefit of the party which the law makes its representative,
cannot fail to come upon us at no great distance of time. We shall
conclude, therefore, by the mere statement of one or two remarks, with
the truth of which we have been forcibly struck, in surveying, under the
guidance of M. Guizot, European civilization in the successive stages of
its development.

One truth, of which M. Guizot manifests a strong sense, and which cannot
be too often enforced, is, that civilization (in the extended meaning in
which he uses the word, to denote all kinds of improvement) is at
present almost in its infancy. “I am persuaded,” says M. Guizot in his
very first lecture,

that when we shall have fairly entered into this study, we shall soon
perceive that civilization is still very young—that the world as yet is
far from seeing the end and limits of it. Most certainly, the
conceptions of the human mind are not yet all that they are capable of
becoming; our imagination is far from being able to embrace all that
human, nature may attain to; and yet, let each of us interrogate his own
mind—let him place before himself all the good which he sees to be
possible, and which he hopes for; let him then compare this conception
with what now exists in the world, and he will be convinced that society
and civilization are yet in a very early stage of their progress, and
that, after all they have done, they have incomparably more remaining to
do.[*]

Imperfect, however, as is our present state, a comparison of it with all
those which have preceded leaves in M. Guizot’s mind no doubt of its
superiority to them on the whole; and proves, too, that during all the
time which has succeeded the destruction of the Roman empire, both
society and human nature have been steadily, though slowly advancing.
This progressive improvement has been attended with two circumstances
sufficiently remarkable to deserve notice.

One is, that those changes which have proved most salutary in the
end,—which, when we now look back to them, seem to have been the only
means by which some great good could have been achieved, or some
insuperable obstacle to further progress removed,—were mostly, in their
origin, viewed with the utmost alarm and aversion; and were often
considered even by the wisest and best men of the time, as pregnant with
the most direful results. Thus, the feudal Edition: current; Page: [393]
régime, the first step out of anarchy on the only road which could
possibly lead to the reconstruction of a regular government, was looked
upon by the most enlightened contemporaries with a kind of horror, as a
breaking-up of society into fragments,[*] and the final blow to that
unity of the empire with which all their notions of security and of the
social union were associated, and which even the vigorous hand of
Charlemagne had vainly attempted to revive.[†] So slow are mankind to
perceive when the traditional ideas of their forefathers have ceased to
be applicable, and when the time has come for pursuing old ends by new
means.

The other remark is of a more encouraging kind: That no sincere and
honestly intended effort for the good of mankind, aiming at right
objects in the right spirit, even when it entirely failed of its
meditated purpose, was ever entirely thrown away. Though the benefits
which were intended were not at the time realized, every such attempt is
fruitful in unforeseen good tendencies, which often meet with better
fortune.[‡] What, for example, could have appeared more utterly lost,
than the efforts and sufferings of the heroic men who at various
periods, from the commencement of the dark ages, asserted, even to the
death, the independence of individual intellect against the pretended
infallibility of popes and priesthoods? They perished—their bodies were
torn limb from limb—the car of the idol to whom they were immolated
passed over them, all voices which responded to them or bewailed them
were reduced to silence, and the tyranny which they had made war upon,
waxed in compactness and intensity for generations after their names had
passed from the minds of all save those who remembered them to abhor
them. Yet, even these men, who suffered so cruelly for what they had
hoped and ventured in behalf of injured humanity, did not labour and
suffer in vain. For though they could not avert from mankind the bondage
they were not strong enough to break, they at least recorded on the
archives of the human race their solemn and indignant protest against
it. That protest did not perish, though they did. For in the lapse of
ages, when more favourable times had at length arrived, and human nature
was now ripe to free itself from its shackles, new and more fortunate
inquirers searched into theological antiquity to verify the pretensions
of spiritual despotism, and found there these men, and the memory of
what they had done. That discovery broke the spell of the pretended
universality on which the Romish hierarchy rested the very foundation of
their empire. And no small share in the honour of the ultimate
emancipation of the human mind belongs to those who perished obscurely,
and as it seemed for ages afterwards, altogether unavailingly, in its
cause.

Edition: current; Page: [394]


Appendix B


French Texts of Material Quoted in Vindication of the French Revolution of February 1848 (1849)

Dissertations and Discussions, 2nd ed. (1867), II, 555-63. Headed.
“Appendix to the Paper entitled ‘Vindication of the French Revolution of
February 1848.’ ” Running titles. “Appendix.” Not mentioned in Mill’s
bibliography. For comment, see cviii-cix above.

Mill here gives more of the text of Tocqueville’s speech of 27 Jan.,
1848, than he quotes (in translation) in the “Vindication.” The passages
he quotes are given in square brackets, with footnotes locating the
translations in the text on 326-8 above.

the following are the passages, translations of which are given in the
text.


From the Speech of M. de Tocqueville

Pour parler d’abord de ce que j’ai appelé la classe qui gouverne
(remarquez que je prends ces mots dans leur acception la plus générale:
je ne parle pas seulement de la classe moyenne, mais de tous les
citoyens, dans quelque position qu’ils soient, [qui possèdent et
exercent des droits politiques]);[*] je dis donc que ce qui existe dans
la classe qui gouverne m’inquiète et m’effraye. Ce que j’y vois,
messieurs, je puis l’exprimer par un mot: [les moeurs publiques s’y
altèrent, elles y sont déjà profondément altérées; elles s’y altèrent de
plus en plus tous les jours; de plus en plus aux opinions, aux
sentiments, aux idées communes, succèdent des intérêts particuliers, des
visées particulières, des points de vue empruntés à la vie et à
l’intérêt privés.][†]

Mon intention n’est point de forcer la chambre à s’appesantir plus qu’il
n’est nécessaire, sur ces tristes détails; je me bornerai à m’adresser à
mes adversaires eux-mêmes, à mes collègues de la majorité ministérielle.
Je les prie de faire pour leur propre usage une sorte de revue
statistique des collèges électoraux qui les ont envoyés dans cette
chambre; qu’ils composent une première catégorie de ceux Edition:
current; Page: [395] qui ne votent pour eux que par suite, non pas
d’opinions politiques, mais de sentiments d’amitié particulière, ou de
bon voisinage. Dans une seconde catégorie, qu’ils mettent ceux qui
votent pour eux, non pas dans un point de vue d’intérêt public ou
d’intérêt général, mais dans un point de vue d’intérêt purement local. A
cette seconde catégorie, qu’ils en ajoutent enfin une troisième,
composée de ceux qui votent pour eux pour des motifs d’intérêt purement
individuels, et je leur demande si ce qui reste est tres nombreux; je
leur demande si ceux qui votent par un sentiment public désintéressé,
par suite d’opinions, de passions publiques, si ceux-là forment la
majorité des électeurs qui leur ont conféré le mandat de député; je
m’assure qu’ils découvriront aisément le contraire. Je me permettrai
encore de leur demander si, à leur connaissance, depuis cinq ans, dix
ans, quinze ans, le nombre de ceux qui votent pour eux par suite
d’intérêts personnels et particuliers ne croît pas sans cesse; si le
nombre de ceux qui votent pour eux par opinion politique ne décroît pas
sans cesse? [Qu’ils me disent enfin si autour d’eux, sous leurs yeux, il
ne s’établit pas peu à peu, dans l’opinion publique, une sorte de
tolérance singulière pour les faits dont je parle, si peu à peu il ne se
fait pas une sorte de morale vulgaire et basse, suivant laquelle l’homme
qui possède des droits politiques se doit à lui-même, doit à ses enfans,
à sa femme, à ses parents, de faire un usage personnel de ces droits
dans leur intérêt; si cela ne s’élève pas graduellement jusqu’à devenir
une espèce de devoir de père de famille? Si cette morale nouvelle,
inconnue dans les grands temps de notre histoire, inconnue au
commencement de notre Révolution, ne se développe pas de plus en plus,
et n’envahit pas chaque jour les esprits.][*] Je le leur demande?[†]

Je crois, messieurs, qu’on peut, sans blesser personne, dire que [le
gouvernement a ressaisi, dans ces dernières années surtout, des droits
plus grands; une influence plus grande, des prérogatives plus
considérables, plus multiples, que celles qu’il avait possédées à aucune
autre époque. Il est devenu infiniment plus grand que n’auraient jamais
pu se l’imaginer, non seulement ceux qui l’ont donné, mais même ceux qui
l’ont reçu en 1830.][‡] . . . [C’est en ressaisissant de vieux pouvoirs
qu’on croyait avoir abolis en Juillet, en faisant revivre d’anciens
droits qui semblaient annulés, en remettant en vigueur d’anciennes lois
qu’on jugeait abrogées, en appliquant les lois nouvelles dans un autre
sens que celui dans lequel elles avaient été faites,][§] c’est par tous
ces moyens détournés, par cette savante et patiente industrie, que le
gouvernement a enfin repris plus Edition: current; Page: [396] d’action,
plus d’activité et d’influence, qu’il n’en avait peut-être jamais eu en
France en aucun temps. . . . [Et pensez-vous, messieurs, que cette
manière que j’ai appelée tout à l’heure détournée et subreptice, de
regagner peu à peu la puissance, de la prendre en quelque sorte par
surprise, en se servant d’autres moyens que ceux que la constitution lui
avait donnés; croyez-vous que ce spectacle étrange de l’adresse et du
savoir-faire donné publiquement pendant plusieurs années, sur un si
vaste théâtre, à toute une nation qui le regarde, croyez-vous qu’un tel
spectacle ait été de nature à améliorer les moeurs publiques?][*] . . .
Ils croient que la révolution qui s’est opérée depuis quinze ans dans
les droits du pouvoir était nécessaire, soit; et ils ne l’ont pas fait
par un intérêt particulier; je le veux croire; mais [il n’est pas moins
vrai qu’ils l’ont opérée par des moyens que la moralité publique
désavoue; il n’est pas moins vrai qu’ils l’ont opérée en prenant les
hommes, non par leur côté honnête, mais par leur mauvais côté—par leurs
passions, par leur faiblesse, par leur intérêt, souvent par leurs
vices.][†] C’est ainsi que tout en voulant peut-être un but honnête, ils
ont fait des choses qui ne l’étaient pas. [Et pour faire ces choses il
leur a fallu appeler à leur aide, honorer de leur faveur, introduire
dans leur compagnie journalière, des hommes qui ne voulaient ni d’un but
honnête, ni de moyens honnêtes, qui ne voulaient que la satisfaction
grossière de leurs intérêts privés, à l’aide de la puissance qu’on leur
confiait.][‡] . . . [Je ne regarde pas ce fait comme un fait isolé; je
le considère comme le symptôme d’un mal général, le trait le plus
saillant de toute une politique: en marchant dans les voies que vous
aviez choisies, vous aviez besoin de tels hommes.][§] . . .

Pour la première fois depuis quinze ans, j’éprouve une certaine crainte
pour l’avenir; et ce qui me prouve que j’ai raison, c’est que cette
impression ne m’est pas particulière: je crois que je puis en appeler à
tous ceux qui m’écoutent, et que tous me répondront que dans les pays
qu’ils représentent, une impression analogue subsiste; qu’un certain
malaise, une certaine crainte a envahi les esprits; que, pour la
première fois peut-être depuis seize ans, [le sentiment, l’instinct de
l’instabilité, ce sentiment précurseur des révolutions, qui souvent les
annonce, qui quelquefois les fait naître, que ce sentiment existe à un
degré très grave dans le pays.][¶] . . . Est-ce que vous ne ressentez
pas, par une sorte d’intuition instinctive qui ne peut pas s’analyser,
mais qui est certaine, que le sol tremble de nouveau en Europe? [Est-ce
que vous ne sentez pas—que dirai-je? un vent de révolutions qui est dans
l’air? Ce vent, on ne sait où il naît, d’où il vient, ni, croyez-le
bien, qui il enlève.][∥] . . .

Edition: current; Page: [397]
[Ma conviction profonde et arrêtée, c’est que les moeurs publiques se
dégradent, c’est que la dégradation des moeurs publiques vous amènera,
dans un temps court, prochain peut-être, à des révolutions nouvelles. .
. . Est-ce que vous avez à l’heure où nous sommes, la certitude d’un
lendemain? Est-ce que vous savez ce qui peut arriver en France d’ici à
un an, à un mois, à un jour peut-être? Vous l’ignorez; mais ce que vous
savez, c’est que la tempête est à l’horizon, c’est qu’elle marche sur
vous; vous laisserez-vous prévenir par elle?][*]

Messieurs, je vous supplie de ne pas le faire; je ne vous le demande
pas, je vous en supplie: je me mettrais volontiers à genoux devant vous,
tant je crois le danger réel et sérieux, tant je pense que le signaler
n’est pas recourir à une vaine forme de rhétorique. Oui, le danger est
grand! conjurez-le quand il en est temps encore: corrigez le mal par des
moyens efficaces, non en l’attaquant dans ses symptômes, mais en
lui-même.

[On a parlé de changements dans la législation. Je suis très porté à
croire que ces changements sont non-seulement utiles, mais nécessaires;
ainsi je crois à l’utilité de la réforme électorale, à l’urgence de la
réforme parlementaire; mais je ne suis pas assez insensé, messieurs,
pour ne pas savoir que ce ne sont pas les lois elles-mêmes qui font la
destinée des peuples; non, ce n’est pas le mécanisme des lois qui
produit les grands événements de ce monde: ce qui fait les événements,
messieurs, c’est l’esprit même du gouvernement. Gardez les lois si vous
voulez; quoique je pense que vous ayez grand tort de le faire,
gardez-les; gardez même les hommes, si cela vous fait plaisir, je n’y
fais, pour mon compte, aucun obstacle; mais, pour Dieu, changez l’esprit
du gouvernement, car, je vous le répète, cet esprit-là vous conduit à
l’abîme.][†]


From the Manifesto of M. de Lamartine

Les traités de 1815 n’existent plus en droit aux yeux de la République
Française; toutefois, les circonscriptions territoriales de ces traités
sont un fait, qu’elle admet comme base et comme point de départ dans ses
rapports avec les autres nations.

Mais, si les traités de 1815 n’existent plus que comme fait à modifier
d’un accord commun, et si la République déclare hautement qu’elle a pour
droit et pour mission d’arriver régulièrement et pacifiquement à ces
modifications, le bon sens, la modération, la conscience, la prudence de
la République existent, et sont pour l’Europe une meilleure et plus
honorable garantie que les lettres de ces traités, si souvent violés ou
modifiés par elle.

Attachez-vous, monsieur, à faire comprendre et admettre de bonne foi
cette émancipation de la République des traités de 1815, et à montrer
que cette franchise n’a rien d’inconciliable avec le repos de l’Europe.

Edition: current; Page: [398]
Ainsi, nous le disons hautement, si l’heure de la reconstruction de
quelques nationalités opprimées en Europe ou ailleurs, nous paraît avoir
sonné dans les décrets de la Providence; si la Suisse, notre fidèle
alliée depuis François ler, était contrainte ou menacée dans le
mouvement de croissance qu’elle opère chez elle pour prêter une force de
plus au faisceau des gouvernements démocratiques; si les états
indépendants de l’Italie étaient envahis; si l’on imposait des limites
ou des obstacles à leurs transformations intérieures; si on leur
contestait à main armée le droit de s’allier entre eux pour consolider
une patrie Italienne, la République Française se croirait en droit
d’armer elle-même pour protéger ces mouvements légitimes de croissance
et de nationalité des peuples.[*]


From the Answer of M. de Lamartine to the Polish Refugees

La République n’est en guerre ouverte ni sourde avec aucune des nations,
avec aucun des gouvernements existants, tant que ces nations et ces
gouvernements ne se déclarent pas eux-mêmes en guerre avec elle. Elle ne
fera donc, elle ne permettra volontairement aucun acte d’agression et de
violence contre les nations Germaniques. . . . Le Gouvernement
Provisoire ne se laissera pas changer sa politique dans la main par une
nation étrangère, quelque sympathique qu’elle soit à nos coeurs. Nous
aimons la Pologne, nous aimons l’Italie, nous aimons tous les peuples
opprimés; mais nous aimons avant tout la France, et nous avons la
responsabilité de ses destinées, et peut-être de celles de l’Europe, en
ce moment. Cette responsabilité nous ne la remettrons à personne qu’à la
nation elle-même. . . . La République ne doit pas et ne veut pas avoir
des actes en contradiction avec ses paroles; le respect de sa parole est
à ce prix; elle ne la décréditera jamais en y manquant. Qu’a-t-elle dit
dans son manifeste aux puissances? Elle a dit, en pensant à vous: Le
jour où il nous paraîtrait que l’heure providentielle aurait sonné pour
la résurrection d’une nationalité injustement effacée de la carte, nous
volerions à son secours. Mais nous nous sommes justement réservé ce qui
appartient à la France seule, l’appréciation de l’heure, du moment, de
la justice, de la cause et des moyens par lesquels il nous conviendrait
d’intervenir. Eh bien, ces moyens, jusqu’ici nous les avons choisis et
résolus pacifiques.[†]


From the Answer of M. de Lamartine to the Irish Deputation

Quant à d’autres encouragements, il ne serait pas convenable à nous de
vous les donner, à vous de les recevoir. Je l’ai déjà dit à propos de la
Suisse, à propos Edition: current; Page: [399] de l’Allemagne, à propos
de la Belgique et de l’Italie Je le répète à propos de toute nation qui
a des débats intérieurs à vider avec elle-même ou avec son gouvernement.
Quand on n’a pas son sang dans les affaires d’un peuple, il n’est pas
permis d’y avoir son intervention ni sa main. Nous ne sommes d’aucun
parti en Irlande ou ailleurs, que du parti de la justice, de la liberté,
et du bonheur des peuples. Aucun autre rôle ne nous serait acceptable,
en temps de paix, dans les intérêts et dans les passions des nations
étrangères. La France veut se réserver libre pour tous ses droits.

Nous sommes en paix, et nous désirons rester en bons rapports d’égalité,
non avec telle ou telle partie de la Grande Bretagne, mais avec la
Grande Bretagne tout entière, Nous croyons cette paix utile et
honorable, non seulement pour la Grande Bretagne et la République
Française, mais pour le genre humain. Nous ne ferons aucun acte, nous ne
dirons aucune parole, nous n’adresserons aucune insinuation en
contradiction avec les principes d’inviolabilité réciproque des peuples,
que nous avons proclamés, et dont le Continent recueille déjà les
fruits. La monarchie déchue avait des traités et des diplomates, nous
avons des peuples pour diplomates, et des sympathies pour traités. Nous
serions insensés de changer une telle diplomatie au grand jour contre
des alliances sourdes et partielles avec les partis même les plus
légitimes dans les pays qui nous environnent. Nous n’avons qualité ni
pour les juger, ni pour les préférer les uns aux autres. En nous
déclarant amis de ceux-ci, nous nous déclarerions ennemis de ceux-là.
Nous ne voulons être ennemis d’aucuns de vos compatriotes; nous voulons
faire tomber, au contraire, par la loyauté de la parole républicaine,
les préventions et les préjugés qui existeraient entre nos voisins et
nous.[*]


From the “History of the Girondists”

Le partage égal des lumières, des facultes, et des dons de la nature est
évidemment la tendance légitime du coeur humain. Les révélateurs, les
poetes, et les sages ont roulé éternellement cette pensée dans leur âme,
et l’ont perpetuellement montrée dans leur ciel, dans leurs rêves, ou
dans leurs lois, comme la perspective de l’humanité. C’est donc un
instinct de la justice dans l’homme. . . . Tout ce qui tend à constituer
des inégalités de lumières, de rang, de conditions, de fortune, parmi
les hommes, est impie. Tout ce qui tend a niveler graduellement ces
inégalités, qui sont souvent des injustices, et à répartir le plus
équitablement l’héritage commun entre tous les hommes, est divin. Toute
politique peut être jugée à ce signe, comme tout arbre est jugé à ses
fruits, l’idéal n’est que la vérité à distance.

Edition: current; Page: [400]
Mais plus un idéal est sublime, plus il est difficile à réaliser en
institutions sur la terre. La difficulté jusqu’ici a été de concilier
avec l’égalité des biens les inégalités de vertus, de facultés, et de
travail, qui différencient les hommes entre eux. Entre l’homme actif et
l’homme inerte, l’égalité de biens devient une injustice; car l’un crée,
et l’autre dépense. Pour que cette communauté des biens soit juste, il
faut supposer à tous les hommes la même conscience, la même application
au travail, la même vertu. Cette supposition est une chimère. Or quel
ordre social pourrait reposer solidement sur un tel mensonge? De deux
choses l’une. Ou bien il faudrait que la société, partout présente et
partout infaillible, pût contraindre chaque individu au même travail et
à la même vertu; mais alors que devient la liberté? La société n’est
plus qu’un universel esclavage. Ou bien il faudrait que la société
distribuât de ses propres mains, tous les jours, à chacun selon ses
oeuvres, la part exactement proportionnée à l’oeuvre et au service de
chacun dans l’association générale; mais alors quel sera le juge?

La sagesse humaine imparfaite a trouvé plus facile, plus sage, et plus
juste de dire à l’homme: “Sois toi-même ton propre juge, rétribue-toi
toi-même par la richesse ou par la misère.” La société a institué la
propriété, proclamé la liberté du travail, et légalisé la concurrence.

Mais la propriété instituée ne nourrit pas celui qui ne possède rien.
Mais la liberté du travail ne donne pas les mêmes éléments de travail à
celui qui n’a que ses bras, et à celui qui possède des milliers
d’arpents sur la surface du sol. Mais la concurrence n’est que le code
de l’égoisme, et la guerre à mort entre celui qui travaille et celui qui
fait travailler, entre celui qui achète et celui qui vend, entre celui
qui nage dans le superflu et celui qui a faim. Iniquité de toutes parts!
Incorrigibles inégalités de la nature et de la loi! La sagesse du
législateur paraît être de les pallier une à une, siècle par siècle, loi
par loi. Celui qui veut tout corriger d’un coup, brise tout. Le possible
est la condition de la misérable sagesse humaine. Sans prétendre
résoudre par une seule solution des iniquités complexes, corriger sans
cesse, améliorer toujours, c’est la justice d’êtres imparfaits comme
nous. . . . Le temps paraît être un élément de la vérité elle-même;
demander la vérité définitive à un seul jour, c’est demander à la nature
des choses plus qu’elle ne peut donner. L’impatience crée des illusions
et des ruines au lieu de vérités. Les déceptions sont des vérités
cueillies avant le temps. La vérité est évidemment la communauté
chrétienne et philosophique des biens de la terre. Les déceptions, ce
sont les violences et les systèmes par lesquels on a cru vainement
pouvoir établir cette vérité et l’organiser jusqu’ici. (Lamartine,
Histoire des Girondins, [8 vols. (Paris: Coquebert, 1847),] livre 39, ad
finem [Vol. V, pp. 407-10].)[*]

Edition: current; Page: [401]


Appendix C


Textual Emendations

in this list, following the page and line numbers, the reading of the
copy-text is given first, and then the emended reading in square
brackets, with explanation if required. “SC” indicates Mill’s library.
Somerville College. Typographical errors in versions other than the
copy-text are ignored.

7.28 d’Eprémenil [d’Epréménil] [as at 74.19]

9.15 dina [dîna] [accent missing also in Source]

9.31 maronniers [marronniers] [as in Source]

9.34 dévait [devait] [as in Source]

10.5 gardes-françoises [gardes-françaises] [as in Source and elsewhere
in passage]

10.9 comme retenus [retenus comme] [error also in Source]

10.10 leur [leurs] [as in Source]

13.11 Stael [Stael]

13.30 Stael [Stael]

13.40 club: [club:] [as elsewhere in paragraph]

13.41 parties [partis] [as in Source]

13.41 deplacés [déplacés] [as in Source]

14.5 vîte [vite] [Source also reads vîte]

14.8 mûs [mus] [Source also reads mûs]

14.13 parceque [parce que] [as in Source]

14.14 vîte [vite] [as in Source]

14.19 crû [cru] [as in Source]

14.24 revolte [révolte] [as in Source]

14.38 depend [dépend] [as in Source]

16.8 edition [édition]

16.8 considerablement [considérablement]

20.42 héroisme [héroisme] [as in Source]

21n.5 ecrivains [écrivains] [as in Source]

22.31 verifier [vérifier] [as in Source]

22.31 revoquent [révoquent] [as in Source]

22.32 histoire [Histoire] [as in Source and elsewhere in quotations,
italicized in this ed.]

22.37 préference [préférence] [as in Source]

22.39 génerale [générale] [as in Source]

22.40 negligé [négligé] [as in Source]

23.1 celèbre [célèbre] [as in Source]

24.13 l’Héristal [d’Héristal]

Edition: current; Page: [402]
27.16 Compiegne [Compiègne]

30.38 Orleans [Orleans,] [for sense]

31.8 had [“had] [restyled in this ed.]

31n.2 94 [94.] [page reference corrected in this ed.]

31.35-7 vol:” “Peut-être,” . . . , “se . . . vécu.” [vol: ‘Peut-être,’ .
. . , ‘se . . . vécu.’ ” [to conform to Source]

32.17 Debonnaire [Débonnaire] [as in Source]

33.26 revèle [révèle] [as in Source]

35n.2 d’Angleterre [de l’Angleterre] [as in Source]

36.22 kings, [kings.]

38.32 desoeuvré [désoeuvré]

39.2 d’emotions [d’émotions] [as in Source]

39.3 Francaise [Française] [as in Source]

39.10 devorés [dévorés] [as in Source]

39.13 derogeait [dérogeait] [as in Source]

39.16 moderer [modérer] [as in Source]

39.32 Sismondi [Sismondi] [restyled in this ed.]

41n.6 fidelité [fidélité] [as in Source]

41n.9 prédecesseurs [prédécesseurs] [as in Source]

41n.15 enchainée [enchaînée] [as in Source]

41n.31 voulèrent [voulurent] [as in Source]

41n.31 rebellion [rébellion] [as in Source]

41n.32 refugier [réfugier] [as in Source]

41n.32 assiègée [assiégée] [as in Source]

41n.35 retabli [rétabli] [as in Source]

41n.38 fit [fit] [as in Source]

41n.39 iillustrates [illustrates]

43.12 possitis [possetis] [as in Source]

43.19 long temps [long-temps] [as in Source]

48.15 periode [période] [as in Source]

48.18 glorie [gloire]

48.20 amphithéatres [amphithéâtres] [as in Source]

48.21 object [objet]

48.23 vouée, [vouée] [as in Source]

48.24 intéressee [intéressée] [as in Source]

48.25 l’exageration [l’exagération] [as in Source]

49.8 depredations [depredations.]

51n.3 in which [from which]

65n.8 Chap [Chap.]

68n.6 plûpart [plupart] [as in Source]

68n.9 jeûnesse [jeunesse] [as in Source]

73n.11 Revolution [Révolution]

74n.20 Evènemens [Evénemens] [as in Source]

74n.20 à [sous] [as in Source]

75n.14 History of [History of]

75n.24 XVI. [XVI,]

81n.6 Revolution [Révolution]

81n.7 Française [Françoise] [as elsewhere and in fact for this title]

87n.3 considérérai [considérerai]

87n.4 &c. &c. [&c. &c.”]

Edition: current; Page: [403]
87.32 steeets [streets]

88.16 étaient [s’étaient] [as in Source]

88.21 formérent [formèrent] [as in Source]

88.30 deputés [députés] [as in Source]

88.31 avoient [avaient] [as in Source]

88.32 resistance [résistance] [as in Source]

88.35 subdélegués [subdélégués] [as in Source]

88.35 de les [de la] [as in Source]

89.6 viz [viz.]

89.16 d’imbécilles [d’imbéciles] [Source also reads imbécilles]

89.26 Baron [baron] [as in Source]

89n.1 Française [Françoise] [as elsewhere and in fact for this title]

90.1 d’Orleans [d’Orléans] [as in Source]

90.1 Sièyes [Sieyès]

90.3 désignes [désignés] [as in Source]

90n.1 XVI. [XVI,]

91.28 revolte [révolte] [as in Source]

91.28 Revolution [Révolution] [révolution in Source]

92n.1 qui [que] [Source also reads qui]

93.4 que [qui] [as in Source]

93n.4 &c. [&c.,]

96.20 Sièyes [Sieyès]

96.24 Molleville [Moleville] [as elsewhere in article]

96n.7 Molleville [Moleville] [as elsewhere in article]

98.26 “ ‘For [‘ “For] [restyled in this ed.]

98.30-99.2 [wrong font, restyled in this ed.]

99.7 both!’ [both”!]

102.34 reflexion [réflexion] [as in Source]

104.29 cet epoque [cette époque] [as in Source]

104.30 s’était [s’étoit] [as in Source]

104.30 aucun [aucune] [as in Source]

104.32 voulait [vouloit] [as in Source]

105.4 était [étoit] [as in Source]

105.5 était [étoit] [as in Source]

105.6 était [étoit] [as in Source]

105.15 énivré [enivré] [Source also reads énivré]

105.16 était [étoit] [as in Source]

105.16 faisaient [faisoient] [as in Source]

105.18 dèfendre [défendre] [as in Source]

105.28 réflechissaient [réfléchissaient] [as in Source]

105.29 seul [seuls] [as in Source]

105.35 parceque [parce que] [as in Source]

105.42 systematique [systématique]

106.4 Soulavie [Soulavie,]

106.4 fût [“fût]

106.14 Sieyes [Sieyès]

107.39 démandés [demandes]

108.1 precisément [précisément] [as in Source]

116.14 this [his] [corrected by JSM in SC copy]

117.1 mispels [misspells]

Edition: current; Page: [404]
117.3 mispelt [misspelt]

117.13 investés [investis] [as in Source]

119.2 our [an] [as in 59,67; corrected by JSM in SC copy]

119.4 lesson [lesson,] [as in 67]

119.15 revolution [Revolution] [as in 59,67, and elsewhere in passage]

127.10 loi.) [loi.)]

127.18 constitution [institution] [corrected by JSM in SC copy of
Source]

135.14 ‘bodied forth’ [“bodied forth”] [as elsewhere in the sentence]

138.13 in a a [in a]

141.6 Sièyes [Sieyès]

141n.2 i 457-9 [i 457-9] [restyled in this ed.]

141n.14 d’Enghein [d’Enghien]

142.32 paroissales [paroissiales] [as in Source]

144.10 ‘Que voulez-vous?’ [“Que voulez-vous?”] [as elsewhere in passage]

144.18 boissons.) [boissons).]

144.11 ‘What [“What] [as elsewhere in passage]

145.4 beleagured [beleaguered]

145.39 Blood [“Blood] [restyled in this ed.]

146.4 benevolenee [benevolence]

146.30 ——— [——!——] [as in Source]

148.5 souffredouleur [souffre-douleur] [as in Source]

149.22 Laekalls [Lackalls] [as in Source]

149n.4 Parlemantaire [Parlementaire]

151.15 wtth [with]

152.37 Démoiselle [Demoiselle]

152.39 countenance;” [countenance.’] [restyled in this ed.]

153.39 better.” [better.’] [restyled in this ed.]

155.17 no [nos]

155.18 ever!” [ever!’ ”] [restyled in this ed.]

156n.1 Part [Parl.] [restyled in this ed.]

156.2 Jerôme [Jerôme]

156.19 The [“The] [restyled in this ed.]

156.36 sauvez moi [sauvez-moi]

157.23 extermination, [extermination.]

159.14 obedienee [obedience]

159.22 become [became]

160n.1 we we [we]

176.7 Duputies [Deputies] [correct in 37,59,75]

176.22 imposibility [impossibility] [correct in 37,59,75]

181.20-1 the History . . . Normans [The History . . . Normans] [as in 37
and to regularize]

191.3 is have [is to have] [correct in 37,59,75]

198.18 andcalled [and called] [correct in 37,59,75]

198.26 king [King] [as in 37,59, and elsewhere in passage]

201.24 redacteurs [rédacteurs]

203.2 Nizard [Nisard] [correct in 37,59,75]

215.16 muliebribus [mulieribus]

218.6 1835 [1833] [as on title page]

222n.33 une indigène [un indigène] [as in Source]

222n.35 s’addressent [s’adressent] [as in Source]

Edition: current; Page: [405]
239.3 1100 [1200] [as in Source and fact]

242.37 VII. [VII.,] [as in 44; restyled in this ed.]

246.14 M [M.] [correct in 44,59,75]

247.6 Arragon [Aragon] [as in Source]

247.29 nnassailable [unassailable] [correct in 44,59,75]

251.6 spoken, the [spoken, the] [as in 44 and for sense]

268.6 society. [society.’] [restyled in this ed.]

276.32 directions. . . . Is [directions Is] [see next entry]

276.33 mankind? [paragraph] At [mankind? . . . [paragraph] At] [JSM’s
ellipsis inserted in wrong place, cf. previous entry]

282.43 corporation.’ [paragraph, reduced type] ‘The [corporation The]
[the quotation is continuous, restyled in this ed.]

289.17 sixth volume [fifth volume] [altered to conform to the actual
numbering of the vols., as explained in the Textual Introduction above]

303.1 interets [intéréts] [as in Source]

303.4 ciel [ciel,] [as Source]

303.6 encore [encore,]

303.6 jété [jeté] [as in Source]

305.14 proprieté [propriété]

306.30 late; [late,] [as in 59,67]

306.34 uneasiness, [uneasiness,] [as in 59,67]

307.25 life, [life,] [as in 59,67]

309.18 personalité [personnalité] [as in Source]

309.27 réfuse [refuse] [as in Source]

311.12 incapacity? [incapacity?’] [restyled in this ed.]

312.37 (or . . . it:) [or . . . it.] [for sense]

328n.7 France?’ [France?’ ”]

368n.7 collecta [contexta] [as on title page]

371.20 Civilization of Europe [Civilization in Europe] [as elsewhere and
in fact]

375.40 Luther [Luther.]

379n.1 Stuttgard [Stuttgart]

379n.1 Tübingeu [Tübingen]

383.15 Empire [empire] [as elsewhere in passage]

391.7 liberty.’ [liberty.’†] [footnote on previous page, restyled in
this ed.]

395.11 permettai [permettrai] [as in Source]

396.8 que [qu’un] [as in Source]

396.31 dégré [degré] [as in Source]

397.11 conjurez le [conjurez-le] [as in Source]

397.22 gardez-même [gardez même] [as in Source]

398.1 réconstruction [reconstruction] [as in Source]

398.2 paraissent [paraît] [typographical error in Source corrected in
later ed.]

398.7 leur [leurs] [as in Source]

398.10 de la nationalité [de nationalité] [as in Source]

399.21 declarant [déclarant] [as in Source]

399.21 ennemi [ennemis] [as in Source]

400.4 des [de] [as in Source]

400.16 retribue-toi [rétribue-toi] [as in Source]

Edition: current; Page: [406]


Appendix D


Index of Persons and Works Cited, with Variants and Notes

like most nineteenth-century authors, Mill is cavalier in his approach
to sources, sometimes identifying them with insufficient care, and
occasionally quoting them inaccurately. This Appendix is intended to
help correct these deficiencies, and to serve as an index of names and
titles (which are consequently omitted in the general Index). Included
here also, at the end of the appendix, are references to British
Statutes and French Bills and Statutes, entered by country in order of
date. The material otherwise is arranged in alphabetical order, with an
entry for each person or work quoted or referred to References to
mythical and fictional characters are excluded. The following
abbreviation is used: HP for Histoire parlementaire, ed. Buchez and Roux
References to Appendices are in italics; when the same quotation or
reference in a quotation appears both in the main text and an appendix,
the latter is also in parentheses

The entries take the following form.

1. Identification: author, title, etc. in the usual bibliographic form.
When only a surname is given, no other identification has been found

2. Notes (if required) giving information about JSM’s use of the source,
indication if the work is in his library, Somerville College, Oxford
(referred to as SC), and any other relevant information

3. Lists of the pages where works are reviewed, quoted, and referred to

4. In the case of quotations, a list of substantive variants between
Mill’s text and his source, in this form: Page and line reference to the
present text. Reading in the present text] Reading in the source (page
reference in the source).

The list of substantive variants also attempts to place quoted passages
in their contexts by giving the beginnings and endings of sentences. The
original wording is supplied where Mill has omitted two sentences or
less, only the length of other omissions is given. There being
uncertainty about the actual Classical texts used by Mill, the Loeb
editions are cited when possible.

Abailard. See Abelard.

Abelard, Peter.

note: the references at 238 and 247 are in quotations from Michelet.

referred to: 238, 246, 248

Abraham.

note: the references are in the same quotation from Guizot.

referred to: 283 (386)

Edition: current; Page: [407]
Adela (of France).

note: wife of Louis VII. The reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 247

Adrian IV (Pope).

note: Nicholas Breakspear. The reference is in a quotation from
Michelet.

referred to: 244

Aetius.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Guizot.

referred to: 263

Aintraigues. See Antraigues.

Alaric I.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Guizot.

referred to: 275

Albert. See Martin.

Alcuin. Letter to Charlemagne. In Opera omnia. Vols. C-CI of Patrologiae
cursus completus, series latina. Ed. Jacques Paul Migne. Paris: Migne,
1851, Vol. C, col. 438.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 248

Alembert, Jean le Rond d’.

note: see also Diderot and d’Alembert, Encyclopédie.

referred to: 67

Alexander III (Pope).

note: the reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 247

Alexander of Hales. Glossa in quatuor libros sententiarum Petri
Lombardi. Vols. XII-XV of Bibliotheca Franciscana Scholastica. Quarrachi
Ex Typographia Colegn S. Bonaventurae, 1951-57.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference.

referred to: 247

Alfred the Great (of England) Referred to: 24

Alison, Archibald. “Fall of the Throne of the Barricades,” Blackwood’s
Edinburgh Magazine, XLIII (Apr., 1848), 393-418.

referred to: 334

— History of Europe during the French Revolution, Embracing the Period
from the Assembly of the Notables, in MDCCLXXXIX, to the Establishment
of the Directory, in MDCCXCV. 2 vols. Edinburgh: Blackwood, London:
Cadell, 1833.

note: eight further volumes were published, III and IV (1835) with a
different subtitle and V-X (1836-42) with the title History of Europe
from the Commencement of the French Revolution in 1789 to the
Restoration of the Bourbons.

reviewed: 111-22

quoted: 115, 116

115.28-30 “memorable discussions,” . . . “most . . . distinguished
them.”] This [attempt at verbatim quotation] is more particularly the
case in all the debates of the National Assembly of France; and in
effecting the selection, the author has been most . . . distinguished
those memorable discussions (l. xvi)

116.25 “dramatic air”] There can be no doubt, that in thus presenting
the speeches in the words of the real actors on the political stage, the
work has assumed in the first volumes a dramatic air, unusual at least
in modern histories, but it is the only method by which the spirit and
feelings of Edition: current; Page: [408] the moment can be faithfully
transmitted to posterity, or justice done to the motives, on either
side, which influenced mankind; and a modern author need not hesitate to
follow an example which has been set by Thucydides, Sallust, Livy, and
Tacitus. (I, xvi)

Amalric, vicomte de Narbonne. Referred to: 49

Amar, Jean Baptiste André. Speech in presenting the “acte d’accusation”
against the Girondists (3 Oct., 1793), Procès-verbal de la convention
nationale, XXII, 55-6.

note: the décret is given ibid., 56-60; cf. the shorter account in the
Gazette Nationale, ou Le Moniteur Universel, 4 Oct., 1793, 1174.

referred to: 106

Amaury of Chartres.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 247

Ambrose. See St. Ambrose.

Anaxagoras. Referred to: 273n

Anon. “Guizot’s Lectures on European Civilization, Translated by
Priscilla Beckwith,” The Times, 21 Aug., 1837, 6.

referred to: 230

Anon. “News of the Week,” Spectator, 11 Mar., 1848, 237.

referred to: 334n

Anon. Review of Benjamin Disraeli’s Henrietta Temple, The Literary
Gazette, and Journal of the Belles Lettres (3 Dec., 1836), 771-2.

quoted: 164n

64n.17 “Affectation!”] There is a great mixture of talent and of
affectation in these volumes (771)

Anon. Review of Walter Scott’s Life of Napoleon Buonaparte, Monthly
Review. n.s. VI (Sept., 1827), 89-105.

referred to: 55

Antraigues, Louis Emmanuel Henri Alexandre de Launay, comte d’.

note: also spelled Aintraigues and Entragues. The reference at 7 is in a
quotation from Mignet, that at 141 is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 7, 74, 141

— Mémoire sur les états-généraux, leurs droits et la manière de les
convoquer, [Paris:] n.p., 1788.

referred to: 141n

Arago, Dominique François.

note: the first reference at 321 is in a quotation from Brougham; the
second at 321 and those at 332, 333 are to the members of the
Provisional Government of 1848.

referred to: 321, 332, 333

Arbrissel, Robert d’.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 246

Archenholz, Johann Wilhelm von. Referred to: 78n

Aristotle.

note: the reference at 248 is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 248, 273n

Arnold, Thomas. Referred to: 217

— Introductory Lectures on Modern History. Oxford: Parker, 1842.

referred to: 226

Edition: current; Page: [409]
Artaud, Jean Baptiste.

note: the reference, to “a certain Neckerean lion’s provider,” in a
quotation from Carlyle derives from Weber.

referred to: 140

Artois, comte d’. See Charles X (of France).

Artois, Marie Thérèse, comtesse d’.

note: wife of Charles X. The reference is in a quotation from Ferrieres.

referred to: 88

Ataulf.

note: JSM uses the spelling Ataulph. The reference at 275 is in a
quotation from Guizot.

referred to: 275, 280

Athenaeus. The Deipnosophists (Greek and English). Trans. Charles Burton
Gulick 7 vols. London: Heinemann, New York: Putnam’s Sons (Vols. I-V),
and Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press (Vols. VI-VII), 1927-41.

note: the reference derives from Michelet.

referred to: 237

Austin, Sarah. See Leopold von Ranke, The Ecclesiastical and Political
History.

— Characteristics of Goethe. From the German of Falk, Muller, etc. 3
vols. London: Wilson, 1833.

note: the reference is to the term “many-sided,” which JSM took from
Goethe via Austin (see CW, I, 171 and 635).

referred to: 183, 259

Avempace.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Michelet, is to the Arabic
commentators on Aristotle.

referred to: 248

Averroës.

note: one of the two references, in a quotation from Michelet, is to the
Arabic commentators on Aristotle.

referred to: 248

Avicenna.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Michelet, is to the Arabic
commentators on Aristotle.

referred to: 248

Babeuf, François Noël.

note: JSM uses the spelling Baboeuf.

referred to: 128

Bacon, Francis.

note: the reference is to “Baconian” philosophizing.

referred to: 324

— The Essays or Counsels. Civill and Morall (1625). In The Works of
Francis Bacon. Ed. James Spedding, et al. 14 vols. London: Longman, et
al., 1857-74, VI, 365-604.

note: this ed., which is in SC, is used for ease of reference, though
the reference antedates it.

quoted: 65

65.8-9 “come . . . their business and bosoms.”] I do now publish my
Essays, which, of all my other works, have been most current, for that,
as it seems, they come . . . men’s business and bosoms. (VI, 373, The
Epistle Dedicatory, 1625)

Bailleul, Jacques Charles. Examen critique de l’ouvrage posthume de Mme
la baronne de Staël, ayant pour titre: Considérations sur les principaux
événemens de la révolution française. 2 vols. Paris: Bailleul, 1818.

Edition: current; Page: [410]
quoted: 85, 102-3, 103-4

referred to: 57, 68n. 108

85.5 constitutionnelle,” . . . “il] constitutionnelle, il (I, 317)

85.17 voir,” . . . “et] voir, et (II, 34)

85.19 Stael,” . . . “faire . . . l’attaque] Staël, faire . . . l’attaque
(II, 34)

102.27 la Gironde] la Gironde (II, 43)

103.1 toutes les] tant de (II, 43)

103.15 il les termina] il termina (II, 45)

Bailly, Jean Sylvain.

note: the reference at 154 is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 80, 154

— Mémoires de Bailly, avec une notice sur sa vie, des notes et des
éclaircissemens historiques. 3 vols. Paris: Baudouin, 1821-22.

note: part of the Collection des mémoires, ed. Berville and Barrière,
q.v. The reference at 147n derives from Carlyle.

quoted: 61n, 87n

referred to: 89, 147n

61n.2-3 “Il . . . peuple, aujourd’hui c’est le peuple qui a] “J’apporte
à Votre Majesté les clefs de sa bonne ville de Paris Ce sont les mêmes
qui ont été présentés à Henri IV, il . . . peuple, ici le peuple a (II,
58)

87n.3-4 “seul . . . cahiers, &c. &c.”] “Vous venez, Messieurs,
d’entendre le résultat de mes dispositions et de mes vues, elles sont
conformes au vif désir que j’ai d’opérer le bien public, et si, par une
fatalité loin de ma pensée, vous m’abandonniez dans une si belle
entreprise, seul, . . . cahiers, connaissant l’accord parfait qui existe
entre le voeu le plus général de la nation, et mes intentions
bienfaisantes, j’aurai toute la confiance que doit inspirer une si rare
harmonie, je marcherai vers le but auquel je veux atteindre, avec tout
le courage et la fermeté qu’il doit m’inspirer. (I, 213)

Balzac, Honoré de. Referred to: 183, 220

Barante, Amable Guillaume Prosper Brugière, baron de. Referred to: 193,
370n

— Histoire des ducs de Bourgogne de la maison de Valois, 1364-1477. 13
vols. in 12. Paris: Ladvocat, 1824-26.

referred to: 185

Barbaroux, Charles Jean Marie.

note: one of the references is in a quotation from Scott.

referred to: 99

Barère de Vieuzac, Bertrand de.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Mignet.

referred to: 14

Barillon, Paul de, marquis de Branges.

note: Louis XIV’s ambassador to the Court of St. James.

referred to: 187

Barnave, Antoine Pierre Joseph Marie.

note: the reference at 90 is in a quotation from Montgaillard.

referred to: 73n 78, 80n, 90, 94, 100

— Speech of 15 July, 1791, Gazette Nationale, ou Le Moniteur Universel,
17 July, 1791, 818.

referred to: 79n

Barrère. See Barère de Vieuzac.

Barrière, Jean François. “Notice sur la vie de madame Campan.” See
Campan.

Barrot, Camille Hyacinthe Odilon. Referred to: 201

Edition: current; Page: [411]
Barruel, Augustin. Mémoires pour servir a l’histoire du jacobinisme. 4
vols. London: Boussonnier, 1797-98.

referred to: 108

Bayard, Pierre Terrail de.

note: the reference derives from Roederer.

referred to: 37, 37n

Béchade, Jean.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Carlyle, is to him as one of
seven prisoners in the Bastille.

referred to: 146

Becket. See St. Thomas à Becket.

Benedict XI (Pope). Referred to: 244

Bentham, Jeremy. Bentham’s Draught for the Organization of the Judicial
Establishment in France. Compared with That of the National Assembly
(1790). In Works. Ed. John Bowring. 11 vols. Edinburgh: Tait, London:
Simpkin, Marshall, Dublin Cumming, 1843, IV, 305-406.

referred to: 362

— The Constitutional Code (1827, 1841). In Works, IX.

referred to: 362

— Plan of Parliamentary Reform, in the Form of a Catechism, with an
Introduction. Showing the Necessity of Radical, and the Inadequacy of
Moderate Reform (1817). In Works, III, 433-557.

referred to: 324

— Principles of the Civil Code (1838). In Works, I, 297-364.

referred to: 354

Béranger, Emeri.

note: the reference derives from Dulaure.

referred to: 49

Berengarius. De sacra coena adversus Lanfrancum liber posterior. Ed.
A.F. and F.T. Vischer. Berlin: Haude and Spener, 1834.

referred to: 246

Bergoing, François.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Mignet, is to the members of
the Commission of Twelve

referred to: 12

Bernard of Clairvaux. See St. Bernard.

Berry, Charles Ferdinand, duc de.

note: JSM uses the spelling Berri.

referred to: 177

Bertier de Sauvigny, Louis Bénigne François de.

note: the Intendant of Paris. The reference is in a quotation from
Toulongeon.

referred to: 91

Bertrand, Antoine.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Mignet, is to the members of
the Commission of Twelve.

referred to: 12

Bertrand de Born.

note: referred to by JSM as “an old writer.”

referred to: 36n

Bertrand de Moleville, Antoine François, marquis de. Referred to: 107

— Mémoires particuliers, pour servir a l’histoire de la fin du règne de
Louis XVI. 2 vols. Paris: Michaud, 1816.

Edition: current; Page: [412]
quoted: 107-8

referred to: 76n, 93n, 96, 107

Berville, Saint-Albin, and Jean François Barrière, eds. Collection des
mémoires relatifs à la révolution française. 68 vols. Paris: Baudouin,
1820-28.

referred to: 5, 97n

— Mémoires historiques et militaires sur Carnot, rédigés d’après ses
manuscrits, sa correspondance inédite et ses écrits. Paris: Baudouin,
1824.

note: JSM almost certainly is adapting the famous phrase, “Carnot a
organisé la victoire,” for which this work provides a convenient
reference.

referred to: 101

Besenval, Pierre Joseph Victor, baron de.

note: the reference at 87 is in a quotation from Scott, that at 91n is
in a quotation from Montgaillard (both use the spelling Bezenval), that
at 146 is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 87, 91n, 146

— Mémoires de M. le baron de Besenval. 4 vols. Paris: Buisson, 1805-06.

note: at 92n JSM uses the spelling Bezenval. The quotations (the first a
translation of “s’en expliquoit hautement dans les rues”; the second an
English adaptation of “une tourbe soudoyée qui inondoit les avenues et
les salles du palais. La société regorgeoit de brochures, de pamphlets”)
are in quotations from Carlyle, as is the reference at 147.

quoted: 139, 140

referred to: 92n, 147

Bible.

note: the reference at 34n derives from Sismondi, those at 283 and 386
are in the same quotation from Guizot.

referred to: 34n, 283 (386)

— Colossians.

note: see also Carlyle, “The Nibelungen Lied.”

quoted: 219

219.10 “shadow of its coming”] Let no man therefore judge you in meat,
or in drink, or in respect of an holyday, or of the new moon, or of the
sabbath days. Which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of
Christ (2:16-17)

— Ezekiel.

referred to: 228

— Genesis.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

quoted: 380

referred to: 145

380.28 “I] And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I (41:44)

— Isaiah.

note: the indirect quotation is in a quotation from Carlyle, as is the
references at 145.

quoted: 155

referred to: 145, 165

— Job.

note: the quotations are indirect.

quoted: 212, 212n

212n.5 Thus far shalt thou go, and no farther.] When I made the cloud
the garment thereof, and thick darkness a swaddlingband for it,/And
brake up for it my decreed place, and set bars and doors,/And said,
Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further: and here shall thy proud waves
be stayed? (38:9-11)

212n.7-8 further, here . . . stayed] [see preceding entry]

— Judith (Apocrypha).

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 151

Edition: current; Page: [413]
— Luke.

note: the quotation, which is indirect and adapted, is in a quotation
from Carlyle.

quoted: 166

166.34 go and do otherwise.] And Jesus said to him, “Go and do
likewise.” (10:37)

— Matthew.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 253

— II Samuel.

note: the indirect quotation is in a quotation from Carlyle.

quoted: 140

140.31 the glory departed from it for evermore.] The glory is departed
from Israel for the ark of God is taken (4.22)

Bingham, Peregrine (prob.) “On Emigration,” Westminster Review, III
(Apr., 1825), 448-87.

note: the reference is to a remark quoted from Birkbeck, q.v. For
evidence of Bingham’s authorship, see Wellesley Index, III, 562.

referred to: 69n

Bins de Saint-Victor, Jacques Maximilien Benjamin. Tableau historique et
pittoresque de Paris, depuis les Gaulois jusqu’à nos jours. 3 vols.
Paris: Nicolle, and Le Normant, 1808.

note: the quotations at 21n are quoted by Dulaure from an unlocated
“prospectus” by Bins de Saint-Victor.

quoted: 21n

Bird, Christopher. “Introduction,” British and Foreign Review, I (July,
1835), 5-16.

quoted: 371n

371n.13-14 “what . . . France.”] Yet should we be ungrateful not to
acknowledge what . . . France, and should be blind with prejudice, not
to see how much more may be derived from the same sources (9)

Birkbeck, Morris.

note: see also Bingham.

referred to: 69n

Blanc, Jean Joseph Louis.

note: one of the references at 321 is to him as one of the four accepted
into the Provisional Government of 1848, that at 332 is to him as one of
its members.

referred to: 321, 328, 332, 353, 354

— “Déposition de M. Louis Blanc, représentant du peuple (29 mai 1848).”
In Rapport de la commission d’enquête (q.v.), I, 103-13.

referred to: 353

— “Déposition de M. Louis Blanc—15 juillet.” Ibid., 238-41.

referred to: 353

— La révolution de février au Luxembourg. Paris: Lévy, 1849.

note: the reference is to Blanc’s speeches at the Luxembourg, which are
included in this volume, to which JSM seems to refer.

referred to: 353

Bodin, Félix. See Thiers, Histoire.

Boileau, Jacques.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Mignet, is to the members of
the Commission of Twelve.

referred to: 12

Boissy d’Anglas, François Antoine, comte de. Referred to: 73n

— Essai sur la vie, les écrits et les opinions de M. de Malesherbes,
adresse à mes enfans. 3 pts. Paris: Treuttel and Wurtz, 1819-21.

Edition: current; Page: [414]
note: the reference at 75n is to “Sur M. Necker,” appended to the second
part, 239-88.

referred to: 75n, 93

Boniface VIII (Pope).

note: the references at 239, 247, 251 are in quotations from Michelet.

referred to: 234, 239, 245, 247, 251, 253

Bonnemer, Aubin.

note: the references are in a quotation from Carlyle, who uses the
spelling Bonnemère.

referred to: 144, 145

Bouillé, François Claude Amour, marquis de. Referred to: 94

— Mémoires de M. de Bouillé, sur la révolution française, depuis son
origine jusqu’à la retraite du duc de Brunswick. 2 vols. Paris: Giguet,
1802.

referred to: 75n, 76n, 93, 94

Bourbon, Louis Henri Joseph, duc de. See Charles X, Mémoire.

Boyer-Fonfrède, Jean Baptiste.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Mignet, is to the Members of
the Commission of Twelve.

referred to: 12

Brahe, Tycho. Referred to: 228

Brantôme, Pierre de Bourdeille, abbé de. Mémoires de Messire Pierre de
Bourdeille. 6 vols. Leyden: Sambix, 1665-66.

referred to: 50

Breakspear, Nicholas. See Adrian IV.

Bréard-Duplessys, Jean Jacques de.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Mignet, is to the moderates on
the Committee of Public Safety.

referred to: 12

Breteuil, Eustache de Pacy, comte de.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Sismondi.

referred to: 41n

Breteuil, Louis Charles Auguste le Tonnelier, baron de.

note: the reference at 9 is in a quotation from Mignet; the quotation at
89 and the references at 89n and 91n are in quotations from or derive
from, Montgaillard (q.v. for the collation), the reference at 87 is to
him as a member of the new ministry following Necker’s dismissal.

quoted: 89

referred to: 9, 87, 89, 89n, 91n, 94

Brissot, Jacques Pierre.

note: the reference at 98 is to the “Brissotin” faction, that at 104 is
in a quotation from Kerverseau.

referred to: 98, 100, 100n, 104, 108

British and Foreign Review; or, European Quarterly Journal. Referred to:
371n

Broglie, Achille Léonce Victor Charles, duc de. Referred to: 192

Broglie, Victor François, duc de.

note: maréchal de France. The quotation is in a quotation from
Montgaillard (q.v. for the collation), the reference at 12 is in a
quotation from Mignet, that at 144 is in a quotation from Carlyle; one
at 86 is to him as “an avowed anti-revolutionist” in command of forces
near Paris, the second is to him as a member of the new ministry after
Necker’s dismissal.

quoted: 89

referred to: 12, 86, 89, 144

Brougham, Henry Peter. Referred to: 319, 320, 322, 323, 324, 329, 330,
333, 334, 343, 344-5

— Letter to the Marquess of Lansdowne, K.G., Lord President of the
Council, on the Late Revolution in France. London: Ridgway, 1848.

Edition: current; Page: [415]
note: the third quotation on 323 and the first on 341, being summary,
are not collated.

reviewed: 317-63

quoted: 319, 320, 321, 321-2, 322, 323, 324, 329, 330, 334, 336, 339,
340, 340-1, 341, 342, 347, 353, 356, 357, 361

319.29 Thinks it . . . on him, as one] I think it . . . on one (1)

321.3 The] [no paragraph] The (2)

321.3 virtues . . . powers] “virtues . . . powers.” (2)

321.28 of it] of this (14)

321.28 men.”] men—I will not say men living in a state of civil society,
but among any collection of rational beings, connected by the slightest
tie, and joined together for the common purposes of their joint defence,
or their joint operations of any kind whatever (14-15)

321.28-9 “no . . . nations.”] To changes more or less rapidly brought
about every institution of human power or wisdom must always be liable,
but so sudden a change as that which in a few hours has, without the
very least preparation, destroyed an established Monarchy, and created
off-hand a Republic in its stead, having no . . . nations, and being
wholly at variance with every principle as well as all experience, I
should feel bound to make the addition of a new head or chapter to the
work of the Society, did I believe that things could last of their
present fashion in France (5)

321.29-30 “wholly . . . experience.”] [see entry for 321.28-9 above]

321.30-1 “feel . . . chapter”] [see entry for 321.28-9 above]

321.32 “a very] At the desire of our Useful Knowledge Society, and in
constant communication with our lamented friend and colleague, Althorp,
I prepared a very (4-5)

321.32 Philosophy”] Philosophy.* [footnote.] *The publication was begun
in 1840, finished 1846 [text.] in which the principles of Government are
fully explained, and the theory as well as the history and the practice
of the various constitutions that have flourished in ancient or in
modern times is minutely described (5)

321.32-3 “our . . . Society.”] [see entry for 321.32 above]

322.1-3 “the . . . complaint.”] That a total change in their social
condition should be the . . . complaint—that all which had before been
adopted by the approval, more or less general of the nation, at any rate
submitted to in peace by all, should be instantaneously renounced,
rejected, cast off, and every vestige be swept away of what had existed
with unusual acquiescence, and an entirely new order of things—an order
in all particulars new, devised without the least deliberation, struck
out at a heat, created off-hand as quick as a ready speaker can off-hand
utter half a dozen sentences unpremeditated—that a few minutes by the
clock should intervene between the old, obsolete, annihilated, and the
span new, untried and even unthought of,—truly this is a convulsion to
which no former revolution ever known in the world offers the least
parallel (15)

322.3 “without] [paragraph] It would be difficult to imagine a more
striking contrast than the late Revolution points to that which we have
been briefly contemplating, and the whole comparison is decidedly
against the more recent alternation, shewing it to have been without
(22)

322.4-5 it, except familiarity with change” and “proneness to
violence.”] it, if we make a single exception, the familiarity with
change, the proneness to violence, the habit of undergoing morbid
convulsive movement instead of the healthy natural action of the politic
body, a habit superinduced by the disasters of the times, and the use of
powerful stimulants (22)

322.5-6 “work . . . printing-office.”] Then this work . . .
printing-office, and leading on two or three thousand in a capital of
one million souls, and a nation of five and thirty, is at once perceived
to have the very probable consequence of uniting the ten or twelve
thousand felons, chiefly discharged galley-slaves, who are always under
the watch of the police, but always hovering about, ready for any
mischief, a national alarm is excited, that the Monarchy having been
destroyed in one contest, all Paris may be subjected in another to fire,
pillage, massacre (14)

322.6-7 “a handful . . . sub-editor.”] So by universal consent, the
inhabitants of that great capital submit to the absolute dominion of the
dictators thus suddenly appointed by a handful . . . sub-editor, and
adopt, as if it had been their own work, the new Government thus
proclaimed by that most insignificant band, without even affecting to
ask the consent of any human being, or even to apprize any one
beforehand of what they intended to do—nay, very possibly without having
five minutes before formed any precise intention at all (14)

Edition: current; Page: [416]
322.17 “terrible truth,”] [paragraph] Yes! yes! this is the truth—the
terrible truth! (14)

322.18-19 “for . . . may be reared,”] The marvellous sight of such a
change having been wrought by a handful of men in Paris, and tamely
submitted to by all France, for . . . may in that country be reared (15)

322.20-1 “All . . . government”] [paragraph] The inevitable result of
this experiment is the destruction of all confidence—all . . .
Government (30-1)

322.34-6 “The . . . of seventeen years,”] Far less did any one breathe a
whisper of enmity to the dynasty, indeed, generally speaking, there was
little personal disrespect shewn towards the . . . of above seventeen
years, and whose private conduct was as unimpeachable as his capacity
for affairs was renowned (24)

323.1 “earnest and zealous”] It was earnestly urged upon the late
Government by their real and zealous friends—of whom I certainly
accounted myself one—that the franchise should be extended considerably.
(10)

323.7-8 “A . . . five-and-thirty.”] [see entry for 322.5-6 above]

323.9 “an armed mob] Instead of attempting to reform the system by
lawful means, or to change the Ministers who had just given offence, or
to exact punishment by the course of justice for that offence, the
indignation of the multitude in Paris suddenly bursts forth, because the
police threaten to stop a dinner and a procession, an armed mob resists
the authorities, an accident renews the conflict, after it had of itself
died away, another accident occasions unnecessary shedding of blood, the
populace, further exasperated, march to the National Assembly, and
without the assent of any regular body whatever, proclaims a Republic,
of which no one had dreamt an hour before, and names as its chiefs some
half-dozen men, of whom no one had dreamt at any time, as rulers of the
State! (13-14)

323.9-10 of two or three thousand,”] [see entry for 322.5-6 above]

323.21-3 “votes . . . juries,” and also “enfranchised, without . . .
arts,”] Nor would as ample an extension of the electoral lists have been
given as many might have deemed desirable and safe, but in all
likelihood the rational and important measure would soon have been
carried, of giving votes . . . juries, and of enfranchising without . .
. arts, an extension most consonant in itself to the soundest
principles, most fit to be adopted even by ourselves, and most desirable
in France as tending to keep those important classes away from the vile
trade of agitation. (49)

324.3-4 “think . . . outbreak.”] The National Guards will think . . .
outbreak, the bulk of the inhabitants will yield implicit obedience to
save their lives, Paris will be conquered, and all France will take the
law from Paris (32)

329.3 is taught] is now taught (31)

329.4 change” . . . “requires] change its form of Government requires
(31)

329.15-16 “There . . . shown,” . . . “towards . . . Prince.”] [see entry
for 322.34 above]

329.20-1 “repeated . . . influence”] But repeated . . . influence would
have made it impossible to hold out long (48-9)

330.16 “improvised government”] My objection is to the manner in which
the change was brought about—to the sudden, unpremeditated revolt, and
as sudden unpremeditated displacing one system and establishing
another,—to Revolutions made with the magic wand of an
enchanter.—Monarchies destroyed at a blow,—Republics founded in a
trice,—Constitutions made extempore—improvised—I must use a foreign
word—we have none to express the thing—our sober English habits with
difficulty allow us to utter a few sentences in this unpremeditated
fashion, we have neither the wish nor the power to make anything but a
speech off-hand, and hence are without the means of describing so
fantastic an operation (30)

330.16 “struck . . . heat”] [see entry for 322.1-3 above]

330.16-17 “the result of a sudden thought”] The mob, led by a few
agitators, got the upper hand, the National Guards, afraid of having
their shops attacked, their windows and toys broken, declined to do
their duty, no sufficient number of troops was assembled, and these were
ill distributed, some hundreds of young men, eager to distinguish
themselves, headed the multitude, a number of boys from schools took
part in the fray, a more powerful body of banditti, discharged from the
galleys and the prisons, and always congregated in the capital from
whencesoever they come, joined in the disorder which is so congenial to
them, eager for the pillage which they surely foresaw; the Abdication
took place, the Regency was proposed and accepted both in the streets
and in the Chamber of Deputies, when all of a sudden an armed mob rushed
in, overpowering the sentinels, terrifying the members, who fled in all
directions; and some one, Edition: current; Page: [417] apparently
giving vent to the emotion that filled his bosom, exclaimed, like the
woman in the German play, “A sudden thought strikes me! Let us swear an
eternal Republic, and let us vow to live together under it.” (28-9)

330.17 “span . . . of.”] [see entry for 322.1-3 above]

330.17 “unthought of.”] [see entry for 322.1-3 above]

334.20 “Rabble.”] But nothing can less deserve the praise of humanity
than the silly half-measures which would make a Government parley with
an armed rabble (88)

334.20 “dregs of the populace.”] See the dregs of the populace for a
season triumphant over the police and the law! (88)

334.20-1 “armed ruffians.”] [see 322.4-5 above]

336.26 “one of his” . . . “commissioners] One of his Commissioners
(113n)

339.24 “to retain] Hence all their proceedings were, as might have been
foreseen, directed to these two ends, their administrative acts to
prevent insurrection—their legislative edicts to retain (120)

340.16-17 “their . . . election.” . . . “the] Their . . . election, was
their worst act of internal administration, it placed the (120)

340.34 Held] [no paragraph] They held (120)

340.34 nations . . . M. Lamartine does] nations. It is in vain that M.
Lamartine, in the able defence by which he so triumphantly refutes the
vile slanders against his personal honour, and shews demonstrably that
his hands are clean, attempts to gloss over this the most pernicious act
of his short administration. He does (121)

341.2 authority Beyond] authority [6-sentence omission] [paragraph]
Beyond (121-2)

347.3 That new-fangled principle, that] [no paragraph]. But having
protested against the propagandist doctrines of the Republic, as openly
avowed now as by the Convention, though without the same excuse, I must
once more lift up my voice against that (126)

347.4-5 is termed] is somewhat the mode among political reasoners of our
day, in other places as well as Paris, I allude to what is termed (126)

347.5-6 seems.” . . . “to] seems to (126)

347.8 These] Those (126)

353.8-10 “to . . . 1794.”] Some of these economic doctors hold it the
absolute right of all men living in a Republic to have so much a day for
their support—five francs for eight hours labour, according to the
doctrine of M. Louis Blanc. [3-sentence footnote omitted] who has shewn
his confidence in his principles, and in the Republic that he helped to
form in order to propagate them, by flying from his trial, and seeking
shelter among us poor benighted creatures, slaves of a Monarchy (and who
have hitherto resisted the attempts of his English disciples at
organizing our labour), to . . . 1794, and the domination of the mob
over the legislature more absolute than it was under the guidance of
those famous political economists. Robespierre and St. Just (56-7)

353.11-12 “panting for . . . government.”] But when the dread of a Red
Republic began to haunt them, even the National Guard, passive in
February, was ready to act in June, and the voices which at one moment
had seemed to lift M. Lamartine above all his rivals, left him, with a
singular accord, as soon as he formed his most inconceivable, or most
suspicious junction with the party that panted for . . . government, and
the assignats as a resource of finance (80)

357.20 They] [no paragraph] They (56)

357.22 them Such are] them—that is, how the impossible problem may be
solved by legislation, of finding profitable employment—that is, wages
with moderate work—for the whole community, without any regard to the
gains of capital, or the investment of capital, or, indeed, the
existence of capital. [2½-page omission] [paragraph] Such, however, are
(56-9)

361.10 The legislative body . . . should] 2 The second principle which I
would propose as quite essential for obtaining even a possibility of
good government, and of a stable system, is that the legislative body,
whether consisting of one or of two chambers, and in whatever way both
or either may be composed, should (71)

361.19 judicial Its] judicial. [paragraph] Its (72)

— Political Philosophy. 3 pts. London: Society for the Diffusion of
Useful Knowledge, and Chapman and Hall, 1842-43.

referred to: 321, 324

Bucer, Martin. Referred to: 375

Edition: current; Page: [418]
Buchez, Philippe Joseph Benjamin, and Prosper Charles Roux, eds.
L’histoire parlementaire de la révolution française, ou Journal des
assemblées nationales, depuis 1789 jusqu’en 1815. 40 vols. Paris:
Paulin, 1834-38.

note: the references and quotations from 142-55 are in quotations from
Carlyle. French Revolution, q.v.

quoted: 142, 151, 155, 156

referred to: 141, 143, 146, 149, 151, 153

Bulwer (later Bulwer-Lytton), Edward George Earle Lytton. Athens, Its
Rise and Fall, with Views of the Literature, Philosophy, and Social Life
of the Athenian People. 2 vols. London: Saunders and Otley, 1837.

referred to: 160

Burgess, Thomas. A Letter to the Honourable and Right Reverend The Lord
Bishop of Durham, on the Origin of the Pelasgi, and on the Original Name
and Pronunciation of the Aeolic Digamma, in Answer to Professor Marsh’s
Horae Pelasgicae. Carmarthon. Evans, 1815.

note: successively Bishop of St. David’s and of Salisbury. Another ed.
was published in 1821.

referred to: 62

— Vindication of the Late Bishop of St. Asaph’s Edition of the
Lacedaemonian Decree, and of His List of Books for the Use of the
Younger Clergy, from the Strictures of R.P. Knight, Esq. and the Rev. H.
Marsh, D.D. Durham. printed Walker, 1816.

note: republished (London: printed Nichols, [1821]), as A Vindication of
Bishop Cleaver’s Edition of the Decretum Lacedaemoniorum contra
Timotheum, from the Strictures of R.P. Knight, Esq.

referred to: 62

Burke, Edmund. Reflections on the Revolution in France, and on the
Proceedings in Certain Societies in London Relative to That Event. In a
Letter Intended to Have Been Sent to a Gentleman in Paris (1790). In The
Works of the Right Honourable Edmund Burke. 8 vols. London: Dodsley
(Vols. I-III), Rivington (Vols. IV-VIII), 1792-1827, III, 19-321.

note: Vols. III-V of this ed. formerly in SC.

quoted: 35, 40

referred to: 86

35.1 “glory of chivalry.”] But the age of chivalry is gone. That of
sophisters, economists, and calculators, has succeeded, and the glory of
Europe is extinguished for ever (III, 111)

40.10-11 “cheap . . . nations.” . . . “nurse . . . heroic virtue.”] The
unbought grace of life, the cheap . . . nations, the nurse . . . heroic
enterprise is gone! (III, 111)

Burlamaqui, Jean Jacques. Principes du droit naturel Geneva: Barillot,
1747.

referred to: 345

— Principes du droit politique. Geneva: Barillot, 1751.

referred to: 345

Butler, Samuel. Hudibras (1678). Ed. Zachary Grey. 2 vols. London:
Vernor and Hood, et al., 1801.

note: Vol. I in SC, with Vol. II of 1806 ed. (Vernor, Hood, and Sharpe).
The quotation is in a quotation from Scott.

quoted: 98

98.29 higher.”] higher:/For venturing to assassinate / And cut the
throats of church and state. And not be allow’d the fittest men / To
take the charge of both again. [the sentence continues for 28 more
lines] (II, 307; III, ii, 1046-50)

Buzot, François Nicolas Léonard. Referred to: 106

Byron, George Gordon, Lord. Referred to: 183

Edition: current; Page: [419]
Cabala. See Kabbalah.

Caesar, Caius Julius. Referred to: 224, 236

— Commentariorum de bello gallico. Vol. I of C Julii Caesaris quae
exstant opera 2 vols. Paris: Barbou, 1755.

note: this ed. formerly in SC. The reference is in a quotation from
Nisard.

quoted: 236n-7n

referred to: 194

236n.1 Aducantanus] Adcantuannus (I, 97)

236n.1-237n.1 quos . . . appellant quorum . . . recusaret.] (quos . . .
appellant, quorum recusaret) cum iis Adcantuannus eruptionem facere
conatus, clamore ab ea parte munitionis sublato, cum ad arma milites
concurrissent, vehementerque ibi pugnatum esset, repulsus in oppidum est
uti tamen eadem deditionis conditione uteretur, a Crasso impetravit (I,
97)

Calonne, Charles Alexandre de. Referred to: 74

Cambacérès, Jean Jacques Régis de, duc de Parme.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Montgaillard.

referred to: 89n

Campan, Jeanne Louise Henriette Genest. Mémoires sur la vie privée de
Marie Antoinette, reine de France et de Navarre, suivis de souvenirs et
anecdotes historiques sur les règnes de Louis XIV, de Louis XV, et de
Louis XVI, 2 vols. London: Colburn and Bossange, 1823.

note: the first quotation is from the introductory “Notice sur la vie de
madame Campan” by Jean François Barrière, the second, from d’Escherny,
is taken by JSM from Campan. The reference at 157, which derives from
Carlyle, who was using the 3-vol. ed. of 1822, has been altered to
conform to this ed. (and to the events described).

quoted: 68n-9n, 85

referred to: 75n, 76n, 80n, 85n, 157

68n.5 “Non] [paragraph] Non (I, xl)

85.2 un systême monstrueux] Ce système monstrueux fut appele
constitution, et ce que la postérité aura peine à croire, c’est que tous
les partis vinrent s’y rallier (II, 444)

Camus, Armand Gaston. Referred to: 73n

Canning, George. Referred to: 193

— Speech on the Indemnity Bill (11 Mar., 1818, Commons), PD, 1st ser.,
Vol. 37, cols. 1022-40.

referred to: 78

— and George Ellis. [“New Morality.”] The Anti-Jacobin, or, Weekly
Examiner, II, 36 (9 July, 1798), 282-7.

note: republished, with title, as Canning’s, in Canning’s copy (British
Library), he indicates that he wrote ll. 81-159, 168-286, and 354-463
(the end), Ellis wrote 1-80, 160-7, and 318-27, together they wrote
328-53 (287-317 are not attributed).

referred to: 78

Cardaine.

note: not otherwise identified, the reference is in a quotation from
Carlyle.

referred to: 156

Cardwell, Edward. Referred to: 369

Carloman.

note: one of the grandsons of Louis I, son of Charles I (the Bald).

referred to: 19

Carloman.

note: one of the grandsons of Louis I, son of Louis II.

referred to: 19

Edition: current; Page: [420]
Carlyle, Thomas. Referred to: 113-14, 133-66 passim, 215, 225, 227n

— “Biography,” Fraser’s Magazine, V (Apr., 1832), 253-60.

note: the quotation at 137 is indirect: that at 162 is in a quotation
from Carlyle.

quoted: 113, 114, 137, 162

113.1 Of history, the] Of History, for example, the (254-5)

114.4 To] [no paragraph] How inexpressibly comfortable to (253)

151.3 “Man,” as has been written, “is for ever interesting to man, nay,
properly there] “Man is perennially interesting to man; nay, if we look
strictly to it, there (253)

— “Boswell’s Life of Johnson,” Fraser’s Magazine, V (May, 1832),
379-413.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 137

referred to: 113n

— “Burns,” Edinburgh Review, XLVIII (Dec., 1828), 267-312.

note: the quotation is indirect.

quoted: 137

— “Characteristics,” Edinburgh Review, LIV (Dec., 1831), 351-83.

note: the quotation at 215 is indirect.

quoted: 162, 215, 261n

162.26-7 “given a world of rogues, to produce an honesty by their united
action,”] What sound mind among the French, for example, now fancies
that men can be governed by ‘Constitutions,’ by the never so cunning
mechanizing of Self-interests, and all conceivable adjustments of
checking and balancing, in a word, by the best possible solution of this
quite insoluble and impossible problem. Given a world of Knaves, to
produce an Honesty from their united action? (382)

— The Collected Letters of Thomas and Jane Welsh Carlyle. Ed. Charles
Richard Sanders, et al. Durham, N.C., Duke University Press, 1970-.

note: the quotation at 114 is in a letter from Carlyle to Mill dated 12
Jan., 1833, that at 201 is in a letter dated 24 Sept., 1833, the
references at 161 and 182-3 are to a letter dated 13 June, 1833.

quoted: 114, 201

referred to: 161, 182-3

114.30 “the] What chiefly attracts me, however, is a face of the matter
in which M. Thiers is unfortunately rather uncommunicative what I might
call the (VI, 302)

201.33 “quiet emphasis”] There is not a word in it [JSM’s review of
Alison’s History of the French Revolution] that I do not subscribe to it
is really a decided little utterance, with a quiet emphasis, a conscious
incontrovertibility, which (heretic that I am) I rejoice to see growing
in you (VI, 445)

— The French Revolution: A History. 3 vols. London: Fraser, 1837.

note: the terms used in the quotation at 133 are so common in Carlyle
that no collation is given, the quotation at 261 is indirect

reviewed: 131-66

quoted: 133, 138-9, 139, 140-2, 142-3, 143-7, 147-50, 150, 150-2, 152-4,
154-5, 155-7, 163, 165-6, 169, 261

referred to: 219

139.22 “Era of Hope”] For them [the masses], in this world, rises no Era
of Hope, hardly now in the other,—if it be not hope in the gloomy rest
of Death, for their faith too is failing (I, 48) [Earlier Carlyle refers
to the age as a “New Era,” and capitalizes “Hope” as its characteristic,
but does not actually use the term.]

142.16 themselves. . . . [paragraph] But] themselves [ellipsis indicates
4½-paragraph omission] [paragraph] But (I, 170-2)

146.3 was one] was of one (I, 269)

148n.12 137-50] 137, 150 (I, 315n)

150.16-17 “Insurrection of Women.”] [The title of Vol. I, Bk. VII.] (I,
333)

153.20-1 thou! . . . . [paragraph] Scarcely] thou! [ellipsis indicates
3-paragraph omission] [paragraph] Yes, Paris is marching on us; and more
than the women of Paris! Scarcely (I, 358-60)

Edition: current; Page: [421]
155.13 Versailles.] Versailles * [footnote.] *See Histoire
Parlementaire, iii (70-117). Deux Amis (166-177), &c (I, 365n)

155.32-3 rest . . . [paragraph] The] [ellipsis indicates 2-page
omission] (I, 366-8)

156.29 those] these (I, 390)

157.31 death-knell] death-melly (I, 392)

163.25-6 “the . . . twenty-five millions”] Whatsoever is cruel in the
panic frenzy of Twenty-five million men, whatsoever is great in the . .
. Twenty-five million men, stand here in abrupt contrast, near by one
another (III, 4)

165.27 The Convention] [no paragraph] It was the frightfullest thing
ever born of Time? One of the frightfullest. This Convention (III, 433)

165.32 women.] women * [footnote.] *Montgaillard, iv 241 (III, 433)

166.2 him?] him?* [footnote.] *Report of the Irish Poor-Law Commission,
1836 (III, 433)

166.32 it seems] it would seem (III, 435)

166.32 rise. . . . That] rise, has risen, and O Heavens! has it not
tanned their skins into breeches for itself? That (III, 435)

261.22 a theory of the world—] Alone of all Frenchmen he [Lafayette] has
a theory of the world, and right mind to conform thereto, he can become
a hero and perfect-character, were it but the hero of one idea (I, 205)

— “The Nibelungen Lied,” Westminster Review, XV (July, 1831), 1-45.

note: see also Bible, Colossians.

quoted: 219

219.10 “shadow of its coming”] A shadow of coming Fate, as it were, a
low inarticulate voice of Doom falls, from the first, out of that
charmed Nibelungen-land the discord of two women, is as a little spark
of evil passion, that ere long enlarges itself into a crime, foul murder
is done, and now the Sin rolls on like a devouring fire, till the guilty
and the innocent are alike encircled with it, and a whole land is ashes,
and a whole race is swept away (17)

— Sartor Resartus. 2nd ed. Boston. Munroe, 1837.

note: in SC. The quotation is indirect.

quoted: 215

215.6 man is still man.] ‘Here also [said Teufelsdruckh] are men [the
Saint-Simonians] who have discovered, not without amazement, that man is
still man, of which high, long-forgotten truth you already see them make
a false application.’ (299)

— “State of German Literature,” Edinburgh Review, XLVI (Oct., 1827),
304-51.

referred to: 137

— “Thoughts on History,” Fraser’s Magazine, II (Nov., 1830), 413-18.

note: Carlyle’s self-quotation is indirect.

quoted: 113

Carnot, Lazare Nicolas Marguerite. Referred to, 101, 109n, 177.

— Le ministère de l’instruction publique et des cultes, depuis le 24
février iusqu’au 5 juillet 1848. Paris: Pagnerre, 1848.

note: Carnot’s “circulaire” appears on 23-6 of this pamphlet.

referred to: 335, 337

Carnot, Sadi, trans. La révolution de 1848 et ses detracteurs. Paris:
Baillière, 1875.

note: this translation of JSM’s “Vindication of the Revolution of
February 1848” is in SC.

Caroline (of England). Referred to: 201

Carrel, Jean Baptiste Nicolas Armand.

note: the quotations at 202 and 214 are in quotations from Nisard, that
at 212 is in a quotation from Littré.

quoted: 202, 212, 214

referred to: 169-215 passim

— “De la guerre d’Espagne en 1823,” Revue Française, III (May, 1828),
131-73.

note: at 145 the running heads change to “De la guerre de 1823 en
Espagne.”

quoted: 180

Edition: current; Page: [422]
referred to: 180, 188, 195

180.4-5 “foreign liberal legion,”] [translated in part from.] Cinq cents
environ dans toute la catalogue, restèrent sous les armes et formèrent,
sous le nom de légion libérale étrangère, un petit bataillon
d’infanterie et un faible escadron de lanciers (168)

— “De l’Espagne et de sa révolution,” Revue Française, II (Mar., 1828),
261-91.

referred to: 180, 188, 195

— “Du flagrant délit en matière d’impression et publication d’écrits,”
National, 24 Jan., 1832, 1-2.

referred to: 197

— “Du nouveau procès entre la république et le tiers-parti,” National,
27 Oct., 1833, 1, 2-3.

referred to: 206-7

— Extrait du dossier d’un prévenu de complicité morale dans l’attentat
du 28 juillet Paris: Paulin, 1835.

referred to: 207, 208

— Histoire de la contre-révolution en Angleterre, sous Charles II et
Jacques II Paris: Sautelet, 1827.

note: the reference at 187 is in a quotation from Nisard.

quoted: 178, 187

referred to: 187, 221

178.14 “the refuge of weak parties,”] [translated in part from.] Elles
n’éclataient point par des complots, signes toujours certains de la
faiblesse des partis (326)

187.4-6 “Everywhere . . . times,” . . . “it . . . wants.”] [translated
from.] Partout et dans tous les temps ce sont les besoins qui ont fait
les conventions appelées principes, et toujours les principes se sont
tus devant les besoins (65)

187.6-8 “All . . . government,” . . . “have . . . else.”] [translated
from.] [paragraph] Car toute question de forme politique a ses données
dans l’état de la société, nullement ailleurs, et, pour cela, la courte
existence républicaine de l’Angleterre n’avait été qu’une excursion
forcée en dehors des voies constitutionnelles que la nation s’était
frayées depuis long-temps (3)

— “La révolution et le tiers-parti,” National, 29 Oct., 1833, 1.

referred to: 207

— “Qu’il faut craindre de rendre les modérés violens en se moquant de la
modération,” National, 31 May, 1832, 1.

referred to: 200

— Speech in the Chamber of Peers (16 Dec., 1834), National, 17 Dec.,
1834, 1-4.

referred to: 198

— Unheaded article, National, 30 Oct., 1833, 2.

referred to: 207

Carrel, Marie Madeleine (née Dubuisson).

note: mother of Armand Carrel. The quotation is in a quotation from
Nisard.

quoted: 181

referred to: 181-2

Carrel, Nicolas Armand.

note: father of Armand Carrel.

referred to: 172

Cartouche, Louis Dominique.

note: his name became a synonym for brigandage.

referred to: 29

Cartwright, John, Referred to: 180

Cathelineau, Jacques. Referred to: 117

Edition: current; Page: [423]
Cavaignac, Godefroy Eléonore Louis.

note: the reference at 128 is to the leading members of the Société des
Droits de l’Homme, those at 204n are in a quotation from a letter of
JSM’s. JSM uses the spelling Godefroi.

referred to: 128, 204n, 207

Cazalès, Jacques Antoine Marie de.

note: the reference derives from Dampmartin.

referred to: 74n

Le Censeur Européen.

note: see also François Charles Louis Comte.

referred to: 109n

Chabry, Louison.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle, who uses the
spelling Chabray.

referred to: 155

Chalmers, Thomas. Considerations on the System of Parochial Schools in
Scotland. Glasgow: Hedderwick, 1819.

referred to: 229

Chambolle, Michel Auguste. Referred to: 303

Chamfort, Sébastien Roch Nicolas.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 140

La chanson de Roland

note: as the reference is general, no ed. is cited.

referred to: 43

Chapelier, Isaac René Guile.

note: the reference at 90 is in a quotation from Montgaillard.

referred to: 90, 100

Charlemagne.

note: the reference at 43 is in a quotation from Roederer, one of those
at 276 and several at 277-81 are in quotations from Guizot.

referred to: 24, 25, 27, 32, 43, 227, 276, 277-81, 288, 289, 357, 393

Charles I (of England). Referred to: 69, 221

Charles II (of England). Referred to: 178, 186, 221

Charles II (of France).

note: known as Charles le Chauve. The reference is in a quotation from
Guizot.

referred to: 279

Charles III (of France).

note: known as Charles le Gros, one of the grandsons of Louis I.

referred to: 19

Charles IV (of France).

note: known as Charles le Bel.

referred to: 49

Charles VIII (of France).

note: known as Charles l’Affable. The reference is in a quotation from
Hallam.

referred to: 52

Charles X (of France).

note: earlier Charles Philippe, comte d’Artois. The reference at 88 is
in a quotation from Ferrières, that at 90 is in a quotation from
Lacretelle, that at 141 is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 88, 90, 101, 141, 175, 186, 189, 190, 191, 192, 305

— Mémoire présenté au roi par monseigneur comte d’Artois, M. le prince
de Edition: current; Page: [424] Condé, M. le duc de Bourbon, M. le duc
d’Enghien et M. le prince de Conti (1788). In HP, I, 256-62.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 141

Charles, comte de Flandre.

note: known as Charles le Bon.

referred to: 24n

Charles de Provence.

note: one of the grandsons of Louis I.

referred to: 19

Chateaubriand, François René, vicomte de. Referred to: 190, 226

Chenevix, Richard. “History and Prospects of English Industry,”
Quarterly Review, XXXIV (June, 1826), 45-99.

referred to: 17

Chenu, Jacques Etienne Adolphe. Referred to: 322

— Déposition. In Rapport de la commission d’enquête (q.v.), I, 182-90.

note: the “déposition” consists of extracts from his interrogation
before the Premier conseil de guerre permanent de la 1re division
militaire.

referred to: 322

Chièvres, Pierre Jacques Auguste Nicolas Gaspard de. Referred to: 180n

Childebert III.

note: one of the rois fainéants.

referred to: 19

Childéric I.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Velly quoted by Thierry.

referred to: 223n

Childéric III.

note: one of the rois fainéants.

referred to: 19

Chilperic II.

note: one of the rois fainéants.

referred to: 19

Churchill, John (Duke of Marlborough).

note: the story is told in Mark Noble, A Biographical History of England
from the Revolution to the End of George I’s Reign. 2 vols. London:
Richardson, et al., 1806, II, 189.

referred to: 367

Choderlos de Laclos, Pierre Ambroise François. Les liaisons dangereuses,
ou Lettres recueillies dans une société, et publiées pour l’instruction
de quelques autres. 4 vols. Amsterdam and Paris: Durand, 1782.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 141

Cholat.

note: not further identified, the reference is in a quotation from
Carlyle.

referred to: 145

Christ. See Jesus.

Cicero, Marcus Tullius. De oratore (Latin and English). Trans. E. W.
Sutton. 2 vols. London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1942.

note: this ed. cited for ease of reference.

referred to: 188

Edition: current; Page: [425]
— Epistolarae ad Atticum, aliosque. In Opera cum optimis exemplaribus
accurate collata. 10 vols. Leyden: Elzevir, 1642, III.

note: in SC. As the original phrase is in Greek, no collation is given.

quoted: 22

Cincinnatus, Lucius Quinctius.

note: the reference, to “l’ordre libre de Cincinnatus,” is in a
quotation from Mignet.

referred to: 9

Clavelin. See Kerverseau.

Clavière, Etienne.

note: JSM uses the spelling Clavières.

referred to: 101, 108

Clement V (Pope). Referred to: 244

Clement VI (Pope). Letter to King John and Queen Joanna of France. In
Luc d’Achery. Spicilegium, sive collectio veterum aliquot scriptorum qui
in Galliae bibliothecis delituerant (1655-77). New ed. 3 vols. Paris:
Montalart, 1723, III, 724.

note: this ed. cited by Dulaure.

quoted: 43

43.12 quae servare commode non possetis]. Votis vestris liberter
annuimus, iis praecipue per quae, sicut pie desideratis, pacem, et
salutem animae, Deo propitio consequi valeatis. Hinc est quod nos
vestris supplicationibus inclinati, vobis, et successoribus vestris
Regibus et Reginis Franciae, qui pro tempore fuerint, ac vestrum et
eorum cuilibet, auctoritate Apostolica, tenore praesentium in perpetuum
indulgemus, ut Confessor Religiosus, vel saecularis, quem vestrum et
eorum quilibet duxerit eligendum, vota per vos forsitan jam emissa, ac
per vos, et successores vestros in posterum emittenda, ultramarino, ac
beatorum Petri et Pauli Apostolorum, ac castitatis et continentiae votis
dumtaxat exceptis, necnon juramenta per vos praestita, et per vos et eos
praestanda in posterum, quae vos et illi servare commodè non possetis,
vobis et eis commutare valeat in alia opera pietatis, prout secundum
Deum, et animarum vestrarum, et eorum saluti viderit expedire (III, 724)

Cliton, Guillaume.

note: of Normandy. The reference, which derives from Sismondi, is to him
as the successor of Charles, comte de Flandre.

referred to: 34n

Cloots, Jean Baptiste du Val de Grâce, baron von.

note: known as Anacharsis Cloots. JSM uses the spelling Clootz.

referred to: 224

Clotaire I (of France). Referred to: 223

Clovis I (of France).

note: the reference at 52 is in a quotation from Hallam.

referred to: 24, 52, 223, 280, 290

Clovis III.

note: of Neustria and Burgundy, one of the rois fainéants.

referred to: 19

Cocker, Edward. Cocker’s Decimal Arithmetick. Wherein Is Shewed the
Nature and Use of Decimal Fractions . . . Whereunto Is Added His
Artificial Arithmetic . . . Also His Algebraic Arithmetic. London:
Richardson and Lacy, 1675.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 165

Code Napoléon. Paris: Imprimeric impériale, 1807

referred to: 109

Coleridge, Samuel Taylor.

note: see also Schiller, The Piccolomini . . . trans. Coleridge.

referred to: 165, 261

Edition: current; Page: [426]
— The Friend: A Series of Essays. London: Gale and Curtis, 1812.

note: the quotation is indirect. The passage occurs in “Satyrane’s
Letters,” was reprinted in Biographia Literaria, 2 vols. in 1 (London:
Rest Fenner, 1817), II, 208 (in SC), and thus omitted in The Friend, 3
vols. (London: Rest Fenner, 1818) (in SC).

quoted: 202

202.27-9 the manner of a gentleman, that which shows respect to others
in such a way as implies an equally habitual and secure reliance on
their respect to himself.] The secret of the matter, I believe to be
this—we feel the gentlemanly character present to us, whenever under all
the circumstances of social intercourse, the trivial not less than the
important, through the whole detail of his manners and deportment, and
with the ease of a habit, a Person shews respect to others in such a
way, as at the same time implies in his own feelings an habitual and
assured anticipation of reciprocal respect from them to himself (243)

Colton, Caleb Charles.

note: “O.P.Q.” of the Morning Chronicle.

referred to: 125

Comines, Philippe de. Referred to: 185

Comte, Auguste. Referred to: 185

— Cours de philosophie positive. 6 vols. Paris: Bachelier, 1830-42.

note: in SC.

referred to: 228

Comte, François Charles Louis.

note: the founder of Le Censeur Européen.

referred to: 109n

— De l’impossibilité d’établir un gouvernement constitutionnel sous un
chef militaire, et particulièrement sous Napoléon. Paris: Les marchands
de nouveautés, 1815.

referred to: 109n

— Über die Unmöglichkeit einer konstitutionellen Regierung unter einem
militarischen Oberhaupte, besonders unter Napoleon. Trans. T. von Haupt.
Cologne. Dumont, Bachmann, 1815.

referred to: 109n

Condé, Louis Joseph de Bourbon, prince de. See Charles X, Mémoire..

Condillac, Etienne Bonnot de. Referred to: 67, 183

Condorcet, Marie Jean Antoine Nicolas Caritat, marquis de. Referred to:
67, 100, 106, 108, 185

— Vie de Voltaire (1787). In Voltaire. Oeuvres complètes. 66 vols.
Paris: Renouard, 1817-25, LXIV, 1-172.

referred to: 66

Constant de Rebecque, Henri Benjamin. Referred to: 177, 198

Constitutions of Clarendon. See Select Charters, ed. William Stubbs.

Conti, Louis François Joseph de Bourbon, prince de.

note: see also Charles X, Mémoire.

referred to: 108

Corancez, Guillaume Olivier de. See Gluck.

Coucy, Enguerrand de. Referred to: 31, 48

Coulanges, Pierre Philippe Emmanuel, marquis de. “Extrait d’un manuscrit
de M. de Coulanges, intitulé: Relation de mon voyage d’Allemagne et
d’Italie ez années 1657 et 1658.” In Mémoires. Paris: Blaise, 1820,
13-16.

referred to: 376

Edition: current; Page: [427]
Courier de Méré, Paul Louis.

note: the second reference at 196 is in a quotation from Littré.

referred to: 196, 371n

— Prospectus d’une traduction nouvelle d’Hérodote (1822). In Oeuvres
complètes 4 vols. Brussels. La librairie parisienne, française et
étrangère, 1828, III, 249-350.

quoted: 222n

222n.16 doute] douta (III, 263)

222n.21 Hérodote . . . Larcher ne] Hérodote Cependant, en si bonne et
noble compagnie. Larcher a fort souvent des termes qui sentent un peu
l’antichambre de madame de Sévigné, comme quand il dit, par exemple. Ces
seigneurs mangeaient du mouton. il prend cela dans la chanson de
monsieur Jourdain. Le grand roi bouchant les derrieres aux Grecs à
Salamine, est encore une de ses phrases, et il en a bien d’autres peu
séantes à un homme comme son Hérodote, qui parle congruement, et surtout
noblement, il ne (III, 263)

Cousin, Victor. Referred to: 193, 262, 370n

Cox, William Hayward.

note: the reference is to recently appointed qualified examiners at
Oxford.

referred to: 369

Crémieux, Isaac Adolphe.

note: the references are to him as a member of the Provisional
Government of 1848, one at 321 is to him as a leading member of the
Paris bar.

referred to: 321, 332, 333n

Croesus.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Courier.

referred to: 222n

Croker, John Wilson. “The French Revolution—February 1848,” Quarterly
Review, LXXXII (Mar., 1848), 541-93.

referred to: 334

— and John Gibson Lockhart. “The Revolutions of 1640 and 1830,”
Quarterly Review, XLVII (Mar., 1832), 261-300.

referred to: 115

Cromwell, Oliver Referred to: 136, 224

Cunin-Gridaine, Laurent.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Duveyrier

referred to: 301

Curtius.

note: not otherwise identified, the reference is in a quotation from
Mignet.

referred to: 9

Cyrus.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Courier

referred to: 222n

Dagobert III.

note: of Neustria and Burgundy, one of the rois fainéants.

referred to: 19

Damas, Anne, baron de. Referred to: 180, 180n

Dampmartin, Anne Henri Cabet, vicomte de. Evènemens qui se sont passés
sous mes yeux pendant la révolution française. 2 vols. Berlin, n.p.,
1799.

quoted: 74n

referred to: 96

74n.15 “Je dînai,” . . . “chez] [paragraph] Deux jours après, je dînai
chez (I, 33)

Edition: current; Page: [428]
74n.15 Luxembourg . . . Nous] Luxembourg, qui devoit pour le moins
autant à son mérite qu’au nom illustre de Montmorenci, l’honneur d’être
président de la Noblesse. Nous (I, 33-4)

74n.26 égards et les] égards et par les (I, 35)

Dante Alighieri.

note: the first reference at 252 derives from, the second is in a
quotation from, Michelet.

referred to: 252

— “Del purgatorio.” In La divina commedia di Dante Alighieri (1472), 3
vols. Florence, Ciardetti, 1821, II.

note: this ed. used as contemporary. The second reference is in a
quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 252

Danton, Georges Jacques.

note: the reference at 12, in a quotation from Mignet, is to the
“Dantonistes.”

referred to: 12, 80n

Darius I (of Persia). Referred to: 222

David of Dinan.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 247

Déclaration des droits de l’homme et du citoyen, avec des commentaires
par le citoyen Laponneraye. [Paris,] La société des droits de l’homme,
[1833].

note: the references at 126, 127 are in a self-quotation. See also
Robespierre, Déclaration.

quoted: 127

referred to: 126, 127, 205, 206

127.9-10 La portion de biens qui . . . loi.] VI La propriété est le
droit qu’a chaque citoyen de jouir et de disposer à son gré de la
portion de bien qui . . . loi (3)

Delort, Joseph. Histoire de l’homme au masque de fer, accompagnée des
pièces authentiques et de fac-simile. Paris: Delaforest, 1825.

note: an example of “Iron Mask” mania, reviewed, with Ellis, by Francis
Palgrave, Quarterly Review, XXXIV (June, 1826), 19-35.

referred to: 62

Demosthenes. Referred to: 224

— Orations.

note: as the reference is general, no ed. is cited.

referred to: 196

Des Barres, Guillaume. Referred to: 35

Deshuttes.

note: not otherwise identified, the references are in a quotation from
Carlyle.

referred to: 156, 157

Desmoulins, Lucie Simplice Camille Benoist.

note: the quotation at 9 is in a quotation from Mignet, that at 151 is
in a quotation from Carlyle.

quoted: 9, 151

Desodoards. See Fantin Des Odoards.

Deux amis. See Kerverseau

Diderot, Denis. Referred to: 67, 68n, 183

— and Jean Le Rond d’Alembert, eds. Encyclopédie, ou Dictionnaire
raisonne des sciences, des arts et des métiers, par une société de gens
de lettres. 17 vols. Paris: Briasson, et al., 1751-65.

referred to: 67n

Dionysius of Syracuse. Referred to: 224

Edition: current; Page: [429]
Disraeli, Benjamin. Coningsby, or, The New Generation. 3 vols. London:
Colburn, 1844.

quoted: 299

— Henrietta Temple. London: Colburn, 1837.

referred to: 164n

Dominic. See St. Dominic.

Dreux-Brézé, Henri Evrard, marquis de.

note: the reference is to him as “the satellite of despotism.”

referred to: 72n

Duchatel, Charles Marie Tanneguy Referred to: 193, 302

Du Châtelet, Achille.

note: JSM uses the spelling Duchâtelet

referred to: 100n

Ducos, Jean François. Referred to: 106

Du Guesclin, Bertrand Referred to: 43

Dulaure, Jacques Antoine Histoire physique, civile et morale de Paris,
depuis les premiers temps historiques jusqu’à nos jours, contenant par
ordre chronologique, la description des accroissemens successifs de
cette ville, et de ses monumens anciens et modernes; la notice de toutes
ses institutions, tant civiles que religieuses, et, a chaque période, le
tableau des moeurs, des usages, et des progrès de la civilisation. Ornée
de gravures représentant divers plans de Paris, ses monumens et ses
edifices principaux (1821-25) 2nd ed. 10 vols. Paris: Guillaume,
1823-24.

note: the 2-vol. ed. of part of the work, referred to by JSM at 18, has
not been located. The ed. begun in 1821 was not completed until 1825.

reviewed: 15-52

quoted: 21n, 22-3, 31, 33

21n.10-12 C’est . . . impudentes.] “C’est . . . impudentes.” (I, ii)

22.34 ennemt de la France] [not in italics] (I, iv)

22.41 fourni . . . Qu on] fourni, [ellipsts indicates 2½-sentence
omission] [paragraph] Qu’on (I, v)

23.9-10 St. . . . vérite.] “St. . . . vérite (1).” [footnote omitted]
(I, vi)

31.35 s’abstenait . . . vol] [in italics] (II, 136)

31.35-6 vol.” “Peut-être,” adds one author, “se] vol. peut-être, disent
les grandes chroniques, se (II, 136)

33.21-2 “Tels,” . . . “etaient] [paragraph] Tels etaient (II, 343)

33.22 du] des (II, 343)

33.22 siècle] siècles (II, 343)

Dumouriez, Charles François Du Périer.

note: the reference at 12 is in a quotation from Mignet

referred to: 12, 101

— La vie et les mémoires du general Dumouriez avec des notes et des
éclaircissemens historiques, 4 vols. Paris: Baudouin, 1822-23.

note: part of the Collection des mémoires, ed. Berville and Barriere,
q.v.

referred to: 89, 93, 97, 97n, 103

Dupin, Amandine Aurore Lucie, baronne Dudevant (“George Sand”).

referred to: 183

Dupin, André Marie Jean Jacques. Referred to: 189

Dupont de l’Eure, Jacques Charles.

note: the references at 320 and 321 are to him as the President of, and
that at 332 as one of the members of, the Provisional Government of
1848.

referred to: 198, 320, 321, 332, 333n

Edition: current; Page: [430]
Dupont de Nemours, Pierre Samuel.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle

referred to: 140

Duport, Adrien Jean François Referred to: 78, 80n

Durozoir, Charles. Biography of Turgot. In Biographie universelle
ancienne et moderne. Ed. Louis Gabriel Michaud. 52 vols. Paris: Michaud
frères, 1811-28, XLVII, 63-84.

note: the quotations of the same passage are in quotations from Carlyle,
the first is indirect.

quoted: 147, 166

referred to: 80

Dusaulx, Jean Joseph. De l’insurrection parisienne, et de la prise, de
la Bastille. In Mémoires de Linguet, sur la Bastille, et de Dusaulx, sur
le 14 juillet Ed. Saint Albin Berville and Jean François Barrière.
Paris: Baudoum, 1821.

note: the quotation (for collation see Carlyle French Revolution) and
references are in quotations from Carlyle, who appears to have used this
edition, which is part of Collection des mémoires, ed. Berville and
Barrière q.v. Carlyle so conflates and modifies his sources that precise
identification is usually impossible.

quoted: 152

referred to: 143-7

Du Val d’Eprémesnil, Jean Jacques.

note: the reference at 7 is in a quotation from Mignet Mignet and JSM
use the spelling Epréménil

referred to: 7, 74

Duveyrier, Charles. Lettres politiques. 2 vols. Paris: Beck and Amyot,
1843.

reviewed: 295-316

quoted: 301, 302, 303, 308, 308-9, 309, 309-10, 310, 311, 311-12, 312,
314

301.14-29 When . . . smaller.] [translated from.] Quand une place vient
à vaquer, grande ou petite, que se passe-t-il? Sur les quatre cent
cinquante députés qui sont au courant de tout, parce qu’ils ont le droit
de pénétrer chaque jour et à toute heure dans les bureaux du ministère,
il y en a vingt ou trente qui commencent le siége. La tactique est
simple. On dit au ministre. vous nommerez tel ou tel parent de tel de
mes électeurs, ou je vous retire mon appur. Que peut faire le ministre?
Louvoyer, opposer les prétentions et les exigences, donner de l’espoir à
tous, et attendre, pour prendre un parti, que de nouvelles vacances
viennent offrir l’expectative d’un dédommagement aux solliciteurs
éconduits. Heureuses les administrations comme celles de la marine, de
l’enregistrement et des domaines, de l’armée, où des règles ont d’avance
fixé le mode d’admission et d’avancement. Et encore, quelle latitude
offerte à la faveur! et dans l’exécution. trop souvent, quel mépris de
la justice! La faveur, voilà la plaie morale, la maladie chronique du
gouvernement. [4½-paragraph omission] Les mandataires de la bourgeoisie,
ne trouvant plus de privilégiés, au lieu d’abolir les priviléges s’en
emparèrent, et les électeurs, au lieu de s’indigner et de gourmander
leurs députés pour avoir usurpé les priviléges des gros emplois,
trouvèrent plus simple et plus avantageux de s’attribuer les petits (I,
168-70)

301.33-8 The . . . laws,] [translated from.] [no paragraph] Il ne faut
pas se faire illusion, le plus grand distributeur des graces
aujourd’hui, c’est le corps électoral, qui n’entretient ses mandataires
que d’intérêts de localité et de parenté, et qui circonscrit leurs
espérances de réélection dans une infinité de cercles si différens les
uns des autres, si changeans, si personnels, qu’il n’y a pas de ministre
qui puisse aborder une grande entreprise d’intérêt public avec la
certitude du succès, témoin M. Molé avec les chemins de fer, M. Guizot
avec l’union douanière, M. Cunin-Gridaine avec la loi des sucres. (I,
170-1)

302.37 Vous n’avez] En résumé, Monsieur [Guizot], vous n’avez (I, 66)

302.38 transformer . . . Redoutez les] transformer Soyez franchement
national dans le droit de visite; dans la politique intérieure redoutez
les (I, 66)

303.7 clarté.] clarté! (I, 67)

303.17-31 Politics . . . hesitate.] [translated from:] [no paragraph] La
politique, se disent-ils, a changé d’aspect; les esprits se sont calmés;
il n’y a plus de situation violente où de grands principes, de grandes
passions, de grands intérêts publics soient mis en question, dès-lors,
Edition: current; Page: [431] qu’importe que le candidat soit un peu
plus ou un peu moins de l’opposition, ce sera un peu plus ou un peu
moins de paroles dans un sens ou dans un autre. Franchement, quand on
voit les hommes d’Etat les plus opposés déclarer qu’ils ne
gouverneraient pas différemment les uns des autres, l’électeur n’est-il
pas en droit de traiter les questions de personnes avec indifference, et
de porter sur son intérét personnel le degré de sollicitude qu’il leur
eût accordé? [paragraph] Mais c’est horrible! la constitution alors est
faussée dans son principe, qui dit gouvernement représentatif dit un
gouvernement où l’opinion sincère du pays est avant tout
représentée!—Eh! sans doute! mais si le pays n’a pas d’opinion? Voilà un
incident que la constitution n’a pas prévu, et, croyez-moi, c’est le cas
de beaucoup d’électeurs, l’enquête l’a suffisamment prouvé Ne vous
étonnez donc pas que nombre de gens soient séduits par ce calcul naif.
“Voici un candidat qui fera le bonheur du pays, en voici un autre qui
fera le bonheur du pays et le mien, je serais un sot d’hésiter.” (II,
171-2)

308.35-7 “The . . . divided.”] [translated from.] [paragraph] Les
meilleurs esprits, les coeurs les plus dévoués a la royauté nouvelle ne
peuvent considérer aujourd’hui sans effroi le mince intervalle qui
sépare les deux forces entre lesquelles se partage désormais le
gouvernement, et les voyant armées pour l’attaque bien plus que pour la
défense, sans barrières, sans remparts qui les mettent à l’abri d’un
coup de main, les hommes d’Etat se demandent, si quelque circonstance
imprévue rallumait les hostilités, de quel côte serait la victoire (I,
71-2)

308.39-309.11 when . . . disappear.] [translated from.] [paragraph] Les
événemens enfantes par la première révolution avaient déjà prouve que
lorsque le pouvoir populaire et le pouvoir royal sont seuls en face l’un
de l’autre, la lutte commence et que l’un des deux doit inévitablement
dominer l’autre. Il est vrai qu’un principe nouveau a reglé leurs
rapports depuis l’établissement du 9 août, et peut-être n’a-t-on pas
suffisamment apprecie jusqu’à ce jour l’heureuse influence que doit
exercer sur nos destinées futures ce dernier compromis. Sous la
préoccupation des périls qui menaçaient la jeune monarchie, il etait
naturel qu’elle frappát davantage les esprits par ses lacunes que par
ses élemens d’ordre et de stabilite, c’est ce qui est arrivé [preceding
entry immediately follows] De la republique ou de la monarchie absolue,
ils se demandent laquelle doit inspirer le plus de crainte. Et c’est un
devoir d’instruire votre Altesse Royale que dans l’etat des esprits, la
republique n’est pas considerée comme le danger le plus imminent ni le
plus redoutable. “La sagesse du Roi. dit-on, a fortifié la royauté mais
les précautions par lesquelles le pouvoir populaire avait pretendu
assurer son contrôle ont tourne a sa confusion, la bourgeoisie ne fait
usage de ses droits que pour decomposer par l’intrigue des Cabinets qui
ne se maintiennent que par les faveurs. Perdant ainsi sa propre estime
par l’intrigue et l’estime des autres par les faveurs, quel frein
salutaire pourrait-elle opposer au pouvoir exécutif que l’intérêt des
ministres est d’etendre incessamment? Sous cette double déconsideration
qui paralyse l’action de ses mandataires, la France, dans un avenir plus
ou moins lointain, marche fatalement au despotisme. Mais après le
despotisme viennent les revolutions, et dans les révolutions les
dynasties disparaissent.” (I, 71-2)

309.16 La] [no paragraph] La (I, 74)

309.16 n’est-elle] n’est-ce (I, 74)

309.41-310.1 originated . . . too.] [translated from.] [paragraph] Si je
remonte à son origine, j’observe que la noblesse, dont nos pères ont vu
les derniers instans, avait pris naissance dans la diversité de
certaines fonctions militaires et dans les rapports hierarchiques qui
s’etaient etablis entr’elles Les ducs commandaient les armees, les
marquis veillaient sur les frontières, les comtes gouvernaient les
provinces, les barons étaient les principaux officiers attaches à la
personne du monarque, les chevaliers, des officiers inférieurs. La
plupart de ces fonctions furent d’abord personnelles et la noblesse
qu’elles conféraient l’etait aussi (I, 76-7)

310.5-9 Noblesse . . . dishonour.] [translated from.] [no paragraph]
Noblesse oblige! Tel etait le premier enseignement que recevait
l’héritier du nom Il avait l’obligation de tous les sentimens généreux,
de la magnificence, de l’intrépidite, tant était universelle l’opinion
que le titre etait seulement le signe d’une fonction, et les priviléges
qu’il conferait, la juste recompense de services publics, de devoirs
auxquels le titulaire n’aurait pu se soustraire sans lâchete et sans
déshonneur. (I, 77-8)

310.15-35 The . . . blood.] [translated from.] La question n’est pas
d’ennoblir les hommes en leur distribuant les titres de fonctions
publiques qui ont cesse d’exister depuis huit ou dix siècles. La
question aujourd’hui est d’ennoblir les fonctions modernes et les
emplois publics, et de les Edition: current; Page: [432] élever peu à
peu à un tel degré d’honneur que leurs qualifications deviennent, pour
les races futures, de véritables titres de noblesse. [paragraph] Ainsi,
la noblesse qu’il s’agit de créer c’est la noblesse gouvernementale, et,
à vrai dire, il n’en a jamais existé d’autre. Si l’on entend par
aristocratie, un corps d’individus distingués par des titres, par des
qualités auxquelles ne sont attachées aucunes des attributions du
Gouvernement, soyez assuré, Monseigneur, qu’il s’agit d’une noblesse à
son déclin, mais l’histoire nous l’a prouvé, à son origine, ou à son
apogée, toute aristocratie gouverne. Ce qu’il faut donc ennoblir
aujourd’hui, c’est la fonction, c’est le pouvoir, ce sont les charges
publiques. Il faut désirer voir se répandre cette idée que tout homme
qui prend part au gouvernement de son pays, doit montrer plus de vertu,
plus de patriotisme, plus de grandeur d’âme que le vulgaire. C’était
déjà l’esprit de l’ancienne noblesse, au temps de sa splendeur, il
existait des gens qui pouvaient subordonner l’intérêt de l’Etat à leurs
intérêts de famille, il y en avait d’autres pour qui c’était un devoir
constant de sacrifier la famille à l’Etat. Les premiers, lorsque
l’ennemi foulait le sol français, pouvaient sans déshonneur éviter le
danger, s’enfermer dans leurs maisons, se conserver pour leurs femmes et
leurs enfans; c’étaient les bourgeois, les vilains, taillables et
corvéables; mais les autres étaient obligés de tout quitter, femmes,
enfans, terres et manoir, pour voler à l’ennemi, c’étaient les nobles
qui devaient au Pays l’impôt du sang. (I, 83-4)

311.1-12 Fixity . . . incapacity.] [translated from.] La fixité d’abord,
rien de plus contraire à l’influence que doit exercer l’administrateur
sur ses administrés que ces fréquens changemens de résidence qui
permettent à un bien petit nombre de se familiariser avec les besoins
particuliers a leurs localités, et d’attirer la confiance publique.
[paragraph] La responsabilité ensuite, la centralisation excessive, qui
place dans la main des ministres, seuls responsables, la décision des
plus simples questions et la distribution des plus petits emplois,
enlève à l’exercice du pouvoir sa considération et son autorité. Le
crédit que tout employe inférieur peut opposer, par la personne des
députés, à la juste surveillance de ses supérieurs, détruit les liens de
la hiérarchie, decourage bien vite le zèle. Quel dévoûment attendre d’un
fonctionnaire qui ne peut ni protéger le talent, ni réprimer
l’insolence, ni congédier la paresse ou l’incapacité? (I, 85)

311.25-36 On . . . ornaments.] [translated from.] D’un côté, le rôle
politique imposé à la plupart des fonctionnaires administratifs, tous
les services relatifs aux élections et à la formation des majorités,
services qu’ils ont dû rendre à l’autorité supérieure en dehors de leurs
fonctions, ont diminué peu à peu la considération attachée à la carrière
des emplois publics et en ont éloigné les grands propriétaires, les
héritiers des noms illustres et des fortunes considérables. [paragraph]
De l’autre côté, la réduction excessive des traitemens a rendu de plus
en plus impossible l’exercice des fonctions administratives aux
personnes qui ne jouissent pas d’une fortune patrimoniale. L’absence de
concours et d’examens pour l’admission a la plupart des emplois civils,
la haute influence exercée sur les ministres, sur les distributeurs des
fonctions par les députés et les collèges électoraux ont éloigné, même
des places les plus minimes et les plus obscures, la classe nombreuse
d’où la république et l’empire avaient fait surgir tant de dévouemens et
tant d’illustrations (II, 4-5)

311.37-312.4 What . . . France? . . . The . . . propriété.] [translated
from.] [no paragraph] Qu’est-il resté de cette grande tentative
impériale qui honorait le genie et les services publics et savait leur
créer des positions égales aux plus grandes positions de la noblesse
européenne? Qu’est devenu aujourd’hui ce proverbe national qui etait
alors une vérité dans toutes les branches de l’activité administrative,
que le dernier conscrit portait dans sa giberne le bâton de maréchal de
France? [ellipsis indicates 4-sentence omission] [paragraph]
Aujourd’hui, les grandes existences créées par l’empire ne sont plus
qu’un souvenir; celle que la restauration n’avait pas créee, mais
qu’elle avait satisfaite, à qui elle avait donné la première part dans
le gouvernement des affaires communes, la grande propriété vit isolée,
mécontente, égarée sur ses propres intérêts, faisant alliance, par
dépit, avec ses ennemis les plus dangereux. La classe agricole et
ouvrière est reléguée dans ses fermes, dans ses ateliers, et aucune
sollicitude, aucun effort du gouvernement ne vient recruter dans son
sein les grands dévouemens, les grands génies, comme aux beaux jours de
la république et de l’empire. La bourgeoisie seule gouverne; nouvelle
égalité, nouveau nivellement qui prétend tout abaisser à de mesquines
proportions et concentrer tous les droits dans les régions moyennes de
la petite propriété (II, 41-2)

312.6-9 It . . . does . . . Every . . . budget.] [translated from.] On
dit avec raison que l’Américain ne croit pas à la misère, ce qui le rend
très entreprenant en industrie. Le Français y Edition: current; Page:
[433] croit. [ellipsis indicates 6-sentence omission] Tout petit
électeur est conservateur-né de son patrimoine, et ne voulant rien
hasarder pour l’établissement de ses enfans, il est invinciblement
entraîné à grossir l’éternel surnumérariat des petits emplois inscrits
au budget (II, 170)

312.19-23 The . . . suspicion.] [translated from.] Le pouvoir exécutif,
interdisant à ses agens toute démarche, toute influence officielle dans
les operations du corps électoral, rendrait immédiatement aux fonctions
publiques leur honneur et leur dignité. L’habileté veritable,
l’intelligence, l’expérience, le dévoûment, le patriotisme des
serviteurs de l’Etat ne seraient plus à tout instant mis en suspicion
(II, 34)

314.1-4 Elle forme . . . entier . . . L’oeuvre . . . civilisation.] On
reconnaîtra, ce qui est la conséquence du caractère, des moeurs, de
l’histoire du peuple français, que sa part dans le grand travail des
nations, c’est le perfectionnement des institutions publiques, de
l’égalite civile, de la sociabilité humaine et qu’elle forme . . .
entier. [ellipsis indicates 2-page omission] [paragraph] Quand la France
aura une intelligence nette de sa destinée sur le globe, quand un
Cabinet tout entier aura le courage de proclamer hautement que l’oeuvre
. . . civilisation, alors seulement les masses pourront comprendre toute
la grandeur du regne de Louis-Philippe (II, 127, 129)

— La pairie dans ses rapports avec la situation politique, son principe,
ses ressources, son avenir. Paris: Guyot, 1842.

reviewed: 297-316

quoted: 299, 299n, 303, 304, 305

299.27-8 “which . . . business.”] [translated in part from.] [paragraph]
Si la Pairie considerait ce mode comme son arche de salut, comme
l’unique moyen de conquérir le rang et le pouvoir auxquels elle a droit,
elle s’epuiserait en efforts impuissans, et sa tactique ne serait pas
sans danger, car prétendre introduire dans l’institution un nouveau
principe, quand la loi qui la constitue compte à peine dix années
d’existence, n’est-ce pas remettre en question la Charte tout entiere,
offrir une arme puissante aux partisans de la réforme, ranimer enfin de
vieilles querelles qui détournent l’esprit public des veritables
affaires du pays, et les hommes d’Etat de leur gestion? (2)

299n.4-8 “Study . . . created.”] [translated from.] “Etudiez les masses,
et vous verrez qu’il s’y passe quelque chose de semblable à la
disposition qui a precedé la majorite de Louis XIV après la Fronde, et
l’etablissement du Consulat a la fin du siècle dernier. Même lassitude,
même degoût du bruit et de l’agitation, même affaiblissement de l’esprit
de défiance, même indifference pour les droits qu’il avait créés (36-7)

303.36-304.2 There . . . manufactures.] [translated from.] Il a existe
depuis 1830 deux politiques distinctes. [paragraph] L’une, que l’on peut
appeler politique constituante, s’est appliquee à fonder la
constitution, à la développer, a la défendre contre les attaques des
partis et les répugnances de l’Europe. [paragraph] L’autre, que l’on
peut nommer politique des affaires, s’est appliquée à protéger, a
favoriser les interêts, les travaux de la societe dans les arts, les
sciences, la religion, l’organisation militaire et diplomatique,
l’administration intérieure, le commerce, l’agriculture, l’industrie (3)

304.6-34 Unhappily . . . fractions . . . Time . . . majority . . . Were
. . . remedy.] [translated from.] Malheureusement il n’en est pas ainsi
pour la politique des affaires, qui n’a pas encore inspiré aux hommes
d’Etat un programme, un systême de gouvernement special à cette
politique. Aussi, dès que l’existence de la monarchie n’est plus
menacee, dès que les principes fondamentaux des constitutions ne sont
plus mis en question, que voyons-nous? [paragraph] Le pouvoir devient
faible, incertain, embarrasse. La majorité se decompose en nuances
infinies, l’accord entre les Chambres semble compromis. [ellipsis
indicates omission of previous clause plus a page] Le temps a résolu la
plupart des questions de politique constituante soulevees au dedans et
au dehors par l’établissement du regime nouveau, et il donne aujourd’hui
la prépondérance en France et en Europe à la politique des affaires. Or,
il n’y a pas encore en France de systême de gouvernement dans les
affaires. L’opposition, à cet egard, n’est pas plus avancée que la
majorité. Nous croyons donc qu’au-dessus de la lutte des opinions et des
partis il y a, au moment où nous écrivons, un intérêt supérieur, une
necessite urgente qui domine tout, même la question de cabinet.
[ellipsis indicates omission of preceding sentence] [paragraph] Le
cabinet serait renversé, que celui qui lui succéderait rencontrerait
bientôt les mêmes attaques et les mêmes embarras, et il aurait moins de
force pour en triompher, car il n’arriverait pas pour Edition: current;
Page: [434] réparer des fautes, pour sauver le pays d’un dangereux
entraînement. Aucune grande situation ne se rattacherait à son
existence. Ce serait recommencer la carrière funeste des hésitations et
des tâtonnemens dont la dissolution du ministère Molé fut le prélude.
[preceding sentence omitted in translation] [paragraph] Avec un systême
général de gouvernement dans les affaires, la situation change.
[paragraph] S’il produit au grand jour et s’il rallie à lui les esprits
éminens de toutes les nuances de la majorité, de deux choses l’une: ou
le ministère l’adoptera, et il lui devra, dans ce cas, son salut, ou il
le dédaignera, et le systême alors deviendra un instrument d’opposition
d’où sortira tôt ou tard un cabinet durable. [paragraph] Telle est, au
fond, la véritable situation politique avec ses difficultés et ses
exigences. Le plus grand service que l’on puisse rendre aujourd’hui au
pays, c’est d’introduire au milieu de ses affaires si languissantes, si
épineuses, si complexes un systême général de gouvernement qui domine
les intrigues, les petites passions des coteries qui ont remplacé les
factions, et qui fasse intervenir dans les discussions un nouvel intérêt
public assez considérable pour imposer aux industries et aux localites
rivales l’union et l’accord. [paragraph] Douze années d’omnipotence
parlementaire ont prouve que cette tâche était au-dessus des forces de
la Chambre des députés. Les embarras les plus grands viennent de sa
propre composition Ce n’est pas d’elle qu’on doit attendre le remède
(4-6)

305.24-37 Every. . . . services.] [translated from.] En réalité, chaque
peuple renferme et renfermera toujours probablement une administration
et un public, c’est-a-dire deux sociétés l’une dont l’intérêt commun est
la loi suprême, ou le principe de l’hérédité ne distribue pas les
positions, qui classe les travailleurs d’après leur mérite, et les
rétribue d’après leurs oeuvres, et qui compense la modicité des salaires
par leur fixité et surtout par l’honneur et la considération l’autre,
composée de propriétaires, de capitalistes, de maîtres et d’ouvriers,
dont la loi suprême est celle de l’héritage, dont la règle principale de
conduite est l’intérêt personnel, dont la concurrence et la lutte sont
les éléments favoris. [paragraph] Ces deux sociéte [sic] se servent
mutuellement de contre-poids, elles agissent et réagissent
continuellement l’une sur l’autre. La tendance du public est
d’introduire dans l’administration le principe d’émulation qui lui
manque, le penchant de l’administration, conforme à sa mission, est
d’introduire de plus en plus dans la grande masse du public des élémens
d’ordre et de prevoyance. Dans cette double direction, l’administration
et le public se sont rendus et se rendent journellement des services
réciproques (12)

Edgar (of England). Referred to: 47n

Edward I (of England). Referred to: 38, 292

Edward III (of England). Referred to: 234

Edward (Prince of Wales).

note: known as the Black Prince.

referred to: 36n, 43

Edward the Confessor (of England). Referred to: 25

Eichhorn, Johann Gottfried. Antiqua historia ex ipsis veterum scriptorum
graecorum narrationibus contexta. 4 vols. Leipzig: Weidmann, 1811-12.

referred to: 368n

— Antiqua historia ex ipsis veterum scriptorum latinorum narrationibus
contexta. 2 vols. Leipzig: Hahn, 1811.

referred to: 368n

Elie, Jacob Job.

note: the references are in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 145, 146, 147

Elizabeth I (of England).

note: the reference at 293 is in a quotation from Guizot.

referred to: 293, 348

Ellis, George. See George Canning, “New Morality.”.

Ellis, George James Welbore Agar. The True History of the
State-Prisoner. Edition: current; Page: [435] Commonly Called “The Iron
Mask:” Extracted from Documents in the French Archives. London: Murray,
1826

note: reviewed, with Delort, by Francis Palgrave, Quarterly Review,
XXXIV (June, 1826), 19-35.

referred to: 62

Enghien, Louis Antoine Henri df Bourbon Condé, duc d’. See Charles X.
Mémoire.

Entragues. See Antraigues.

Epicurus.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 166

Epréménil. See Du Val d’Eprémesnil.

Escherny, François Louis, comte d’. La philosophie de la politique, ou
Principes généraux sur les institutions civiles, politiques et
religieuses. 2 vols. Paris: n.p., 1796.

note: the quotation is taken from an Appendix to Vol. II of Campan’s
Mémoires (q.v. for the collation).

quoted: 284-5

referred to: 285n

Estreville, Péronne d’.

note: the reference derives from Dulaure.

referred to: 49

Eudes I, duc de Bourgogne. Referred to: 29

Eudes, comte de Blois et de Champagne.

note: Eudes II of Blois, Eudes I of Champagne. JSM is mistaken in
referring to him as brother of Henry I.

referred to: 29

The Examiner

note: the reference is to the Examiner’s articles on France, 1830-34,
most of which were written by JSM himself.

referred to: 125

Exelmans, Rémi Joseph Isadore, comte. Speech in the French Chamber of
Peers (16 Dec., 1834), National, 17 Dec., 1834, 2.

note: JSM uses the spelling Excelmans.

referred to: 198

Fantin Des Odoards, Antoine Etienne Nicolas. Histoire philosophique de
la révolution de France (1796). New rev. ed. 4 vols. Paris: Perlet, et
al., 1797.

note: JSM uses the spelling Desodoards.

referred to: 75n

Faucher, Léonard Joseph. Referred to: 337

Fauchet, Claude, abbé.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 146

Fénelon, François Salignac de la Mothe.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Carlyle, derives from
Montgaillard.

referred to: 140

Ferdinand VII (of Spain). Referred to: 89, 179

Ferrières, Charles Elie, marquis de. Mémoires du marquis de Ferrières,
aveg une notice sur sa vie, des notes et des éclaircissemens historiques
(1821). 2nd ed. 3 vols. Paris: Baudouin, 1821-22.

Edition: current; Page: [436]
note: part of Collection des mémoires, ed. Berville and Barrière, q.v.

quoted: 88, 91, 96, 107

referred to: 73n, 74n, 75n, 76n, 85n, 87n, 88, 94, 96, 100n, 108

88.9-10 “Trente régimens,” . . . “marchaient . . . états”,] [paragraph]
Cependant trente régimens marchaient . . . états (I, 71)

88.16 étaient] s’étaient [treated as typographical error in this ed.]
(I, 130)

88.27 desseins] intérêts (I, 131)

88.28-9 au . . . Paris] [not in italics] (I, 131)

88.30 états-généraux] états (I, 131)

88.30 enlever les députés] [not in italics] (I, 131)

88.31 en . . . force] [not in italics] (I, 131)

88.32 dissoudre l’assemblée] [not in italics] (I, 131)

88.33 les] la [treated as typographical error in this ed.] (I, 131)

91.13-14 pas même une] pas une (I, 75)

91.16 “Ils] On eût dit que les nouveaux ministres, assures du succes,
laissaient marcher l’insurrection, et voulaient autoriser le déploiement
des mesures de rigueur qu’ils etaient résolus d’employer, ils (I,
115-16)

96.22-3 “ne . . . guerre, de sang, et de vengeance.”] La plupart,
indiscrets, bouffis d’orgueil, irrités de la moindre résistance, ne . .
. guerre, que de sang, que de vengeance (II, 254)

107.10-11 “les Girondins . . . vues,”] [paragraph] Les Girondins . . .
vues, c’était une mesure extrême qui avait ses dangers ils résolurent de
hasarder encore une démarche, et de tenter le rétablissement des trois
ministres disgraciés (III, 165)

107.19-20 “la république . . . Girondins”,] La république . . .
girondins, ni dans celle de la grande majorité de la nation (III, 242)

Ferron, Jourdan. Referred to: 49

Fielding, Henry. Joseph Andrews (1742). In Works with a Life of the
Author. 12 vols. London: Otridge and Rackham, et al., 1824, V-VI.

note: in SC. The reference is to Parson Adams.

referred to: 164

Fieschi, Giuseppe. Referred to: 178, 205, 208

Filicaja, Vincenzio da. “All’Italia, Sonnetto 1.” In Poesie toscane.
Florence: Matini, 1707.

quoted: 376n

376n.8 Dono . . . bellezza.] Italia, Italia, o tu, cui feo la Sorte /
Dono . . . bellezza, onde hai Funesta dote d’infiniti guai, / Che in
fronte scritti per gran doglia porte (320, ll. 1-4)

Flesselles, Jacques de.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 145

Flocon, Ferdinand.

note: the reference at 321 is to him as one of four accepted into the
Provisional Government of 1848, that at 332 is to him as one of its
members.

referred to: 321, 332

Florus, Drepanius. “Querela de divisione imperii post mortem Ludovici
Pii.” In Recueil des historiens des Gaules et de la France. Ed. Martin
Bouquet, et al. 24 vols. Paris: Aux dépens des libraires associés, et
al., 1738-1904, VII, 301-4.

note: the reference derives from Guizot.

referred to: 280

Fonfrède, Jean Baptiste Boyer. Referred to: 107

Fouché, Joseph.

note: the quotation (repeated) has not been located in a primary source.

quoted: 174, 175

referred to: 174

Edition: current; Page: [437]
Foullon, Joseph François.

note: the reference at 9 is in a quotation from Mignet, who uses the
spelling Foulon, that at 87 is to him as a member of the new ministry
following Necker’s dismissal.

referred to: 9, 87

Foy, Maximilien Sébastien. Referred to: 177

Francis I. See François I.

Francis of Assisi. See St. Francis.

François I (of France).

note: the reference at 253 is in a quotation from Michelet, that at 341
is in a quotation from Lamartine.

referred to: 253, 341

Frayssinous, Denis, comte (évéque de Hermopolis). Speech of 26 May, 1826
(Deputies), Le Moniteur Universel, 29 May, 1826, 819-20.

referred to: 189

— Speech of 4 July, 1826 (Peers), Le Moniteur Universel, 6 July, 1826,
1021.

referred to: 189

Frederick II (Holy Roman Emperor).

note: the reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 248

Frederick II (of Prussia).

note: known as the Great. The reference is in a quotation from Carlyle,
who refers to him as “the great Fritz.”

referred to: 165

Frederick William II (of Prussia).

note: the reference is to him as the “infuriated despot.”

referred to: 78

Froissart, Jean. Chroniques. In Collection des chroniques nationales
françaises écrites en langue vulgaire du treizièmé au seizième siecle.
Ed. Jean Alexandre Buchon. 48 vols. Paris: Verdière, 1824-26, I-XV.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference.

referred to: 36n, 185

Galt, John. Ringan Gilhaize, or, The Covenanters. 3 vols. Edinburgh:
Oliver and Boyd, 1823.

referred to: 57

Gardien, Jean François Martin.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Mignet, is to the members of
the Commission of Twelve.

referred to: 12

Garnier-Pagès, Louis Antoine.

note: the references are to him as one of the members of the Provisional
Government of 1848.

referred to: 321, 332

— Speech in the French National Assembly (24 Oct., 1848), Moniteur, 25
Oct., 1848, 2966-7.

note: the French original, to which the collation applies, is given by
JSM in his footnote.

quoted: 328, 328n

328n 4-8 “Je le . . . France?”] Depuis, dans un jour de colere, le
peuple entier, les ouvriers, la garde nationale, l’armée elle-même, tout
le peuple se souleva, et notre glorieuse revolution de février fut
faite: et ici, je dis à tous et je le demande à tous, est-ce que dans le
premier jour il n’était pas évident que la revolution qui se faisait
etait une revolution politique et morale, surtout Edition: current;
Page: [438] morale? est-ce qu’il n’était pas évident aux yeux de tous
que cette grande révolution avait été précédée par une réaction réelle,
irrésistible, contre la corruption, dans tout ce qu’il y avait d’honnête
et de généreux dans le coeur de la France? (2966)

Gazette de France.

note: the reference, an indirect quotation in a quotation from Dulaure,
is to criticism of Dulaure’s Histoire (q.v.) in Oct., 1821; the specific
terms do not occur in the mention of the work on 18 Oct., or in the
review of it on 30 Aug.

referred to: 21n

Genghis Khan. Referred to: 24

Gensonné, Armand.

note: the references at 102-3 are in a quotation from Bailleul. See also
Guadet, “Copie.”

referred to: 102-3, 106, 107, 108

Georgel, Jean François. Mémoires pour servir à l’histoire des événemens
de la fin du dix-huitième siècle depuis 1760 jusqu’en 1806-1810, par un
contemporain impartial. 6 vols. Paris: Eymery and Delaunay, 1817-18.

referred to: 79n, 108

Georget.

note: not otherwise identified, the reference is in a quotation from
Carlyle.

referred to: 145

Gerbert. See Sylvester II.

Gibbon, Edward. The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.
6 vols. London: Strahan and Cadell, 1776-88.

referred to: 134, 136, 264

Gildas. Opus novum. Gildas britannus monachus cui sapientis cognomatu
est inditum, de calamitate excidio, & conquestu britanniae, quam angliam
nunc vocant, author vetustus a multis diu desyderatus, & nuper in
gratiam. Ed. Polydore Vergil and Robert Ridley. London: Tonstall, 1525.

note: Gildas is the source for the story that Aetius, a Roman consul,
received in 446 ad a letter entitled “The Groans of the Britons.” The
reference is in a quotation from Guizot.

referred to: 263

Girardin, Emile de. Referred to: 212n

Glück, Christoph Willibald von. Iphegenia in Aulis (1774).

note: the reference, in a quotation from Carlyle, is to an anecdote told
by Guillaume Olivier de Corancez in the Journal de Paris, 21 Aug., 1788,
1009-10.

referred to: 147

Godwin (Earl of Wessex). Referred to: 25, 26

Godwin, William. Things As They Are, or, The Adventures of Caleb
Williams (1794) 4th ed. 3 vols. London: Simpkin and Marshall, 1816.

note: in SC.

referred to: 157, 299

Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von.

note: see also Sarah Austin, Characteristics.

referred to: 184

— Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre (1795-96). In Werke. 55 vols. in 36.
Stuttgart and Tübingen: Cotta’schen Buchhandlung, 1828-33, XVIII-XX.

note: in SC. The quotation is in a quotation from Carlyle.

quoted: 151

referred to: 379

151.3-4 “Man,”. . . . “is for ever interesting to man, nay, properly
there is nothing else interesting.”] [translated from:] Sie haben Recht,
versetzte er mit einiger. Verlegenheit, der Edition: current; Page:
[439] Mensch ist dem Menschen das Interessanteste und sollte ihn
vielleicht ganz allein interessieren (XVIII, 158, II, iv)

Goldsmith, Oliver.

note: for examples of Goldsmith’s generosity, see Thomas Percy, “Life of
Dr. Oliver Goldsmith,” in The Miscellaneous Works of Oliver Goldsmith, 4
vols. (London: Johnson, et al., 1801), I, 1-118.

referred to: 214

— The History of England, from the Earliest Times to the Death of George
II. 4 vols. London: Davies, et al., 1771.

referred to: 367

Gomaire, Jean René.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Mignet, is to the members of
the Commission of Twelve.

referred to: 12

Gondran.

note: not otherwise identified than as a Captain, the quotation is in a
quotation from Carlyle.

quoted: 157

Goudchaux, Michel. “Déposition de M. Goudchaux, à titre de renseignement
(25 juillet).” In Rapport de la commission d’enquéte (q.v.), I, 288-90.

referred to: 328

Gouvion, Jean Baptiste.

note: the references are in quotations from Carlyle, who refers to him
as de Gouvion.

referred to: 151-2, 153

Gramont, Antoine, duc de. Mémoires du marechal de Gramont. In Collection
des mémoires relatifs à l’histoire de France. Ed. Claude Bernard
Petitot. 2nd ser. 78 vols. Paris: Foucault, 1820-29, LVI, 243-LVII, 118.

referred to: 376

Grégoire, Henri, abbé. Referred to: 177, 177n

Gregory I (the Great). See St. Gregory I.

Gregory VII. See St. Gregory VII.

Gregory IX (Pope).

note: the reference is in a quotation from Sismondi.

referred to: 39

Gregory of Tours. See St. Gregory of Tours.

Grey, Charles (Lord). Referred to: 329

Guadet, Marguerite Elie.

note: the reference at 102-3 is in a quotation from Bailleul, that at
105 is in a quotation from Toulongeon.

referred to: 102-3, 105, 106, 107, 108

—, et al. “Copie de la lettre écrite au citoyen Boze, par Guadet,
Vergniaud et Gensonné.” In Charles François Du Périer Dumouriez. La vie
et les mémoires (q.v.), II, 422-6.

referred to: 103

Guibert.

note: Abbot of Nogent. The quotation derives from Sismondi (q.v. for the
collation).

quoted: 31

Guillaume.

note: brother-in-law of Guy de la Roche-Guyon.

referred to: 32

Guillaume de Nogaret. Referred to: 244

Edition: current; Page: [440]
Guinard, Auguste.

note: the reference is to the leading members of the Société des Droits
de l’Homme.

referred to: 128

Guizot, François Pierre Guillaume.

note: the reference at 301 is in a quotation from Duveyrier.

referred to: 134n, 185, 188, 190, 192, 193, 227-30, 231, 259-94 passim,
301, 302, 367-93

— Cours d’histoire moderne: histoire de la civilisation en France,
depuis la chute de l’empire romain jusqu’en 1789, 5 vols. Paris: Pichon
and Didier, 1829-32.

note: in SC, with “I” to “V” on spines: cf. the next entry, which has
the same general title. We have adopted the short title JSM uses, i.e.,
Civilisation en France.

reviewed: 257-94, 367-93

quoted: 271-2, 275, 276, 276-7, 277, 277-8, 278, 279, 280, 281, 286-7,
287, 287-8, 375, 376, 377, 378, 389, 389-90, 392

referred to: 186, 228, 229, 230, 231

271.36-272 41 Liberty . . . authority.] [translated from.] Un fait
immense, et beaucoup trop peu remarqué, à mon avis, me frappe d’abord,
c’est que le principe de la liberté de penser, le principe de toute
philosophie, la raison se prenant elle-même pour point de départ et pour
guide, est une idée essentiellement fille de l’antiquité, une idée que
la société moderne tient de la Grèce et de Rome. Nous ne l’avons
évidemment reçue ni du Christianisme, ni de la Germanie, car elle
n’était contenue ni dans l’un ni dans l’autre de ces élemens de notre
civilisation. Elle était puissante au contraire, dominante dans la
civilisation gréco-romaine c’est là sa véritable origine, c’est la le
legs le plus précieux qu’ait fait l’antiquité au monde moderne, legs qui
n’a jamais été absolument suspendu et sans valeur, car vous avez vu
l’idée mère de la philosophie, le droit de la raison a partir
d’elle-même, animant les ouvrages et la vie de Jean-le-Scot, et le
principe de la liberte de la pensée debout encore, au IXe siècle, en
face du principe de l’autorité (III, 191-2)

275.15-44 We . . . it.] [translated from.] [no paragraph] Tout à
l’heure, nous assistions au dernier âge de la civilisation romaine, et
nous la trouvions en pleine décadence, sans force, sans fecondité, sans
éclat, incapable, pour ainsi dire, de subsister. La voilà vaincue,
ruinée par les barbares, et tout à coup elle reparaît, puissante,
féconde, elle exerce sur les institutions et les moeurs qui s’y viennent
associer, un prodigieux empire, elle leur imprime de plus en plus son
caractère, elle domine, elle métamorphose ses vainqueurs. [paragraph]
Deux causes, entre beaucoup d’autres, ont produit ce résultat la
puissance d’une legislation civile, forte et bien liée, l’ascendant
naturel de la civilisation sur la barbarie. [paragraph] En se fixant, en
devenant propriétaires, les barbares contractèrent, soit entre eux, soit
avec les Romains, des relations beaucoup plus variées et plus durables
que celles qu’ils avaient connues jusqu’alors, leur existence civile
prit plus d’etendue et de permanence. La loi romaine pouvait seule la
régler, elle seule était en mesure de suffire à tant de rapports. Les
barbares, tout en conservant leurs coutumes, tout en demeurant les
maîtres du pays, se trouvèrent pris, pour ainsi dire, dans les filets de
cette législation savante, et obligés de lui soumettre, en grande
partie, non sans doute sous le point de vue politique, mais en matière
civile, le nouvel ordre social. [paragraph] Le spectacle seul de la
civilisation romaine exerçait d’ailleurs sur leur imagination un grand
empire. Ce qui émeut aujourd’hui notre imagination, ce qu’elle cherche
avec avidité dans l’histoire, les poèmes, les voyages, les romans, c’est
le spectacle d’une société étrangere à la régularité de la nôtre; c’est
la vie sauvage, son indépendance, sa nouveauté, ses aventures. Autres
étaient les impressions des barbares; c’est la civilisation qui les
frappait, qui leur semblait grande et merveilleuse: les monumens de
l’activité romaine, ces cités, ces routes, ces aqueducs, ces arènes,
toute cette société si régulière, si prévoyante, si variée dans sa
fixité, c’était là le sujet de leur étonnement, de leur admiration.
Vainqueurs, ils se sentaient inférieurs aux vaincus, le barbare pouvait
mépriser individuellement le romain, mais le monde romain, dans son
ensemble, lui apparaissait comme quelque chose de supérieur, et tous les
grands hommes de l’âge de la conquête, les Alaric, les Ataulphe, les
Théodoric et tant d’autres, en détruisant et foulant aux pieds la
société romaine, faisaient tous leurs efforts pour l’imiter (I, 386-8)

276.26-33 The . . . mankind? . . .] [translated from.] [no paragraph] On
lui rend même souvent des hommages aveugles, on lui prodigue, pour ainsi
dire, au hasard le génie et la gloire. Et en même temps, on répète qu’il
n’a rien fait, rien fondé, que son empire, ses lois, toutes ses oeuvres
Edition: current; Page: [441] ont péri avec lui. Et ce lieu commun
historique amène une foule de lieux communs moraux sur l’impuissance des
grands hommes, leur inutilité, la vanité de leurs desseins, et le peu de
traces réelles qu’ils laissent dans le monde, apres l’avoir sillonné en
tous sens. [paragraph] Tout cela serait-il vrai, Messieurs? La destinée
des grands hommes ne serait-elle en effet que de peser sur le genre
humain et de l’étonner? [final ellipsis indicates 3-sentence omission]
(II, 262-3)

276.34-277.30 At . . . him.] [translated from.] Au premier aspect, il
semble qu’il en soit ainsi, et que le lieu commun ait raison. Ces
victoires, ces conquétes, ces institutions, ces réformes, ces desseins,
toute cette grandeur, toute cette gloire de Charlemagne se sont
évanouies avec lui, on dirait un météore sorti tout à coup des ténèbres
de la barbarie pour s’aller perdre et éteindre aussitôt dans les
ténèbres de la feodalité. Et l’exemple n’est pas unique dans l’histoire,
le monde a vu plus d’une fois, nous avons vu nous-mêmes un empire
semblable, un empire qui prenait plaisir à se comparer à celui de
Charlemagne, et en avait le droit, nous l’avons vu tomber également avec
un homme. [paragraph] Gardez-vous cependant, Messieurs, d’en croire ici
les apparences, pour comprendre le sens des grands événemens et mesurer
l’action des grands hommes, il faut pénétrer plus avant. [paragraph] Il
y a dans l’activité d’un grand homme deux parts, il joue deux rôles, on
peut marquer deux époques dans sa carrière. Il comprend mieux que tout
autre les besoins de son temps, les besoins réels, actuels, ce qu’il
faut a la société contemporaine pour vivre et se développer
régulierement. Il le comprend, dis-je mieux que tout autre, et il sait
aussi mieux que tout autre s’emparer de toutes les forces sociales et
les diriger vers ce but, De là son pouvoir et sa gloire c’est là ce qui
fait qu’il est, des qu’il paraît, compris, accepté, suivi, que tous se
prétent et concourent a l’action qu’il exerce au profit de tous.
[paragraph] Il ne s’en tient point là les besoins réels et genéraux de
son temps à peu pres satisfaits, la pensée et la volonte du grand homme
vont plus loin. Il s’élance hors des faits actuels, il se livre à des
vues qui lui sont personnelles, il se complaît à des combinaisons plus
ou moins vastes, plus ou moins spécieuses, mais qui ne se fondent point,
comme ses premiers travaux, sur l’état positif, les instincts communs,
les voeux determines de la sociéte, en combinaisons lointaines et
arbitraires, il veut, en un mot, étendre indéfiniment son action,
posséder l’avenir comme il a possédé le présent. [paragraph] Ici
commencent l’egoisme et le réve pendant quelque temps, et sur la foi de
ce qu’il a déjà fait, on suit le grand homme dans cette nouvelle
carrière; on croit en lui, on lui obéit, on se prête, pour ainsi dire, à
ses fantaisies, que ses flatteurs et ses dupes admirent même et vantent
comme ses plus sublimes conceptions. Cependant le public, qui ne saurait
demeurer long-temps hors du vrai, s’aperçoit bientôt qu’on l’entraîne où
il n’a nulle envie d’aller, qu’on l’abuse et qu’on abuse de lui. Tout à
l’heure le grand homme avait mis sa haute intelligence, sa puissante
volonte au service de la pensee generale, du voeu commun, maintenant il
veut employer la force publique au service de sa propre pensee, de son
propre désir, lui seul sait et veut ce qu’il fait. On s’en inquiète
d’abord, bientôt on s’en lasse, on le suit quelque temps mollement, à
contre-coeur, puis on se recrie, on se plaint, puis enfin on se sépare,
et le grand homme reste seul, et il tombe: et tout ce qu’il avait pense
et voulu seul, toute la partie purement personnelle et arbitraire de ses
oeuvres tombe avec lui (II, 263-5)

277.35-8 “They . . . necessity.”] [translated from.] [paragraph] De ce
tableau seul il resulte clairement que ces guerres ne ressemblent point
a celles de la première race ce ne sont point des dissensions de tribu à
tribu, de chef à chef, des expéditions entreprises dans un but
d’établissement ou de pillage, ce sont des guerres systematiques,
politiques, inspirees par une intention de gouvernement, commandées par
une certaine necessite (II, 273)

277.42-278.24 At . . . changed] [translated from:] A la mort de
Charlemagne, la conquête cesse, l’unité s’évanouit, l’empire se demembre
et tombe en tous sens, mais est-il vrai que rien n’en reste, que toute
l’oeuvre guerrière de Charlemagne disparaisse, qu’il n’ait rien fait,
rien fondé? [paragraph] Il n’y a qu’un moyen de répondre à cette
question il faut se demander si, après Charlemagne, les peuples qu’il
avait gouvernes se sont retrouvés dans le même etat, si cette double
invasion qui, au nord et au midi, menaçait leur territoire, leur
religion et leur race, a repris son cours; si les Saxons, les Slaves,
les Avares, les Arabes ont continué de tenir dans un etat d’ébranlement
et d’angoisse les possesseurs du sol romain. Evidemment, il n’en est
rien. Sans doute l’empire de Charlemagne se dissout, mais il se dissout
en Etats particuliers qui s’élèvent comme autant de barrières sur tous
les points où subsiste encore le danger. Avant Charlemagne, les
frontières de Germanie, d’Italie, d’Espagne, étaient dans une
fluctuation continuelle, aucune force politique, constituée, n’y était
en permanence, aussi etait-il contraint de se transporter sans Edition:
current; Page: [442] cesse d’une frontière à l’autre, pour opposer aux
envahisseurs la force mobile et passagère de ses armées. Après lui, de
vraies barrières politiques, des Etats plus ou moins bien organisés,
mais réels et durables, s’élèvent: les royaumes de Lorraine,
d’Allemagne, d’Italie, des deux Bourgognes, de Navarre, datent de cette
époque, et malgré les vicissitudes de leur destinée, ils subsistent et
suffisent pour opposer au mouvement d’invasion une résistance efficace.
Aussi ce mouvement cesse, ou ne se reproduit plus que par la voie des
expéditions maritimes, désolantes pour les points qu’elles atteignent,
mais qui ne peuvent se faire avec de grandes masses d’hommes, ni amener
de grands résultats [paragraph] Quoique la vaste domination de
Charlemagne ait disparu avec lui, il n’est donc pas vrai de dire qu’il
n’ait rien fondé, il a fondé tous les Etats qui sont nés du démembrement
de son Empire. Ses conquêtes sont entrées dans des combinaisons
nouvelles, mais ses guerres ont atteint leur but. La forme a changé,
mais au fond l’oeuvre est restée. (II, 276-8)

278.39-41 “The . . . departed.”] [translated from.] Je crois en effet
qu’il l’avait essayé, mais qu’il y avait très-peu réussi, malgré l’unité
malgré l’activité de sa pensée et de son pouvoir, le désordre était
autour de lui immense, invincible, il le réprimait un moment, sur un
point, mais le mal régnait partout où ne parvenait pas sa terrible
volonté, et là où elle avait passe, il recommençait dès qu’elle s’était
éloignée. (II, 278-9)

279.14-40 Is . . . much] [translated from:] [no paragraph] Maintenant je
reproduis ici la question que j’élevais tout à l’heure sur les guerres
de Charlemagne est-il vrai, est-il possible que, de ce gouvernement si
actif, si puissant, rien ne soit resté, que tout ait disparu avec
Charlemagne, qu’il n’ait rien fondé au dedans et pour l’état social?
[paragraph] Ce qui est tombe avec Charlemagne, ce qui tenait à lui seul
et ne pouvait lui survivre, c’est le gouvernement central. Après s’être
prolongées quelque temps sous Louis le débonnaire et Charles le chauve,
mais de plus en plus sans force et sans effet, les assemblées générales,
les missi dominici, toute l’administration centrale et souveraine ont
disparu, mais il n’en a pas été ainsi du gouvernement local, de ces
ducs, comtes, vicaires, centeniers, bénéficiers, vassaux, qui, sous
Charlemagne, en exerçaient les pouvoirs. Avant lui, le désordre n’était
pas moindre dans chaque localité que dans l’Etat en général les
propriétés, les magistratures changeaient sans cesse de main, aucune
régularité, aucune permanence dans les situations et les influences
locales. Pendant les quarante-six années de son gouvernement, elles
eurent le temps de s’affermir sur le même sol, dans les mêmes familles,
elles devinrent stables, première condition du progrès qui devait les
rendre indépendantes, héréditaires, c’est-à-dire en faire les élémens du
regime féodal Rien a coup sûr ne ressemble moins à la féodalité que
l’unité souveraine à laquelle aspirait Charlemagne; et pourtant c’est
lui qui en a été le véritable fondateur c’est lui qui, en arrêtant le
mouvement extérieur de l’invasion, en réprimant jusqu’à un certain point
le désordre intérieur, a donné aux situations, aux fortunes, aux
influences locales, le temps de prendre vraiment possession du
territoire et de ses habitans. Après lui, son gouvernement général a
peri comme ses conquêtes, la souveraineté unique comme l’empire, mais de
même que l’empire s’est dissous en Etats particuliers qui ont vecu d’une
vie forte et durable, de même, la souveraineté centrale de Charlemagne
s’est dissoute en une multitude de souverainetés locales qui avaient
puise dans sa force et acquis, pour ainsi dire, sous son ombre, les
conditions de la réalité et de la durée. En sorte que sous ce second
point de vue, et en pénétrant au delà des apparences, il a beaucoup fait
et beaucoup fondé. (II, 293-5)

280.11-22 This . . . duration.] [translated from.] C’était là, en lui,
la part de l’égoisme et du rêve; ce fut en cela aussi qu’il échoua
L’empire romain et son unité répugnaient invinciblement à la nouvelle
distribution de la population, aux relations nouvelles, au nouvel état
moral des hommes, la civilisation romaine ne pouvait plus entrer que
comme un élément transformé dans le monde nouveau qui se préparait.
Cette pensée, ce voeu de Charlemagne n’étaient point une pensée, un
besoin public. Ce qu’il avait fait pour l’accomplir périt avec lui. De
cela même, cependant, quelque chose resta; ce nom d’empire d’occident
qu’il avait relevé, et les droits qu’on croyait attachés au titre
d’empereur, rentrèrent, si je puis ainsi parler, au nombre des élémens
de l’histoire, et furent encore, pendant plusieurs siècles, un objet
d’ambition, un principe d’évènemens. En sorte que, même dans la portion
purement égoiste et éphemère de ses oeuvres, on ne peut pas dire que la
pensée de Charlemagne ait été absolument stérile, ni que toute durée lui
ait manqué. (II, 306-7)

Edition: current; Page: [443]
281.7-23 The . . . Charlemagne.] [translated from.] Or, l’état moral et
l’état social des peuples, à cette époque, répugnaient également à toute
association, à tout gouvernement unique et étendu. Les hommes avaient
peu d’idées et des idees fort courtes. Les relations sociales étaient
rares et étroites. L’horizon de la pensée et celui de la vie étaient
extrêmement bornés. A de telles conditions, une grande société est
impossible. Quels en sont les liens naturels, nécessaires? d’une part le
nombre et l’étendue des relations, de l’autre le nombre et l’etendue des
idées par lesquelles les hommes communiquent et se tiennent. Dans un
pays et un temps ou il n’y a ni relations ni idées nombreuses et
étendues, évidemment les liens d’une grande société, d’un grand Etat,
sont impossibles. C’était-là précisément le caractère de l’époque dont
nous nous occupons. Les conditions fondamentales d’une grande société
n’y existaient donc pas. De petites sociétés, des gouvernemens locaux,
des sociétés et des gouvernemens taillés en quelque sorte la a mesure
des idées et des relations humaines, cela seul était possible. Cela seul
en effet réussit a se fonder [paragraph] Les élémens de ces petites
sociétes, de ces petits gouvernmens locaux, etaient tout trouvés. Les
possesseurs de bénéfices tenus du roi ou de domaines occupés par la
conquéte, les comtes, les ducs, les gouverneurs de provinces etaient
semes ça et la sur le territoire. Ils devinrent les centres naturels
d’associations correspondantes Autour d’eux s’agglomererent, de gré ou
de force, les habitans, libres ou esclaves, des environs, et ainsi se
formerent ces petits Etats, ces fiefs dont je parlais tout a l’heure, et
une multitude d’autres moins importans, et qui n’ont pas eu la même
existence historique. C’est-la, Messieurs, la cause dominante, la vraie
cause de la dissolution de l’empire de Charlemagne. (II, 451-2)

286.23-287.3 No . . . will.] [translated from.] Que la réforme sociale
qui s’est accomplie de notre temps, sous nos yeux, soit immense, nul
homme de sens ne le peut contester. Jamais les relations humaines n’ont
eté réglees avec plus de justice, jamais il n’en est resulte un
bien-être plus général. [paragraph] Non-seulement la rétorme sociale est
grande, mais je suis convaincu qu’une réforme morale correspondante
s’est aussi accomplie, qu’a aucune epoque peut-être il n’y a eu, à tout
prendre, autant d’honnéteté dans la vie humaine, autant d’hommes vivant
régulièrement, que jamais une moindre somme de force publique n’a été
necessaire pour réprimer les volontés individuelles. La moralite
pratique a fait, j’en suis convaincu, presque les mêmes progrès que le
bien-être et la prospérite du pays. [paragraph] Mais sous un autre point
de vue, nous avons, je crois, beaucoup à gagner, et nous sommes
justement reprochables. Nous avons vécu, depuis cinquante ans, sous
l’empire d’idees generales de plus en plus accreditees et puissantes,
sous le poids d’évenemens redoutables, presque irresistibles. Il en est
resulte une certaine faiblesse, une certaine mollesse dans les esprits
et dans les caracteres. Les convictions et les volontés individuelles
manquent d’énergie et de confiance en elles-mêmes. On croit à une
opinion commune, on obéit à une impulsion génerale, on cede à une
necessite exterieure. Soit pour résister, soit pour agir, chacun a peu
d’idee de sa propre force, peu de confiance dans sa propre pensée.
L’individualité, en un mot, l’energie intime et personnelle de l’homme
est faible et timide. Au milieu des progrès de la liberté genérale,
beaucoup d’hommes semblent avoir perdu le sentiment fier et puissant de
leur propre liberte. [paragraph] Messieurs, tel n’était pas le moyen
âge. La condition sociale y etait déplorable, la moralité humaine fort
inferieure à ce qu’on en a dit, fort inférieure à celle de nos jours.
Mais dans beaucoup d’hommes, l’individualité etait forte, la volonté
énergique. Il y avait alors peu d’idees generales qui dominassent tous
les esprits, peu d’événemens qui, dans toutes les parties du territoire,
dans toutes les situations, pesassent sur les caractères. L’individu se
déployait pour son compte, selon son penchant, irregulierement et avec
confiance, la nature morale de l’homme apparaissait çà et là dans toute
son ambition, avec toute son énergie. Spectacle non-seulement
dramatique, attachant, mais instructif et utile, qui ne nous offre rien
à regretter, rien à imiter, mais beaucoup à apprendre, ne fût-ce qu’en
eveillant sans cesse notre attention sur ce qui nous manque, en nous
montrant ce que peut un homme quand il sait croire et vouloir. (IV,
29-31)

287.19-22 “Accordingly . . . nature.”] [translated from.] Aussi.
independamment de toute cause étrangère, par sa seule nature, par sa
tendance propre, la societé féodale etait-elle toujours en question,
toujours sur le point de se dissoudre, incapable du moins de subsister
regulièrement et de se développer sans se dénaturer. (IV, 366)

287.28-9 “A . . . fiefs.”] [translated from.] [paragraph] Et d’abord une
prodigieuse inegalité s’introduisit très-vite entre les possesseurs de
fiefs. (IV, 366)

Edition: current; Page: [444]
287.30-288.3 Thus . . . subordinate.] [translated from.] Ainsi,
Messieurs, par cela seul que le lien social manquait à la féodalité, les
libertés féodales périssaient rapidement, les excès de l’indépendance
individuelle compromettaient perpétuellement la societé, elle ne
trouvait, dans les relations des possesseurs de fiefs, ni de quoi se
maintenir régulièrement, ni de quoi se développer, elle eut recours à
d’autres principes, à des principes contraires à ceux de la féodalite,
elle chercha dans d’autres institutions les moyens dont elle avait
besoin pour devenir permanente, régulière, progressive. La tendance vers
la centralisation, vers la formation d’un pouvoir supérieur aux pouvoirs
locaux, fut rapide. Bien avant que la royauté générale, la royauté qui
est devenue la royauté française, intervînt sur tous les points du
territoire, il s’y était formé, sous les noms de duché, de comté, de
vicomté, etc., plusieurs petites royautés, investies du gouvernement
central, dans telle ou telle province, et sous la main desquelles les
droits des possesseurs de fiefs, c’est-à-dire les souverainetés locales,
s’abaissaient de plus en plus (IV, 370-1)

375.13-23 I . . . epoch.] [translated from.] Je porte mes regards sur
les temps de la plus grande activité intellectuelle de l’Angleterre, sur
les époques où il semble que les idees, le mouvement des esprits aient
tenu le plus de place dans son histoire, je prends la crise politique et
religieuse des XVIe et XVIIe siècles. Personne n’ignore quel prodigieux
mouvement a travaille alors l’Angleterre. Quelqu’un pourrait-il me dire
quel grand systeme philosophique, quelles grandes doctrines générales,
et devenues européennes, ce mouvement a enfantés? Il a eu d’immenses et
admirables résultats, il a fondé des droits, des moeurs, il a
non-seulement puissamment agi sur les relations sociales, mais sur les
âmes, il a fait des sectes, des enthousiastes; il n’a guere éleve ni
agrandi, directement du moins, l’horizon de l’esprit humain, il n’a
point allumé un de ces grands flambeaux intellectuels qui éclairent
toute une époque (I, 12)

376.11-17 No . . . it.] [translated from.] Il n’y a personne qui ne
sache quelle a ete depuis cinquante ans l’activité de l’esprit en
Allemagne, dans tous les genres, en philosophie, en histoire, en
littérature, en poesie, il s’est avancé tres-loin, on peut dire qu’il
n’a pas toujours suivi les meilleures voies, on peut contester une
partie des résultats auxquels il est arrive, mais quant a l’énergie, à
l’étendue du développement même, il est impossible de les contester. A
coup sûr, l’état social, la condition publique, n’a point marché du même
pied (I, 15)

377.29-42 There . . . country . . . which . . . myself . . . if . . .
civilization.] [translated from.] Il y a un autre grand pays dont en
vérité je parle par egard, par respect pour un peuple noble et
malheureux, plutôt que par nécessité, je veux dire l’Espagne. Ni les
grands esprits, ni les grands évènemens n’ont manqué à l’Espagne,
l’intelligence et la societé humaine y ont apparu quelquefois dans toute
leur gloire, mais ce sont des faits isolés, jetés çà et là dans
l’histoire Espagnole, comme des palmiers sur les sables. Le caractère
fondamental de la civilisation, le progrès, le progres général, continu,
semble refusé, en Espagne, tant à l’esprit humain qu’à la société. C’est
une immobilité solennelle, ou des vicissitudes sans fruit. Cherchez une
grande idee ou une grande amélioration sociale, un système philosophique
ou une institution féconde, que l’Europe tienne de l’Espagne; il n’y en
a point ce peuple a eté isole en Europe, il en a peu reçu et lui a peu
donne. Je me serais reproché d’omettre son nom, mais sa civilisation est
de peu d’importance dans l’histoire de la civilisation europénne (I,
18-19)

378.17-30 Man . . . else.] [translated from:] [no paragraph] L’homme et
la sociéte y ont toujours marché et grandi, je ne dirai pas de front et
également, mais à peu de distance l’un de l’autre. A côté des grands
evènemens, des révolutions, des améliorations publiques, on aperçoit
toujours, dans notre histoire, des idées générales, des doctrines qui
leur correspondent. Rien ne s’est passé dans le monde réel, dont
l’intelligence ne se soit a l’instant saisie, et n’ait tiré pour son
propre compte une nouvelle richesse, rien dans le domaine de
l’intelligence, qui n’ait eu dans le monde réel, et presque toujours
assez vite, son retentissement et son résultat. En général même, les
idées en France ont précédé et provoqué les progrès de l’ordre social,
ils se sont prépares dans les doctrines avant de s’accomplir dans les
choses, et l’esprit a marché le premier dans la route de la
civilisation. Ce double caractère d’activité intellectuelle et
d’habileté pratique, de meditation et d’application, est empreint dans
tous les grands évenemens de l’histoire de France, dans toutes les
grandes classes de la société française, et leur donne une physionomie
qui ne se retrouve point ailleurs (I, 20-1)

389.25-6 a glorious and powerful fact.] [translated from:] [paragraph]
Fait glorieux et puissant. Messieurs, qui a rendu, du Ve au XIIIe
siècle, d’immenses services à l’humanité (I, 424)

Edition: current; Page: [445]
389.35-390.7 What . . . times.] [translated from.] Quel sens attachaient
a ces mots [l’unité de l’Eglise], Messieurs, les hommes de cette époque,
et quels progres avaient-ils déja faits dans cette voie? Qu’était
vraiment, dans les esprits et dans les faits, cette société spirituelle,
objet de leur ambition et de leur respect? Comment était-elle conçue et
pratiquée? Il faut repondre a ces questions pour savoir ce qu’on dit
quand on parle de l’unité de l’Eglise, et ce qu’on doit penser de ses
principes comme de ses résultats. [paragraph] Une conviction commune,
c’est-a-dire, une même idée reconnue et acceptée comme vraie, telle est
la base fondamentale, le lien caché de la société humaine. On peut
s’arrêter aux associations les plus bornées et les plus simples, ou
s’élever aux plus compliquées, aux plus etendues, on peut examiner ce
qui se passe entre trois ou quatre Barbares réunis pour une expédition
de chasse, ou dans le sein d’une assemblée appelee a traiter des
affaires d’un grand peuple, partout et dans tous les cas, c’est dans
l’adhesion des individus à une même pensée que consiste essentiellement
le fait de l’association tant qu’ils ne se sont pas compris et entendus,
ils ne sont que des êtres isolés, placés les uns a côte des autres, mais
qui ne se penètrent et ne se tiennent point. Un même sentiment une même
croyance, quels qu’en soient la nature ou l’objet, telle est la
condition première de l’etat social, c’est dans le sein de la vérité
seulement, ou de ce qu’ils prennent pour la vérite, que les hommes
s’unissent et que naît la société. Et en ce sens, un philosophe moderne!
[footnote.] M. l’abbe de la Mennais. [text:] a eu grande raison de dire
qu’il n’y a de societe qu’entre les intelligences, que la societe ne
subsiste que sur les points et dans les limites ou s’accomplit l’union
des intelligences que la ou les intelligences n’ont rien de commun, la
société n’est pas, en d’autres termes, que la societé intellectuelle est
la seule société, l’élement nécessaire et comme le fond de toutes les
associations extérieures et apparentes. [paragraph] Or, le caractere
essentiel de la vérité. Messieurs et précisément ce qui en fait le lien
social par excellence, c’est l’unité. La verite est une, c’est pourquoi
les hommes qui l’ont reconnue et acceptee sont unis, union qui n’a rien
d’accidentel ni d’arbitraire, car la vérité ne dépend ni des accidens
des choses, ni de l’incertitude des hommes rien de passager, car la
vérité est éternelle, rien de borné car la verite est complète et
infinie. Comme de la vérité, l’unité sera donc le caractere essentiel de
la societe qui n’aura que la verite pour objet, c’est-à-dire de la
societé purement spirituelle. Il n’y a pas, il ne peut y avoir deux
sociétés spirituelles, elle est, de sa nature, unique et universelle.
[paragraph] Ainsi est nee l’Eglise, de là cette unité qu’elle a proclamé
comme son principe, cette universalite qui a toujours été son ambition.
[4-sentence omission] Or, à quelle condition s’unissent les esprits dans
la vérité? A cette condition qu’ils la connaissent et acceptent son
empire quiconque obeit sans connaître la vérite, par ignorance et non
par lumière, ou quiconque, ayant connaissance de la vérité, refuse de
lui obéir, n’est pas entre dans la societe spirituelle nul n’en tait
partie s’il ne voit et ne veut, elle exclut d’une part l’ignorance, de
l’autre la contrainte elle exige de tous ses membres l’intime et
personnelle adhesion de l’intelligence et de la liberte. [paragraph] Or,
a l’epoque qui nous occupe. Messieurs, ce second principe, ce second
caractere de la societe spirituelle manquait à l’Eglise. (I, 424-7)

392.3 “Il lui] Ni la capacite intellectuelle ni la capacite politique
n’ont peri en Italie, il lui manque ce qui lui a toujours manque, ce qui
est partout une des conditions vitales de la civilisation; il lui (I,
17)

— Cours d’histoire moderne, histoire generale de la civilisation’en
Europe, depuis la chute de l’empire romain jusqu’à la révolution
française. Paris: Pichon and Didier, 1828.

note: in SC, without bookplate, but probably JSM’s, with I” on the
spine. See the preceding entry, which has the same general title. See
also Guizot General History . . . and Lectures . . . which are
translations of this volume. The Lectures are separately paged. We have
adopted the short title JSM uses, i.e., Civilisation en Europe.

reviewed: 257-94, 367-93

quoted: 267 (392), 267-8, 268 (381-2), 271, 272, 272-3, 273, 278, 280,
281-2 (384-5), 282 (385-6), 283-4 (386-7), 284-5 (387-8), 285-6 (388-9),
293-4, 294, 381, 384-8, 391

referred to: 186, 228, 229, 230, 231

267.3-11 I . . . achieve.] [translated from.] Je crois. Messieurs, que
quand nous serons un peu entrés dans cette étude, nous acquerrons bien
vite la conviction que la civilisation est très-jeune, Edition: current;
Page: [446] qu’il s’en faut bien que le monde en ait encore mesure la
carrière. A coup sûr, la pensée humaine est fort loin d’être aujourd’hui
tout ce qu’elle peut devenir, nous sommes fort loin d’embrasser l’avenir
tout entier de l’humanité; cependant, que chacun de nous descende dans
sa pensée, qu’il s’interroge sur le bien possible qu’il conçoit, qu’il
espère, qu’il mette ensuite son idée en regard de ce qui existe
aujourd’hui dans le monde, il se convaincra que la société et la
civilisation sont bien jeunes, que, malgré tout le chemin qu’elles ont
fait, elles en ont incomparablement davantage à faire (Lecture 1, 30-1)

267.40-268.6 Among . . . elsewhere . . . the . . . society.] [translated
from:] Chez les Egyptiens, les Etrusques, les Grecs même, etc., la caste
des guerriers, par exemple, a lutté contre celle des prêtres: ailleurs,
l’esprit de clan contre l’esprit d’association libre, le système
aristocratique contre le système populaire, etc. Mais c’est à des
époques anté-historiques que se sont passées, en général, de telles
luttes, il n’en est resté qu’un vague souvenir. [paragraph] La lutte
s’est reproduite quelquefois dans le cours de la vie des peuples, mais,
presque toujours, elle a été promptement terminée: l’une des forces qui
se disputaient l’empire l’a promptement emporté, et a pris seule
possession de la société (Lecture 2, 4-5)

268.7-16 This . . . congealed.] [translated from:] De là est résultée,
dans la plupart des civilisations antiques, une simplicité remarquable.
Elle a eu des résultats très-différents. Tantôt, comme dans la Grèce, la
simplicité du principe social a amené un developpement prodigieusement
rapide, jamais aucun peuple ne s’est déployé en aussi peu de temps, avec
autant d’éclat. Mais après cet admirable élan, tout à coup la Grèce a
paru épuisée, sa décadence, si elle n’a pas été aussi rapide que son
progrès, n’en a pas moins été étrangement prompte. Il semble que la
force créatrice du principe de la civilisation grecque fût épuisée.
Aucun autre n’est venu la réparer. [paragraph] Ailleurs, dans l’Egypte
et dans l’Inde, par exemple, l’unité du principe de la civilisation a eu
un autre effet, la société est tombée dans un état stationnaire. La
simplicite a amené la monotonie, le pays ne s’est pas détruit, la
société a continué d’y subsister, mais immobile et comme glacée (Lecture
2, 5)

268.18-43 Her civilization . . . is . . . shape.] [translated from:] Il
en a été tout autrement de la civilisation de l’Europe moderne. Sans
entrer dans aucun détail, regardez-y, recueillez vos souvenirs, elle
vous apparaîtra sur-le-champ variée, confuse, orageuse, toutes les
formes, tous les principes d’organisation sociale y coexistent, les
pouvoirs spirituel et temporel, les éléments théocratique, monarchique,
aristocratique, démocratique, toutes les classes, toutes les situations
sociales se mêlent, se pressent, il y a des degres infinis dans la
liberté, la richesse, l’influence. Et ces forces diverses sont
entr’elles dans un état de lutte continuelle, sans qu’aucune parvienne a
étouffer les autres et a prendre seule possession de la societé. Dans
les temps anciens, à chaque grande époque, toutes les sociétés semblent
jetées dans le même moule c’est tantôt la monarchie pure, tantôt la
théocratie ou la démocratie qui prévaut, mais chacune prévaut à son tour
complétement. L’Europe moderne offre des exemples de tous les systèmes,
de tous les essais d’organisation sociale, les monarchies pures ou
mixtes, les théocraties, les républiques plus ou moins aristocratiques y
ont vécu simultanément, à côté les unes des autres, et malgré leur
diversité, elles ont toutes une certaine ressemblance, un certain air de
famille qu’il est impossible de méconnaître. [paragraph] Dans les idées
et les sentimens de l’Europe, même variété, même lutte. Les croyances
théocratiques, monarchiques, aristocratiques, populaires, se croisent,
se combattent, se limitent, se modifient. Ouvrez les plus hardis écrits
du moyen-âge jamais une idée n’y est suivie jusqu’à ses dernières
conséquences. Les partisans du pouvoir absolu reculent tout à coup et à
leur insçu devant les résultats de leur doctrine, on sent qu’autour
d’eux, il y a des idées, des influences qui les arrêtent et les
empêchent de pousser jusqu’au bout. Les democrates subissent la même
loi. Nulle part cette imperturbable hardiesse, cet aveuglement de la
logique qui éclatent dans les civilisations anciennes. Les sentimens
offrent les mêmes contrastes, la même variété, un goût d’indépendance
très-énergique a côté d’une grande facilité de soumission une rare
fidélité d’homme à homme, et en même temps un besoin impérieux de faire
sa volonte, de secouer tout frein, de vivre seul, sans s’inquiéter
d’autrui. Les âmes sont aussi diverses, aussi agitées que la société
[paragraph] Le même caractère se retrouve dans les littératures. On ne
saurait disconvenir que, sous le point de vue de la forme et de la
beauté de l’art, elles sont très-inférieures à la littérature ancienne,
mais sous le point de vue du fond des sentimens, des idées, elles sont
plus fortes et plus riches. On voit que l’âme humaine a été remuée sur
un plus grand nombre de points, à une plus grande profondeur.
L’imperfection de la forme provient de Edition: current; Page: [447]
cette cause même. Plus les matériaux sont riches, nombreux, plus il est
difficule de les ramener à une forme simple (Lecture 2, 6-9)

271.24-6 “the . . . name.”] [translated from:] Un autre fait, une autre
idée survécut également, c’est l’idée de l’Empire, le nom de l’Empereur,
l’idée de la Majesté impériale, d’un pouvoir absolu, sacré, attaché au
nom de l’empereur (Lecture 2, 21-2)

272.11-21 At . . . world.] [translated from:] [no paragraph] Il n’y
avait alors aucun des moyens par lesquels aujourd’hui les influences
morales s’établissent ou résistent indépendamment des institutions,
aucun des moyens par lesquels une pure vérite, une pure idée acquiert un
grand empire sur les esprits, gouverne les actions, détermine des
événemens. Rien de semblable n’existait au quatrième siècle, pour donner
aux idées, aux sentimens personnels, une pareille autorité. Il est clair
qu’il fallait une société fortement organisée, fortement gouvernee, pour
lutter contre un pareil désastre, pour sortir victorieuse d’un tel
ouragan. Je ne crois pas trop dire en affirmant qu’a la fin du
quatrieme, et au commencement du cinquieme siecle, c’est l’Eglise
chrétienne qui a sauvé le christianisme, c’est l’Eglise avec ses
institutions, ses magistrats, son pouvoir, qui s’est défendue
vigoureusement contre la dissolution intérieure de l’Empire, contre la
Barbarie, qui a conquis les Barbares, qui est devenue le lien le moyen,
le principe de civilisation entre le monde romain et le monde barbare
(Lecture 2, 23-4)

272.35-273.2 Among . . . epoch, . . . there . . . ascendancy.]
[translated from:] Parmi les chrétiens de cette époque, Messieurs, dans
le clergé chretien, il y avait des hommes qui avaient pensé à tout, à
toutes les questions morales, politiques, qui avaient sur toutes choses
des opinions arrêtées, des sentimens énergiques, et un vit desir de les
propager de les faire régner. Jamais société n’a fait, pour agir autour
d’elle et s’assimiler le monde extérieur, de tels efforts que l’Eglise
chrétienne du cinquieme au dixième siecle. Quand nous étudierons en
particulier son histoire, nous verrons tout ce qu’elle a tente. Elle a
en quelque sorte attaque la barbarie par tous les bouts, pour la
civiliser en la dominant (Lecture 3, 22-3)

273.25-7 “The . . . truth.”] [translated from:] La separation du
temporel et du spirituel se fonde sur cette idée que la force matérielle
n’a ni droit ni prise sur les esprits, sur la conviction, sur la vérité
(Lecture 2, 30)

278.28-32 “whom . . . them.”] [translated from:] Il y a des hommes que
le spectacle de l’anarchie ou de l’immobilité sociale frappe et révolte,
qui en sont choques intellectuellement comme d’un fait qui ne doit pas
être, et sont invinciblement possedes du besoin de le changer, du besoin
de mettre quelque règle, quelque chose de général, de regulier, de
permanent, dans le monde soumis à leurs regards (Lecture 3, 23)

280.31-2 “Consult . . . end.”] [translated from:] Consultez soit les
poetes du temps, soit les chroniqueurs, ils se croient tous à la fin du
monde (Lecture 4, 7)

281.33-282.30 Every . . . society?] [translated from:] [no paragraph]
Qui ne sait combien on a étudié la question de l’influence des climats,
et toute l’importance qu’y a attachée Montesquieu? Si l’on considère
l’influence directe du climat sur les hommes, peut-être n’est-elle pas
aussi étendue qu’on l’a suppose, elle est du moins d’une appréciation
vague et difficile. Mais l’influence indirecte du climat, ce qui
résulte, par exemple, de ce fait que, dans un pays chaud, les hommes
vivent en plein air, tandis que, dans les pays froids ils s’enferment
dans l’interieur des habitations, qu’ils se nourrissent ici d’une
manière, là d’une autre ce sont la des faits d’une extrême importance,
et qui, par le simple changement de la vie materielle, agissent
puissamment sur la civilisation. Toute grande révolution amène dans
l’état social des modifications de ce genre, et dont il faut tenir grand
compte [paragraph] L’etablissement du regime féodal en produisit une
dont la gravité ne saurait être méconnue, il changea la distribution de
la population sur la face du territoire. Jusques-là les maîtres du
territoire, la population souveraine, vivaient réunis en masses d’hommes
plus ou moins nombreuses, soit sedentaires dans l’interieur des villes,
soit errant par bandes dans le pays. Par la féodalite, ces mêmes hommes
vecurent isoles, chacun dans son habitation, à de grandes distances les
uns des autres. Vous entrevoyez a l’instant quelle influence ce
changement dut exercer sur le caractère et le cours de la civilisation.
La prépondérance sociale, le gouvernement de la societe passa tout à
coup des villes aux campagnes, la propriété privee dut prendre le pas
sur la propriete publique, la vie privee sur la vie publique. Tel fut le
premier effet, un effet purement matériel, du triomphe de la societe
féodale. Plus nous y pénétrerons, plus les conséquences de ce seul fait
se devoileront à nos yeux. [paragraph] Examinons cette societe en
elle-même, et voyons quel rôle elle a dû jouer dans Edition: current;
Page: [448] l’histoire de la civilisation. Prenons d’abord la féodalité
dans son élément le plus simple, dans son élément primitif, fondamental,
considérons un seul possesseur de fief dans son domaine, voyons ce que
sera, ce que doit faire, de tous ceux qui la composent, la petite
société qui se forme autour de lui. [paragraph] Il s’établit dans un
lieu isole, élevé, qu’il prend soin de rendre sûr, fort; il y construit
ce qu’il appellera son château. Avec qui s’y établit-il? Avec sa femme,
ses enfans, peut-être quelques hommes libres qui ne sont pas devenus
propriétaires, se sont attachés à sa personne, et continuent à vivre
avec lui, à sa table. C’est la ce qui habite dans l’interieur du
château. Tout autour, au pied, se groupe une petite population de
colons, de serfs qui cultivent les domaines du possesseur du fief. Au
milieu de cette population inférieure, la religion vient planter une
église, elle y amène un prêtre D’ordinaire, dans les premiers temps du
regime féodal, ce prêtre est à la fois le chapelain du château et le
curé du village, un jour les deux caractères se sépareront, le village
aura son curé qui y habitera, à côté de son église. Voilà la société
féodale élémentaire, la molécule féodale, pour ainsi dire. C’est cet
élément que nous avons d’abord a examiner, nous lui ferons la double
question qu’il faut adresser à tous les faits qu’en a-t-il du résulter
pour le développement 1° de l’homme même 2° de la societé? (Lecture 4,
9-12)

282 37-9 “was . . . family”] [translated from.] Je prends dans le monde
ancien une grande situation aristocratique, un patricien romain, par
exemple, comme le seigneur féodal, le patricien romain était chef de
famile, maître, supérieur. Il était de plus magistrat religieux,
pontife, dans l’intérieur de sa famille (Lecture 4, 13)

282 41-3 “was . . . corporation.”] [translated from.] Le patricien
romain était en outre membre d’une corporation qui vivait réunie dans un
même lieu, membre du senat, encore une importance qui lui venait du
dehors, de sa corporation, une importance reçue, empruntée (Lecture 4,
13)

282 43-283.10 The . . . Soul!] [translated from.] [no paragraph] La
grandeur des aristocrates anciens, associée à un caractère religieux et
politique, appartenait à la situation, à la corporation en général,
plutót qu’à l’individu. Celle du possesseur de fief est purement
individuelle, il ne tient rien de personne, tous ses droits, tout son
pouvoir lui viennent de lui seul. Il n’est point magistrat religieux, il
ne fait point partie d’un sénat, c’est dans sa personne, dans son
individu que toute son importance réside, tout ce qu’il est, il l’est
par lui-même, en son propre nom. Quelle influence ne doit pas exercer
une telle situation sur celui qui l’occupe! Quelle fierte individuelle,
quel prodigieux orgueil, tranchons le mot, quelle insolence, doivent
naître dans son âme! Au-dessus de lui, point de supérieur dont il soit
le représentant et l’interprète, auprès de lui point d’égaux, nulle loi
puissante et commune qui pese sur lui, nul empire extérieur qui ait
action sur sa volonté, il ne connaît de frein que les limites de sa
force et la presence du danger. Tel est, sur le caractère de l’homme, le
résultat moral de la situation (Lecture 4, 13-14)

283 13-284.15 History . . . life.] [translated from.] Jetons un
coup-d’oeil sur les divers systèmes de famille, prenons d’abord la
famille patriarchale, dont la Bible et les monumens orientaux offrent le
modèle. Elle est très-nombreuse, c’est la tribu. Le chef, le patriarche,
y vit en commun avec ses enfans, ses proches, les diverses genérations
qui se sont réunies autour de lui, toute sa parenté, ses serviteurs, et
non-seulement il vit avec eux tous, mais il a les mêmes interêts, les
mêmes occupations, il mène la même vie N’est-ce pas là la situation
d’Abraham, des patriarches, des chefs de tribus arabes qui reproduisent
encore l’image de la vie patriarchale? [paragraph] Un autre système de
famille se présente, le clan, petite societé dont il faut chercher le
type en Ecosse, en Irlande, et par laquelle probablement une grande
portion du monde européen a passé. Ceci n’est plus la famille
patriarchale. Il y a une grande diversité de situation entre le chef et
le reste de la population, il ne mène point la même vie, la plupart
cultivent et servent; lui, il est oisif et guerrier. Mais leur origine
est commune, ils portent tous le même nom, des rapports de parenté,
d’anciennes traditions, les mêmes souvenirs, des affections pareilles
établissent entre tous les membres du clan un lien moral, une sorte
d’égalité [paragraph] Voilà les deux principaux types de la société de
famille que présente l’histoire. Est-ce là, je vous le demande, la
famille féodale? Evidemment non. Il semble, au premier moment, qu’elle
au quelque rapport avec le clan, mais la différence est bien plus
grande. La population qui entoure le possesseur de fief lui est
parfaitement étrangère, elle ne porte pas son nom, il n’y a, entre elle
et lui, point de parenté, point de lien historique ni moral. Ce n’est
pas non plus la famille patriarchale. Le possesseur de fief ne mène pas
la même vie, ne se livre point aux mêmes travaux que ceux qui
l’entourent, il est oisif et guerrier, tandis que les autres sont
laboureurs. La famille féodale n’est pas nombreuse, ce n’est point la
tribu; elle se réduit à la famille proprement dite, a Edition: current;
Page: [449] la femme, aux enfans; elle vit séparée du reste de la
population, dans l’intérieur du château. Les colons, les serfs, n’en
font point partie, l’origine est diverse, l’inégalité de condition
prodigieuse. Cinq ou six individus, dans une situation a la fois
supérieure et étrangere, voila la famille féodale. Elle doit évidemment
revêtir un caractere particulier. Elle est étroite, concentrée, sans
cesse appelée à se défendre, à se méfier, a s’isoler du moins, même de
ses serviteurs. La vie intérieure, les moeurs domestiques y prendront, à
coup sûr une grande prépondérance. Je sais que la brutalité des
passions, l’habitude du chef de passer son temps, a la guerre ou à la
chasse, apporteront au développement des moeurs domestiques un assez
grand obstacle. Mais cet obstacle sera vaincu, il faudra bien que le
chef revienne habituellement chez lui, il y retrouvera toujours sa
femme, ses enfans et eux presque seuls, seuls, ils seront sa société
permanente, seuls, ils partageront toujours ses intéréts, sa destinée.
Il est impossible que l’existence domestique n’acquière pas un grand
empire. Les preuves abondent. N’est-ce pas dans le sein de la famille
féodale que l’importance des femmes s’est enfin développee? Dans toutes
les sociétes anciennes, je ne parle pas de celles où l’esprit de famille
n’existait pas, mais dans celles-là même où il était puissant, dans la
vie patriarchale, par exemple, les femmes ne tenaient pas a beaucoup
pres la place qu’elles ont acquise en Europe sous le regime feodal.
C’est au developpement, à la prépondérance nécessaire des moeurs
domestiques dans la feodalite, qu’elles ont dû surtout ce changement, ce
progrès de leur situation. On en a voulu chercher la cause dans les
moeurs particulières des anciens Germains, dans un respect national
qu’au milieu des forêts, ils portaient, a-t-on dit, aux femmes. Sur une
phrase de Tacite, le patriotisme germanique a eleve je ne sais quelle
supériorité, quelle pureté primitive et ineftaçable des moeurs germaines
dans les rapports des deux sexes. Pures chimères! Des phrases pareilles
a celles de Tacite, des sentimens, des usages analogues à ceux des
anciens Germains, se rencontrent dans les recits d’une foule
d’observateurs des peuples sauvages ou barbares. Il n’y a rien la de
primitif, rien de propre a une certaine race. C’est dans les effets
d’une situation sociale fortement determinee, c’est dans les progrès,
dans la prépondérance des moeurs domestiques que l’importance des femmes
en Europe a pris sa source, et la prépondérance des moeurs domestiques
est devenue, de tres-bonne heure, un caractère essentiel du regime
féodal (Lecture 4, 14-18)

284 29-285.8 In . . . inspire.] [translated from.] [no paragraph] La
nature de l’homme est si bonne, si féconde, que, lorsqu’une situation
sociale dure quelque temps, il s’etablit inevitablement entre ceux
qu’elle rapproche, et quelles que soient les conditions du rapprochement
un certain lien moral, des sentimens de protection, de bienveillance,
d’affection. Ainsi il est arrive dans la féodalité. Nul doute qu’au bout
d’un certain temps, ne se soient formees, entre les colons et le
possesseur de fief, quelques relations morales, quelques habitudes
affectueuses. Mais cela est arrivé en dépit de leur situation
reciproque, et nullement par son influence. Consideree en elle-même, la
situation était radicalement vicieuse. Rien de moralement commun entre
le possesseur du fief et les colons, ils font partie de son domaine, ils
sont sa propriete, et sous ce mot de propriété sont compris tous les
droits que nous appelons aujourd’hui droits de souverainete publique,
aussi bien que les droits de propriete privee, le droit de donner des
lois, de taxer, de punir, comme celui de disposer et de vendre. Il n’y
a, entre le seigneur et les cultivateurs de ses domaines, autant du
moins que cela peut se dire toutes les fois que des hommes sont en
presence, point de droits, point de garanties, point de societe.
[paragraph] De la, je crois, cette haine vraiment prodigieuse,
invincible, que le peuple des campagnes a portée de tout temps au regime
féodal, à ses souvenirs, à son nom. Il n’est pas sans exemple que les
hommes aient subi de pesans despotismes et s’y soient accoutumes, bien
plus, qu’ils les aient acceptés. Le despotisme théocratique, le
despotisme monarchique ont plus d’une fois obtenu l’aveu, presque
l’affection de la population qui les subissait. Le despotisme féodal a
toujours ete repousse, odieux, il a pese sur les destinées, sans jamais
regner sur les âmes. C’est que dans la theocratie, dans la monarchie, le
pouvoir s’exerce en vertu de certaines croyances communes au maître et
aux sujets, il est le représentant, le ministre d’un autre pouvoir,
superieur à tous les pouvoirs humains, il parle et agit au nom de la
Divinité ou d’une idee generale, point au nom de l’homme lui-même, de
l’homme seul. Le despotisme féodal est tout autre, c’est le pouvoir de
l’individu sur l’individu, la domination de la volonte personnelle et
capricieuse d’un homme. C’est là peut-être la seule tyrannie qu’à son
éternel honneur, l’homme ne veuille jamais accepter. Partout où, dans un
maître, il ne voit qu’un homme, dès que la volonte qui pese sur lui
n’est qu’une volonte humaine, individuelle comme la sienne, il s’indigne
et ne supporte le joug qu’avec courroux. Tel Edition: current; Page:
[450] était le véritable caractère, le caractère distinctif du pouvoir
féodal, et telle est aussi l’origine de l’antipathie qu’il n’a cessé
d’inspirer. (Lecture 4, 18-20)

285.39-286.2 Feudality . . . passion.] [translated from.] 1°. La
féodalité a dû exercer une assez grande influence, et, à tout prendre,
une influence salutaire sur le développement intérieur de l’individu,
elle a suscité dans les âmes des idées, des sentimens énergiques, des
besoins moraux, de beaux développemens de caractère, de passion (Lecture
4, 30-1)

286.2-17 Considered . . . advanced. The . . . it.] [translated from.]
[paragraph] 2°. Sous le point de vue social, elle n’a pu fonder ni ordre
légal, ni garanties politiques, elle était indispensable pour
recommencer en Europe la société tellement dissoute par la barbarie,
qu’elle n’était pas capable d’une forme plus régulière ni plus étendue,
mais la forme féodale, radicalement mauvaise en soi, ne pouvait ni se
régulariser, ni s’étendre. Le seul droit politique que le régime féodal
ait su faire valoir dans la société européenne, c’est le droit de
résistance je ne dis pas de la résistance légale, il ne pouvait être
question de résistance légale dans une société si peu avancée
[4-sentence omission] Le droit de résistance qu’a soutenu et pratiqué le
régime féodal, c’est le droit de résistance personnelle, droit terrible,
insociable, puisqu’il en appelle à la force, à la guerre, ce qui est la
destruction de la société même, droit qui cependant ne doit jamais être
aboli au fond du coeur des hommes, car, son abolition, c’est
l’acceptation de la servitude. Le sentiment du droit de résistance avait
péri dans l’opprobre de la société romaine, et ne pouvait renaître de
ses débris, il ne sortait pas non plus naturellement, à mon avis, des
principes de la société chrétienne. La féodalité l’a fait rentrer dans
les moeurs de l’Europe. C’est l’honneur de la civilisation de le rendre
à jamais inactif et inutile, c’est l’honneur du régime féodale de
l’avoir constamment professé et défendu (Lecture 4, 31-2)

293.13-294.2 When . . . influence.] [translated from.] [no paragraph]
Lorsque j’ai tenté de déterminer la physionomie propre de la
civilisation européenne comparée aux civilisations anciennes et
asiatiques, j’ai fait voir que la première était variée, riche,
complexe, qu’elle n’était jamais tombée sous la domination d’aucun
principe exclusif, que les divers élémens de l’etat social s’y étaient
combinés, combattus, modifiés, avaient été continuellement obligés de
transiger et de vivre en commun. Ce fait, Messieurs, caractère général
de la civilisation européenne, a été surtout celui de la civilisation
anglaise: c’est en Angleterre qu’il s’est produit avec le plus de suite
et d’évidence; c’est la que l’ordre civil et l’ordre religieux,
l’aristocratie, la démocratie, la royauté, les institutions locales et
centrales, le développement moral et politique ont marché et grandi
ensemble, pêle-mêle pour ainsi dire, sinon avec une égale rapidité, du
moins toujours à peu de distance les uns des autres. Sous le règne des
Tudor, par exemple, au milieu des plus éclatans progrès de la monarchie
pure, on voit le principe démocratique, le pouvoir populaire percer et
se fortifier presque en même temps. La révolution du dix-septième siècle
éclate, elle est à la fois religieuse et politique. L’aristocratie
féodale n’y paraît que fort affaiblie et avec tous les symptômes de la
décadence cependant elle est encore en état d’y conserver une place, d’y
jouer un rôle important et de se faire sa part dans les résultats. Il en
est de même dans tout le cours de l’histoire d’Angleterre, jamais aucun
élément ancien ne périt complétement, jamais aucun élément nouveau ne
triomphe tout-à-fait, jamais aucun principe spécial ne s’empare d’une
domination exclusive. Il y a toujours développement simultane des
différentes forces, transaction entre leurs prétentions et leurs
intérêts [paragraph]. Sur le continent la marche de la civilisation a
été beaucoup moins complexe et moins complète. Les divers élémens de la
société, l’ordre religieux, l’ordre civil, la monarchie, l’aristocratie,
la démocratie, se sont développés non pas ensemble et de front, mais
successivement. Chaque principe, chaque système a eu en quelque sorte
son tour. Il y a tel siècle qui appartient, je ne voudrais pas dire
exclusivement, ce serait trop, mais avec une prédominance très marquée,
a l’aristocratie féodale, par exemple; tel autre au principe
monarchique, tel autre au principe démocratique. Comparez le moyen âge
français avec le moyen âge anglais, les onzieme, douzième et treizième
siècles de notre histoire, avec les siècles correspondans au delà de la
Manche, vous trouverez en France à cette époque la féodalité presque
absolument souveraine, la royauté et le principe démocratique à peu près
nuls. Allez en Angleterre, c’est bien l’aristocratie féodale qui domine,
mais la royauté et la démocratie ne laissent pas d’être fortes et
importantes. La royauté triomphe en Angleterre sous Elisabeth, comme en
France sous Louis XIV, mais que de ménagemens elle est contrainte de
garder! que de restrictions, tantôt aristocratiques, tantôt
démocratiques, elle a à subir! En Angleterre aussi chaque système,
chaque principe a eu son Edition: current; Page: [451] temps de force et
de succès, jamais aussi complétement, aussi exclusivement que sur le
continent le vainqueur a toujours été contraint de tolérer la présence
de ses rivaux et de leur faire à chacun sa part (Lecture 14, 4-7)

294.5-18 There . . . civilization.] [translated from.] [no paragraph]
Nul doute, par exemple, que ce développement simultané des divers
élémens sociaux n’ait beaucoup contribué à faire arriver l’Angleterre,
plus vite qu’aucun des Etats du continent, au but de toute société,
c’est-à-dire à l’établissement d’un gouvernement à la fois regulier et
libre. C’est précisément la nature d’un gouvernement de menager tous les
intérêts, toutes les forces, de les concilier, de les faire vivre et
prospérer en commun or, telle était d’avance, par le concours d’une
multitude de causes, la disposition, la relation des divers élémens de
la société anglaise un gouvernement général et un peu régulier a donc eu
la moins de peine à se constituer. De même l’essence de la liberté,
c’est la manifestation et l’action simultanées de tous les interêts, de
tous les droits, de toutes les forces, de tous les élémens sociaux.
L’Angleterre en était donc plus près que la plupart des autres Etats.
Par les mêmes causes, le bon sens national, l’intelligence des affaires
publiques ont dû s’y former plus vite, le bon sens politique consiste à
savoir tenir compte de tous les faits, les apprécier et faire a chacun
sa part, il a été en Angleterre une nécessité de l’état social, un
résultat naturel du cours de la civilisation (Lecture 14, 7-8)

294.23-42 In . . . result.] [translated from.] Dans les Etats du
continent, en revanche, chaque système, chaque principe ayant eu son
tour, ayant dominé d’une façon plus complète, plus exclusive, le
développement s’est fait sur une plus grande échelle, avec plus de
grandeur et d’éclat. La royauté et l’aristocratie féodale, par exemple,
se sont produites sur la scène continentale avec bien plus de hardiesse,
d’etendue, de liberté. Toutes les experiences politiques, pour ainsi
dire, ont été plus larges et plus achevées. Il en est résulté que les
idées politiques, je parle des idées générales, et non du bon sens
appliqué a la conduite des affaires, que les idees, dis-je, les
doctrines politiques se sont élevées bien plus haut et déployées avec
bien plus de vigueur rationnelle. Chaque système s’étant en quelque
sorte présenté seul, étant reste long-temps sur la scène, on a pu le
considérer dans son ensemble, remonter à ses premiers principes,
descendre à ses dernières conséquences, en demêler pleinement la
theorie. Quiconque observera un peu attentivement le génie anglais sera
frappé d’un double fait d’une part, de la sûreté du bon sens, de
l’habilete pratique, d’autre part, de l’absence d’idées générales et de
hauteur d’esprit dans les questions théoriques. Soit qu’on ouvre un
ouvrage anglais d’histoire, ou de jurisprudence, ou sur toute autre
matière, il est rare qu’on y trouve la grande raison des choses, la
raison fondamentale. En toutes choses, et notamment dans les sciences
politiques, la doctrine pure, la philosophie, la science proprement
moins ont beaucoup plus prosperé sur le continent qu’en Angleterre,
leurs élans du moins ont ete beaucoup plus puissans et hardis. Et l’on
ne peut douter que le caractère différent du developpement de la
civilisation dans les deux pays n’ait grandement contribué à ce résultat
(Lecture 14, 8-10)

381.21-3 “unity . . . frozen.”] [translated from.] La simplicite a amene
la monotonie, le pays ne s’est pas détruit, la société a continué d’y
subsister, mais immobile et comme glacée (Lecture 2, 5)

381.35-382.17 All . . . society.] [see entry for 268.18-43 minus the
first sentence and the concluding paragraph] (Lecture 2, 6-8)

384.32-6 Sufficient . . . civilization.] [translated from.] [no
paragraph] Il y a un autre ordre de considérations, tout opposé à
celui-là, et qu’on a en général trop négligé, je veux parler de la
condition matérielle de la societé, des changemens materiels introduits
dans la manière d’être et de vivre des hommes, par un fait nouveau, par
une revolution, par un nouvel état social. On n’en a pas toujours assez
tenu compte, on ne s’est pas assez demandé quelles modifications ces
grandes crises du monde apportaient dans l’existence materielle des
hommes, dans le côté matériel de leurs relations. Ces modifications ont,
sur l’ensemble de la societe, plus d’influence qu’on ne le croit
(Lecture 4, 9)

384.36-385.33 Every . . . society?] [see entry for 281.33-282.30]

385.34-41 The . . . civilization.] [translated from.] Le premier fait
qui me frappe en considérant cette petite société, c’est la prodigieuse
importance que doit prendre le possesseur du fief, à ses propres yeux et
aux yeux de ceux qui l’entourent le [sic] sentiment de la personnalité,
de la liberté individuelle, était le sentiment dominant dans la vie
barbare. Il s’agit ici de tout autre chose, ce n’est plus seulement la
liberté de l’homme, du guerrier, c’est l’importance du Edition: current;
Page: [452] propriétaire, du chef de famille, du maitre. De cette
situation doit naître une impression de supériorité immense; supériorité
toute particulière, et bien différente de ce qui se rencontre dans le
cours des autres civilisations. (Lecture 4, 13)

385.41-50 Take . . . corporation.] [translated from.] Je prends dans le
monde ancien une grande situation aristocratique, un patricien romain,
par exemple comme le seigneur féodal, le patricien romain était chef de
famille, maître, supérieur. Il était de plus magistrat religieux, pontif
dans l’intérieur de sa famille. Or, l’importance du magistrat religieux
lui vient du dehors, ce n’est pas une importance purement personnelle,
individuelle, il la reçoit d’en haut, il est le délégué de la Divinité,
l’interprète des croyances religieuses qui s’y rattachent. Le patricien
romain était en outre membre d’une corporation qui vivait réunie dans un
même lieu, membre du sénat, encore une importance qui lui venait du
dehors, de sa corporation, une importance reçue, empruntée (Lecture 4,
13)

385.50-386.11 The grandeur . . . individual.] [see entry for
282.43-283.10]

386.12-13 I . . . society.] [translated from.] Je passe à une seconde
consequence, grave aussi, et trop peu remarquée, le tour particulier de
l’esprit de famille féodal (Lecture 4, 14)

386.14-387.14 History . . . life.] [see entry for 283.13-284.15]

387.15-24 A . . . family.] [translated from.] Un second fait, nouvelle
preuve de l’empire de l’existence domestique, caractérise également la
famille feodale, c’est l’esprit d’hérédite, de perpétuité qui y domine
évidemment. L’esprit d’hérédité est inhérent a l’esprit de famille, mais
il n’a pris nulle part un aussi grand développement que dans la
féodalité. Cela tient à la nature de la propriété à laquelle la famille
était incorporée. Le fief n’était pas une proprieté comme une autre, il
avait constamment besoin d’un possesseur qui le défendît, qui le servît,
qui s’acquittât des obligations inhérentes au domaine, et le maintînt
ainsi à son rang dans l’association générale des maîtres du pays. De là,
une sorte d’identification entre le possesseur actuel du fief et le fief
même, et toute la série de possesseurs futurs. [paragraph] Cette
circonstance a beaucoup contribué à fortifier, à resserrer les liens de
famille, déjà si puissans par la nature de la famille féodale. (Lecture
4, 18)

387.25-6 Let . . . aspect.] [translated from.] Je sors maintenant de la
demeure seigneuriale, je descends au milieu de cette petite population
qui l’entoure. Ici toutes choses ont un autre aspect (Lecture 4, 18)

387.26-388.9 Human . . . inspire.] [see the entry for 284.29-285.8]

388.10-22 The religious . . . condition.] [translated from.] L’élément
religieux qui s’y associait était peu propre à en adoucir le poids. Je
ne crois pas que l’influence du prêtre, dans la petite société que je
viens de décrire, fût grande, ni qu’il réussît beaucoup à légitimer les
rapports de la population inférieure avec le seigneur. L’Eglise a exercé
sur la civilisation européenne une tres-grande action, mais en procédant
d’une manière générale, en changeant les dispositions générales des
hommes. Quand on entre de pres dans la petite societé féodale proprement
dite l’influence du prêtre, entre le seigneur et les colons, est presque
nulle. Le plus souvent, il était lui-même grossier et subalterne comme
un serf, et tres-peu en état ou en disposition de lutter contre
l’arrogance du seigneur. Sans doute, appelé seul a entretenir, à
développer dans la population inférieure quelque vie morale, il lui
était cher et utile à ce titre, il y répandait quelque consolation et
quelque lumière, mais il pouvait et faisait, je crois, très-peu de chose
pour sa destinée (Lecture 4, 21)

388.33-389.6 Feudality . . . it.] [see the entries for 285.39-286.2 and
286.2-17]

391.1-7 “limits . . . world” . . . “a . . . example.” . . . “in . . .
liberty.”] [translated from.] Aussi est-elle tombée dans une double
faute d’une part elle n’a pas connu ni respecté tous les droits de la
pensée humaine, au moment où elle les réclamait pour son propre compte,
elle les violait ailleurs, d’autre part, elle n’a pas su mesurer, dans
l’ordre intellectuel, les droits de l’autorité; je ne dis pas de
l’autorité coactive qui n’en saurait posséder aucun en pareille matiere,
mais de l’autorité purement morale, agissant sur les esprits seuls et
par la seule voie de l’influence. Quelque chose manque, dans la plupart
des pays réformés, à la bonne organisation de la société intellectuelle,
à l’action régulière des opinions anciennes, générales. On n’a pas su
concilier les droits et les besoins de la tradition avec ceux de la
liberté, et la cause en a éte sans aucun doute dans cette circonstance
que la Réforme n’a pleinement compris et accepté ni ses principes ni ses
effets. (Lecture 12, 29-30)

Edition: current; Page: [453]
391.30-3 Nous . . . désirons . . . Nous . . . siecles.] [no paragraph]
Nous . . . désirons. Il faut prendre garde, Messieurs, à ne pas nous
laisser envahir par l’un ou l’autre de ces deux défauts.
Accoutumons-nous à mesurer ce que nous pouvons légitimement avec nos
forces, notre science, notre puissance, et ne prétendons à rien de plus
qu’a ce qui se peut acquérir légitimement, justement, régulièrement, en
respectant les principes sur lesquels repose notre civilisation même.
Nous . . . siècles (Lecture 1, 33)

392.20-1 “I am persuaded,” . . . that . . . do.] [paragraph, see entry
for 267.3-11]

— De la démocratie en France, (Janvier 1849). Paris: Masson, 1849.

quoted: 328n-9n

329n.1 “the idolatry of democracy.”] [translated in part from.] Plus j’y
pense, plus je demeure convaincu que son grand mal, le mal qui est au
fond de tous ses maux, qui mine et détruit ses gouvernements et ses
libertes, sa dignite et son bonheur c’est le mal que j’attaque,
l’idolátrie démocratique (2)

— Essais sur l’histoire de France (1823). 2nd ed. Paris: Brière;
Leipzig: Bossange, 1824.

note: in SC. The reference at 136 is to the first essay, “Du regime
municipal dans l’empire romain, au cinquième siecle de l’ere chrétienne,
lors de la grande invasion des Germains en occident,” 1-51. The 1st ed.
(Paris: Brière, 1823), to which the reference at 371 presumably applies,
was published as a complement to Mably’s Observations, q.v. At 227 JSM
dates the 1st ed. to 1822.

reviewed: 257-94

quoted: 263-4, 266, 291, 292, 292-3.

referred to: 136, 186, 227, 229, 371

263.7-264.11 The . . . consequences.] [translated from.] La chute de
l’Empire romain en Occident offre un phenomène singulier. Non seulement
la nation ne soutient pas le gouvernement dans sa lutte contre les
Barbares, mais la nation, abandonnee à elle-même, ne tente, pour son
propre compte, aucune résistance. Il y a plus, rien, dans ce long débat,
ne revèle qu’une nation existe, a peine est-il question de ce qu elle
souffre, elle subit tous les fleaux de la guerre, du pillage, de la
famine, un changement complet de destinée et d’etat, sans agir, sans
parler, sans paraître. [paragraph] Ce phénomene n’est pas seulement
singulier, il est sans exemple. Le despotisme a régne ailleurs que dans
l’Empire romain, plus d’une tois l’invasion etrangère et la conquête ont
dévasté des pays qu’avait opprimes un long despotisme. La même ou la
nation n’a pas résisté, son existence se manifeste de quelque façon dans
l’histoire, elle souffre, se plaint, et, malgre son avilissement, se
débat contre son malheur, des recits, des monuments attestent ce qu’elle
a eprouvé, ce qu’elle est devenue, et sinon ce qu’elle a fait, du moins
ce qu’on a fait d’elle. [paragraph] Au Ve siècle, les débris des legions
romaines disputent a des hordes de Barbares l’immense territoire de
l’Empire, mais il semble que ce territoire fût un desert. Les soldats de
l’Empire éloignés ou vaincus, il n’est plus question de personne ni de
rien. Les peuplades Barbares s’arrachent successivement les provinces. A
cóte d’elles, une seule existence se révèle dans les faits, celle des
evéques et du clerge. Si les lois n’etaient la pour nous apprendre
qu’une population romaine couvrait encore le sol, l’histoire nous en
laisserait douter. [paragraph] C’est surtout dans les provinces soumises
depuis long-temps à Rome, et ou la civilisation est plus avancée, que le
peuple a ainsi disparu. On regarde comme un monument de la mollesse des
sujets de l’Empire, la lettre des. Bretons (gemitus Brittonum) implorant
avec larmes l’assistance d’Aetius et l’envoi d’une legion 1 [footnote
omitted] Cela est injuste. Les Bretons, moins civilisés, moins romains
que les autres sujets de Rome, ont résiste aux Saxons, et leur
résistance a une histoire. A la même epoque, dans la même situation, les
Italiens, les Gaulois, les Espagnols n’en ont point. L’Empire s’est
retiré de leur pays les Barbares l’ont occupe, sans que la masse des
habitants ait joué le moindre rôle, ait marque en rien sa place dans les
evenements qui la livraient à tant de fléaux. [paragraph] Cependant la
Gaule, l’Italie, l’Espagne etaient couvertes de villes naguère riches et
peuplées. La civilisation s’y était developpee avec eclat. Les routes,
les aqueducs, les cirques, les ecoles y abondaient. Rien n’y manquait de
ce qui atteste la richesse et procure aux peuples une existence
brillante et animee. Les invasions des Barbares venaient piller toutes
ces richesses, disperser toutes ces reunions, detruire tous ces
plaisirs. Jamais l’existence d’une nation ne fut plus complètement
bouleversee, jamais les individus Edition: current; Page: [454] n’eurent
plus de maux à endurer et de craintes à concevoir. D’où vient que ces
nations sont muettes et mortes? Pourquoi tant de villes saccagées, tant
de situations changées, tant de carrières interrompues, tant de
propriétaires dépossédés ont-ils laissé si peu de traces, je ne dis pas
de leur résistance active, mais seulement de leurs douleurs? [paragraph]
On allégue le despotisme du gouvernement impérial, l’avilissement des
peuples, l’apathie profonde qui s’était emparée de tous les sujets. On a
raison. C’est là en effet la grande cause d’un fait si étrange. Mais
c’est peu d’énoncer ainsi, d’une façon générale, une cause qui ailleurs,
la même en apparence, n’a pas produit les mêmes résultats. Il faut
pénétrer plus avant dans l’état de la société romaine, telle que le
despotisme l’avait faite. Il faut rechercher par quels moyens il lui
avait enlevé à ce point toute consistance et toute vie. Le despotisme
peut revêtir des formes très-diverses et s’exercer par des procédés qui
donnent à son action une toute autre énergie, à ses conséquences une
bien plus grande portée. (1-4)

266.12-16 “Hence,” . . . “in . . . Barbarians.”] [translated from.] De
là, au Ve siecle, tant de campagnes en friche et de villes presque
désertes ou pleines seulement d’une populace affamée et oisive. Le
régime que je viens de décrire y contribua beaucoup plus que les
dévastations des Barbares (42)

266.19-22 “On . . . Gaul”—“Causes . . . Carlovingians”—“Social . . .
Carlovingians”—“Political . . . régime.”] [translated from.] De
l’origine et de l’établissement des Francs dans les Gaules. Des causes
de la chute des Merovingiens et des Carlovingiens. De l’état social et
des institutions politiques en France du cinquième au dixième siècle. Du
caractère politique du Régime féodal (519)

266.25-6 “Causes . . . England.”] [translated from.] Des causes de
l’établissement du Gouvernement représentatif en Angleterre (520)

292.15-16 “had . . . corporation,”] [translated from:] Il est clair que
la hiérarchie féodale s’est convertie en une corporation vraiment
aristocratique, que cette corporation se sent obligee de prendre en main
la cause nationale, d’agir dans un intérêt public. (419)

292.15-18 “to . . . coalition.”] [translated from.] Les barons n’étaient
pas assez forts pour imposer en même temps au roi leur liberté, au
peuple leur tyrannie, et de même qu’ils avaient ete obligés de se
coaliser pour se défendre, de même ils se sentaient dans la nécessité
d’appeler le peuple à l’appui de leur coalition (424)

292.36-293.8 In . . . destinies.] [translated from.] [paragraph] Ainsi
en France, depuis la fondation de la monarchie jusqu’au XIVe siècle,
tout a été individuel, les forces, les libertes, la résistance comme
l’oppression l’unité, principe de tout gouvernement, l’association entre
égaux, principe de toutes les garanties, ne se sont rencontrées que dans
l’étroite sphère de chaque seigneurie ou de chaque cité, la royauté a
été nominale, l’aristocratie n’a point formé un corps, il y a eu des
bourgeois dans les villes, et point de bourgeoisie dans l’Etat. En
Angleterre, au contraire, depuis la conquête des Normands, tout a été
collectif, les forces de même nature, les situations analogues ont été
contraintes de se rapprocher, de se coaliser, d’arriver à l’unite par
l’association. Dès son origine, la royauté a été réelle, cent cinquante
ans après son établissement la féodalité s’est brisée en deux parts,
dont l’une est devenue la haute aristocratie, l’autre le corps des
communes du pays. Qui pourrait méconnaître, dans ce premier travail de
la formation des deux sociétés, dans ces caractères si divers de leur
premier âge, les vraies causes de la longue différence de leurs
institutions et de leurs destinées? (516)

— General History of Civilisation in Europe, from the Fall of the Roman
Empire to the French Revolution. Trans. D.A. Talboys. Oxford: Talboys,
1837.

note: a translation of Cours d’histoire moderne . . . Civilisation en
Europe.

referred to: 229

— Histoire de la république d’Angleterre et de Cromwell (1649-1658). 2
vols. Paris: Didier, 1854.

note: Vols. III and IV of Histoire de la révolution d’Angleterre, q.v.

referred to: 187n

— Histoire de la révolution d’Angleterre deputs l’avènement de Charles
ler jusqu’a la restauration de Charles II, 1st pt. 2 vols. Paris: Leroux
and Chantpie, 1826-27.

note: no further volumes of this ed. appeared.

referred to: 187, 221, 227

Edition: current; Page: [455]
— Histoire du protectorat de Richard Cromwell et du rétablissement des
Stuart (1658-1660), 2 vols. Paris: Didier, 1856.

note: Vols. V and VI of Histoire de la révolution d’Angleterre, q.v.

referred to: 187n

— Lectures on European Civilization. Trans. P.M. Beckwith. London:
Macrone, 1837.

note: a translation of Cours d’histoire moderne . . . Civilisation en
Europe.

referred to: 229

—, ed. Collection des mémoires relatifs a la révolution d’Angleterre,
accompagnée de notices et d’éclaircissemens historiques. 25 vols. Paris
and Rouen: Béchet, 1823-25.

referred to: 221

Guy, comte de Rochefort Referred to: 30

Guyton-Morveau, Louis Bernard.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Mignet, is to the moderates on
the Committee of Public Safety.

referred to: 12

Hallam, Henry. View of the State of Europe during the Middle Ages. 2
vols. London: Murray, 1818.

note: the title JSM gives at 51, “History and Government of Europe
during the Middle Ages,” derives from that which appears at the head of
Chap. i in Vol. I and Chap. vii in Vol. II, “View of the History and
Governments of Europe during the Middle Ages,” and the running titles
throughout, “History and Governments of Europe during the Middle Ages.”

quoted: 40

referred to: 34, 38n, 40, 51-2

40.17-18 “disdain of money,”] Liberality indeed, and disdain of money,
might be reckoned, as I have said, among the essential virtues of
chivalry (II, 551)

Hampden, John. Referred to: 121, 136

Harenc.

note: son of Raoul de Harenc, not otherwise identified. The reference is
in a quotation from Sismondi.

referred to: 41n

Harenc, Raoul de.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Sismondi.

referred to: 41n

Head, Edmund Walker.

note: the reference is to recently appointed qualified examiners at
Oxford

referred to: 369

Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich.

note: the reference is to the Hegelians

referred to: 261

Héloïse.

note: the second reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 246

Helvétius, Claude Adrien. Referred to: 66, 183

Hénault, Charles Jean François. Nouvel abrégé chronologique de
l’histoire de France; contenant les événemens de notre histoire depuis
Clovis jusqu’a la mort de Louis XIV (1744). New ed. 3 vols. Paris:
Prault, et al., 1775-74.

note: continuously paginated. The quotation is in a quotation from
Carlyle.

quoted: 139

Edition: current; Page: [456]
Henri I (of France).

note: grandson of Hugh Capet.

referred to: 32

Henri IV (of France).

note: the reference at 152 is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 61n, 152

Henry I (of England).

note: the reference at 41n is in a quotation from Sismondi.

referred to: 41n, 47, 292

Henry II (of England).

note: the reference at 239 is in a quotation from Michelet

referred to: 28, 35, 239, 244

Henry IV (Holy Roman Emperor).

note: the reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 247

Henry IV (of France). See Henri IV.

Henry V (of England). Referred to: 234

Henry VIII (of England).

note: the reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 253

Henry of Almain.

note: son of Richard, Duke of Cornwall.

referred to: 49

Henry, Robert. The History of Great Britain, from the First Invasion of
It by the Romans under Julius Caesar (1771-93). 2nd ed. 12 vols. London:
Strahan and Cadell, 1788-95.

note: JSM’s reference conforms to this ed.

referred to: 48n

Henry-Larivière, Pierre François Joachim.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Mignet, is to the members of
the Commission of Twelve.

referred to: 12

Herder, Johann Gottfried von. Referred to: 185, 185n

— Ideen zur Philosophie der Geschichte der Menschheit. 4 vols. Riga and
Leipzig Hartknoch, 1784-91.

referred to: 261

Herodotus. History.

note: the references at 222 and 222n (the second of which is in a
quotation from Courier) derive from the translation by Larcher (q.v.),
that at 368-9 is general, so no ed. is cited. Two Greek and Latin eds.
formerly in SC.

referred to: 222, 222n, 368-9

Hickson, William Edward. “The French Republic,” Westminster Review, L
(Oct., 1848), 188-236.

referred to: 334

Hildebrand. See St. Gregory VII.

Hilderic. See Childéric I.

Histoire de la révolution par deux amis de la liberté. See Kerverseau.

Histoire parlementaire. See Buchez.

Hoche, Lazare. Referred to: 178

Holbach, Paul Henri, baron d’. Referred to: 66, 183

Edition: current; Page: [457]
Homer.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 151

— The Iliad (Greek and English). Trans. A.T. Murray, 2 vols. London:
Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1924.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. The references at 57 and 210
being general, no ed. is there cited, that at 210 is to Achilles and
Ulysses as archetypes. In SC is Iliad and Odyssey (Greek), 2 vols.
(Oxford, 1800).

referred to: 57, 145, 210

— Odyssey.

note: as the reference is general, no ed. is cited.

referred to: 57

Hordain, Adam de. Referred to: 49

Horsley, Samuel. The Speeches in Parliament of Samuel Horsley. Ed. H.
Horsley Dundee: Chalmers, 1813.

referred to: 334

Houssaie, Mathieu de. Referred to: 49

Hoveden, Roger de. See Roger of Hoveden.

Hugh, seigneur de Puiset. Referred to: 30

Hugh Capet. See Hughes Capet.

“Hughson, David.” See David Pugh

Hugo, Victor Marie, vicomte. Referred to: 188n

Hugues Capet (of France). Referred to: 27, 30, 32, 289

Hulin, Pierre Augustin.

note: the references are in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 145, 146, 147

Hume, David. The History of England from the Invasion of Julius Caesar
to the Revolution in 1688 (1754-62). 8 vols. London: Cadell, et al.,
1823.

note: the reference at 19 is referential.

quoted: 47-8

referred to: 4, 19, 47n, 134, 135, 136, 221, 239, 367

47.33-48.2 “not,” . . . “with . . . revered.”] The affair was examined
by Anselm, in a Council of the Prelates and nobles, which was summoned
at Lambeth. Matilda there proved that she had put on the veil, not with
. . . revered (I. 318-19)

Hunter, Henry. The History of London, and Its Environs. 2 vols. London:
Stockdale, 1811.

note: cited as an example of histories of London on which JSM comments.

referred to: 18

Innocent III (Pope).

note: the references at 239, 247, 248, 249 are in quotations from
Michelet.

referred to: 239, 245, 247, 248, 249

Isnard, Maximin.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Toulongeon.

referred to: 105

James II (of England). Referred to: 186, 192, 221, 330

Jean II (of France).

note: known as le Bon. The quotation is in a quotation from Roederer
(q.v. for the collation).

quoted: 43

Edition: current; Page: [458]
Jeanne d’Arc.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Carlyle, is to the Maid of
Orleans.

referred to: 152

Jesus.

note: the first reference is in a quotation from Simon of Tournai quoted
by Michelet, the second is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 248, 253

Joannes Scotus (Erigena).

note: the reference is in a quotation from Guizot.

referred to: 272

John (of England).

note: the reference at 239 is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 29, 239, 292

John (of France). See Jean II.

Johnson, Samuel. “Preface to Shakespeare. Published in the Year 1768.”
In The Works of Samuel Johnson, LL.D. 13 vols. London: Buckland, et al.,
1787, IX, 239-302.

referred to: 135

Joseph (son of Jacob). Referred to: 380

Joubert, Charles.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Littré.

referred to: 179

Jourdan, Mathieu Jouve.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 157

Journal des Débats. Referred to: 190

Julian the Apostate. Referred to: 224

Juliane.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Sismondi.

referred to: 41n

“Junius.” Junius: Including Letters by the Same Writer, under Other
Signatures (Now First Collected). To Which Are Added, His Confidential
Correspondence with Mr. Wilkes, and His Private Letters Addressed to Mr.
H.S. Woodfall. With a Preliminary Essay, Notes, Fac-similes, &c. 3 vols.
London: Rivington, et al., 1812.

note: in SC.

referred to: 196

Kabbalah.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 248

Kant, Immanuel.

note: the reference is to “Kantism.”

referred to: 183

— Idee zu einer allgemeinen Geschichte in weltburgerlicher Absicht
(1784). In Sämmtliche Werke. Ed. Karl Rosenkrantz and Friedrich
Schubert. 14 vols. in 12. Leipzig: Voss, 1838-40, VII, 315-35.

referred to: 261

Kelly, Walter Keating. See Leopold von Ranke, The History of the Popes.

Kepler, Johann. Referred to: 228

Edition: current; Page: [459]
Kersausie, Guillard de.

note: the reference is to the leading members of the Société des Droits
de l’Homme.

referred to: 128

Kervélégan, Augustin Bernard François Legoazre de.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Mignet, is to the members of
the Commission of Twelve.

referred to: 12

Kerverseau, F.M., G. Clavelin, et al. Histoire de la révolution de
France. Précédée de l’exposé rapide des administrations successives qui
ont déterminé cette révolution mémorable. Par deux amis de la liberté.
New ed. 19 vols. Paris: Garnery (Vols. I-VI, 1792), and Bidault (Vols.
VII-XIX, 1797-1803), 1792-1803.

note: the quotations and references from 143 to 154 are in quotations
from Carlyle.

quoted: 104-5, 152, 153, 153-4, 154, 156, 157

referred to: 73n, 75n, 93, 95n, 100, 142, 144, 145, 146, 147, 152, 154,
156, 157

104.28 “La] Plus loin s’élevoient un amphithéâtre les deux divisions de
Jacobins votant encore ensemble, et paroissant se diriger vers le même
but, c’est-à-dire, le renversement de la constitution dont ils s’étoient
cependant déclarés les amis exclusifs(1), [footnote.] (1) Toutes les
sociétés populaires s’appelloient alors Sociétés des Amis de la
Constitution [text.] et au nom de laquelle ils juroient tous les jours
le détrônement du roi, pour faire passer la couronne sur la tête d’un
autre, car la (VII, 12)

104.28 autres [the Gironde nor the Montagne] ne] autres ne (VII, 12)

104.35 faveurs S’il] faveurs, s’il (VII, 13)

104.40 Tuileries, vous] Tuileries, discours qu’on n’oubliera pas de
rapporter ou d’extraire au moins dans cette histoire, vous (VII, 13)

105.8-11 Au . . . république.] [not in italics] (VII, 14)

105.10 la] sa (VII, 14)

Kléber, Jean Baptiste. Referred to: 178

Knight, Richard Payne. An Analytical Essay on the Greek Alphabet.
London: Elmsly, 1791.

referred to: 62

—, ed. Carmina Homerica, Ilias et Odyssea. London: Valpy; Paris and
Strasbourg: Treuttel and Würtz, 1820.

referred to: 62

Knox, John. Referred to: 224

Koch, Christophe Guillaume de. Abrégé de l’histoire des traités de paix
entre les puissances de l’Europe depuis la paix de Westphalie. 4 vols.
Basle. Decker, 1796-97.

note: see also Schoell.

referred to: 372

— Tableau des révolutions de l’Europe, depuis le bouleversement de
l’empire d’occident jusqu’à nos jours. Lausanne and Strasbourg: Bauer,
1771.

referred to: 372

Lacenaire, Pierre François. Referred to: 184

Laclos. See Choderlos de Laclos.

La Corrège, Jean.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Carlyle, is to him as one of
seven prisoners in the Bastille.

referred to: 146

Lacretelle, Charles Jean Dominique de. Histoire de France pendant le
dix-huitième siècle (1808-26). 5th ed. 3 vols. Paris: Delaunay, 1819.

Edition: current; Page: [460]
note: in SC, the work was completed in 14 vols. (Paris: Buisson) in
1826. The quotation, in a quotation from Carlyle, is summary.

quoted: 146

— Histoire de l’assemblée constituante. 2 vols. Paris, Strasbourg, and
London: Treuttel and Würtz, 1821.

note: part, eventually, of his Histoire de la révolution française, 8
vols. (Paris: Treuttel and Wurtz, 1821-26).

quoted: 90

90.21 Le] [no paragraph] Le (I, 68)

90.25 adorateurs] adorations (I, 69)

90.26-7 Il . . . frappé.] [not in italics] (I, 69)

90.34 dissoudre l’assemblée] [not in italics] (I, 69)

Lacy, Louis de.

note: the reference is to the Spanish general butchered by Ferdinand
VII.

referred to: 89

La Fayette, Marie Joseph Paul Roch Yves Gilbert Du Motier, marquis de.

note: JSM sometimes uses the spelling Lafayette. The reference at 90 is
in a quotation from Montgaillard, the quotation and references at 150,
154, 155, 157 are in quotations from Carlyle.

quoted: 150

referred to: 78, 80, 90, 97, 154, 155, 157, 198

— “Lettre du général La Fayette au chevalier d’Archenholz” (Magdebourg,
27 Mar., 1793). In Jean Baptiste Regnault-Warin Mémoires pour servir à
la vie du général La Fayette, et à l’histoire de l’assemblée
constituante, 2 vols. Paris: Hesse, 1824, II, 116-22.

note: part of Collection des mémoires, ed. Berville and Barrière, q.v.

referred to: 78n

Laffitte, Jacques. Referred to: 177, 198

La Fontaine, Jean de. Fables choisies mises en vers. Paris: Thierry,
1668.

note: the reference, to “Le loup et l’agneau,” Book I, Fable x, is in a
quotation from Scott.

referred to: 87

La Gallissonnière, Augustin Félix Elisabeth Barrin, comte de.

note: the reference at 9 is in a quotation from Mignet, that at 87 is to
him as a member of the new ministry following Necker’s dismissal.

referred to: 9, 87

Laing, Malcolm. The History of Scotland, from the Union of the Crowns on
the Accession of James VI to the Throne of England, to the Union of the
Kingdoms in the Reign of Queen Anne, 2 vols. London: Cadell and Davies;
Edinburgh: Manners and Miller, 1800.

referred to: 57

Lally-Tolendal, Trophime Gérard, marquis de.

note: the quotation, which originates with Mme de Stael (q.v. for the
collation), is in a quotation from Bailleul. The reference at 90 is in a
quotation from Montgaillard.

quoted: 104

referred to: 83, 86, 90

La Luzerne, César Henri, comte de.

note: the reference at 9 is in a quotation from Mignet, that at 86-7 is
to him as one of the ministers dismissed with Necker.

referred to: 9, 86-7

Lamarque, Jean Maximilien. Referred to: 200

Edition: current; Page: [461]
Lamartine, Alphonse Marie Louis de Prat de.

note: the references at 321, 332 are to him as one of the members of the
Provisional Government of 1848, that at 340-1 is in a quotation from
Brougham.

referred to: 188n, 321, 332, 339, 340-1, 343

— “Discours au peuple envahissant l’intérieur de l’hôtel de ville,
accusant le gouvernement provisoire de trahison, et voulant le forcer à
proclamer immediatement, sans réserver les droits de la nation, la forme
du gouvernement républicain” (25 Feb., 1848). In Trois mois au pouvoir
(q.v.), 64-5.

referred to: 333

— “Discours au peuple rassemblé en armes dans la salle du trône, et
voulant forcer le gouvernement provisoire à arborer le drapeau rouge”
(25 Feb., 1848). Ibid., 66.

referred to: 333

— Histoire des Girondins. 8 vols. Paris: Coquebert, 1847.

note: the quotations are of the same passage, that at 355-6 is JSM’s
translation of the original, given at 399-400, which is collated.

quoted: 355-6 (399-400)

399.26 Le] Ce (V, 407)

399.30-31 l’homme . . . Tout] l’homme, par conséquent un plan divin que
Dieu fait entrevoir à ses créatures. Tout ce qui contrarie ce plan,
c’est-à-dire tout (V, 407)

400.11 esclavage. Ou] esclavage [paragraph] Ou (V, 408)

400.14 générale, mais] genérale Mais (V, 408)

400.16-17 par la . . . par la] par ta . . . par ta (V, 408)

400.24 faim.] faim! (V, 409)

400.30 nous . . . Le temps] nous. Dans les desseins de Dieu, le temps
(V, 409)

400.34 temps La] temps. XXI [paragraph] La (V, 409-10)

400.35 terre. Les déceptions] terre, les déceptions (V, 410)

— Lettre aux dix départements (25 Aug., 1848). In Trois mois au pouvoir
(q.v.), 5-60.

referred to: 338, 341

— Manifeste aux puissances. Circulaire du ministre des affaires
étrangères aux agents diplomatiques de la république française (4 Mar.,
1848). Ibid., 69-78.

note: the quotation is collated with the French version in App. B. The
reference at 342 is in a quotation from Lamartine.

quoted: 341 (397-8), 342

referred to: 340, 342, 343-4, 348 (398)

398.10 de la nationalité] de nationalite (76) [treated as printer’s
error in this ed.]

— Réponse à une députation des citoyens irlandais habitant Dublin,
Manchester et Liverpool, demandant la sympathie de la France pour
l’indépendance de l’Irlande (3 Apr., 1848). Ibid., 148-52.

note: the second quotation is collated with the French version in App.
B.

quoted: 342, 342-3 (398-9)

342.37 “liberty . . . privilege,”] [translated from.] Dites à vos
concitoyens que le nom de l’Irlande et le nom de la liberté
courageusement défendue contre le privilege est un même nom pour tout
citoyen français! (149)

399.6 peuples. Aucun] peuples! aucun (150)

399.7 étrangères. La] étrangères la (150)

399.11 entière.] entière! (150)

399.12 humain. Nous] humain! nous (150)

399.15 fruits.] fruits! (150)

399.16 diplomates.] diplomates! (151)

399.17 traités. Nous] traités! nous (151)

399.20 environnent. Nous] environnent! nous (151)

Edition: current; Page: [462]
— Réponse à une députation des Polonais, demandant l’appui du
gouvernement pour le rétablissement de la nationalité polonaise (19
Mar., 1848). Ibid., 130-6.

note: the quotation is collated with the French version in App. B.

quoted: 342 (398)

398.12 La République] La République est républicaine sans doute, elle le
dit à haute voix au monde, mais la République (131)

398.14 elle.] elle! (131)

398.16 Germaniques. . . . Le Gouvernement] germaniques [ellipsis
indicates 1½-page omission] Le Gouvernment (131-2)

398.20 moment.] moment! (133)

398.21-2 elle-même. . . . La République] elle-même! [ellipsis indicates
1½-page omission] [paragraph] La République (135)

398.29 d’intervenir Eh] d’intervenir [paragraph] Eh (135)

398.30 pacifiques.] pacifiques! (135)

— Trois mois au pouvoir. Paris: Lévy, 1848.

note: the references are given under separate texts above.

Lambesc. See Lorraine.

La Mennais, Hugues Félicité Robert de. Essai sur l’indifférence en
matière de religion. 4 vols. Paris: Tournachon-Molin and Sequin (Vols.
I-II), Librairie Classique-Elémentaire (Vols. III-IV), 1817-23.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Guizot.

referred to: 390

Lameth, Alexandre Théodore Victor, baron de Referred to: 78

— Histoire de l’assemblée constituante, 2 vols. Paris: Moutardier,
1828-29.

note: the quotation (Carlyle’s English recension of a French passage) is
in a quotation from Carlyle, who gives the reference.

quoted: 140

Lameth, Charles Malo François, comte de Referred to: 78, 80n

La Noue, François de.

note: the quotation is taken from Roederer (q.v. for the collation).

quoted: 43

Lansdowne, Marquis of. See Petty-Fitzmaurice.

Larcher, Pierre Henri, trans. Histoire d’Hérodote traduite du grec, avec
des remarques historiques et critiques, un essai sur la chronologie
d’Hérodote, et une table géographique, 7 vols. Paris: Musier and Nyon,
1786.

note: Courier is the source of the references (the second of which is in
a quotation from him).

referred to: 222, 222n

La Roche de Gluy (Lord of). Referred to: 49

Laroche, Bernard.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Carlyle, is to him as one of
seven prisoners in the Bastille.

referred to: 146

La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt, François Alexandre Frédéric, duc de.

note: the quotation is in a quotation from Toulongeon.

quoted: 91

Laud, William. Referred to: 299

Launay, Bernard René Jourdan de.

note: the quotation, which derives from Dusaulx (q.v.), and the
references are in a quotation from Carlyle.

quoted: 144

referred to: 143-4, 145, 146, 147

Lavallé, Joseph, marquis de Bois-Robert, Histoire de l’origine, des
progrès, et de la. Edition: current; Page: [463] décadence des diverses
factions qui ont agité la France depuis le 14 juillet, 1789, jusqu’à
l’abdication de Napoléon. 3 vols. London: Murray, 1816

quoted: 91

referred to: 108

91.8 “le soir] Le soir (I, 86)

La Vauguyon, Paul François, duc de.

note: the reference at 9 is in a quotation from Mignet that at 87 is to
him as a member of the new ministry following Necker’s dismissal.

referred to: 9, 87

Léans, Hannot de. Referred to: 49

Léans, Pierre de. Referred to: 49

Leclaire, Edmé Jean. Des améliorations qu’il serait possible d’apporter
dans le sort des ouvriers peintres en bâtiments, suivies des règlements
d’administration et de répartition des bénéfices que produit le travail,
par Leclaire et mis en pratique dans sa maison . . . 1842. Paris:
Bouchard-Huzard, Carilian-Goeury, n.d.

referred to: 315

Lecointre, Laurent. “Dépositions du lieutenant-colonel commandant la
première division de la garde nationale de Versailles.” In HP (q.v.),
III, 111-15.

note: the quotation is in a quotation from Carlyle.

quoted: 156

Ledru-Rollin, Alexandre Auguste.

note: the references at 321, 332 are to him as one of the members of the
Provisional Government of 1848, one at 321 is to him as a leading member
of the Paris bar.

referred to: 321, 332, 336, 339

— Bulletins de la république, ministère de l’intérieur. In Recueil
complet des actes du gouvernement provisoire. Ed. Emile Carrey. 2 pts.
Paris: Durand, 1848, II, 617-79.

referred to: 336

Lee, Nathaniel. The Rival Queens, or The Death of Alexander the Great.
London: Magnes and Bentley, 1677.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 149

Lefèbre-Laroche, Pierre Louis, abbé.

note: the references are in quotations from Carlyle.

referred to: 152, 153

Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm. Referred to: 376

Leo X (Pope). Referred to: 224

Leofric (Earl of Mercia). Referred to: 25, 26

Leopold II (of Austria).

note: the reference is to him as “a foreign despot.”

referred to: 101

— Letter to Louis XVI (3 Dec., 1791), Gazette Nationale, ou Le Moniteur
Universel, 26 Dec., 1791, 1505.

referred to: 101

— Letter of 17 Feb., 1792, ibid., 2 Mar., 1792, 254.

referred to: 80n

Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim. Die Erziehung des Menschengeschlechts.
Berlin: Voss, 1780.

referred to: 261

Edition: current; Page: [464]
L’Héritier, Jérôme Honoré.

note: the references are in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 156, 157

Liancourt, duc de. See La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt.

Licinius, Gaius.

note: the reference derives from Livy.

referred to: 64-5

Lingard, John. Referred to: 239

L’Isle, Jourdain de, sire de Casaubon. Referred to: 49

Littré, Emile. “Notice biographique.” In Oeuvres littéraires et
économiques d’Armand Carrel. Ed. Charles Romey. Paris: Guillaumin and
Lecou, 1854, 5-66.

note: JSM is ostensibly reviewing a work still to be published, which
combines a translation of an abridged form of an article by Littre on
Carrel with the translation of an article on Carrel, by Nisard, q.v. The
reasons for our using the work cited here are given in the Textual
Introduction, cii above.

reviewed: 167-215

quoted: 170, 178-9, 188, 196, 197, 212, 214, 214n

170.18-35 “Armand Carrel” . . . was . . . them.] [translated from.]
Armand Carrel a été sous-lieutenant et journaliste, c’est dans ce cercle
qu’a été renfermée la vie d’un homme qui, mort à la fleur de l’âge,
laisse un nom connu de la France entière, et des regrets même à ses
ennemis politiques. Sa renommée ne lui vint pas de la faveur des
gouvernements ni de ces fonctions élevées où l’on trouve toujours
l’occasion de se distinguer ou, au moins, de faire parler de soi.
Impliqué dans les conspirations contre la Restauration, officier au
service de la Constitution espagnole, prisonnier en Catalogne, condamné
à mort, hardi dans l’opposition avant la révolution de Juillet, plus
hardi encore apres, il a toujours été laissé à ses propres forces, de
manière à ne valoir jamais que sa vraie valeur, à ne recevoir aucun
eclat emprunté, et à n’avoir d’autre rang que celui qu’il se créait
lui-même. La fortune, cet inexplicable hasard qui distribue les balles
dans une bataille, et qu’il faut bien admettre dans les choses humaines,
ne se plut pas a le favoriser, il n’eut pas d’étoile qu’il pût invoquer
dans les mauvais jours et qui lui jetât un rayon inattendu, et, moins
que personne. Armand Carrel a été l’ouvrage des circonstances il ne les
a pas cherchées, elles ne sont pas venues. Force de caractère dans les
temps difficiles, admirable talent d’écrivain dans tous les temps,
noblesse d’âme envers amis et ennemis, c’est là ce qui le soutint et ce
qui lui assurait, partout et à toute époque, non-seulement une place
élevée dans l’estime des hommes, mais encore de l’ascendant. (5-6)

178.27-179.11 Carrel . . . plots.] [translated from.] Carrel était
sous-lieutenant dans le 29e de ligne en 1821, au moment où les
conspirations se tramaient de toutes parts contre la Restauration. Le
29e tenait garnison dans Béfort et Neuf-Brissach. Carrel se trouvait
dans la dernière de ces deux villes. Il était engagé dans le complot
qu’on a appelé depuis conspiration de Béfort, les officiers de
Neuf-Brissach qui en faisaient partie avaient été découragés par les
lenteurs apportées dans cette affaire, et ils ne voulaient plus marcher
que le mouvement n’eût éclaté à Béfort. Il était urgent que, du moins,
ils enlevassent leurs soldats dès que le coup aurait réussi dans cette
dernière ville. La haute vente avait envoyé de Paris plusieurs conjurés,
l’un d’eux, M. Joubert, était à Neuf-Brissach pour juger de ce qu’il y
avait à faire. Carrel offrit de l’accompagner à Béfort, d’assister au
mouvement et de rapporter la nouvelle à Neuf-Brissach il s’habilla en
bourgeois. Tous deux partirent et arrivèrent à Béfort vers minuit. Le
complot avait été découvert, des arrestations avaient été faites, tout
le monde était en fuite. Carrel reprit à franc-étrier la route de
Neuf-Brissach, où il arriva de grand matin. Il eut le temps de rentrer
chez lui, de se mettre en uniforme, et put assister à l’exercice du
matin sans qu’on se doutât qu’il avait passé la nuit sur la grand’route.
Lorsque l’on fit une instruction pour rechercher les complices des
officiers de Béfort, et surtout pour savoir quel était celui qui s’était
rendu de Neuf-Brissach dans cette ville, on ne put rien découvrir, et
les soupçons se portèrent sur tout autre que sur Carrel, car ses
manières légères et insouciantes l’avaient fait regarder, par ses chefs,
comme tout à fait en dehors des menées (7-8)

Edition: current; Page: [465]
188.4 (il . . . d’acier).] Sa modeste épée de sous-lieutenant fut brisée
par le sort entre ses mains, mais la plume qui la remplaça devint
redoutable, et il a été dit souvent, et avec raison, qu’il . . .
d’acier. (6)

196.16-18 “Unlike . . . Courier,” . . . “who . . . sentence.”]
[translated from.] Au contraire de Paul-Louis Courier, qui hésitait sur
un mot, Carrel n’hésitait jamais sur une phrase (37)

196.22 la sûreté de l’expression.] Son style, sans artifice et sans
recherche, était un chef-d’oeuvre pour la sûreté de l’expression, qui
arrivait toujours abondante comme la pensee, si pleine et si abondante
elle-même; et si on ne sentait pas le travail de l’écrivain qui retouche
avec soin chaque passage, on sentait une inspiration vigoureuse qui
donnait à toute chose le mouvement, la forme et la couleur, et jetait
dans un même moule le style et la pensée (37)

196.24-30 “L’expression” . . . “arrivait . . . thought.”] [see preceding
entry]

197.11-15 “The National,” . . . “was . . . journal.”] Le National, en
effet, n’a pas été pour Carrel un fiord théâtre où il venait jouer le
rôle que le hasard lui imposait, ce fut pour lui une arène où il
luttait, une tribune du haut de laquelle il parlait, un champ clos où il
se serait cru malheureux de ne pouvoir descendre en personne le National
fut une personnification d’Armand Carrel, et, si le journal exprima ses
pensees, les entraînements, les passions de l’écrivain, l’écrivain, à
son tour, était toujours sur la bréche, prét a defendre, au péril de sa
vie ou de sa liberté, ce qu’il venait de dire dans le journal (37-8)

212.23-35 “He . . . repeated,” . . . that . . . exposed.”] [translated
from.] Il a répété souvent que le National n’âvait point de procureur du
roi pour le defendre, et qu’il fallait qu’il se défendît lui-même. Il
était persuadé aussi que rien n’alimente plus les haines politiques et
ne les rend plus capables de se porter aux derniers excès que l’impunité
des diffamations odieuses il prétendait que les hommes de la révolution
avaient prépare eux-mêmes leur échafaud en n’imposant pas le silence au
dénigrement, et, eût-il dû s’exposer bien plus qu’il ne l’a fait, il
n’aurait jamais souffert, dans quelque situation où il se fût trouvé,
qu’on se jouât impunément de son nom et de sa personne. C’était là ce
qu’il répondait quand on le blâmait de risquer sa vie légerement; et,
aujourd’hui qu’il a succombé, il faut, en défendant sa memoire d’un
reproche que la douleur a arraché à des voix amies, se rappeler ce qu’il
disait sur son lit de mort. “Le porte-drapeau du régiment est le plus
exposé.” (58-9)

214.6-11 “he . . . things,” . . . “are . . . prevented.”] [translated
from.] Mais, quand une impression venait le saisir, quand son esprit
était oblige de deployer ses hautes facultes, endormies souvent devant
d’insignifiants détails, alors nul regard mieux que le sien n’embrassait
le présent et l’avenir, il reconnaissait d’un coup d’oeil, comme il
aurait fait sur le champ de bataille, tout le terrain où il se trouvait
placé, et, ce qui etonnait surtout en lui, c’était la sûrete de
l’instinct qui lui faisait deviner la portée des petites choses. Les
petites choses sont celles que le vulgaire n’aperçoit pas, puis, quand
elles ont produit de graves résultats, on s’arrête, tout déconcerté,
devant l’irrévocable événement, qu’il aurait été si facile de prévenir
(62)

214n.8-9 “Every body,” . . . “thinks . . . ones.”] [translated from.]
Tout le monde songe aux grandes choses, seuls, les esprits supérieurs
songent aux petites (62)

Livy (Titus Livius). Livy (Latin and English). Trans. B.O. Foster, et
al., 14 vols. London: Heinemann, New York: Putnam’s Sons; and (Vols.
VI-XIV) Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1919-59.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference.

referred to: 3, 37, 65, 368-9

Lombard, Peter.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 248

Loménie de Brienne, Etienne Charles de, cardinai.

note: the reference and quotation are in a quotation from Carlyle.

quoted: 142

referred to: 140

Lorraine, Charles Eugène de, prince de Lambesc.

note: the references are in a quotation from Mignet.

referred to: 9, 10

Edition: current; Page: [466]
Lothaire I, empereur d’Occident.

note: the first of the “series of Lothaires.”

referred to: 24

Lothaire II.

note: of Lorraine, one of the grandsons of Louis I.

referred to: 19

Louis I (of France; Roman Emperor).

note: known as le Débonnaire or le Pieux. The reference at 279 is in a
quotation from Guizot.

referred to: 32, 279

Louis II (Roman Emperor).

note: known as le Jeune, one of the grandsons of Louis I.

referred to: 19

Louis II (of France).

note: known as le Bègue, one of the grandsons of Louis I.

referred to: 19

Louis III (of France).

note: one of the grandsons of Louis I.

referred to: 19

Louis V (of France).

note: “the last of the Carlovingians.”

referred to: 290

Louis VI (of France).

note: known as le Gros.

referred to: 30, 31

Louis VII (of France).

note: known as le Jeune. The references are in quotations from Michelet.

referred to: 239, 247

Louis IX (of France).

note: St. Louis. The reference at 239 and the second at 251 are in
quotations from Michelet.

referred to: 33, 44, 48, 49, 50, 239, 250, 251, 289

Louis XI (of France). Referred to: 254

Louis XIV (of France).

note: the reference at 293 is in a quotation from Guizot.

referred to: 49, 222, 293, 299n, 346

Louis XV (of France).

note: the first reference at 138 derives from, the second is in a
quotation from, Carlyle.

referred to: 50, 138

— Edit du roi, concernant la société des jésuites. Paris: Simon, 1764.

note: this edict, of Nov., 1764, banishing the Jesuits, was still in
effect at the period of which JSM is writing.

referred to: 189

Louis XVI (of France).

note: the quotation at 87n derives from Bailly (q.v. for the collation),
that at 91 is from Toulongeon, that at 157 has not been located. The
references at 6-7, 7-9, 12, are in quotations from Mignet; that at 80
derives from the Histoire parlementaire; the first at 88 is in a
quotation from Scott; the second is in a quotation from Ferrières, that
at 90 is from Lacretelle, one at 97 derives from Dumouriez; that at 103
is in a quotation from Bailleul, that at 105 is from Kerverseau, that at
106 is in a quotation from Soulavie, one at 107 is in a quotation from
Bertrand de Moleville; those at 142, 153, 155, 156, 166 are in
quotations from Carlyle; that at 252 is in a quotation from Michelet.

Edition: current; Page: [467]
quoted: 87n, 91, 157

referred to: 6-7, 7-9, 12, 61n, 70, 72n, 73n, 75, 78, 80-1, 85n, 87, 88,
90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 96-7, 99, 100, 101, 102, 105, 106, 107, 121, 127,
139, 141, 142, 153, 155, 156, 166, 177n, 252

— “Réponse du roi à l’assemblée nationale” (11 July, 1789), Gazette
Nationale, ou Le Moniteur Universel, 10-13 July, 1789, 74.

referred to: 8

— “Déclaration des intentions du roi” (23 June, 1789), ibid., 20-24
June, 1789, 47-8.

note: the reference at 88 is in a quotation from Ferrières: that at 90
is in a quotation from Lacretelle.

referred to: 72n, 88, 90, 101

— “Déclaration du roi, concernant la présente tenue des états-généraux”
(23 June, 1789), ibid., 46-7.

note: the reference at 88 is in a quotation from Ferrieres, that at 90
is in a quotation from Lacretelle.

referred to: 72n, 88, 90, 101

— “Discours prononcé par le roi a l’assemblée nationale” (4 Feb., 1790),
ibid., 5 Feb., 1790, 147-8.

referred to: 96

— Lettre de M. Montmorin, écrite par ordre du roi aux ambassadeurs pres
les souverains étrangers (23 avril 1791). In Dumouriez, La vie et les
memoirés du général Dumouriez (q.v.), II, 419-22.

referred to: 97

— “Proclamation du roi” (12 Nov., 1791), Gazette Nationale, ou Le
Moniteur Universel, 14 Nov., 1791, 1325.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Mignet.

referred to: 11

— “Proclamation du roi à tous les Français à sa sortie de Paris” (20
June, 1791), ibid., 22 June, 1791, 718.

referred to: 97

— “Refus de sanction du décret contre les prêtres non assermentés,”
ibid., 20 Dec., 1791, 1481.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Mignet.

referred to: 11

— “Réglement du roi pour la convocation des etats-generaux à Versailles”
(24 Jan., 1789). In HP, I, 262-76.

note: the quotation and the references are in a quotation from Carlyle.

quoted: 142

referred to: 142, 143

Louis XVII; Louis Charles, dauphin de France.

note: the reference at 104 is in a quotation from Kerverseau, that at
106 is from Soulavie, that at 107 is from Bertrand de Moleville, those
at 153 and 156 are in quotations from Carlyle.

referred to: 99, 104, 106, 107, 153, 156

Louis XVIII (of France) Referred to: 72n, 101, 129, 174, 175, 176, 177,
186

Louis Philippe (of France).

note: the reference at 125 is in a self-quotation, that at 322-3 is in a
quotation from Brougham.

referred to: 125, 129, 175, 180n, 193, 198, 199, 200, 201, 315, 320,
322-3, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330

Louvel, Louis Pierre. Referred to: 177

Edition: current; Page: [468]
Lucas-Montigny, Gabriel.

note: see also Mirabeau, Mémoires.

referred to: 148n

Luther, Martin. Referred to: 375

Luxembourg. See Montmorency-Luxembourg.

Mably, Gabriel Bonnot de, abbé. Referred to: 66

— Observations sur l’histoire de France (1765). New ed. Rev. F.P.G.
Guizot, 3 vols. Paris: Brière, 1823.

note: this ed. was accompanied by the 1st ed. of Guizot’s Essais, q.v.

referred to: 371

Macaulay, Thomas Babington. “Dumont’s Recollections of Mirabeau,”
Edinburgh Review, LV (July, 1832), 552-76.

referred to: 115

Mackintosh, James. The History of England. 10 vols. London: Longman, et
al., 1830-40.

note: the reference is not overt, but JSM elsewhere (see CW, VII, 151-2)
attributes the comment to Mackintosh

referred to: 356

Macpherson, James. See Ossian.

Maillard, Marie Julien Stanislas.

note: the references are in quotations from Carlyle.

referred to: 146, 147, 152, 153, 154, 155

Malcolm III (of Scotland). Referred to: 47

Malcolm, James Peller. Londinium redivivum; or, An Antient History and
Modern Description. 4 vols. London: Rivington, et al., 1802-07.

note: cited as an illustration of histories of London, on which JSM
comments.

referred to: 18

Malesherbes, Chrétien Guillaume de Lamoignon.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Carlyle, derives from
Montgaillard.

referred to: 140

Manfred (of Sicily).

note: the reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 248

Manuel, Jacques Antoine. Referred to: 177

Marat, Jean Paul. Avis au peuple, ou Les ministres dévoilés (1789). In
HP, II, 37-8.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 146

Marceau, François Séverin. Referred to: 178

Maria Theresa (of Austria).

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 165

Marie-Adélaïde.

note: known as Madame, the elder daughter of Louis XV. The reference is
in a quotation from Ferrières.

referred to: 88

Marie Antoinette (of France).

note: the quotation, which derives from Ferrières (q.v.), is in a
quotation from Carlyle, the reference at 6 is in a quotation from
Mignet, that at 90 is from Lacretelle, that at 106 is from Soulavie,
that at 142 is from Carlyle.

Edition: current; Page: [469]
quoted: 156

referred to: 6, 75, 80, 90, 94, 106, 142, 156

Marie de Saint-Georges, Alexandre Pierre Thomas Amable.

note: the references are to him as one of the members of the Provisional
Government of 1848, one at 321 is to him as a distinguished member of
the Paris bar.

referred to: 321, 332

Marie Thérèse Charlotte, princesse.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Carlyle, is to her as one of
the children of Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette.

referred to: 156

Marlborough, Duke of. See John Churchill.

Marmontel, Jean François. Mémoires d’un père (1804) 4 vols. London:
Peltier, 1805.

note: in SC.

referred to: 75n

Marne, Thomas de. Referred to: 31

Marrast, Armand.

note: one of the references at 321 is to him as one of the four accepted
into the Provisional Government of 1848, that at 332 is to him as one of
its members.

referred to: 321, 332

Marsh, Herbert. Horae Pelasgicae Part the First Containing an Inquiry
into the Origin and Language of the Pelasgi, or Ancient Inhabitants of
Greece, with a Description of the Pelasgic or Aeolic Digamma as
Represented in the Various Inscriptions in Which It Is Still Preserved,
and an Attempt to Determine Its Genuine Pelasgic Pronunciation. London
(printed Cambridge): Murray, 1815.

referred to: 62

Martignac, Jean Baptiste Gay, vicomte de.

note: the references are to the Martignac Ministry.

referred to: 190, 191, 192, 262

Martin, Alexandre.

note: known as M. Albert. The reference at 321 is to him as one of the
four accepted into the Provisional Government of 1848, that at 332 is to
him as one of its members.

referred to: 321, 332, 353

Martin, Joseph Calixte (alias Riancourt) Referred to: 336

Mary (mother of Jesus).

note: the reference at 246 is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 246, 251

Matilda.

note: wife of Henry I of England.

referred to: 47

Mauguin, François. Referred to: 201

Maury, Jean Siffrein, abbé. Referred to: 89n

Mazure, François Antoine Jean. Histoire de la revolution de 1688 en
Angleterre. 3 vols. in 1. Paris: Gosselin, 1825.

referred to: 187, 221

Melanchthon, Philipp.

note: the spelling Melancthon appears in the text.

referred to: 375

Mercy-Argenteau, Florimond Claude, comte de.

note: the reference derives from Montgaillard.

referred to: 94

Edition: current; Page: [470]
Mérimée, Prosper. Referred to: 185

Michelet, Jules. Histoire de France. 5 vols. Paris: Hachette, 1833-42.

note: five further vols. published 1844-67.

reviewed: 217-55

quoted: 235, 235-6, 237, 238, 238-9, 239, 242, 244, 246, 246-7, 247,
247-8, 248, 248-9, 249, 249-50, 250, 251, 252, 253

235.34-6 “The . . . people,” . . . “is . . . things.”] [translated
from.] [paragraph] La base originaire, celle qui a tout reçu, tout
accepte, c’est cette jeune, molle et mobile race des Gaels, bruyante,
sensuelle et légère, prompte à apprendre, prompte à dédaigner, avide de
choses nouvelles (I, 129)

235.38-236.2 “Such . . . impulse.”] [translated from.] [paragraph] Il
faut à de tels enfans des précepteurs sévères. Ils en recevront et du
midi et du nord. La mobilité sera fixée, la mollesse durcie et
fortifiée, il faut que la raison s’ajoute à l’instinct, à l’élan la
réflexion (I, 129)

237.4-6 “Ce . . . l’homme,”] [paragraph] Ce . . . l’homme, qui plus tard
devint le principe de l’organisation féodale, ne paraît pas de bonne
heure chez l’autre branche des tribus odiniques (I, 168)

237.7 “profonde impersonnalité”] J’ai parlé dans un autre ouvrage de la
profonde impersonnalite du génie germanique, et j’y reviendrai ailleurs
(I, 171n)

237.12-13 “le génie . . . libre,”] Ce génie . . . libre, de l’orgueil
effréne du moi, n’est-il pas éminent dans la philosophie celtique, dans
Pélage, Abailard et Descartes, tandis que le mysticisme et l’idéalisme
ont fait le caractère presque invariable de la philosophie et de la
théologie allemandes1? [footnote begins with sentence quoted in
preceding entry] (I, 171)

238.37-8 Chap. I. . . . France.] [translated from.] Livre IV. Chapitre
ler L’an 1000 Le roi de France et le pape français. Robert et
Gerbert.—France féodale (II, 708)

238.38-9 II. . . . England.] [translated from.] Chapitre II. Onzième
siècle.—Grégoire VII.—Alliance des Normands et l’Eglise.—Conquêtes des
Deux-Siciles et de l’Angleterre (II, 709)

238.39 III. The Crusade.] [translated from.] Chapitre III. La Croisade.
1195-1199 [sic for 1095-1099) (II, 710)

238.40-239.1 IV. Consequences . . . Century.] [translated from.]
Chapitre IV. Suites de la croisade Les Communes, Abailard Premiere
moitié du douzième siècle (II, 711)

239.1-3 V. . . . Henry.] [translated from.] Chapitre V. Le roi de France
et le roi d’Angleterre Louis-le-Jeune. Henri II. (Plantagenet).—Seconde
croisade, humiliation de Louis.—Thomas Becket, humiliation d’Henri
(seconde moitié du douzième siecle) (II, 712)

239.3-5 VI. . . . France.] [translated from.] Chapitre VI. 1200.
Innocent III.—Le pape prévaut par les armes des Français du Nord, sur le
roi d’Angleterre et l’empereur d’Allemagne, sur l’empire grec et sur les
Albigeois. Grandeur du roi de France (II, 713-14)

239.5-6 VII. . . . Albigeois.] [translated from.] Suite du Chapitre VII
[sic].—Ruine de Jean Défaite de l’Empereur Guerre des Albigeois Grandeur
du roi de France 1204-1222 (II, 715)

239.6-7 VIII. . . . France.] [translated from.] Chapitre VIII. Premiere
moitié du treizieme siecle Mysticisme. Louis IX. Sainteté du roi de
France (II, 716)

239.7-9 IX. . . . Ages.] [translated from.] Chapitre dernier. Lutte des
Mendians et de l’Université Saint Thomas Doutes de saint Louis La
Passion comme principe d’art au moyen-âge (II, 718)

239.10-11 “The Sicilian Vespers;”] [translated from.] Livre V. Chapitre
ler Vêpres siciliennes (III, 520)

239.11 “Philippe le Bel and Boniface VIII.”] [translated from.] Chapitre
II. Philippe-le-Bel,—Boniface VIII. 1285-1304 (III, 520)

242.5 “sons of serfs.”] [relevant words translated from.] [paragraph]
Attendu que la superstition des clercs (oubliant que c’est par la guerre
et le sang répandu, sous Charlemagne et d’autres, que le royaume de
France a été converti de l’erreur des gentils à la foi catholique),
absorbe tellement la juridiction des princes séculiers, que ces fils de
serfs jugent selon leur loi les libres et fils de libres, bien que,
suivant la loi des premiers conquérans, ce soient eux plutôt que nous
devrions juger. (II, 615n)

244.2-9 “These rights,” . . . gave . . . mankind.] [translated from.]
Ces droits donnaient lieu a de grands abus sans doute, bien des crimes
étaient impunément commis par des prêtres, mais quand Edition: current;
Page: [471] on songe à l’épouvantable barbarie, a la fiscalité exécrable
des tribunaux laiques au douzième siècle, on est obligé d’avouer que la
juridiction ecclésiastique était alors une ancre de salut. Elle pouvait
épargner des coupables, mais combien elle sauvait d’innocens! L’église
était presque la seule voie par où les races méprisées pussent reprendre
quelque ascendant. On le voit par l’exemple des deux saxons Breakspear
(Adrien IV) et Becket Les libertes de l’eglise étaient alors celles du
monde (II, 343-4)

246.16-29 The . . . Christendom . . .] [translated from.] La
restauration de la femme qui avait commencé avec le christianisme, eut
lieu principalement au douzième siècle. Esclave dans l’Orient, enfermée
encore dans le gynécée grec, émancipée par la jurisprudence impériale,
elle fut reconnue par la nouvelle religion pour l’égale de l’homme.
Toutefois le Christianisme, a peine affranchi de la sensualité payenne,
craignait toujours la femme et s’en défiait. Il se connaissait faible et
tendre. Il la repoussait d’autant plus qu’il sympathisait de coeur avec
elle. De là, ces expressions dures, méprisantes même, par lesquelles il
s’efforce de se prémunir. La femme est communément désignée dans les
écrivains ecclésiastiques et dans les capitulaires par ce mot dégradant,
mais profond Vas infirmius. Quand Grégoire VII voulut affranchir le
clergé de son double lien, la femme et la terre, il y eut un nouveau
dechainement contre cette dangereuse Eve, dont la séduction a perdu
Adam, et qui le poursuit toujours dans ses fils [paragraph] Un mouvement
tout contraire commença au douzième siècle. Le libre mysticisme
entreprit de relever ce que la dureté sacerdotale avait traîne dans la
boue. Ce fut surtout un Breton. Robert d’Arbrissel, qui remplit cette
mission d’amour. Il rouvrit aux femmes le sein du Christ, fonda pour
elles des asiles, leur bâtit Fontevrault, et il y eut bientôt des
Fontevrault par toute la chrétienté1 [footnote omitted, second ellipsis
indicates 11-sentence omission] (II, 297-8)

246.29-247.10 There . . . monarchies.] [translated from.] [paragraph] La
grâce prévalant sur la loi, il se fit insensiblement une grande
révolution religieuse. Dieu changea de sexe, pour ainsi dire. La Vierge
devint le dieu du monde, elle envahit presque tous les temples et tous
les autels. La piéte se tourna en enthousiasme de galanterie
chevaleresque. La mere de Dieu fut proclamee pure et sans tache.
L’église mystique de Lyon célébra la féte de l’immaculée conception
[1134]1, exaltant ainsi l’idéal de la pureté maternelle, precisément à
l’époque ou Héloise exprimait dans ses fameuses lettres le pur
désintéressement de l’amour [paragraph] La femme régna dans le ciel,
elle régna sur la terre. Nous la voyons intervenir dans les choses de ce
monde et les diriger. Bertrade de Montfort gouverne à la fois son
premier epoux Foulques d’Anjou, et le second Philippe ler, roi de
France, Le premier, exclus de son lit, se trouve trop heureux, de
s’asseoir sur l’escabeau de ses pieds2. Louis VII date ses actes du
couronnement de sa femme Adèle. Les femmes, juges naturels des combats
de poésie et des cours d’amour, siegent aussi comme juges, à l’égal de
leurs maris, dans les affaires serieuses. Le roi de France reconnait
expressement ce droit1. Nous verrons Alix de Montmorency conduire une
armée a son époux, le tameux Simon de Montfort [paragraph] Exclues
jusque-là des successions par la barbarie féodale, les femmes y rentrent
partout dans la première moitie du douzième siècle en Angleterre, en
Castille, en Aragon, à Jérusalem, en Bourgogne, en Flandre, Hainaut,
Vermandois, en Aquitaine, Provence et bas Languedoc. La rapide
extinction des mâles, l’adoucissement des moeurs et le progrès de
l’équité, rouvrent les héritages aux femmes. Elles portent avec elles
les souverainetes dans des maisons étrangères, elles mêlent le monde,
elles accélèrent l’agglomeration des etats, et préparent la
centralisation des grandes monarchies [footnotes omitted] (II, 300-2)

247.15-37 The . . . arise . . .] [translated from.] La face du monde
etait sombre à la fin du douzième siècle. L’ordre ancien etait en peril,
et le nouveau n’avait pas commencé. Ce n’était plus la lutte matérielle
du pape et de l’Empereur, se chassant alternativement de Rome, comme au
temps d’Henri IV et de Grégoire VII. Au onzième siècle, le mal etait à
la superficie, en 1200 au coeur. Un mal profond, terrible, travaillait
le christianisme. Qu’il eût voulu revenir a la querelle des
investitures, et n’avoir à combattre que sur la question du bâton droit
ou courbe! Au temps de Grégoire VII, l’église c’était la liberté, elle
avait soutenu ce caractère jusqu au temps d’Alexandre III, le chef de la
ligue lombarde. Mais Alexandre lui-même n’avait osé appuyer Thomas
Becket, il avait défendu les libertés italiennes, et trahi celles
d’Angleterre. Ainsi l’eglise allait s’isoler du grand mouvement du
monde. Au lieu de le guider et le devancer, comme elle avait fait
jusqu’alors, elle s’efforçait de l’immobiliser, ce mouvement, d’arrêter
le temps au passage, de fixer la terre qui tournait sous elle et qui
l’emportait. Innocent III parut y réussir. Edition: current; Page: [472]
Boniface VIII périt dans l’effort. [paragraph] Moment solennel, et d’une
tristesse infinie. L’espoir de la Croisade avait manqué au monde.
L’autorité ne semblait plus inattaquable, elle avait promis, elle avait
trompé. La liberté commençait à poindre, mais sous vingt aspects
fantastiques et choquans, confuse et convulsive, multiforme, difforme.
La volonté humaine enfantait chaque jour, et reculait devant ses enfans.
C’etait comme dans les jours séculaires de la grande semaine de la
création la nature s’essayant, jeta d’abord des produits bizarres,
gigantesques, éphémères, monstrueux avortons dont les restes inspirent
l’horreur. [paragraph] Une chose perçait dans cette mystérieuse anarchie
du douzième siecle, qui se produisait sous la main de l’église irritée
et tremblante, c’était un sentiment prodigieusement audacieux de la
puissance morale et de la grandeur de l’homme. Ce mot hardi des
Pélagiens. Christ n’a rien eu de plus que moi, je puis me diviniser par
la vertu, il est reproduit au douzième siecle sous forme barbare et
mystique. L’homme déclare que la fin est venue, qu’en lui-même est cette
fin, il croit a soi, et se sent Dieu, partout surgissent des Messies
[last ellipsis indicates 4-sentence omission] (II, 392-4)

247.37-248.16 A . . . reign. . . . Nothing . . . it.] [translated from.]
En Europe, un messie paraît dans Anvers, et toute la populace le suit.
Un autre, en Bretagne, semble ressusciter le vieux gnosticisme
d’Irlande2. Amaury de Chartres, et son disciple, le breton David de
Dinan, enseignent que tout chrétien est matériellement un membre du
Christ, autrement dit, que Dieu est perpétuellement incarné dans le
genre humain. Le fils a régne assez, disent-ils, regne maintenant le
Saint-Esprit. C’est sous quelque rapport l’idée de Lessing sur
l’éducation du genre humain. [paragraph] Rien n’égale l’audace de ces
docteurs, qui pour la plupart professent a l’université de Paris
(autorisée par Philippe-Auguste en 1200). On a cru étouffer Abailard,
mais il vit et parle dans son disciple Pierre-le-Lombard, qui de Paris
régente toute la philosophie européenne, on compte près de cinq cents
commentateurs de ce scholastique. L’esprit d’innovation a reçu deux
auxiliaires. La jurisprudence grandit à côté de la théologie qu’elle
ébranle, les papes défendent aux prêtres de professer le droit, et ne
font qu’ouvrir l’enseignement aux laiques. La métaphysique d’Aristote
arrive de Constantinople, tandis que ses commentateurs, apportés
d’Espagne, vont être traduits de l’arabe par ordre des rois de Castille
et des princes italiens de la maison de Souabe (Frédéric II et Manfred).
Ce n’est pas moins que l’invasion de la Grèce et de l’Orient dans la
philosophie chrétienne. Aristote prend place presque au niveau de
Jésus-Christ1. Défendu d’abord par les papes, puis toléré, il règne dans
les chaires. Aristote tout haut, tout bas les Arabes et les Juifs, avec
le panthéisme d’Averrhoès et les subtilités de la Cabale. La dialectique
entre en possession de tous les sujets, et se pose toutes les questions
hardies. Simon de Tournai enseigne à volonté le pour et le contre. Un
jour qu’il avait ravi l’Ecole de Paris et prouvé merveilleusement la
vérité de la religion chrétienne, il s’écria tout à coup “O petit Jésus,
petit Jésus, comme j’ai élevé ta loi! Si je voulais, je pourrais encore
mieux la rabaisser2.” [footnotes omitted] (II, 394-6)

248.19-34 What . . . head! . . . [paragraph] The . . . Islamism.]
[translated from.] Quels devaient être dans ce danger de l’église le
trouble et l’inquiétude de son chef visible. [ellipsis indicates
8-sentence omission] [paragraph] Le pape était alors un Romain, Innocent
III1. Tel péril, tel homme. Grand légiste2, habitué à consulter le droit
sur toute question, il s’examina lui-même, et crut à son droit. Dans la
réalité, l’église avait certainement alors pour elle l’immense majorité,
la voix du peuple, qui est celle de Dieu. Elle avait partout, en tout,
la possession actuelle, possession ancienne, si ancienne qu’on pouvait
croire à la prescription. L’église dans ce grand proces, était le
défendeur, propriétaire reconnu, établi sur le fond dispute, elle en
avait les titres le droit écrit semblait pour elle. Le demandeur,
c’était l’esprit humain, il venait un peu tard. Puis il semblait s’y
prendre mal, dans son inexpérience, chicanant sur des textes, au lieu
d’invoquer l’équité. Qui lui eût demandé ce qu’il voulait, il était
impossible de l’entendre; des voix confuses s’élevaient pour répondre.
Tous demandaient choses différentes, la plupart voulaient moins avancer
que rétrograder. En politique, ils attestaient la république antique,
c’est-à-dire les libertés urbaines, à l’exclusion des campagnes. En
religion, les uns voulaient supprimer le culte, et revenir,
disaient-ils, aux apôtres. Les autres remontaient plus haut, et
rentraient dans l’esprit de l’Asie, ils voulaient deux dieux; ou bien
préféraient la stricte unité de l’islamisme. [footnotes omitted] (II,
419-21)

248.36-249.11 Such . . . Inquisition.] [translated from:] Tels
apparaissaient alors les ennemis de l’église; et l’église était peuple.
Les préjugés du peuple, l’ivresse sanguinaire des haines et des Edition:
current; Page: [473] terreurs, tout cela remontait par tous les rangs du
clergé jusqu’au pape. Ce serait aussi faire trop grande injure à la
nature humaine que de croire que l’égoisme ou l’intérét de corps anima
seul les chefs de l’église. Non, tout indique qu’au treizième siecle ils
étaient encore convaincus de leur droit. Ce droit admis, tous les moyens
leur furent bons pour le défendre. Ce n’etait pas pour un intérêt humain
que saint Dominique parcourait les campagnes du midi, seul et sans arme,
au milieu des sectaires, qu’il envoyait a la mort, cherchant et donnant
le martyre, avec la même avidité1. [footnote omitted] Et quelle qu’ait
été dans ce grand et terrible Innocent III la tentation de l’orgueil et
de la vengeance, d’autres motifs encore l’animèrent dans la croisade des
Albigeois et la fondation de l’inquisition dominicaine (II, 422-3)

249.38-250.1 “In . . . authority,” . . . “and . . . mysticism.”]
[translated from.] [paragraph] A mesure que l’autorité s’en allait, que
le prêtre tombait dans l’esprit des peuples, la religion, n’étant plus
contenue dans les formes, se repandait en mysticisme1 [footnote omitted]
(III, 195)

250.14-17 “wandered . . . elements.”] [translated from.] Ces apôtres
effrenés de la grâce, couraient partout pieds nus, jouant tous les
Mystères dans leurs sermons, trainant apres eux les femmes et les
enfans, riant à Noel, pleurant le Vendredi-Saint, developpant sans
retenue tout ce que le christianisme a d’élémens dramatiques (II, 540-1)

250.24-9 “Mysticism,” . . . “had . . . Pastoureaux,”] [translated from.]
Le mysticisme, répandu dans le peuple par l’esprit des croisades, avait
déjà porté son fruit le plus effrayant, la haine de la loi1,
l’enthousiasme sauvage de la liberté politique et religieuse. Ce
caractère demagogique du mysticisme, qui devait se produire nettement
dans les jacqueries des siècles suivans, particulièrement dans la
révolte des paysans de Souabe, en 1525, et des anabaptistes, en 1538, il
apparut déjà dans l’insurrection des Pastoureaux2, qui éclata pendant
l’absence de saint Louis [footnotes omitted] (II, 579)

251.26-37 The . . . expeditions.] [translated from.] La croisade de
saint Louis fut la derniere croisade. Le moyen-âge avait donné son
ideal, sa fleur et son fruit il devait mourir. En Philippe-le-Bel,
petit-fils de saint Louis, commencent les temps modernes, le moyen-âge
est souffleté en Boniface VIII, la croisade brûlee dans la personne des
Templiers. [paragraph] L’on parlera long-temps encore de croisade, ce
mot sera souvent repete c’est un mot sonore, efficace pour lever des
décimes et des impôts. Mais les grands et les papes savent bien entre
eux ce qu’ils doivent en penser1. Quelque temps apres [1327], nous
voyons le venitien Sanuto proposer au pape une croisade commerciale. “Il
ne suffisait pas, disait-il, d’envahir l’Egypte, il fallait la ruiner.”
Le moyen qu’il proposait, c’etait de rouvrir au commerce de l’Inde la
route de la Perse, de sorte que les marchandises ne passassent plus par
Alexandrie et Damiette2. Ainsi s’annonce de loin l’esprit moderne, le
commerce, et non la religion, va devenir le mobile des expeditions
lointaines [footnotes omitted] (II, 606-7)

252.3-21 This . . . misconduct.] [translated from.] Cette furieuse
invective gibeline, toute pleine de vérités et de calomnies, c’est la
plainte du vieux monde mourant, contre ce laid jeune monde qui lui
succède. Celui-ci commence vers 1300, il s’ouvre par la France, par
l’odieuse figure de Philippe-le-Bel. [paragraph] Au moins quand la
monarchie française, fondee par Philipe-Auguste et Philippe-le-Bel,
finit en Louis XVI, elle eut dans sa mort une consolation. Elle périt
dans la gloire immense d’une jeune republique qui, pour son coup
d’essai, vainquit l’Europe et la renouvela. Mais ce pauvre moyen âge,
papaute, chevalerie, feodalite, sous quelle main périssent-ils? Sous la
main du procureur, du banqueroutier, du faux-monnaveur. [paragraph] La
plainte est excusable; ce nouveau monde est laid. S’il est plus legitime
que celui qu’il remplace, quel oeil, fût-ce celui de Dante, pourrait le
decouvrir à cette epoque? Il naît sous les rides du vieux droit romain,
de la vieille fiscalité imperiale. Il naît avocat, usurier, il naît
gascon, lombard et juif. [paragraph] Ce qui irrite le plus contre ce
systeme moderne, contre la France, son premier représentant, c’est sa
contradiction perpetuelle, sa duplicite d’instinct, l’hypocrisie naive,
si je puis dire, avec laquelle il va attestant tour à tour, et alternant
ses deux principes, romain et féodal. La France est alors un légiste en
cuirasse, un procureur barde de fer, elle emploie la force feodale à
exécuter les sentences du droit romain et canonique. [paragraph] Fille
obéissante de l’Eglise, elle s’empare de l’Italie et de l’Eglise même,
si elle bat l’Eglise; c’est comme sa fille, comme obligée en conscience
de corriger sa mere (III, 31-2)

252.29-34 It . . . friends.] [translated from.] [paragraph] Ce n’est
donc pas la faute de ce gouvernement s’il est avide et affamé. La faim
est sa nature, sa nécessite, le fond même de son tempérament. Pour y
satisfaire, il faut qu’il emploie tour à tour la ruse et la force. Il y
a ici en un Edition: current; Page: [474] seul prince, comme dans le
vieux roman, maître Renard et maître Isengrin. [paragraph] Ce roi, de sa
nature, n’aime pas la guerre, il est juste de le reconnaître, il préfère
tout autre moyen de prendre, l’achat, l’usure. D’abord, il trafique, il
échange, il achète, le fort peut dépouiller ainsi honnêtement des amis
faibles (III, 42)

253.3-6 The . . . question.] [translated from:] [paragraph] La
confiscation de l’Eglise fut la pensée des rois depuis le treizième
siècle, la cause principale de leurs luttes contre les papes, toute la
différence, c’est que les protestants prirent, et que les catholiques se
firent donner. Henri VIII employa le schisme, François Ier le Concordat.
[paragraph] Qui donc, au quatorzieme siècle, du roi ou de l’Eglise,
devait désormais exploiter la France? telle était la question (III, 50)

253.24-33 The . . . symbol.] [translated from.] La forme de réception
était empruntée aux rites dramatiques et bizarres, aux mystères dont
l’église antique ne craignait pas d’entourer les choses saintes. Le
récipiendaire était présenté d’abord comme un pécheur, un mauvais
chrétien, un renégat. Il reniait, à l’exemple de saint Pierre, le
reniement dans cette pantomime, s’exprimait par un acte1, [footnote
omitted] cracher sur la croix. L’ordre se chargeait de réhabiliter ce
renégat, de l’élever d’autant plus haut, que sa chûte était plus
profonde. Ainsi dans la Fête des fols ou idiots (fatuorum), l’homme
offrait l’hommage même de son imbecillité, de son infamie, a l’Eglise
qui devait le régénérer. Ces comédies sacrées, chaque jour moins
comprises, étaient de plus en plus dangereuses, plus capables de
scandaliser un âge prosaique, qui ne voyait que la lettre et perdait le
sens du symbole (III, 127-8)

254.14-20 What . . . misunderstood.] [translated from.] La vraie cause
de leur ruine, celle qui mit tout le peuple contre eux, qui ne leur
laissa pas un défenseur parmi tant de familles nobles auxquelles ils
appartenaient, ce fut cette monstrueuse accusation d’avoir renie et
craché sur la croix. Cette accusation est justement celle qui fut avouée
du plus grand nombre. La simple énonciation du fait éloignait d’eux tout
le monde, chacun se signait et ne voulait plus rien entendre.
[paragraph] Ainsi l’ordre qui avait représenté au plus haut degré le
génie symbolique du moyen âge, mourut d’un symbole non compris (III,
206)

— Histoire romaine république. 1st pt. 3 vols. Brussels, Hauman, 1835.

note: in SC. No more published.

referred to: 232

Michell, Richard.

note: the reference is to recently appointed qualified examiners at
Oxford.

referred to: 369

Mignet, François Auguste Marie. Referred to: 185, 194

— Histoire de la révolution française, depuis 1789 jusqu’en 1814. 2 pts.
Paris: Firmin Didot, 1824.

note: JSM in his headnote and at 6 says the work is in two vols. (as the
English translation actually is); there are two parts continuously
paged.

reviewed: 1-14

quoted: 6-7, 7-9, 8-10, 11-12, 12, 13, 14, 73n, 100

referred to: 57, 80n, 116

6.14-7.36 The . . . nothing.] [translated from.] Le gouvernement aurait
dû mieux comprendre l’importance des états-généraux. Le retour de cette
assemblée annonçait seul une grande révolution. Attendus avec espérance
par la nation, ils reparaissaient à une époque où l’ancienne monarchie
était affaissée, et où ils étaient seuls capables de réformer l’état, de
pourvoir aux besoins de la royauté. La difficulté des temps, la nature
de leur mandat, le choix de leurs membres, tout annonçait qu’ils
n’étaient plus convoqués comme contribuables, mais comme législateurs.
Le droit de régénérer la France leur était accordé par l’opinion, dévolu
par leurs cahiers, et ils devaient trouver dans l’énormité des abus et
dans les encouragements publics, la force d’entreprendre et d’accomplir
cette grande tâche. [paragraph] Il importait au monarque de s’associer à
leurs travaux. Il aurait pu de cette manière restaurer son pouvoir, et
se garantir d’une révolution en l’opérant lui-même. Si, prenant
l’initiative des changements, il avait fixé avec fermeté mais avec
justice le nouvel ordre des choses; si, réalisant les voeux de la
France, il eût déterminé les droits des citoyens, les attributions des
états-généraux, les limites de la royauté, s’il eût renoncé à
l’arbitraire pour lui, à l’inégalité pour la noblesse, aux priviléges
pour les corps, Edition: current; Page: [475] enfin, s’il eût accompli
toutes les réformes qui étaient réclamées par l’opinion et qui furent
exécutées par l’assemblée constituante, cette résolution aurait prévenu
les funestes dissensions qui éclaterent plus tard. Il est rare de
trouver un prince qui consente au partage de son pouvoir et qui soit
assez éclairé pour céder ce qu’il sera réduit à perdre. Cependant Louis
XVI l’aurait fait, s’il avait été moins dominé par ses alentours, et
s’il eût suivi ses inspirations personnelles. Mais l’anarchie la plus
grande régnait dans les conseils du roi. Lorsque les états-généraux
s’assemblèrent, aucune mesure n’avait été prise, on n’avait rien décidé
de ce qui pouvait prévenir les contestations. Louis XVI flottait
irrésolu entre son ministère, dirigé par Necker, et sa cour dirigée par
la reine et par quelques princes de sa famille. [paragraph] Le ministre,
satisfait d’avoir obtenu la double représentation du tiers-état,
craignait l’indécision du roi et le mécontentement de la cour.
N’appréciant pas assez l’importance d’une crise qu’il considérait plus
comme financière que comme sociale, il attendait les évènements pour
agir, et se flattait de les conduire sans avoir rien fait pour les
préparer. Il sentait que l’ancienne organisation des états ne pouvait
plus être maintenue, que l’existence des trois ordres, ayant chacun le
droit de refus, s’opposait à l’exécution des réformes et à la marche de
l’administration. Il espérait, après l’épreuve de cette triple
opposition, réduire le nombre des ordres, et faire adopter le
gouvernement anglais, en réunissant le clergé et la noblesse dans une
seule chambre, et le tiers-état dans une autre. Il ne voyait pas que, la
lutte une fois engagée, son intervention serait vaine, que les
demi-mesures ne conviendraient à personne; que les plus faibles par
opiniâtreté, et les plus forts par entraînement, refuseraient ce système
modérateur. Les concessions ne satisfont qu’avant la victoire.
[paragraph] La cour, loin de vouloir régulariser les etats-généraux,
désirait les annuler. Elle préférait la résistance accidentelle des
grands corps du royaume au partage de l’autorité avec une assemblée
permanente. La séparation des ordres favorisait ses vues, elle comptait
fomenter leur désaccord, et les empêcher d’agir. Autrefois ils n’avaient
jamais eu aucun résultat à cause du vice de leur organisation, elle
espérait d’autant plus qu’il en serait de même aujourd’hui, que les deux
premiers ordres seraient moins disposés à condescendre aux réformes
sollicitées par le dernier. Le clergé voulait conserver ses priviléges
et son opulence, il prévoyait bien qu’il aurait plus de sacrifices à
faire que d’avantages à acquérir. La noblesse, de son côté, tout en
reprenant une indépendance politique depuis long-temps perdue,
n’ignorait point qu’elle aurait plus a céder au peuple qu’à obtenir de
la royauté. C’était presque uniquement en faveur du tiers-état que la
nouvelle révolution allait s’opérer, et les deux premiers ordres étaient
portes a se coaliser avec la cour contre lui, comme naguère ils
s’étaient coalises avec lui contre la cour. L’intérêt seul motivait ce
changement de parti, et ils se réunissaient au monarque sans
attachement, comme ils avaient défendu le peuple, sans vue de bien
public. [paragraph] Rien ne fut épargné pour maintenir la noblesse et le
clergé dans ces dispositions. Les députés de ces deux ordres furent
l’objet des prévenances et des seductions. Un comite dont les plus
illustres personnages faisaient partie, se tenait chez la comtesse de
Polignac, leurs principaux membres y furent admis. C’est là qu’on gagna
d’Eprémenil et d’Entragues, deux des plus ardents defenseurs de la
liberté dans le parlement ou avant les états-généraux, et qui devinrent
depuis ses antagonistes les plus declares. C’est là que fut reglé le
costume des deputes des divers ordres, et qu’on chercha à les séparer
d’abord par l’étiquette, ensuite par l’intrigue, et en dernier lieu par
la force. Le souvenir des anciens états-généraux dominait la cour, elle
croyait pouvoir régler le présent sur le passe, contenir Paris par
l’armée, les députés du tiers par ceux de la noblesse, maîtriser les
etats en divisant les ordres, et pour séparer les ordres faire revivre
les anciens usages qui relevaient la noblesse et abaissaient les
communes. C’est ainsi qu’apres la première seance, on crut avoir tout
empêché en n’accordant rien (41-5)

7.39-9.5 The . . . cause.] [translated from.] La cour, apres avoir
inutilement tente d’empêcher la formation de l’assemblée, n’avait plus
qu’à s’associer a elle pour diriger ses travaux. Elle pouvait encore,
avec de la prudence et de la bonne foi, réparer ses fautes et faire
oublier ses attaques. Il est des moments où l’on a l’initiative des
sacrifices, il en est d’autres où il ne reste plus qu’à se donner le
mérite de leur acceptation. Le monarque aurait pu, à l’ouverture des
états-géneraux, faire lui-même la constitution. Il fallait aujourd’hui
la recevoir de l’assemblee s’il se fût soumis à cette position, il l’eût
infailliblement améliorée. Mais, revenus de la première surprise de la
défaite, les conseillers de Louis XVI resolurent de recourir à l’emploi
des baionnettes, après avoir échoué dans celui de l’autorité. Ils lui
firent entendre que le mepris de ses ordres, la sûreté de son trône, le
maintien des lois du royaume, la félicite même de son peuple, exigeaient
qu’il Edition: current; Page: [476] rappelât l’assemblée à la
soumission, que cette dernière, placée à Versailles, voisine de Paris,
deux villes déclarées en sa faveur, devait être domptée par la force,
qu’il fallait la transférer ou la dissoudre; que cette résolution était
urgente afin de l’arrêter dans sa marche, et qu’il était nécessaire,
pour l’exécuter, d’appeler en toute hâte des troupes qui intimidassent
l’assemblée et qui continssent Versailles et Paris. [paragraph] Pendant
que ces trames s’ourdissaient, les députés de la nation ouvraient leurs
travaux législatifs, et préparaient cette constitution si impatiemment
attendue, et qu’ils croyaient ne devoir plus être retardée. Des adresses
leur arrivaient de Paris, et des principales villes du royaume, on les
félicitait de leur sagesse, et on les encourageait à poursuivre l’oeuvre
de la régénération française. Sur ces entrefaites les troupes arrivaient
en grand nombre. Versailles prenait l’aspect d’un camp, la salle des
états était environnée de gardes, l’entrée en était interdite aux
citoyens, Paris était cerné par divers corps d’armée, qui semblaient
postés pour en faire, suivant le besoin, le blocus ou le siege. Ces
immenses préparatifs militaires, des trains d’artillerie venus des
frontières, la présence des régiments étrangers, dont l’obéissance était
sans bornes, tout annonçait des projets sinistres. Le peuple était
agité, l’assemblée voulut éclairer le trône et lui demander le renvoi
des troupes. Sur la proposition de Mirabeau, elle fit une adresse au
roi, respectueuse et ferme, mais qui fut inutile Louis XVI déclara qu’il
était seul juge de la nécessité de faire venir ou de renvoyer les
troupes, assura que ce n’était là qu’une armée de précaution pour
empêcher les troubles et garder l’assemblée; il lui offrit d’ailleurs de
la transférer à Noyon ou à Soissons, c’est-à-dire de la placer entre
deux armées, et de la priver de l’appui du peuple. [paragraph] Paris
était dans la plus grande fermentation, cette ville immense était
unanime dans son dévouement à l’assemblée. Les périls dont les
représentants de la nation étaient menacés, les siens propres, et le
défaut de subsistances, la disposaient à un soulèvement. Les
capitalistes, par intérêt, et dans la crainte de la banqueroute, les
hommes éclairés, et toute la classe moyenne, l’étaient par patriotisme,
le peuple, pressé par ses besoins, rejetant ses souffrances sur les
privilégiés et sur la cour, désireux d’agitation et de nouveautés, avait
embrassé avec chaleur la cause de la révolution. Il est difficile de se
figurer le mouvement qui agitait cette capitale de la France, elle
sortait du repos et du silence de la servitude, elle était comme
surprise de la nouveauté de sa situation, et s’enivrait de liberté et
d’enthousiasme. La presse échauffait les esprits, les journaux
répandaient les délibérations de l’assemblée, et faisaient assister en
quelque sorte à ses seances, on discutait en plein air, sur les places
publiques, les questions qui étaient agitées dans son sein. C’etait au
Palais-Royal surtout que se tenait l’assemblée de la capitale. Il était
toujours rempli d’une foule qui semblait permanente, et qui se
renouvelait sans cesse. Une table servait de tribune, le premier citoyen
d’orateur, là on haranguait sur les dangers de la patrie, et on
s’excitait à la résistance Déja, sur une motion faite au Palais-Royal,
les prisons de l’Abbaye avaient été forcées, et des grenadiers des
gardes-françaises, qui avaient été renfermés pour avoir refusé de tirer
sur le peuple, en avaient été ramenés en triomphe. Cette émeute n’avait
pas eu de suite, une députation avait sollicité, en faveur des
prisonniers délivrés, l’intérêt de l’assemblée, qui les avait
recommandés à la clémence du roi; ils s’étaient remis en prison et ils
avaient reçu leur grâce Mais ce régiment, l’un des plus complets et des
plus braves, était devenu favorable à la cause populaire (57-60)

11.3-12.2 If . . . republic.] [translated from.] Si l’on présentait le
tableau d’un état qui sort d’une grande crise, et qu’on dît: Il y avait
dans cet état un gouvernement absolu dont l’autorité a été restreinte,
deux classes privilégiées qui ont perdu leur suprématie, un peuple
immense, déja affranchi par l’effet de la civilisation et des lumières,
mais sans droits politiques, et qui a été obligé, à cause des refus
essuyés, de les conquérir lui-même si l’on ajoutait, Le gouvernement,
après s’être opposé à cette révolution, s’y est soumis, mais les classes
privilégiées l’on constamment combattue, voici ce que l’on pourrait
conclure de ces données. [paragraph] Le gouvernement aura des regrets,
le peuple montrera de la défiance, et les classes privilégiées
attaqueront l’ordre nouveau chacune à sa maniere. La noblesse ne le
pouvant pas au-dedans, où elle serait trop faible, émigrera, afin
d’exciter les puissances étrangères, qui feront les préparatifs d’une
attaque; le clergé, qui perdrait au-dehors ses moyens d’action, restera
dans l’intérieur, où il cherchera des ennemis à la révolution. Le
peuple, menacé au-dehors, compromis au-dedans, irrité contre
l’émigration qui armera les étrangers, contre les étrangers qui
attaqueront son indépendance, contre le clergé qui insurgera son pays,
traitera en ennemis le clergé, l’émigration Edition: current; Page:
[477] et les étrangers. Il demandera d’abord la surveillance, puis le
bannissement des prétres réfractaires, la confiscation du revenu des
émigrés; enfin, la guerre contre l’Europe coalisée, pour la prévenir de
sa part. Les premiers auteurs de la révolution condamneront celles de
ces mesures qui violeront la loi, les continuateurs de la révolution y
verront, au contraire, le salut de la patrie, et le désaccord éclatera
entre ceux qui préféreront la constitution à l’état et ceux qui
préfereront, l’état à la constitution. Le prince, porté par ses intérêts
de roi, ses affections et sa conscience a rejeter une pareille
politique, passera pour complice de la contre-révolution, parce qu’il
paraîtra la protéger. Les révolutionnaires tenteront alors de gagner le
roi en l’intimidant, et, ne pouvant pas y réussir, ils renverseront son
pouvoir. [paragraph] Telle fut l’histoire de l’assemblée législative.
Les troubles intérieurs amenerent le décret contre les prêtres, les
menaces extérieures, celui contre les emigrés, le concert des puissances
étrangeres, la guerre contre l’Europe, la première défaite de nos
armées, celui du camp de vingt mille hommes. Le refus d’adhésion a la
plupart de ces décrets fit suspecter Louis XVI par les Girondins, les
divisions de ces derniers et des constitutionnels, qui voulaient se
montrer les uns législateurs comme en temps de paix, les autres ennemis
comme en temps de guerre, désunirent les partisans de la révolution.
Pour les Girondins, la question de la liberté était dans la victoire, la
victoire dans les décrets. Le 20 juin fut une tentative pour les faire
accepter, mais, ayant manque son effet, ils crurent qu’il fallait
renoncer à la révolution ou au trône, et ils firent le 10 août Ainsi,
sans l’emigration qui amena la guerre, sans le schisme qui amena les
troubles, le roi se serait probablement fait à la constitution, et les
révolutionnaires n’auraient pas pu songer à la république (289-92)

13.38-9 “C’est . . . esperances.”] [not in italics] (458)

13.39 “Tout ce . . . s’étend”] Elle ne cessa pas d’abord d’étre une
assemblée préparatoire mais, comme tout ce . . . s’étend, le club
jacobin ne se contenta pas d’influencer l’assemblee, il voulut encore
agir sur la municipalité et sur la multitude, et il admit comme
sociétaires des membres de la commune et de simples citoyens (166)

13.40-1 “Il ne . . . propos.”] Sans la révolution, Mirabeau eût manque
sa destinée, car il ne propos (107)

13.41-2 “Des . . . part,”] Dès . . . part, et ils forcent a prendre
contre eux des mesures de guerre (204)

14.1-3 “Tous les . . . nécessités”] Les uns et les autres moururent avec
le même courage, ce qui fait voir que tous les . . . nécessités (518)

14.5 “Quand] [no paragraph] Quand (357)

14.6 toujours”] toujours, c’est ce qui manquait a Dumouriez, ce qui
arrêta son audace, et ébranla ses partisans (357)

14.8-9 “En révolution . . . commandement”] Il ne faut jamais oublier
qu’en revolution commandement (442)

14.15 manière”] manière (161)

14.19 être”] être, et le parti montagnard le prit pour son chef, parce
que les Girondins le poursuivirent comme tel (311)

14.20 ne vouloir pas] ne pas vouloir (317)

14.29 “Barrère] Ce parti composait les comites de sûrete generale et de
salut public, il etait dirige par Barrère (363)

14.35 “Ce redoutable] Mais les juges furent élus et temporaires ce
redoutable (153)

73n.21-2 “La constitution civile ne fut pas l’ouvrage de philosophes . .
. austères.”] Ce projet dont l’adoption à fait tant de mal, tendait à
reconstituer l’eglise sur ses antiques bases, et à ramener la pureté des
croyances il n’était point l’oeuvre des philosophes . . . austères, qui
voulaient appuyer le culte sur la constitution, et les faire concourir
l’un et l’autre au bonheur de l’état (145)

— History of the French Revolution, from 1789 to 1814 2 vols. London:
Hunt and Clarke, 1826.

note: for quotations and references, see the preceding entry, JSM made
his own translation, rather than using this version, for the passages in
English.

reviewed: 1-14

Milans del Bosch, Francisco. Referred to: 180

Edition: current; Page: [478]
Mill, John Stuart. “The Claims of Labour,” Edinburgh Review, LXXXI
(Apr., 1845), 498-525. In CW, IV, 363-89.

referred to: 315

— “Guizot’s Essays and Lectures in History,” Edinburgh Review, LXXXII
(Oct., 1845), 381-421.

note: the reference is prospective to the essay printed at 257-94 above.

referred to: 231n

— “De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [II],” Edinburgh Review, LXXII
(Oct., 1840), 1-47. In CW, XVIII, 153-204.

quoted: 305-8

— Letter to Thomas Carlyle (25 Nov., 1833). In Earlier Letters. Ed.
Francis E. Mineka. Vols. XII-XIII of Collected Works. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 1963, XII, 190-7.

note: the collations are given in variant notes at 201-2 and 204n-5n
above.

quoted: 201-2, 204n-5n

referred to: 176n

— “Mignet’s French Revolution,” Westminster Review, V (Apr., 1826),
385-98.

note: one of the Westminster articles on French historical works,
reprinted at 3-14 above.

referred to: 18

— “Scott’s Life of Napoleon,” Westminster Review, IX (Apr., 1828),
251-313.

note: reprinted at 53-110 above, the reference (of 1826) is to JSM’s
plan to write at length in the Westminster about the French Revolution.

referred to: 4

— Summary of French news, Examiner, 26 Jan., 1834, 56-7.

note: the collations are given as variant notes at 125-8 above.

quoted: 125-8

— A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive (1843). Collected
Works, Vols. VII-VIII. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1974.

referred to: 298

Millar, John. An Historical View of the English Government, from the
Settlement of the Saxons in Britain to the Accession of the House of
Stewart. London: Strahan, et al., 1787.

note: formerly in SC.

referred to: 46, 51, 52

— Observations Concerning the Distinction of Ranks in Society. London:
Richardson and Murray, 1771.

note: the reference is inferential.

referred to: 51

Milton, John. Areopagitica. A Speech for the Liberty of Unlicensed
Printing, to the Parliament of England (1644). In The Prose Works of
John Milton; with a Life of the Author, Interspersed with Translations
and Critical Remarks. Ed. Charles Symmons 7 vols. London: Johnson, et
al., 1806, I, 286-331.

note: in SC, now lacking Vol. I.

referred to: 165

— Paradise Regained (1671). In The Poetical Works of Mr. John Milton.
London: Tonson, 1695, 1-66.

note: the works are separately paginated.

quoted: 172

172.12-13 “fierce democracy,”] Thence to the famous Orators repair, /
Those ancient, whose resistless eloquence / Wielded at will that fierce
Democratie, / Shook the Arsenal and fulmined over Greece, / To Macedon,
and Artaxerxes Throne. . . . (55, Bk. IV, ll. 264-8)

Edition: current; Page: [479]
— The Reason of Church Government Urged against Prelaty. In Two Books
(1641-42). In The Prose Works, I, 78-151.

quoted: 138

138.26 “will not willingly be let die.”] But much latelier in the
private academies of Italy, whither I was favoured to resort, perceiving
that some trifles which I had in memory, composed at under twenty or
thereabout, (for the manner is, that every one must give some proof of
his wit and reading there) met with acceptance above what was looked
for, and other things, which I had shifted in scarcity of books and
conveniences to patch up amongst them, were received with written
encomiums, which the Italian is not forward to bestow on men of this
side the Alps. I began thus far to assent both to them and divers of my
friends here at home, and not less to an inward prompting which now grew
daily upon me, that by labour and intense study, (which I take to be my
portion in this life) joined with the strong propensity of nature, I
might perhaps leave something so written to after times, as they should
not willingly let it die (I, 119)

Mina, Francisco Espoz y. Referred to: 180

Miomandre de Sainte-Marie.

note: not otherwise identified. The quotation is in a quotation from
Carlyle.

quoted: 157

Mirabeau, Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de.

note: the reference at 8 is in a quotation from Mignet, that at 90 is in
a quotation from Montgaillard, that at 140 is in a quotation from
Carlyle.

referred to: 8, 73n, 80, 90, 95, 116, 140, 160, 170, 187, 187n, 203

— Mémoires biographiques, littéraires et politiques de Mirabeau, écrits
par lui-même, par son père, son oncle et son fils adoptif. Ed. Gabriel
Lucas-Montigny, 8 vols. Paris: Auffray, et al., 1834-35.

note: the quotations are in a quotation from Carlyle, and are,
therefore, not collated.

quoted: 148

referred to: 161

— Oeuvres de Mirabeau, 9 vols. Paris: Dupont and Brissot-Thivars,
1825-27.

quoted: 117

referred to: 8, 72n, 73n, 80, 88

117.12-13 “Dites-lui . . . investis.”] [paragraph] Dites-lui que les
hordes etrangeres dont nous sommes investis, ont reçu hier la visite des
princes, des princesses, des favoris, des favorites, et leurs caresses,
et leurs exhortations, et leurs présents dites-lui que toute la nuit ces
satellites étrangers, gorgés d’or et de vin, ont prédit dans leurs
chants impies l’asservissement de la France, et que leurs voeux brutaux
invoquaient la destruction de l’assemblee nationale, dites-lui que, dans
son palais même, les courtesans ont mêlé leurs danses au son de cette
musique barbare, et que telle fut l’avant-scène de la Saint-Barthélemy
(VII, 166)

117.13-14 la hideuse banqueroute,] Mais aujourd’hui la banqueroute, la
hideuse banqueroute est là, elle menace de consumer vous, vos
proprietés, votre honneur . . . et vous déliberez! (VII, 301)

Mirabeau, Victor Riqueti, marquis de.

note: the quotations at 148, in a quotation from Carlyle, are from
Honore Gabriel de Mirabeau’s Mémoires, q.v.

quoted: 148

referred to: 161

Mitford, William. Referred to: 224

Moberly, George.

note: the reference is to recently appointed qualified examiners at
Oxford.

referred to: 369

Molé, Louis Mathieu, comte.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Duveyrier.

referred to: 301

Edition: current; Page: [480]
Mollevault, Etienne.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Mignet, is to the members of
the Commission of Twelve.

referred to: 12

Montesquieu, Charles Louis de Secondat, baron de la Brède et de.
Referred to: 13

— De l’esprit des loix, ou Du rapport que les loix doivent avoir avec la
constitution de chaque gouvernement, les moeurs, le climat, la religion,
le commerce, etc. A quoi l’auteur a ajouté des recherches nouvelles sur
les loix romaines touchant les successions, sur les loix françoises, et
sur les loix féodales. 2 vols. Geneva: Barillot, [1748].

note: the reference at 70 is in a quotation from Scott, that at 281
(384) is in a quotation (repeated) from Guizot.

referred to: 70, 281 (384)

Montfort, Guy de. Referred to: 49

Montgaillard, Guillaume Honoré Rocques, abbé de. Histoire de France,
depuis la fin du règne de Louis XVI jusqu’à l’année 1825. 9 vols. Paris:
Moutardier, 1827.

note: the references at 140 and 141 derive from quotations from Carlyle,
that at 165 is in a quotation from Carlyle.

quoted: 89, 89n, 89-90, 91n

referred to: 68n, 72n, 75n, 79n, 89, 91n, 94, 140, 141, 165

89.15 hommes,” . . . “je] hommes, je (II, 63)

89.23 Lorsque] [paragraph] Lorsque (II, 63)

89.26-7 s’il . . . habitans] [not in italics] (II, 63)

89.29 époque.* [footnote.] *“Et . . . tard,” . . . “ce] époque, et . . .
tard, ce (II, 63)

89.29 époque.* . . . On] [ellipsis indicates that JSM has jumped back to
middle of preceding paragraph] (II, 62)

91n.13-92n.1 quoique . . . coûte.] [not in italics] (II, 81)

Montjoie, Christophe Félix Louis Ventre de la Touloubre. Histoire de la
conjuration de L.P.J. d’Orléans, surnommé Egalité. 6 vols. Paris: Les
marchands de nouveautés, 1800.

referred to: 79n

Montmorency-Luxembourg, Adélaide Geneviève, duchesse de.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Dampmartin.

referred to: 74n

Montmorency-Luxembourg, Anne Charles Sigismond, duc de.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Dampmartin.

referred to: 74n

Montmorin, Armand Marc de, comte de St. Hérem.

note: the reference at 9 is in a quotation from Mignet, that at 86-7 is
to him as one of the ministers dismissed with Necker; that at 106
derives from Soulavie.

referred to: 9, 86-7, 106

Morellet, André, abbé.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 140

Morgan, Sydney (Lady). “The French Revolution,” Athenaeum, 20 May, 1837,
353-5.

note: the quotations merely indicate the gravamen of Lady Morgan’s
criticism of Carlyle’s work.

quoted: 163, 164

163.31 “flippancy”] But it is one thing to put forth a few pages of
quaintness, neologism, and a whimsical coxcombry; and another, to carry
such questionable qualities through three long volumes of misplaced
persiflage and flippant pseudo-philosophy (353)

164.19 “affected;”] Originality, without justness of thought, is but
novelty of error, and originality of style, without sound taste and
discretion, is sheer affectation (353)

Edition: current; Page: [481]
Mounier, Jean Joseph.

note: the first reference at 90 is in a quotation from Montgaillard.

referred to: 83, 85, 86, 90, 109n

Müller, Johannes von. Referred to: 185n

Muratori, Lodovico Antonio. Annali d’Italia, dal principio dell’era
volgare sino all’anno 1500. 12 vols. Milan: Pasquali, 1744-49.

referred to: 234

Napoléon I (of France).

note: one of the references at 89n is in a quotation from Montgaillard,
that at 311 is in a quotation from Duveyrier.

referred to: 55, 57, 89n, 109n, 160, 174, 175, 193, 211, 277, 310, 311,
325, 344, 370

— “Allocution de l’empereur aux membres du corps législatif présens à
l’audience du ler janvier 1814.” In HP, XXXIX, 459-61.

quoted: 207

207.28 il faut laver notre linge sale chez nous.] C’est du linge sale
qu’il fallait blanchir en famille, et non sous les yeux du public
(XXXIX, 460)

— Mémoires pour servir à l’histoire de France sous Napoléon, écrits à
Sainte-Hélène, par les généraux qui ont partagé sa captivité, et publies
sur les manuscrits entièrement corrigés de la main de Napoléon. 7 vols.
Paris: Didot, 1823-24.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Nisard

referred to: 194

Narbonne-Lara, Louis Marie Jacques Amalric, comte de.

note: the reference is to the leading constitutional minister.

referred to: 101

Nares, Edward. Referred to: 369

Le National.

note: the references at 195 and 210 are in quotations from Nisard, one
of those at 197 and one at 212 are in quotations from Littre, that at
201 is in a self-quotation.

referred to: 170, 179, 182, 194, 195, 197, 198, 200, 201, 206, 210, 212,
214

Necker, Jacques.

note: the references at 6 and 9 are in quotations from Mignet, those at
140 and 142 are in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 6, 9, 71n, 73-4, 80, 86-7, 140, 142

— “Extrait du rapport fait au roi dans son conseil, le 27 décembre
1788.” In Kerverseau and Clavelin (q.v.), I, 79-93.

referred to: 142

Necker, Louise Suzanne (née Curchod).

note: the reference is in a quotation from Mignet.

referred to: 9

Nemours, Louis Charles Philippe, duc de. Referred to: 308

Newton, Isaac. Referred to: 228

Ney, Michel, duc d’Elchingen.

note: maréchal de France.

referred to: 198

Niebuhr, Barthold Georg. Referred to: 225

— The History of Rome. 3 vols. Trans. Julius Charles Hare and Connop
Thirlwall (Vols. I and II); William Smith and Leonhard Schmitz (Vol.
III); London (Vols. I and II printed Cambridge): Taylor, 1828 (Vol. I),
1832 (Vol. II); Taylor and Walton, 1842 (Vol. III).

Edition: current; Page: [482]
note: a German ed., 3 vols. (Berlin: Reimer, 1827-32 [Vol. II is of the
1836 ed.]), is in SC, as are the two vols. of lectures, ed. Schmitz
(London: Taylor and Walton, 1844) that complete Niebuhr’s History.

referred to: 219, 232

Nisard, Jean Marie Napoléon Désiré. “Armand Carrel,” La Revue des Deux
Mondes, XII (Oct., 1837), 5-54.

note: the article is dated July, 1837, by Nisard. JSM is ostensibly
reviewing a work still to be published, which combines a translation of
Nisard on Carrel with the translation of an abridged article on Carrel
by Littré (q.v.). The reasons for our using the work cited here are
given in the Textual Introduction, cii above.

reviewed: 167-215

quoted: 172-3, 181-2, 186, 194, 195, 203, 208-9, 209, 209-10, 211, 213,
213n, 214

172.27-173.7 “His literary studies,” . . . were . . . him.] [translated
from.] [paragraph] Les études littéraires de Carrel avaient été fort
négligées. Il nous racontait que tout en étant dans les meilleurs élèves
de son collége par les dispositions, il était dans les médiocres par les
résultats. Ses penchans militaires se montraient dès le collége par le
choix même de ses lectures. Il lisait les historiens, surtout à
l’endroit des opérations militaires, et il aimait, avant de les
comprendre, ces détails si étrangers à la vie de collége. Jamais
vocation ne fut plus précoce et plus décidée. Pour le reste des études,
il y assistait avec impatience, plutôt qu’il n’y prenait part.
Toutefois, nous disait-il, Virgile l’avait frappé. Il m’en récitait
quelquefois des vers appris dans sa tendre jeunesse, et qu’il n’avait ni
relus ni oubliés. Regardez comme la destinée d’un homme supérieur se
prépare de loin. Cet enfant qui, après avoir dévoré une mauvaise
traduction de Xénophon ou de César, est sensible à l’art divin de
Virgile, un jour le goût et la volonté en feront un homme d’action,
l’instinct en fera un admirable écrivain. [paragraph] Au sortir du
collége, et pendant la préparation pour entrer à l’école militaire de
Saint-Cyr. Carrel se livra exclusivement aux études historiques et de
stratégie. A l’école, il y employa tout le temps que lui laissaient les
occupations spéciales (34)

181.25-182.4 During . . . convinced.] [translated from.] Dans
l’intervalle, la mère de Carrel avait fait un voyage à Paris. Les
lettres de M. Thierry ne l’avaient pas rassurée. Cette modeste existence
d’homme de lettres ne la tranquillisait point, et paraissait la flatter
médiocrement. Elle avait besoin que M. Thierry lui renouvelât ses
premières assurances, et se portât en quelque façon garant de l’aptitude
littéraire et de l’avenir de son fils. Dans deux dîners qu’elle offrit à
M. Thierry, elle l’interpella vivement sur ce sujet. “Vous croyez donc,
monsieur, que mon fils réussira, et qu’il aura une carrière?”—“Je
réponds de lui comme de moi-même, dit M. Thierry, j’ai quelque
expérience des vocations littéraires votre fils a toutes les qualités
qui font le succès aujourd’hui.” Pendant qu’il parlait, Mme Carrel
fixait sur lui un regard pénétrant, comme pour distinguer ce qui était
vrai, dans ses paroles, de ce qui pouvait n’être que politesse ou
encouragement. Quant au jeune homme, il écoutait sans rien dire,
respectueux, soumis, et, a ce que raconte M. Thierry, presque craintif
devant sa mère, dont la fermeté d’esprit et la décision avaient sur lui
beaucoup d’empire. Carrel ne fléchissait que devant ses propres
qualités, car ce qu’il respectait dans sa mère n’était autre chose que
ce qui devait, plus tard, le faire respecter lui-même comme homme
public. [paragraph] La première réunion avait laissé des doutes à Mme
Carrel. Au sortir de la seconde, où, pressé entre ces deux volontés
inflexibles, l’une qui lui demandait presque de s’engager pour son fils,
l’autre, discrète et silencieuse, qui lui promettait de ne pas lui faire
défaut, M. Thierry s’était sans doute montré plus affirmatif, Mme Carrel
partit pour Rouen, plus convaincue et plus tranquille (36-7)

186.5-11 “In . . . back-shop,” . . . “on . . . England.”] [translated
from.] C’est dans l’arrière-boutique de cette librairie, sur un comptoir
auquel était attaché un gros chien de Terre-Neuve, que Carrel, tantôt
plongé dans les recueils politiques anglais, tantôt caressant son chien
favori, médita et écrivit l’Histoire de la contre-révolution en
Angleterre (39)

194.28-35 “Carrel,” . . . was . . . enlarged;] [translated from.]
[paragraph] Carrel n’a éte écrivain que faute d’un rôle où il pût agir
plus directement. [12-sentence omission] Quoiqu’il ait beaucoup écrit,
et dès l’école militaire, il n’a jamais pensé à se faire un nom dans les
lettres. Ecrire a été pour lui, dans le commencement, un moyen de fixer
dans sa mémoire des connaissances dont il pouvait avoir besoin pour un
but encore vague, mais nullement littéraire Edition: current; Page:
[483] Plus tard, ç’a été un moyen d’imposer, sous la forme de doctrines,
sa passion d’agir aux consciences et aux évènemens, ou au moins de la
soulager. Pour lui, le modèle de l’écrivain était l’homme d’action
racontant ce qu’il a fait. C’était César dans ses commentaires.
Bonaparte dans ses mémoires. Carrel voulait qu’on écrivît soit après
avoir agi, soit pour agir, quand c’était le seul mode d’action opportun
ou possible. Plus tard ses idées se modifièrent là-dessus, ou plutôt se
complétèrent. (32-3)

195.3-10 “thus completed,” . . . “Carrel’s . . . composition” . . . He .
. . writer] [translated from.] Ainsi completée, l’idée de Carrel est
excellente en soi. Cela équivaut à dire que l’action étant la
manifestation la plus franche et la plus naturelle de l’homme, pour bien
écrire, il faut étre mu par une force aussi impérieuse que celle qui
nous fait agir. Or, on n’est dans cette condition-là qu’autant qu’on a
une forte et noble passion à satisfaire, quelque grande vérité à
défendre, un idéal à atteindre. [JSM moves back to preceding page.] Mais
celui qui n’écrit que pour agir, et qui écrit comme on agit, de toute sa
personne, celui-là pourra exceller des l’abord sans passer par toutes
ces transformations où il reste toujours des vestiges de l’imitation
dans le naturel. S’il a de l’instinct, c’est-à-dire un tour d’esprit
parfaitement conforme au génie de son pays, il pourra devenir un
écrivain supérieur sans même se douter qu’il soit écrivain. (33-4)

195.13 “nothing . . . pen.”] [translated from.] [paragraph] Entre les
deux articles sur la guerre de 1823 et la polémique à jamais mémorable
du National, Carrel publia quelques écrits politiques et littéraires. On
les compte, car, de ce jour-là, rien de médiocre ne sortit de sa plume.
(49)

195.16-25 that . . . wit [paragraph] “All the qualities,” . . . which .
. . century.] [translated from.] Dans ces divers écrits, cette qualité
de peindre par l’expression qu on avait rencontrée avec quelque surprise
dans les articles sur L’Espagne, eclate presque a chaque phrase. Mais
prenez garde, ce n’est pas une certaine science d’effet ou Carrel s’est
perfectionné, son expression ne s’illumine et ne se colore que parce que
ses pensées sont devenues plus nettes, plus hautes et plus à lui. Il a
encore ce trait de ressemblance avec les grands écrivains, qu’il
proportionne son style à ses pensées, et qu’il sait être simple et
humble quand les pensées sont d’un ordre où il n’est pas besoin, pour
les rendre, que la raison s’aide de l’imagination. Appliquer à toutes
choses uniformément une certain qualité brillante qu on se sait, et dont
on a été souvent loué, n’est pas plus du génie, que faire des traits à
tout propos n’est de l’esprit. [paragraph] Toutes les qualités qu’avait
Carrel le premier jour qu’il tint une plume, relevées de ce don venu le
dernier, se déployèrent à la fois dans la polémique du National, avec
une grandeur qui laissera de longs souvenirs. Cette polémique a été
admirée de ceux même qui la craignatent, soit qu’on la craignît moins
qu’on n’affectait de le dire, soit qu’en France on n’ait jamais assez
peur du talent pour se priver de l’admirer! Il est certain qu’entre les
mains de Carrel, le National, à ne le considérer que comme monument de
littérature politique, a été l’oeuvre la plus originale du XIXe siècle.
(49-50)

203.2-4 “augment . . . increased.”] [translated from.] Leurs défauts, au
lieu de diminuer, augmentent en proportion de ce que leur talent leur
acquiert d’excuses [7-sentence omission] Il a été évident pour tous ses
amis que ses défauts diminuaient en proportion de ce que gagnaient ses
qualités, et avec elles sa belle renommée. (22, 23)

208.20-209.2 to . . . able.] [translated from.] Résister à ses propres
lumières, ne pas flechir, ne pas laisser voir ses doutes, ne pas
délaisser les principes arborés dans certaines crises, même si ces
principes n’ont été au commencement que des impressions ou des
esperances téméraires que l’impatience a converties en doctrines de
gouvernement, ne pas manquer aux ames simples qu’on y a engagées et qui
y persévèrent et s’y exaltent, etouffer son bon sens de ses propres
mains, et, au besoin, appeler froidement sur sa vie ou sur sa liberté
des périls inutiles et prematures, pour ne pas faire douter de soi,
voilà à quel prix on est le chef agree d’une opinion en guerre ouverte
avec un gouvernement établi; voilà ce qu’il faut savoir faire à toute
heure, et avec beaucoup de bonne grace, en outre, pour que ceux qui le
reconnaissent pour chefs [sic] le lui pardonnent, et avec un talent si
hors de toute portee que nul amour-propre, dans le parti qu’il
représente, n’ose s’y égaler. Pendant plus de quatre années, sauf
quelque relâchement vers la fin, soit par lassitude, soit dégoût de ces
discordes intérieures par lesquelles les partis font scandale de leur
defaite, Carrel ne manqua pas un moment à ce rôle. Il n’entraîna jamais
que ceux qu’il était resolu à suivre, et, en certaines occasions où
l’impulsion n’avait pas été donnée par lui, mais malgre lui, il se mit à
la tête de ceux qu’il n’avait pas commandes. Le même homme qui, dans les
circonstances ordinaires, souffrait modestement qu’on lui disputât le
titre de chef de l’opinion Edition: current; Page: [484] républicaine,
s’en emparait dans le danger, comme d’un signe où les coups pussent le
reconnaître de loin. Il faisait comme un général porté rapidement, par
son courage et ses talens, au premier grade de l’armée: il se laissait
contester dans les chuchottemens jaloux de la caserne, sauf à prendre,
dans une affaire désespérée, le commandement en chef, du droit du plus
courageux et du plus habile. (8-9)

209.17 “Théorie . . . commun,”] [paragraph] Le coup le plus sensible que
reçut Carrel des évènemens, et ceci soit dit à son éternel honneur! ce
ne fut pas dans son ambition, mais dans sa plus chère pensée, dans son
plus glorieux titre d’écrivain politique, dans sa théorie du droit
commun. (14)

209.21-210.41 “I affirm,” . . . that . . . at.] [translated from.] [no
paragraph] J’affirme ne lui avoir vu de tristesses vraiment amères que
pour les blessures qu’elle eut à souffrir, et, sur ce point seulement,
ses désenchantemens furent douloureux. Son bon sens, encore des années
de jeunesse et d’âge viril devant lui, l’inattendu, l’inconnu, pouvaient
lui faire prendre patience sur ses espérances, mais rien ne le consola
de voir cette noble politique de garanties réciproques, compromise et
rejetée au rang des choses à jamais controversables par tout le monde,
et, comme à l’envi, par le gouvernement, par le pays, par son propre
parti. C’était en effet la vue la plus haute et la plus droite de sa
raison, l’instinct le plus vrai de sa nature genéreuse. Carrel était la
tout entier. Jamais il ne se fût retourné contre ce noble enfant de son
intelligence et de son coeur. Si quelquefois il le fit craindre par des
menaces vagues qui lui échappèrent dans le feu de la polémique, ce ne
fut qu’à ceux qui étaient intéressés à avoir cette crainte, et à ruiner
par elle son plus noble titre à l’estime publique. Toutefois, les doutes
qui purent lui venir en certaines occasions sur l’excellence de cette
idée, furent, je le répète, la plus douloureuse de ses épreuves. La
révolution de juillet, si extraordinaire entre toutes les révolutions
par le spectacle d’un peuple laissant au vaincu la liberté de se
plaindre et de se railler de la victoire, avait permis d’espérer un
retour éclatant et définitif au droit commun. Carrel se fit l’organe de
ces espérances et le théoricien de cette doctrine. Il traita la question
avec sa rigueur et sa netteté accoutumées. Il opposa aux exemples, si
nombreux depuis cinquante ans, de gouvernemens périssant tous par
l’arbitraire, le modèle d’un gouvernement offrant à tous les partis des
garanties contre son légitime et nécessaire instinct de conservation. Il
n’invoquait que des raisons exclusivement pratiques, se refusant le
secours innocent de toute forme passionnée, pour ne pas exposer sa belle
théorie a l’ironique qualification d’utopie. C’est cette politique qui
fit tant d’amis à Carrel sur tous les points de la France, et partout où
pénétrait le National. Il eut, en dehors de tous les partis, un parti
composé de tous les hommes, soit placés hors des voies de l’activité
politique, soit trop éclairés pour s’y jeter à la suite de quelque chef
ne se recommandant que par des succes de plume ou de tribune. Que de
gens, lassés des querelles sur la forme du gouvernement, incrédules même
aux admirables apologies de la forme américaine, quittant l’ombre pour
la chose, se rangerent sous cette bannière du droit commun, que Carrel
avait levée sur toutes les fautes et sur toutes les ruines, même sur
celles de ses théories républicaines! Il lui en venait de toutes parts
des témoignages d’adhésion qui parurent un moment lui suffire, et je le
vis se résignant à être, pour un temps indéterminé, le premier écrivain
spéculatif de son pays. Mais des fautes ou tout le monde eut sa part
l’eurent bientôt refroidi. Ce fut un rude coup. Carrel avait foi dans la
politique du droit commun. il y avait cru plus fortement peut-être qu’a
ses théories républicaines précipitamment arborées, et dans un accès
d’inquiétude plutôt qu’apres un sûr et paisible regard jeté sur les
choses. Après celles-ci, ou l’honneur le soutenait contre les doutes
croissans, il fallait donc encore douter de celle-là! Carrel eut les
deux douleurs à la fois. [2-paragraph omission] [paragraph] L’affliction
de Carrel fut irréparable le jour qu’il se vit resté seul défenseur du
droit commun entre la nation, qui, par peur, en faisait le sacrifice au
gouvernment, et un parti, son propre parti, qui le menaçait de ses
arrière-pensées. Nous eûmes à ce sujet, lui et moi, une longue
conversation, quelques mois avant sa mort, dans une promenade au bois de
Boulogne. Je vis qu’il y avait presque renoncé comme principe de
politique applicable, tout au plus y tenait-il encore comme théorie, par
pure générosité, et peut-être aussi par le sentiment de sa force. Carrel
pensait que, les choses venant à son parti, il serait de force à
résister à la tentation de l’arbitraire, et à ne le prendre pas même des
mains d’une majorité qui le lui offrirait au nom du pays. Mais une
politique ajournée était pour lui une politique vaincue. Ses doutes sur
le droit commun furent une dernière défaite. Quoique ce principe eût été
la vue la plus désintéressée de son esprit et le meilleur mouvement de
son coeur, les théories des hommes d’action impliquent toujours l’espoir
Edition: current; Page: [485] d’une application prochaine. Du moment
donc que le droit commun avait échoué comme politique d’application,
Carrel devait en abandonner la doctrine. Dans les derniers jours de sa
vie, il n’en parlait plus que comme d’un progres qu’il ne lui serait pas
donné de voir de son vivant, et auquel ne devaient peut-être jamais
arriver les sociétés humaines (14-16)

211.12-13 se retremper par l’étude,] Carrel sentait le besoin de se
renouveler par l’étude (12)

213.17 un . . . vifs,] Comme tous les hommes d’une nature excellente, il
avait un . . . vifs, outre que ses impressions, par leur extrême force
et par la manière dont il s’y abandonnait, avaient l’air d’être des
goûts (31)

213.22-8 “the . . . character,” . . . was . . . little.] [translated
from.] [paragraph] Le trait distinctif du caractère de Carrel etait la
générosite. De quelque maniere qu’on entende ce mot, dont le vague même
fait la beauté, la vie de Carrel offre de quoi en appliquer toutes les
nuances. Soit qu’il signifie l’entrainement d’un homme qui se devoue,
soit qu’il veuille dire simplement la libéralité, il ne convient a
personne mieux qu’a lui. Toutes les actions de sa vie sont marquées de
la première sorte de générosité. La plupart de ses fautes ne sont que de
la genérosite ou il manquait du calcul. C’est par là qu’il était
populaire en France, ou son courage mieux compris que son talent, lui
avait fait plus de partisans que ses ecrits. C’est par trop de
génerosité qu’il joua sa vie une première fois dans le duel legitimiste,
c’est par trop de generosité qu’il est mort [paragraph] Quant à la
libéralité, personne n’en eut plus que lui, ni d’une meilleure sorte. Je
n’en diminuerai pas le mérite en disant qu’il y entrait je ne sais
quelle imprévoyance qui n’était que de la foi dans sa fortune. On eût
dit qu’il chargeait l’avenir de liquider sa génerosite. Il ne savait ni
refuser ni donner peu (21)

213n.12-15 I . . . alms.] [translated from.] [see 2nd last sentence of
preceding entry followed by.] Exposé par sa position à d’incessantes
demandes, il puisait souvent dans la bourse de ses amis pour soulager
des malheurs qu’il ne suspectait ni ne recherchait jamais. [paragraph]
On m’a raconté ce trait touchant de sa manière d’obliger. Une personne,
dont les nécessités n’etaient pas extrêmes, a recours à lui. Carrel lui
offre la somme dont elle a besoin. Il rentre chez lui, et trouve sa
bourse vide, il avait promis plus qu’il ne possédait. Sa montre
représente a peu près la somme demandée, il la fait mettre au
Mont-de-Piete. (21-2)

214.18-29 take . . . own.] [translated from.] Il prenait un journal,
soit du gouvernement, soit d’une opposition moins prononcée que la
sienne et, lisant l’article du jour, il en adoptait la pensée, et la
complétait ou la développait dans le sens des opinions qui l’avaient
inspirée: Quelquefois c’était un discours de tribune qu’il refaisait.
“Ils n’ont pas donné les meilleures raisons de leur opinion, disait-il,
ceci eût été plus spécieux, et nous eût plus embarrassés.” J’admirais
d’autant plus cette flexibilité d’esprit que ces raisons de gymnastique
étaient les meilleures et les plus sincères. C’était tout ce qu’il y a
de vrai et d’honorable dans chaque opinion Carrel voulait me montrer par
là deux qualités fort supérieures à une certaine facilité capricieuse et
paradoxale, d’une part sa connaissance des interêts des partis, et
d’autre part, l’estime réelle qu’il faisait, à beaucoup d’égards, des
plus opposes a ses idees (10)

— “Lamartine,” London and Westminster Review, IV & XXVI (Jan., 1837),
501-41.

referred to: 188n

— “Victor Hugo,” London Review, II (L&WR, XXXI) (Jan., 1836), 389-417.

referred to: 188n

“O.P.Q.” See Colton

Oakeley, Frederick.

note: the reference is to the recently appointed qualified examiners at
Oxford.

referred to: 369

Ogden, William. Referred to: 78

Orléans, Ferdinand, duc d’.

note: referred to as heir to the French throne, the indirect quotation
of his opinion derives from Nisard.

quoted: 78

Edition: current; Page: [486]
Orléans, Louis Philippe d’, comte de Paris.

note: the reference is to him as the heir presumptive of King Louis
Philippe.

referred to: 330

Orléans, Louis Philippe Joseph, duc d’.

note: known as Philippe Egalité. The reference at 9 is in a quotation
from Mignet, those at 78-81n include references to Orleanists and
Orleanism, that at 90 is in a quotation from Montgaillard, that at 141
is in a quotation from Carlyle. See also Sieyès, “Déliberations.”

referred to: 9, 78, 79, 80, 81, 81n, 90, 95, 141

— Instructions. See Sieyès.

Ossian. Fingal, an Ancient Epic Poem in Six Books: Together with Several
Other Poems, Composed by Ossian, the Son of Fingal Trans. from the Galic
Language by James Macpherson. London: Becket and Hondt, 1762.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 113

Otto IV (Holy Roman Emperor).

note: the reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 239

Otway, Thomas. Venice Preserv’d, or, A Plot Discover’d. London:
Hindmarsh, 1682.

note: the quotation is in a quotation from Scott.

quoted: 69

69.16-17 —disturb . . . world. To rule it when ’twas wildest,] A
Councel’s held hard by, where the destruction / Of this great Empire’s
hatching. There I’l [sic] lead thee! / But be a Man, for thou art to mix
with Men / Fit to disturb . . . World, / And rule it when it’s
wildest—(17, II)

Oudegherst, Pierre d’. Annales de Flandre de P. d’Oudegherst. Ed. Jean
Baptiste Lesbroussart 2 vols. Ghent: de Goesin-Verhaeghe, Paris: Janet,
[1789].

note: the quotation derives from Sismondi (q.v. for the collation), this
ed., which omits “et chroniques” from the title, cited merely for
identification.

quoted: 34n

Owen, Robert.

note: the reference at 126, in a self-quotation, is to Owenites.

referred to: 126, 354

Pacchiarotti, Guiseppe.

note: JSM, like Nisard, whose account he follows, uses the spelling
Pachiarotti. The source of the quotation has not been located.

quoted: 180

referred to: 180

Paine, Thomas. The American Crisis, No. I (1776). In The Political and
Miscellaneous Works of Thomas Paine. 2 vols. London: Carlile, 1819, I,
1-10.

note: in SC; the items are separately paginated.

quoted: 163

163.1 “times which try men’s souls,”] These are the times that try men’s
souls (3)

Pajol, Claude Pierre. Referred to: 200-1

Palgrave, Francis. The Rise and Progress of the English Commonwealth:
Anglo-Saxon Period. 2 pts. London: Murray, 1832.

note: the allegation that Palgrave refers to Guizot twice and
slightingly is not true, see 371n above.

referred to: 370-1

Panizzi, Anthony. “Michelet’s Histoire de France. Boniface VIII,”
British and Foreign Review, XIII (June, 1842), 415-41.

referred to: 234

Edition: current; Page: [487]
Paris, Matthew. Matthaei Paris Angli historia major. Juxta exemplar
Londinense 1571, verbatim recusa. Ed. William Wats. London: Hodgkinson,
1640.

note: the quotation at 248, which is in a quotation from Michelet, is
not collated. JSM is translating Michelet’s French, not the Latin
original.

quoted: 248, 250

referred to: 29

250.31-2 dispersi . . . detruncatt.] Et cum increbruissent rumores, quod
ipsi omnes et eorundem fautores et auditores excommunicarentur, dispersi
. . . detruncati (824)

Paulin, J.B. Alexandre.

note: the reference is to “the responsible editor of the National.”

referred to: 200

Peacock, Thomas Love.

note: the reference is to the “grave drollery” in “the best” of
Peacock’s novels.

referred to: 164

Peel, Robert.

note: the reference at 300 is to the Peel ministry.

referred to: 193, 300

Pelagius.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 247

Pépin d’Héristal. Referred to: 24

Pericles. Referred to: 224

Périer, Casimir Pierre.

note: the reference at 197 is to the Perier ministry.

referred to: 177, 197, 198

Peter, Saint. See St. Peter.

Pétion de Villeneuve, Jérôme.

note: the quotation is in a quotation from Kerverseau, q.v., the
reference at 12 is in a quotation from Mignet.

quoted: 105

referred to: 12, 100, 106, 107

Petty-Fitzmaurice, Henry (Marquis of Lansdowne). Referred to: 320

Philip (of France). See Philippe.

Philip II (of Macedon). Referred to: 224

Philippe.

note: son of Philippe I (of France).

referred to: 29

Philippe I (of France). Referred to: 27, 29

Philippe II (of France).

note: known as Philippe Auguste. The references at 239, 247, 251 are in
quotations from Michelet.

referred to: 33, 35, 36, 36n, 50n, 239, 248, 251, 289

Philippe IV (of France).

note: known as le Bel. The references at 239 and 251 are in quotations
from Michelet.

referred to: 38, 50n, 239, 244, 251, 252, 289

Phra Narai (of Siam).

note: the reference, to his cannon, is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 145

Piron, Alexis. Referred to: 67

Edition: current; Page: [488]
Pitt, William (the younger). Referred to: 343

Plato. Republic (Greek and English). Trans. Paul Shorey. 2 vols. London:
Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1946.

note: this ed. cited for ease of reference.

referred to: 314

Plutarch. Lives.

note: as the references are general, no ed. is cited.

referred to: 215, 224

Polignac, Jules, duc de.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Ferrières.

referred to: 88

Polignac, Yolande Martine Gabrielle df Polastron, duchesse de.

note: the reference at 7 is in a quotation from Mignet, who refers to
her as comtesse, that at 88 is in a quotation from Ferrières.

referred to: 7, 88

Pompadour, Jeanne Antoinette Poisson le Normant d’Etoiles, marquise de.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 165

Pompone, Hugh de (seigneur de Crécy). Referred to: 30

Poor Laws. See 43 Elizabeth, c. 2 (1601)

Pope, Alexander. The Dunciad (1728). In The Works of Alexander Pope with
Notes and Illustrations by Joseph Warton and Others. Ed. Joseph Warton,
et al. 9 vols. and Supplementary Vol. London: Priestley, 1822 (Supp.
Vol., London: Hearne, 1825), V.

note: in SC.

referred to: 62

— An Essay on Man (1733-34) Ibid., III, 1-160.

quoted: 224

224.6 “damned . . . fame.”] If Parts allure thee, think how Bacon
shin’d. The wisest, brightest, meanest, of mankind: Or ravish’d with the
whistling of a Name, See Cromwell, damn’d to everlasting fame! (III,
146; IV, 281-4)

Porlier, Juan Díaz.

note: the reference is to the Spanish general butchered by Ferdinand
VII.

referred to: 89

Protagoras. Referred to: 273n

Provence, Louise Marie Joséphine, comtesse de.

note: the reference to “Madame,” wife of “Monsieur” (later Louis XVIII),
is in a quotation from Ferrières.

referred to: 88

Pufendorf, Samuel von. Le droit de la nature et des gens, ou Système
géneral des principes les plus importans de la morale, de la
jurisprudence, et de la politique Trans. Jean Barbeyrac 5th ed. 2 vols.
Amsterdam. De Coup, 1734.

note: in SC. Original Latin ed. (De jure naturae et gentium), 1672. JSM
uses the spelling Puffendorf.

referred to: 345

Pugh, David. (“David Hughson”). London: Being an Accurate History and
Description of the British Metropolis and Its Neighbourhood, to Thirty
Miles Extent, from an Actual Perambulation. 6 vols. London: Stratford,
1805-09.

note: cited as an illustration of histories of London, on which JSM
comments.

referred to: 18

Edition: current; Page: [489]
Puiségur, comte de. See Puységur.

Pujade, Jean Antoine.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Carlyle, is to him as one of
seven prisoners in the Bastille.

referred to: 146

Puységur, Pierre Louis de Chastenet, comte de.

note: the reference at 9 is in a quotation from Mignet, that at 86-7 is
to him as one of the ministers dismissed with Necker.

referred to: 9, 86-7

Quintilian (Marcus Fabius Quintilianus). Institutio oratoria (Latin and
English) Trans. H.E. Butler 4 vols. London: Heinemann, Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1921.

note: this ed. cited for ease of reference.

referred to: 188

Rabaut Saint-Etienne, Jean Paul.

note: the reference at 12, in a quotation from Mignet, is to him as a
member of the Commission of Twelve.

referred to: 12, 73n

Rabelais, François. Referred to: 50

Ranke, Leopold von. Die romischen Papste, ihre Kirche und ihr Staat im
16 und 17 Jahrhundert 3 vols. Berlin: Duncker and Humblot, 1834-36.

note: see also the next two entries.

referred to: 220, 249

— The Ecclesiastical and Political History of the Popes of Rome during
the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries. Trans. Sarah Austin. 3 vols.
London: Murray, 1840.

referred to: 220

— The History of the Popes, Their Church and State in the Sixteenth and
Seventeenth Centuries. Trans. Walter Keating Kelly. London: Whittaker,
1843.

referred to: 220

Rapin de Thoyras, Paul de. L’histoire d’Angleterre. 8 vols. The Hague:
Rogissart, 1724.

referred to: 221

Rapport de la commission d’enquête sur l’insurrection qui a eclate dans
la journée du 23 juin et sur les événements du 15 mai. 3 vols. in 1
Paris: n.p., 1848

note: see also Blanc, Chenu, Goudchaux.

referred to: 339

Raynouard, François Just Marie, ed. Choix des poésies originales des
troubadours. 6 vols. Paris: Didot, 1816-21.

note: the quotation derives from Thierry.

quoted: 36n

Regnault-Warin, Jean Baptiste Joseph Innocent Philadelphe. Mémoires. See
La Fayette, “Lettre.”

Reid, Thomas.

note: the reference is to Reidism.

referred to: 183

Réole.

note: not otherwise identified, the reference is in a quotation from
Carlyle.

referred to: 145

Edition: current; Page: [490]
Le Républicain. Referred to: 100

Riancourt. See Joseph Calixte Martin.

Richard (Earl of Cornwall).

note: JSM refers to him as Duke of Cornwall.

referred to: 49

Richard I (of England).

note: known as Coeur de Lion. The second reference at 36 is to him as
the royal troubadour.

referred to: 34, 35, 36, 36n, 47, 185, 226

Ricardo, David. Referred to: 193

Richardson, Samuel. The History of Sir Charles Grandison (1753-54) 3rd
ed. 7 vols. London: Richardson, 1754.

note: in SC.

referred to: 22

Rinaldi, Odorico. Annales ecclesiastici ab anno ubi desinit cardinalis
Baronius. Ed. Giovanni Domenico Mansi. 15 vols. Lucca. Venturini,
1747-56.

referred to: 234

Robert II (of France).

note: known as le Pieux, son of Hugues Capet. The reference at 238 is in
a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 32, 238

Robertson, William. The History of America with a Disquisition on
Ancient India (1777). In Works. 6 vols. London: Longman, et al., 1851,
V-VI.

note: in SC.

referred to: 134

— The History of Scotland under Mary and James VI (1759). Ibid., I-II.

referred to: 134

— The History of the Reign of the Emperor Charles V (1769). Ibid.,
III-IV.

referred to: 134

Robespierre, Maximilien François Marie Isidore de.

note: the reference at 12 is in a quotation from Mignet, those at 126-7
are in a self-quotation, that at 347 is in a quotation from Brougham.

referred to: 5, 12, 126-7, 347

— Déclaration des droits de l’homme et du citoyen proposée par
Maximilien Robespierre 24 avril, 1793. Paris: Imprimerie nationale,
1793.

note: for the collation, see Déclaration des droits de l’homme.

quoted: 126

referred to: 127, 205

Rochambeau, Jean Baptiste Donatien de Vimeur, comte de Referred to: 97

Roche-Guyon, Guy de la, Referred to: 31

Roederer, Pierre Louis, comte. Louis XII et François Ier, ou Mémoires
pour servir a une nouvelle histoire de leur règne; suivis d’appendices
comprenant une discussion entre M. le comte Daru et l’auteur, concernant
la réunion de la Bretagne à la France 2 vols. in 1. Paris: Bossange,
1825.

quoted: 43, 48

referred to: 33, 37n, 38n, 51n

43.17-18 Honoris . . . pulchritudine.] [paragraph] Dans ce même siècle,
le roi Jean déclara douloureusement que la chevalerie était devenue
insensible à la gloire et à l’honneur même Honoris . . . pulchritudine,
et, pour rétablir l’honneur et l’ordre de la chevalerie, il créa une
nouvelle chevalerie dans l’ancienne, afin d’en rassembler l’élite (II,
251)

Edition: current; Page: [491]
43.19-20 Il . . . Roland en France.] Le roi Jean n’y croyait-il pas
quand, entendant chanter la chanson de Roland, il dit Il . . . [not in
italics] Roland en France (II, 290)

43.21-2 On . . . tête.] Et ce vieux capitaine qui lui répondit, On . . .
tête, ce vieux capitaine n’y croyait-il pas aussi, et avec lui tous les
historiens qui ont rapporté cette anecdote? (II, 290)

43.28-9 Il n’y . . . ans qui . . . estropié.] Mais, ô contrariété
déplorable1 les cuirasses deviennent si lourdes qu’il n’y . . . ans, dit
Lanoue, qui . . . estropié, c’est-à-dire qu’il n’y avait chevalier de
trente ans qui ne s’estropiât lui-même pour éviter d’être estropié par
un autre (II, 268)

48.15 Fut pour] Le temps de la première fut pour (I, 297)

Roger of Hoveden. Annalium pars prior et posterior. In Rerum anglicarum
scriptores post Bedam praecipui, ex vetustissimis codicibus manuscriptis
nunc primum in lucem editi. Ed. Henry Savile London: Bishop, et al.,
1596, 228-472.

note: the reference derives from Thierry.

referred to: 35

Roland de la Platière, Jean Marie.

note: the reference at 12 is in a quotation from Mignet, that at 108 is
in a quotation from Moleville.

referred to: 12, 101-2, 108

Roland de la Platière, Marie Jeanne Phlipon. Referred to: 68n-9n

— Mémoires de Madame Roland. 2 vols. Paris: Baudouin. 1820.

note: part of the Collection des memoires, ed. Berville and Barriere,
q.v. This ed. cited because it restored her portrait of Louvet to which
Scott objected (see 68n-9n).

quoted: 100

referred to: 68n-9n, 102

100.15 “qu’il . . . republique.”] Pétion et Brissot disaient, au
contraire, que cette fuite du roi etait sa perte, et qu’il fallait en
profiter, que les dispositions du peuple etaient excellentes, qu’il
serait mieux eclairé sur la perfidie de la cour par cette demarche, que
n’auraient pu faire les plus sages écrits, qu’il était évident pour
chacun, par ce seul tait, que le roi ne voulait pas de la constitution
qu’il avait jurée, que c’était le moment de s’en assurer une plus
homogene, et qu il . . . république (I, 351)

Rollin, Charles. Referred to: 224

Roscelinus. “Roscelini nominalistarum in philosophia quondam choragi, ad
Petrum Abaelardum epistola hactenus inedita.” In Petri Abaelardi . . .
opera omnia. Vol. CLXXVIII of Patrologiae cursus completus, series
latina. Ed. Jacques Paul Migne, Paris: Garnier, 1849, cols. 357-72.

note: this ed. cited for ease of reference.

referred to: 246

Rousseau, Jean Jacques. Referred to: 66, 67, 371n

— Du contrat social, ou Principes du droit politique. Amsterdam Rey,
1762.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 141

Royer-Collard, Pierre Paul. Referred to: 192

St. Ambrose. Epistola LI. In Opera omnia. Vols. XIV-XVII of Patrologiae
cursus completus, series latina. Ed. Jacques Paul Migne Paris: Migne,
1845, Vol. XVI, cols. 1160-4.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference.

referred to: 341

St. Benedict. Referred to: 240, 249

St. Bernard of Clairvaux. Referred to: 246

St. Dominic.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 249

Edition: current; Page: [492]
St. Francis of Assisi. Referred to: 249

St. Gregory I (the Great). Homiliarum in Ezechielem prophetam. In Opera
omnia. Vols. LXXV-LXXIX of Patrologiae cursus completus, series latina.
Ed. Jacques Paul Migne, Paris: Migne, 1849, Vol. LXXVI, cols. 785-1072.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. The quotation is in a
quotation from Dulaure.

quoted: 23

St. Gregory VII.

note: known as Hildebrand. The references at 238, 246, 247 are in
quotations from Michelet.

referred to: 224, 238, 239, 242-3, 246, 247, 249

St. Gregory of Tours.

note: the quotation is in a quotation from Thierry (q.v.), who cites
Gregoru Turonensis historia Francorum, ed. Martin Bouquet, the reference
is in a quotation from Dulaure.

quoted: 223

referred to: 23

St. Louis. See Louis IX.

Saint-Martin-Valogne, Charles Vaissière de.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Mignet, is to the members of
the Commission of Twelve.

referred to: 12

St. Peter.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 253

Saint-Priest, François Emmanuel Guignard, comtf de.

note: the reference at 9 is in a quotation from Mignet, that at 86-7 is
to him as one of the ministers dismissed with Necker.

referred to: 9, 86-7

Saint-Simon, Claude Henri de Rouvroy, comte de.

note: the reference at 126, in a self-quotation, is to Saint-Simonians,
those at 185, 203, and 370n are to the Saint-Simonian school.

referred to: 126, 185, 203, 370n

St. Thomas Aquinas.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 239

St. Thomas à Becket.

note: the references are in quotations from Michelet.

referred to: 239, 244, 247

Saint-Victor. See Bins de Saint-Victor.

Sand, George. See Amandine Dupin.

Santerre, Antoine Joseph.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 146

Sanuto, Marino.

note: the quotation derives from Michelet (q.v. for the collation).

quoted: 251

Schiller, Johann Christoph Friedrich von. Referred to: 184

— Geschichte des dreissigjährigen Kriegs (1791-93). In Sammtliche Werke.
12 vols. Stuttgart and Tübingen: Cotta’schen Buchhandlung, 1818-19, VI.

note: in SC.

referred to: 137

— The Piccolomini; or, The First Part of Wallenstein, and The Death of
Edition: current; Page: [493] Wallenstein. Trans. Samuel Taylor
Coleridge, 2 vols. in 1. London: Longman and Rees, 1800

referred to: 136

— Wallenstein, ein dramatisches Gedicht (1798-99). In Sämmtliche Werke,
IX, Pt. 2.

note: the reference at 136 is to “Wallenstein’s Camp” (“Wallensteins
Lager”), those at 137 are to Wallenstein, the Piccolomini (“Die
Piccolomini”), and to Count Terzsky (“Die Piccolomini” and “Wallensteins
Tod”), all parts of Wallenstein.

referred to: 134, 136, 137

Schlosser, Friedrich Christoph. Geschichte des achtzehnten Jahrhunderts
und des neunzehnten bis zum Sturz des franzosischen Kaiserreichs. 7
vols. Heidelberg Mohr, 1836-49.

referred to: 220

— Universalhistorische Uebersicht der Geschichte der alten Welt und
threr Kultur. 9 vols. Frankfurt: Varrentrapp, 1826-34.

referred to: 220

Schoell, Maximilian Samson Friedrich. Histoire abregée des traites de
paix, entre les puissances de l’Europe, depuis la paix de Westphalie.
Ouvrage entièrement refondu, augmenté et continué jusqu’au Congres de
Vienne et aux Traités de Paris de 1815. Ed. Christophe Guillaume de
Koch. 15 vols. Paris: Gide, 1817-18.

note: continuation of the work by Koch, q.v.

referred to: 372n

Scipio Africanus, Publius Cornelius. Referred to: 37-8

Scott, Walter.

note: the reference at 184 is to Scott’s romances.

referred to: 184, 221, 226

— Ivanhoe, a Romance. 3 vols. Edinburgh: Constable, 1820.

referred to: 184, 226

— The Life of Napoleon Buonaparte, Emperor of the French With a
Preliminary View of the French Revolution. 9 vols. Edinburgh: Cadell,
London: Longman, et al., 1827.

reviewed: 53-110

quoted: 66, 67, 68n, 69, 69-70, 70, 71, 72n, 73, 73n, 74n, 87, 88, 92,
94, 95, 98, 99, 109n

66.23 “anti-crusade,” . . . “religious . . . kind.”] Unhappily blinded
by self-conceit, heated with the ardour of controversy, gratifying their
literary pride by becoming members of a league, in which kings and
princes were included, and procuring followers by flattering the vanity
of some, and stimulating the cupidity of others, the men of the most
distinguished parts in France became allied in a sort of anti-crusade
against Christianity, and indeed against religious principles of every
kind (I, 61)

66.30 “league,”] [see preceding entry]

66.30 “conspiracy,”] An envenomed fury against religion and all its
doctrines, a promptitude to avail themselves of every circumstance by
which Christianity could be misrepresented, an ingenuity in mixing up
their opinions in works, which seemed the least fitting to involve such
discussions, above all, a pertinacity in slandering, ridiculing, and
vilitying all who ventured to oppose their principles, distinguished the
correspondents in this celebrated conspiracy against a religion, which,
however it may be defaced by human inventions, breathes only that peace
on earth, and good will to the children of men, which was proclaimed by
Heaven at its divine origin. (I, 58-9)

67.4 “and . . . Encyclopedists”] In France they had discovered the
command which they had acquired over the public mind, and united as they
were, (and . . . Encyclopedists.) they augmented and secured that
impression, by never permitting the doctrines which they wished to
propagate to die away upon the public ear (I, 53)

Edition: current; Page: [494]
68n.39-40 “habitual . . . ideas,”] So far had an indifference to
delicacy influenced the society of France, and so widely spread was this
habitual . . . ideas, especially among those who pretended to
philosophy, that Madame Roland, a woman admirable for courage and
talents, and not, so far as appears, vicious in her private morals, not
only mentions the profligate novels of Louvet as replete with the graces
of imagination, the salt of criticism, and the tone of philosophy, but
affords the public, in her own persons, details with which a courtezan
of the higher class should be unwilling to season her private
conversation (I, 56-7)

69.2 “licence and infidelity”] We do not tax the whole nation of France
with being infirm in feligious faith, and relaxed in morals, still less
do we aver that the Revolution, which broke forth in that country, owed
its rise exclusively to the licence and infidelity, which were but too
current there (I, 62)

69.5 had] These would have existed had (I, 62)

70.3 talent] talents (I, 69)

71.14 “odious and contemptible.”] After dismission of the Notables, the
minister adopted or recommended a line of conduct so fluctuating and
indecisive, so violent at one time in support of the royal prerogative,
and so pusillanimous when he encountered resistance from the
newly-awakened spirit of liberty, that had he been bribed to render the
Crown at once odious and contemptible, or to engage his master in a line
of conduct which should irritate the courageous, and encourage the
timid, among his dissatisfied subjects, the Archbishop of Sens could
hardly, after the deepest thought, have adopted measures better adapted
for such a purpose (I, 103-4)

71.19 “national discontent!”] In punishment of their undaunted defence
of the popular cause, the Parliament was banished to Troyes, the
government thus increasing the national discontent by the removal of the
principal court of the kingdom, and by all the evils incident to a delay
of public justice (I, 105)

72n.35 the king, after having] the King, having (I, 253)

72n.39 before] before (I, 253)

73.2-3 “Sound and virtuous”] Necker, a minister of an honest and candid
disposition, a republican also, and therefore on principle a respecter
of public opinion, unhappily did not recollect, that to be well-formed
and accurate, public opinion should be founded on the authority of men
of talents and integrity, and that the popular mind must be pre-occupied
by arguments of a sound and virtuous tendency, else the enemy will sow
tares, and the public will receive it in the absence of more wholesome
grain (I, 114)

73n.18-19 “the . . . religion”] It can only be imputed, on the one hand,
to the . . . religion, and on the other, to the preconcerted
determination of the Revolutionists, that no consideration should
interfere with the plan of new-modelling the nation through all its
institutions, as well of church as of state (I, 226-7)

74n.12 “usual ministerial arts”] This might doubtless have been done by
the usual ministerial arts of influencing elections, or gaining over to
the crown-interests some of the many men of talents, who, determined to
raise themselves in this new world, had not yet settled to which side
they were to give their support (I, 116-17)

87.21 The successful] The answer to this is, that the successful (I,
163)

88.3 “dark intrigues,”] Meanwhile, the dark intrigues which had been
long formed for accomplishing a general insurrection in Paris, were now
ready to be brought into action (I, 154)

92.29 plied,” . . . “with] plied with (I, 154)

94.34 “under . . . of popular frenzy.”] For this purpose, all those who
desired to carry the Revolution to extremity, became desirous to bring
the sittings of the National Assembly and the residence of the King
within the precincts of Paris, and to place them under . . . of that
popular frenzy which they had so many ways of exciting, and which might
exercise the authority of terror over the body of representatives, fill
their galleries with a wild and tumultuous band of partizans, surround
their gates with an infuriated populace, and thus dictate the issue of
each deliberation (I, 180-1)

95.11 societies.”] societies, and the hundreds of hundreds of popular
orators whom they had at their command, excited the citizens by
descriptions of the most dreadful plots, fraught with massacres and
proscriptions (I, 184)

98.8-9 “determined . . . monarchy,”] In stern opposition to those
admirers of the Constitution, stood two bodies of unequal numbers,
strength, and efficacy, of which the first was determined Edition:
current; Page: [495] . . . monarchy, while the second entertained the
equally resolved purpose of urging these changes still farther onwards,
to the total destruction of all civil order, and the establishment of a
government in which terror and violence should be the ruling principles,
to be wielded by the hands of the demagogues who dared to nourish a
scheme so nefarious (I, 264-5)

98.30 “the association] The beauty, talents, courage, and
accomplishments of this remarkable woman, pushed forward into public
notice a husband of very middling abilities, and preserved a high
influence over the association (I, 269)

98.33-4 “the affected . . . who were] He has never been supposed to
possess any great firmness of principle, whether public or private but a
soldier’s honour, and a soldier’s frankness, together with the habits of
good society, led him to contemn and hate the sordid treachery, cruelty,
and cynicism of the Jacobins, while his wit and common sense enabled him
to see through and deride the affected . . . who, he plainly saw, were
(I, 313)

98.36-7 “the Brissotin . . . faction” (he . . . faction), “who] Their
claims to share the spoils of the displaced ministry were passed over
with contempt, and the King was compelled, in order to have the least
chance of obtaining a hearing from the Assembly, to select his ministers
from the Brissotin . . . faction, who (I, 306-7)

109n.11-12 “a . . . return.”] This Monsieur Lecompte was a loud, and
probably a sincere advocate of freedom, and had been a . . . return, as
likely to advance the good cause (VIII, 422)

— Old Mortality. In Tales of My Landlord, Collected and Arranged by
Jedediah Cleishbotham. 4 vols. Edinburgh: Blackwood: London: Murray,
1816, II-IV.

note: the reference at 164 is to Mause Headriggs.

referred to: 57, 164

— Waverley, or, ’Tis Sixty Years Since. 3 vols. Edinburgh: Constable,
London: Longman, et al., 1814.

note: the reference at 164 is to the Baron of Bradwardine.

referred to: 55, 164

Scotus Erigena. See Johannes Scotus.

Sertorius, Quintus. Referred to: 237

Servan, Joseph Michel Antoine.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Moleville.

referred to: 108

Sévigné, Marie de Rabutin Chantal, marquise de.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Courier. See also Voltaire.

referred to: 222n

Sextius, Lucius.

note: the reference derives from Livy

referred to: 64-5

Shakespeare, William. Referred to: 134, 135, 367

— Hamlet. In The Riverside Shakespeare. Ed. G. Blakemore Evans. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1974, 1135-97.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. The reference at 114 is in a
quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 114, 122

— Henry IV, Part I. Ibid., 842-85.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle

referred to: 145, 164

— Henry IV, Part II. Ibid., 886-929.

referred to: 161, 164

— Macbeth, Ibid., 1306-42.

note: the references are in quotations from Carlyle.

referred to: 143, 145

Edition: current; Page: [496]
— A Midsummer Night’s Dream. Ibid., 217-49.

note: the same passage is quoted in both places.

quoted: 135, 224

135.12-14 “forms of things unknown,” . . . “bodied forth” . . . “turned
into shape.”] The poet’s eye, in a fine frenzy rolling. Doth glance from
heaven to earth, from earth to heaven. And as imagination bodies forth /
The forms of things unknown, the poet’s pen. Turns them to shapes, and
gives to aery nothing / A local habitation and a name (242, V, I, 12-17)

224.30 “body forth the forms of things unknown”] [see preceding
collation]

— Othello. Ibid., 1198-1248.

note: the references are in quotations from Carlyle.

referred to: 145, 149

— Twelfth Night. Ibid., 403-41.

note: the quotation is an indirect echo.

quoted: 333

Sidney, Algernon. Referred to: 121

Le Siècle. Referred to: 303

Sieyès, Emmanuel Joseph.

note: the remark quoted was reported to JSM in a private conversation,
the reference at 90 is in a quotation from Montgaillard; that at 141 is
in a quotation from Carlyle.

quoted: 96

referred to: 90, 106, 141

— “Délibérations à prendre dans les assemblées de bailliages.” In Louis
Philippe Joseph, due d’Orléans, Instructions envoyées par M. le due
d’Orléans. [Paris: n.p., 1788,] 11-66.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle, who attributes the
“Délibérations” to Laclos.

referred to: 141

— Qu’est-ce que le tiers état? 3rd ed. [Paris:] n.p., 1789.

note: the quotations (both indirect) are in a quotation from Carlyle,
the sense of the second appears in several places.

quoted: 141

141.9-10 What . . . something.] [translated from.] [paragraph] 1°.
Qu’est-ce que le Tiers-Etat?—Tout [paragraph] 2°. Qu’a-t-il été jusqu’a
présent dans l’ordre politique?—Rifn [paragraph] 3°. Que demande-t-il?—A
être quelque chose. (3)

141.13 “The Third Estate is the Nation.”] [translated from.] [paragraph]
Sous le second rapport, il [Le Tiers] est la Nation (154)

Simon of Tournai.

note: the quotation, in a quotation from Michelet, derives from Matthew
Paris, q.v.

quoted: 248

Sismondi, Jean Charles Léonard Simonde de. Histoire des Français. Vols.
I-IX Paris: Treuttel and Würtz, 1821-26.

note: ultimately 31 vols. (1821-44).

reviewed: 15-52

quoted: 20-1, 30, 31, 34n, 39, 40n, 41n, 45, 49, 50n

referred to: 276

20.39-40 dit,” . . . “que] dit que (I, xx)

21.1 brillantes, Plutôt] brillantes; plutôt (I, xxi)

21.4 féodalité?] féodalité (I, xxi)

30.8-20 The . . . superiors.] [translated from.] [no paragraph] Les
comtes ruraux, les vicomtes et les barons, qui relevoient immédiatement
du roi, dans le duché de France, avoient profite de la foiblesse de
Philippe pour secouer absolument son autorité, dans les châteaux où ils
s’étoient fortifiés. Ils en sortoient pour fondre sur les voyageurs et
les marchands qui passoient à portée de leur retraite, lorsque ceux-ci
ne consentoient pas à se racheter par une grosse rançon: ils Edition:
current; Page: [497] abusoient également de leur force contre les
couvens et contre tous les seigneurs ecclésiastiques Tantôt ils venoient
loger chez eux avec leurs écuyers, leurs soldats, leurs chevaux et leurs
chiens, et ils exigeoient que la maison religieuse ou ils prenoient de
force l’hospitalité les détrayât pendant des mois entiers, tantôt ils
forçoient les paysans des moines ou des évêques a leur payer des
redevances, ou en argent ou en denrées, pour la protection que les
hommes de guerre, promettoient de leur accorder. Les barons en
particulier, qui etoient vassaux de quelque eglise, sembloient se faire
un titre de leur vasselage même pour dépouiller leurs seigneurs
ecclésiastiques (V, 10-11)

31.6-17 “This seigneur,” . . . had . . . operation.] [translated from.]
“Ce seigneur, dit l’abbé de Nogent, fils d’Engherrand de Coucy, avoit,
dès sa premiere jeunesse, augmente incessamment ses richesses par le
pillage des voyageurs et des pelerins, et il avoit étendu sa domination
par des mariages incestueux avec de riches héritières ses parentes. Sa
cruaute étoit tellement inouie, que les bouchers, qui cependant passent
pour insensibles, épargnent plus de douleurs au bétail, en l’égorgeant,
qu’il n’en épargnoit aux hommes car il ne se contentoit point de les
punir par le glaive, pour des fautes déterminees, comme on a coutume de
faire, il les déchiroit par les plus horribles supplices. Lorsqu’il
vouloit arracher une rançon à ses captifs, il les suspendoit par quelque
partie plus délicate de leur corps, ou bien il les couchoit par terre et
les couvrant de pierres, il marchoit dessus, les frappant en même temps
jusqu’a ce qu’ils eussent promis tout ce qu’il demandoit, ou qu’ils
fussent morts a la peine.”† [footnote omitted] (V, 94-5)

31.22-6 “The king,” . . . “tried . . . life.”] [translated from.] Le roi
voulut l’engager a remettre en liberté, dans ses derniers momens, les
marchands qu’il avoit enleves sur les grands chemins, il les retenoit
dans ses cachots, pour les forcer a lui payer une rançon, ou il les
faisoit torturer pour son divertissement, mais même dans les agnoies de
la mort. Coucy se refusoit à toute miséricorde, et il sembloit regretter
sa domination sur ses captifs, bien plus que sa propre vie (V, 210-11)

34n.11-12 “marvellously severe and rigorous”] [translated from.] Il
etoit merveilleusement sévère et rigoureux contre les sorcières,
enchanteurs, negromanciens et autres, qui s’aidoient de semblables et
indues arts [Sismondi is quoting Oudegherst] (V, 205)

34n.14-15 “qu’il] Il chassit et bannit de Flandre tous juifs et usuriers
lesquels avoient auparavant illec vécu sans tribu, disant qu’il
[Sismondi is quoting Oudegherst] (V, 205)

34n.19 les cervoises] Pour à la famine obvier, et afin que les vivres
tussent de tant meilleur prix, il fit par tout le pays de Flandre
défendre les cervoises, et tuer les chiens et les veaux, ordonnant que
tous les greniers des marchands de bles fussent ouverts, et que lesdits
bles fussent vendus et distribués à prix raisonnable [Sismondi is
quoting Oudegherst] (V, 206)

34n.21 at a reasonable price.] [see preceding entry]

39n.3 Française.”] française aussi n’y avoit-il jamais des combats à
livrer, et des dangers a braver, d’un bout de la chrétiente à l’autre,
sans que cette noblesse vint comme volontaire en réclamer sa part (VII,
108)

39.7 Les] [no paragraph] Les (VII, 122)

39.22 jamais de l’argent] jamais d’argent (VII, 123)

39.25 La . . . noblesse] [not in italics] (VII, 123)

39.25 vanité] cupidité (VII, 123)

39.29 interdit La] interdit 1 [footnote omitted] La (VII, 123)

40n.1 “Dans . . . âge,” . . . “on] En effet dans . . . âge on (VI, 364)

41n.4 “Au] [paragraph] Au (V, 139)

41n.19 tourmens] traitemens (V, 140)

41n.5 sa] la (V, 141)

45.10 “deux . . . noblesse,”] [see entry for 39.25 above]

49.2 haute justice, . . . garenne] Enfin il se laissa flechir, et il
accorda la vie à Enguerrand, mais il lui imposa une amende
très-considérable, un exil de trois ans a la Terre-Sainte, et il le
priva du droit de haute justice et du droit de garenne dans toutes ses
terres 1 [footnote omitted] (VIII, 98)

50n.2 “Le siècle,” . . . “dont] Le siècle dont (IX, 195)

50n.4 témoignage.”] témoignage, on y trouve sans cesse des attestations
solennelles de choses évidemment controuvées, et le sens commun se
révolte contre la preuve ecrite qu’on lui presente (IX, 195-6)

Edition: current; Page: [498]
Siward (Earl of Northumberland). Referred to: 24

Socrates. Referred to: 273n

Solages, comte de.

note: no other information available, the reference, in a quotation from
Carlyle, is to him as one of seven prisoners in the Bastille.

referred to: 146

Solon. Referred to: 160

Sorel, Agnes.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 165

Soulavie, Jean Louis. Mémoires historiques et politiques du règne de
Louis XVI, depuis son mariage, jusqu’à sa mort. 6 vols. Paris: Treuttel
and Wurtz, 1801.

quoted: 106

referred to: 93, 106

106.4 “Quoique . . . Girondins,” . . . “fût] Les girondins et tous les
partis effrayés de leur férocité respective, ont été obligés de mentir
et de tenir le langage du tems, et quoique girondins fût (VI, 450)

Soult, Nicolas Jean de Dieu, duc de Dalmatie.

note: maréchal de France.

referred to: 189

Southern, Henry (prob.). “Barante, Histoire des ducs de Bourgogne,”
Westminster Review, II (Oct., 1824), 442-62.

note: one of the Westminster articles on French historical works.

referred to: 18

— “The Chronicles of Froissart,” Westminster Review, IV (July, 1825),
1-20.

note: one of the Westminster articles on French historical works.

referred to: 18

— “Court of Louis XIV and the Regency,” Westminster Review, II (July,
1824), 121-49.

note: one of the Westminster articles on French historical works.

referred to: 18

— “Montlosier’s French Monarchy,” Westminster Review, III (Jan., 1825),
35-48.

note: one of the Westminster articles on French historical works.

referred to: 18

— “Private Memoirs of Madame du Hausset,” Westminster Review, V (Jan.,
1826), 249-62.

note: one of the Westminster articles on French historical works.

referred to: 18

Spencer, Robert (Earl of Sunderland) Referred to: 189

Spinola, Ambrose, marquis de los Balbases.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 146

Staël-Holstein, Anne Louise Germaine Necker, baronne de.

note: the references at 68n and 85n are in the title of a work by
Bailleul.

referred to: 13, 68n, 85n, 371n

— Considérations sur les principaux événemens de la révolution françoise
3 vols. Paris: Delaunay, and Bossange and Masson, 1818.

note: the quotation at 104, and the references at 85 and 102 are in
quotations from Bailleul.

quoted: 65, 93, 104

referred to: 72n, 75n, 81n, 85, 85n, 88-9, 93n, 102, 102n, 108

Edition: current; Page: [499]
65.14-19 “Les . . . étrangers,” . . . qui . . . nègre . . . La]
[paragraph] Les . . . étrangers qui nègre. C’étoit un argument pour
soulager les blancs, mais non pour s’endurcir contre les noirs La (I,
79)

93.4-5 “Un . . . faire une idée . . . nation.”] Mais un . . . faire
l’idée . . . nation (I, 228)

104.5 monarchie?”] monarchie, ils périrent peu de temps après, en
essayant de sauver la France et son roi (II, 28)

104.7-8 leur . . . patrie,] Aussi M. de Lalli a-t-il dit, avec son
éloquence accoutumée, que leur patrie (II, 28-9)

Stanhope, Philip Henry. “Lord John Russell, The Causes of the French
Revolution,” Quarterly Review, XLIX (Apr., 1833), 152-74.

referred to: 115

Stephen (of England) Referred to: 26

Stephen of Tours. Referred to: 35

Sterne, Laurence. The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman
(1760-67), 9 vols. in 5, London: Tonson and Millar, 1781.

note: in SC. The reference is to Uncle Toby.

referred to: 164

Strafford. See Wentworth.

Stubbs, William, ed. “Constitutions of Clarendon.” In Select Charters
and Other Illustrations of English Constitutional History from the
Earliest Times to the Reign of Edward the First. Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1870, 129-34.

note: this ed., which postdates the reference, used for ease of
reference, the text is on 131-4.

referred to: 244

Sue, Eugène. Referred to: 220

Suetonius Tranquillus, Gaius.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Dulaure.

referred to: 23

Suger, abbé.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Dulaure.

referred to: 23

Sulpice, seigneur d’Amboise et de Chaumont.

note: not otherwise identified.

referred to: 28

Sunderland. See Spencer.

Sylvester II (Pope).

note: Gerbert. The reference is in a quotation from Michelet.

referred to: 239

Tacitus, Cornelius.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Dulaure.

referred to: 23

— Agricola. In Dialogus, Agricola, Germania (Latin and English) Trans.
Maurice Hutton. London: Heinemann, New York: Macmillan, 1914, 168-252.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference. Two eds. (Leyden Elzevir,
1640, and Amsterdam Elzevir, 1672-73) formerly in SC.

quoted: 215

215.16-19 nosque ab . . . et immortalibus laudibus . . . decorabimus.]
nosque domum tuam ab . . . et laudibus . . . colamus is verus honos, ea
coniunctissimi cuiusque pietas (250, 46)

— Germania, Ibid., 264-333.

note: the references at 284 and 387 are in a (repeated) quotation from
Guizot.

referred to: 284 (387)

Edition: current; Page: [500]
Talleyrand-Périgord, Charles Maurice de.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle

referred to: 140

Tardivet du Repaire.

note: not otherwise identified, the reference is in a quotation from
Carlyle.

referred to: 156

Tavernier.

note: no other information available, the reference, in a quotation from
Carlyle, is to him as one of seven prisoners in the Bastille.

referred to: 146

Theobald II, comte de Champagne.

note: known as le Grand.

referred to: 30

Theobald V, comte de Chartres et de Blois.

note: known as le Bon.

referred to: 28

Théodoric.

note: King of the Ostrogoths. The reference at 275 is in a quotation
from Guizot.

referred to: 275, 280

Theodosius I Referred to: 241

Théroigne de Méricourt, Anne Josèphe.

note: the references are in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 152, 155

Thierry.

note: the reference, to the servant of Louis XVI, is in a quotation from
Bailleul.

referred to: 103

Thierry III.

note: of Neustria and Burgundy, one of the rois faineants.

referred to: 19

Thierry IV.

note: of Neustria, one of the rois fainéants.

referred to: 19

Thierry, Jacques Nicolas Augustin.

note: the quotation and references at 181 are in a quotation from
Nisard.

quoted: 181

referred to: 181, 221, 226-7, 228, 231, 233, 234, 275, 370n

— Dix ans d’études historiques. Brussels. Hauman, 1835.

note: in SC.

quoted: 226

226.21 “to plant the standard of historical reform,”] [translated from.]
Cette vocation que j’embrassai dès lors avec toute l’ardeur de la
jeunesse, c’était, non de ramener isolément un peu de vrai dans quelque
coin mal connu du moyen-âge, mais de planter, pour la France du
dix-neuvième siècle, le drapeau de la réforme historique (xv)

— Histoire de la conquête de l’Angleterre par les Normands, de ses
causes, et de ses suites jusqu’à nos jours, en Angleterre, en Ecosse, en
Irlande et sur le continent (1825). 2nd ed. 4 vols. Paris, Sautelet,
1826.

note: JSM’s references conform to this ed.

referred to: 35, 36, 181, 221n, 226

— Lettres sur l’histoire de France pour servir d’introduction à l’étude
de cette histoire (1827). 5th ed. Brussels: Hauman, 1836.

Edition: current; Page: [501]
note: in SC.

quoted: 222n-3n

referred to: 185, 226, 245, 289

222n.32 S’agit-il] [no paragraph] S’agit-il (32)

222n.34 étranger] étranger1 [footnote omitted] (33)

223n.6 richesse] richesse . . .2 [footnote.] 2[Velly,] Histoire de
France, tome I, page 381 et 382 (33)

223n.6-7 richesse [paragraph] “ ‘Hilderic] richesse . . .2 [footnote
above] [JSM moves back 3 pages, no paragraph] “Hilderik (30)

223n.10 Thuringe.] Thuringe . . .1 [footnote omitted] (30)

223n.17 Allemagne.”] Allemagne . . .2 [footnote.] 2[Velly,] Histoire de
France, tome I, page 41 (30)

— Récits des temps mérovingiens précédés de considérations sur
l’histoire de France, 2 vols. Paris, Tessier, 1840.

quoted: 234

referred to: 227, 241

234.3 “conscientious studies”] [translated from.] Il peut se rencontrer,
je le sais, un homme que l’originalité de son talent absolve du reproche
de s’être fait des regles exceptionnelles, et qui, par des études
consciencieuses et de rares qualités d’intelligence, ait le privilege de
contribuer a l’agrandissement de la science, quelque procéde qu’il
emploie pour y parvenir, mais cela ne prouve pas qu’en histoire toute
méthode soit légitime (I, 213-14)

Thiers, Louis Adolphe. Referred to: 185, 193, 221

— Histoire de la révolution française 10 vols. Paris, Lecointe and
Durey, 1823-27.

note: the title page of I and II has the sub-title, “accompagnee d’une
histoire de la révolution de 1355, ou Des etats-genéraux sous le roi
Jean,” and authorship is assigned to Thiers and Félix Bodin, this joint
scheme was abandoned with the publication of III.

referred to: 116, 143n, 185

— History of the French Revolution Trans. Frederick Shoberl 5 vols.
London: Bentley, 1838.

note: the reference (1837) anticipates the publication.

referred to: 143n

— Leading article in Le National, 4 Feb., 1830, 1-2.

note: the notion did not originate with Thiers (it is attributed to Jan
Zamoyski), but JSM evidently has him in mind. Thiers made a similar
comment, ibid., 20 Jan., 1830, 2.

quoted: 332

332.14 “le roi règne et ne gouverne pas.”] Le roi n’administre pas, ne
gouverne pas, il règne (1)

Thucydides. Thucydides (Greek and English). Trans. Charles Forster Smith
4 vols. London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass. Harvard University Press,
1969.

note: this ed. cited for ease of reference. Formerly two Greek and Latin
eds. in SC.

referred to: 3, 368

Thuriot de la Rozière, Jacques Alexis.

note: the quotation and references are in a quotation from Carlyle.

quoted: 144

referred to: 144, 146, 147

Timur (Tamurlane).

note: JSM uses the spelling Timour.

referred to: 24

Tocqueville, Alexis Henri Charles Maurice Clérel. comte de De la
democratic en Amérique. [1st pt.] 2 vols. Paris, Gosselin, 1835, 2nd pt.
2 vols. Paris, Gosselin, 1840.

note: the reference antedates the publication of the final two volumes.

referred to: 184

Edition: current; Page: [502]
— “Discours prononcé à la chambre des députés, le 27 janvier 1848, dans
la discussion du projet d’adresse en réponse au discours de la
couronne.” In Oeuvres complètes. Ed. Mme de Tocqueville [and Gustave de
Beaumont]. 9 vols. Paris: Lévy frères, 1864-66, IX, 520-35.

note: the quotations at 326-8 are translations of part of the speech
quoted at 394-7. This ed. postdates JSM’s quotations, but the wording he
uses is not that in the Moniteur of 28 Jan., 1848, this ed. reproduces
the text that Tocqueville prepared himself, copies of which (none
apparently now extant) he evidently had printed, and perhaps one of
which he sent to JSM.

quoted: 326-8 (394-7)

394.3 Pour parler] [no paragraph] Et pour parler (521)

395.24-5 demande? [paragraph] Je] demande? [3½-page omission] Je (523-7)

395.30 1830 . . . C’est] 1830 [ellipsis indicates 4-sentence omission]
C’est (527)

396.2 temps. . . . Et] temps [paragraph] Voilà, messieurs, ce que le
gouvernement a fait, ce qu’en particulier le ministère actuel a fait. Et
(528)

396.9 publiques? . . . Ils] publiques? [paragraph] Pour moi, je suis
profondément convaincu du contraire, je ne veux pas prêter à mes
adversaires des motifs déshonnêtes qu’ils n’auraient pas eus;
j’admettrai, si l’on veut, qu’en se servant des moyens que je blâme, ils
ont cru se livrer à un mal nécessaire; que la grandeur du but leur a
caché le danger et l’immoralité du moyen. Je veux croire cela; mais les
moyens en ont-ils été moins dangereux? Ils (528)

396.15 vices. C’est] vices (Mouvement.) C’est (528)

396.20 confiait . . . Je ne] confiait, ils ont ainsi accordé une sorte
de prime a l’immoralité et au vice. [paragraph] Je ne veux citer qu’un
exemple, pour montrer ce que je veux dire, c’est celui de ce ministre,
dont je ne rappellerai pas le nom, qui a été appelé dans le sein du
cabinet, quoique toute la France, ainsi que ses collègues, sussent déjà
qu’il était indigne d’y siéger, qui est sorti du cabinet parce que cette
indignité devenait trop notoire, et qu’on a placé alors ou? sur le siége
le plus élevé de la justice, d’où il a dû bientôt descendre pour venir
s’asseoir sur la sellette de l’accusé. [paragraph] Et bien! messieurs,
quant à moi, je ne (529)

396.23-4 hommes. . . . [paragraph] Pour la] hommes [JSM moves back 8½
pages] [no paragraph] Pour mon compte, je déclare sincèrement à la
Chambre que, pour la (529, 520)

396.32 pays . . . Est-ce que] pays. [JSM moves ahead 13 pages] Est-ce
que (521, 534)

396.32 ressentez] sentez (534)

396.36-397.1 enlève. . . [paragraph]Maconviction] enlève etc’est dans de
pareils temps que vous restez calmes en présence de la dégradation des
moeurs publiques, car le mot n’est pas trop fort. [paragraph] Je parle
ici sans amertume, je vous parle, je crois, même sans esprit de parti,
j’attaque des hommes contre lesquels je n’ai pas de colère, mais enfin
je suis obligé de dire à mon pays ce qui est ma conviction profonde at
arrêtée. Eh bien! ma conviction (534)

397.3 nouvelles . . . Est-ce que] nouvelles. Est-ce donc que la vie des
rois tient à des fils plus fermes et plus difficiles à briser que celle
des autres hommes? est-ce que (535)

397.7-8 elle? [paragraph] Messieurs] elle? (Interruption au centre.)
[paragraph] Messieurs (535)

Toulongeon, François Emmanuel d’Emskerque, vicomte de. Referred to: 91,
105

— Histoire de France, depuis la révolution de 1789, écrite d’après les
mémoires et manuscrits contemporains, recueillis dans les dépôts civils
et militaires. 7 vols. Paris: Treuttel and Würtz, 1801-10.

note: the quotation at 157 is in a quotation from Carlyle.

quoted: 91, 105, 157

referred to: 74n, 75n, 81n, 91n, 93, 117

91.7-8 “l’intendant . . . tranquille,”] Le jour même où la Bastille fut
assaillie et prise, tandis qu’une députation des états-généraux venait
agiter le repos du monarque, l’intendant . . . tranquille. (I, 17-18)

105.27-9 “La république . . . seuls.”] Dans les circonstances où elle se
trouvait, un changement de dynastie (car la république . . . seuls), un
changement de dynastie était donc le seul parti qui pût balancer celui
que prit l’assemblée, et la branche d’Orléans était la seule qui eût pu
attirer les Edition: current; Page: [503] regards, les opinions et les
intérêts, mais lorsqu’on venait a peser toutes les oppositions que ce
système créait avec soi, lors même qu’il fallait faire entrer en ligne
de compte, le personnel de celui qui se trouvait nécessairement appelé
le premier, lorsqu’on venait à réfléchir que pour lui créer des droits,
il fallait écarter et cependant laisser debout les droits de tous ceux
de la même famille qui précédaient les siens, qu’il fallait laisser cet
aliment inépuisable aux factions intérieures, et ce prétexte inévitable
aux ambitions étrangeres, la délibération desintéressée ramenait au
parti qui fut adopté (II, 49-50)

105.30-2 “Ce parti . . . nécessaire.”] Mais rarement ces avertissements
sont entendus, l’assemblée fut menée, le roi et le public furent
conduits successivement, non pas au terme ou le parti voulait les
amener, car ce parti . . . nécessaire, et on ne put ensuite lui échapper
que par elle (II, 91)

105.35 Guadet, tout] Guadet . . . tout (III, 9)

105.40 légales.”] légales, mais leurs adversaires Danton. Robespierre.
Collot d’Herbois. Billaud-Varennes, Marat . . . tous ces hommes du 2
septembre, poursuivis par les spectres sanglants des victimes de ces
journees, redoutaient les moyens licites et les formes legales qui leur
eussent fait rendre compte (III, 9)

157.17-19 “We . . . Fontenoy!”] [translated by Carlyle from.]
[paragraph] Au premier bruit du tumulte, les grenadiers des deux
compagnies des gardes-françaises, devenues gardes nationales, étaient
accourus, ils continrent cette multitude en paraissant à la porte de
l’Oeil-de-Boeut, et, sur le refus des gardes-du-corps d’ouvrir, ils leur
crièrent. Ouvrez-nous, messieurs les gardes-du-corps, nous n’avons pas
oublié que vous nous avez sauvés a Fontenoy (I, 143-4)

Tournay, Louis.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 145

Treilhard, Jean Baptiste.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Mignet, is to the moderates on
the Committee of Public Safety.

referred to: 12

Turgot, Anne Robert Jacques, baron de l’Aulne.

note: the reference at 166 is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 67, 80, 166

— “A Monsieur de C[ondorcet] sur le livre De l’esprit” (1760?). In
Oeuvres de Mr. Turgot, ministre d’état, précédées et accompagnees de
memoires et de notes sur sa vie, son administration et ses ouvrages. 9
vols. Paris: Delance, et al., 1808-11. IX, 288-98.

referred to: 66

Turner, Sharon. The History of the Anglo-Saxons. 4 vols. London: Cadell
and Davies. et al., 1799-1805.

note: Vol. I is subtitled From Their First Appearance above the Elbe, to
the Death of Egbert. Vols. II-III (Longman and Rees, 1802). From Their
First Appearance above the Elbe to the Norman Conquest, Vol. IV
(Longman, et al., 1805) is entitled The History of the Manners, Landed
Property, Government, Laws, Poetry, Literature, Religion, and Language,
of the Anglo-Saxons. See also the next entry, which was combined with
this and Turner’s Modern History of England, 2 vols. (1826-39), in his
History of England from the Earliest Period to the Death of Elizabeth,
12 vols. (1839)

referred to: 221n

— History of England. 3 vols. London: Longman, et al., 1814-23.

note: Vol. I (1814) is subtitled From the Norman Conquest, to the
Accession of Edward the First. Vol. II (1815), From the Accession of
Edward the First, to the Death of Henry the Fifth. Vol. III (1823) is
entitled The History of England during the Middle Ages, the second
reference at 221n is to Vols. II-III. See also the preceding entry.

referred to: 221n

Edition: current; Page: [504]
Turpin, Richard (Dick).

note: his name became proverbial for highwaymen.

referred to: 29

Twiss, Travers.

note: the reference is to recently appointed qualified examiners at
Oxford.

referred to: 369

Tycho. See Brahe.

Van der Strate, Bertholf.

note: the reference derives from Sismondi.

referred to: 34n

Vane, Henry. Referred to: 136

Varicourt, Rouph de.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle, who refers to him as
Varigny.

referred to: 156, 157

Varigny. See Varicourt.

Vattel, Emerich de. Le droit des gens, ou Principes de la loi naturelle
appliques à la conduite et aux affaires des nations et des souverains. 2
vols. Leyden: Dépens de la compagnie, 1758.

note: also published in Neuchâtel in 1758.

referred to: 345

Velly, Paul François.

note: the quotations are not collated, because they derive from Thierry,
who is citing Velly’s Histoire de France, depuis l’établissement de la
monarchie, jusqu’au règne de Louis XIV, 15 vols. (Paris: Saillant and
Nym. Desaint, 1770-86.)

quoted: 223n

referred to: 222n

Vergniaud, Pierre Victurnien.

note: the quotation and the references at 102, and 103 are in a
quotation from Bailleul, the reference at 105 is in a quotation from
Toulongeon. See also Guadet, “Copie.”

quoted: 103

referred to: 102, 103, 105, 106, 107

Vico, Giovanni Batista. Referred to: 185

Victoire-Louise.

note: known as Madame, the younger daughter of Louis XV. The reference
is in a quotation from Ferriers.

referred to: 88

Victor Emmanuel II (of Sardinia). Referred to: 345

Viger, Louis François Sébastien.

note: the reference, in a quotation from Mignet, is to the members of
the Commission of Twelve.

referred to: 12

Vigny, Victor Alfred, comte de. Referred to: 185

Villèle, Jean Baptiste Séraphin Joseph, comte de.

note: the reference at 190 is to the Villèle ministry.

referred to: 179, 190, 229

Villemain, Abel François. Referred to: 193, 262, 302, 370n

Virgil (Publius Virgilius Maro).

note: the reference is in a quotation from Nisard.

referred to: 173

Edition: current; Page: [505]
Vitet, Louis. Referred to: 185

— Les barricades, scènes historiques, mai 1588. Paris: Brière, 1826.

referred to: 134

— Les états de Blois, ou La mort de MM. de Guise, scènes historiques,
décembre 1588. Paris: Ponthieu, 1827.

referred to: 134

— La mort de Henri III, août 1589, scenes historiques faisant suite aux
Barricades et aux Etats de Blois. Paris: Fournier jeune, 1829.

referred to: 134

Voltaire, François Marie Arouet.

note: the reference at 67 is to his articles in the Encyclopédie, that
at 220 is to the Voltairian philosophy.

referred to: 67, 220, 221, 371n

— Charlot, ou La comtesse de Givry, piece dramatique en trois actes
(1767). In Oeuvres complètes. 66 vols. Paris: Renouard, 1817-25, VI,
85-142.

note: in SC.

quoted: 71

71.33-4 “Et] Tout le monde a crie le roi sur les chemins. On le crie au
village, et chez tous les voisins; Dans votre basse-cour on s’obstine à
le croire Et (VI, 108, I, vii)

— “Discours aux Velches, par Antoine Vadé, frere de Guillaume” (1764)
Ibid., XLI, 209-31.

note: the quotation, in a quotation from Carlyle, is a paraphrase, and
is therefore not collated.

quoted: 150

— L’enfant prodigue (1736) Ibid., II, 397-492.

quoted: 228

228.4 “genre ennuyeux”.] Tous les genres sont bons, hors le genre
ennuyeux (II, 401, 31)

— “Histoire” (1784) In Dictionnaire philosophique Ibid., XXXVI, 396-426.

referred to: 185

— “Traductions” (1761). In Mélanges littéraires Ibid., XLIII, 117-23.

referred to: 222n

Walter the Penniless.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Carlyle.

referred to: 153

Walter, Hubert.

note: the reference is to the chancellor of Richard I.

referred to: 36

Washington, George. Referred to: 170

Weber, Joseph. Mémoires concernant Marie-Antoinette, archiduchesse
d’Autriche, reine de France: et sur plusieurs époques importantes de la
révolution françoise, depuis son origine jusqu’au 16 octobre, 1793, jour
de martyre de sa majesté. 3 vols. London: the Author, et al., 1804-09.

note: the quotations at 140 (“old form of 1614,” “vacation,” “exile in
its estates,” “clearly declared opinion,” “covered with outrages”),
which are in a quotation from Carlyle, are Carlyle’s freely rendered
translations of isolated phrases in Weber, as is the quotation at 150.

quoted: 140, 150

referred to: 140

Wellesley, Arthur (Duke of Wellington). Referred to: 330

Wellington, Duke of. See Wellesley.

Edition: current; Page: [506]
Wentworth, Thomas (Earl of Strafford). Referred to: 136

Wesley, John. Referred to: 224

Whyte (or De Witt).

note: no other information available, the reference, in a quotation from
Carlyle, is to him as one of seven prisoners in the Bastille.

referred to: 146

William I (of England).

note: known as the Conqueror.

referred to: 26, 47n

William III (of England). Referred to: 330

William of Malmesbury. Gesta regum anglorum, atque historia novella. Ed.
Thomas Duffus Hardy. 2 vols. London: English Historical Society, 1840.

note: this ed. cited for ease of reference.

referred to: 47n

Wilson, Robert Thomas. Referred to: 179

Wordsworth, William. Referred to: 165

— Sonnet XIII (“O Friend! I know not which way I must look”) (1807) of
“Sonnets Dedicated to Liberty.” In The Poetical Works. 5 vols. London:
Longman, et al., 1827, III, 139.

note: in SC.

quoted: 177

177.5-6 “good old cause”] Rapine, avarice, expense, / This is idolatry,
and these we adore Plain living and high thinking are no more. / The
homely beauty of the good old cause. Is gone, our peace, our fearful
innocence, / And pure religion breathing household laws (III, 139, 9-14)

Xenophon. Αναβασις Κυρου Χενοϕωντος, or, The Expedition of Cyrus into
Persia, and the Retreat of the Ten Thousand Greeks. Trans. N.S. Smith
London: Longman, et al., 1824.

note: the translated phrase to which JSM calls attention (“gentlemen of
the army”—most translations give “soldiers”) is footnoted by Smith
“literally, ‘Armed Men,’ smartly translated, ‘Gentlemen of the Army.’ ”

quoted: 222-3

— The Anabasis of Cyrus. In Hellenica, Anabasis, Symposium, and Apology.
Trans Carleton L. Brownson and O.J. Todd. 3 vols. London: Heinemann, New
York Putnam’s Sons, 1918, 1921, 1922, II, 229-43, III, 1-371.

note: this ed. used for ease of reference.

quoted: 223

Young, Arthur. Travels, during the Years 1787, 1788, and 1789.
Undertaken More Particularly with a View of Ascertaining the
Cultivation, Wealth, Resources, and Natural Prosperity, of the Kingdom
of France. Bury St. Edmunds: Richardson, 1792.

note: the quotations, which are in quotations from Carlyle, are not
collated because Carlyle’s adaptation is loose. See also 2nd ed., next
entry.

quoted: 148, 149, 150

referred to: 148

— 2nd ed. 2 vols. London and Bury St. Edmunds: Richardson, 1794.

note: the references are to this ed., see also 1st ed., preceding entry.

referred to: 66, 81n

Edition: current; Page: [507]


BRITISH STATUTES

43 Elizabeth, c. 2. An Act for the Reliefe of the Poore (1601)

referred to: 127, 348

2 & 3 William IV, c. 45. An Act to Amend the Representation of the
People in England and Wales (7 June, 1832)

referred to: 192, 320, 329


FRENCH BILLS AND STATUTES

Loi sur la constitution civile du clergé, et la fixation de son
traitement (24 Aug., 1790) Lois, et actes du gouvernement, I, 372-3.

referred to: 73n

Loi Constitution française (14 Sept., 1791) Ibid., IV, 188-232

note: “Déclaration des droits de l’homme et du citoyen” appears on
188-91.

referred to: 72n

Décret concernant les émigrans (9 Nov., 1791), Gazette Nationale, ou Le
Moniteur Universel, 10 Nov., 1791, 1310-11.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Mignet, the décret is
unheaded in the Gazette.

referred to: 11

Décret relatif aux troubles excités sous prétexte de religion (16 Nov.,
1791), ibid., 17 Nov., 1791, 1338.

note: the reference is in a quotation from Mignet. The text of the
decret (unheaded in the Gazette) appeared on 17 Nov., voting ended on 12
Nov. (ibid., 24 Nov., 1368-9).

referred to: 11

Décret sur les prêtres non-sermentés (27 May, 1792), ibid., 4 June,
1792, 647

referred to: 102

Décret d’augmentation de vingt mille hommes pour l’armée, et du mode de
cette levée (8 June, 1792), ibid., 9 June, 1792, 668.

note: the décret is not entitled in the Gazette, nor is the text given.
For Louis XVI’s refusal to sanction it, see ibid., 20 June, 1792, 716.

referred to: 11, 102

Acte constitutionnel de la république (24 June, 1793), ibid., 27 June,
1793, 765-6.

note: the reference, to the French Constitution of 1793, is in a
self-quotation. The Constitution was not presented for approval by the
National Convention (and so does not appear in the Lois, et actes du
gouvernement), but was approved by “the people of France” at a fête on
10 Aug., 1793. The “Acte” is preceded by a “Déclaration des droits de
l’homme et du citoyen.”

referred to: 126

Loi sur le mode de gouvernement provisoire et révolutionnaire (14
frimaire an II, 4 Dec., 1793) Lois, et actes du gouvernement, VIII,
100-13

referred to: 174

Constitution de la république française, proposee au peuple français par
la convention nationale. Paris: Imprimerie de la république, an III
[1795].

note: the Directorial Constitution.

referred to: 359

Loi concernant la division du territoire de la république et
l’administration. Bulletin 17, No. 115 (28 pluviôse an VIII, 17 Feb.,
1800). Bulletin des lois de la république française, I, 1-94

Edition: current; Page: [508]
note: at this time the Bulletins were separately paginated (this is the
whole of Bulletin 17).

referred to: 174

Charte constitutionnelle. Bulletin 17, No. 133 (14 June, 1814). Bulletin
des lois du royaume de France, 5th ser., I, 197-207

referred to: 128, 175, 176, 192

Loi sur la publication des journaux et écrits périodiques. Bulletin 356,
No. 8494 (31 March, 1820). Ibid., 7th ser., X, 386-7.

referred to: 178

Loi sur les élections. Bulletin 379, No. 8910 (29 June, 1820). Ibid.,
1001-6.

referred to: 178

Loi relative à la censure des journaux. Bulletin 464, No. 10,933 (26
July, 1821). Ibid., XIII, 33-4.

referred to: 178

Ordonnance du roi relative à l’administration supérieure de
l’instruction publique, aux collèges, institutions, pensions, et écoles
primaires. Bulletin 664, No. 16,774 (8 Apr., 1824). Ibid., XVIII, 200-3.

referred to: 189

Loi relative au renouvellement intégral et septennal de la chambre des
députés. Bulletin 672, No. 17,159 (9 June, 1824). Ibid., XVIII, 321-2

referred to: 182, 189

Loi pour la répression des crimes et des délits commis dans les édifices
ou sur les objets consacrés à la religion catholique ou aux autres
cultes légalement établis en France. Bulletin 29, No. 665 (20 Apr.,
1825). Ibid., 8th ser., I, 221-5.

referred to: 189

Loi concernant l’indemnité à accorder aux anciens propriétaires des
biens-fonds confisqués et vendus au profit de l’état en vertu des lois
sur les émigrés, les condamnés et les déportés. Bulletin 30, No. 680 (27
Apr., 1825). Ibid., II, 229-38

referred to: 189

Projet de loi sur les successions et les substitutions (5 Feb., 1826).
Le Moniteur Universel, 11 Feb., 1826, 168.

note: concerning primogeniture, the bill was presented to the Chamber of
Peers on 10 Feb., and finally rejected on 8 Apr. (ibid., 12 Apr.)

referred to: 190

Projet de loi sur la police de la presse (27 Dec., 1826), ibid., 30
Dec., 1826, 1730.

note: presented to the Chamber of Deputies on 29 Dec., 1826. Withdrawn
by an ordonnance, 17 Apr., 1827 (ibid., 19 Apr., 1827, 615).

referred to: 190

Ordonnance du roi portant la remise en vigueur des lois des 31 mars 1820
et 26 juillet 1821. Bulletin 170, No. 6439 (24 June, 1827). Bulletin des
lois du royaume de France, 8th ser., VI, 729

note: the laws referred to are Loi sur la publication des journaux et
écrits périodiques (31 Mar., 1820), q.v.; and Loi relative à la censure
des journaux (26 July, 1821), q.v.

referred to: 190

Ordonnance du roi qui suspend la liberté de la presse périodique et
semi-périodique. Bulletin 367, No. 15,135 (25 July, 1830). Ibid., 8th
ser., XII, 33-4.

referred to: 192

Ordonnance du roi qui dissout la chambre des députés des départemens.
Bulletin 367, No. 15,136 (25 July, 1830). Ibid., XII, 35.

referred to: 192

Edition: current; Page: [509]
Ordonnance du roi qui réforme, selon les principes de la charte
constitutionnelle, les règles d’élection, et prescrit l’exécution de
l’article 46 de la charte. Bulletin 367, No. 15,137 (25 July, 1830).
Ibid., 35-9.

referred to: 192

Ordonnance du roi qui convoque les colléges électoraux d’arrondissement
pour le 6 septembre prochain, les colléges de département pour le 13, et
la chambre des députés pour le 28 du même mois. Bulletin 367, No. 15,138
(25 July, 1830). Ibid., 39-40

referred to: 192

Charte constitutionnelle. Bulletin 5, No. 59 (14 Aug., 1830) Ibid., 9th
ser., Pt. 1, I, 51-64

referred to: 175, 323

Loi contenant l’article qui remplace l’article 23 de la charte. Bulletin
54, No. 130 (29 Dec., 1831). Ibid., Pt. 1, III, 61-4

referred to: 305

Ordonnance du roi qui met la ville de Paris en état de siège. Bulletin
161, No. 4204 (6 June, 1832). Ibid., Pt. 2, Sect. 1, IV, 662

referred to: 200

Loi sur l’instruction primaire. Bulletin 105, No. 236 (28 June, 1833).
Ibid., Pt. 1, V, 251-62.

referred to: 324

Loi sur les associations. Bulletin 115, No. 261 (10 Apr., 1834). Ibid.,
Pt. 1, VI, 25-6

note: the reference at 128 is to its passing through the Chambers.

referred to: 128, 300

Loi sur les crimes, délits et contraventions de la presse et des autres
moyens de publication. Bulletin 155, No. 356 (9 Sept., 1835). Ibid., Pt.
1, VII, 247-56

referred to: 205, 209, 211, 329, 390n

Loi sur les cours d’assises. Bulletin 155, No. 357 (9 Sept., 1835).
Ibid., Pt. 1, VII, 256-9

referred to: 205, 209, 211, 329, 390n

Loi qui rectifie les articles 341, 345, 346, 347 et 352 du code
d’instruction criminelle, et l’article 17 du code pénal. Bulletin 155,
No. 358 (9 Sept., 1835). Ibid., Pt. 1, VII, 259-62.

referred to: 205, 209, 211, 329, 390n

Loi sur les chemins vicinaux. Bulletin 422, No. 6293 (21 May, 1836).
Ibid., XII, 193-200.

referred to: 324

Loi sur les sucres. Bulletin 1019, No. 10,728 (2 July, 1843). Ibid.,
XXVII, 549-51

referred to: 301

Décret and Arrêtés. Bulletin 5, Nos. 67-9 (4 Mar., 1848). Bulletin des
lots de la république française, 10th ser., I, 53-4

note: these set up and named the members of the commission to abolish
slavery immediately in the French colonies.

referred to: 339

Constitution de la république française. Bulletin 87, No. 825 (4 Nov.,
1848). Ibid., II, 575-605.

referred to: 358

Edition: current; Page: [510] Edition: current; Page: [511]
1
John Stuart Mill, Autobiography, in Autobiography and Literary Essays,
ed. John M. Robson and Jack Stillinger, Collected Works of John Stuart
Mill [CW], I (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1981), 59, 63. On
the year in France, see John Mill’s Boyhood Visit to France, ed. Anna J.
Mill (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1960), and Iris Wessel
Mueller, John Stuart Mill and French Thought (Urbana: University of
Illinois Press, 1956), 2-10.

2
Journal, 22 June, and Notebook, 27 May, 1820, in John Mill’s Boyhood
Visit to France, 22, 105-6.

3
Autobiography, CW, I, 63.

4
Letter of James Mill to Francis Place of 6 Sept., 1815, Place
Collection, BL Add. MSS. 35152 fl60r.

5
“It is commonly said that the French are an idle people, this I do not
think true. . . .” (Notebook, 27 May, 1820, in John Mill’s Boyhood Visit
to France, 105).

6
Autobiography, CW, I, 63.

7
Mueller states that Mill was evidently “unaware of the lasting influence
this early experience was to have on him” (Mill and French Thought, 8),
but it is not clear that merely meeting Saint-Simon had any influence on
him at all.

8
Letter to Harriet Mill, in The Later Letters of John Stuart Mill [LL],
ed. Francis E. Mineka and Dwight N. Lindley, CW, XIV-XVII (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 1972), XIV, 263 (22 Dec., 1854).

9
“Periodical Literature. Edinburgh Review” (1824), CW, I, 301-2, 304-5,
307-11.

10
D’Eichthal to Dr. Henry (26 Nov., 1873), quoted in Gustave d’Eichthal, A
French Sociologist Looks at Britain Gustave d’Eichthal and British
Society in 1828, trans. and ed. Barrie M. Ratcliffe and W.H. Chaloner
(Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1977), 3n. On d’Eichthal, see
the editors’ “Gustave d’Eichthal (1802-1886). An Intellectual Portrait,”
ibid., 109-61.

11
Autobiography, CW, I, 111, 137.

12
Ibid., 171, 173.

13
“The Reorganisation of the European Community; or, The Necessity and the
Means of Uniting the Peoples of Europe in a Single Body While Preserving
for Each of Them Their Independence, by the comte de St. Simon and A.
Thierry, His Pupil, Oct. 1814,” in Henri de Saint-Simon, Selected
Writings, ed. and trans. F.M.H. Markham (Oxford: Blackwell, 1952), 30-1,
50-1.

14
This was the revised edition of the essay Comte had first published in
1822, and which contained the germ of his philosophical and historical
thought, to which Mill would be infinitely more receptive after 1830. It
is reprinted in Système de politique positive, ou Traité de sociologie,
instituant la religion de l’humanité, 4 vols. (Paris: Carilian-Goeury
and Dalmont, et al., 1851-54), IV, Appendice génerale, 47-136. Letter to
d’Eichthal, in The Earlier Letters of John Stuart Mill [EL], ed. Francis
E. Mineka, CW, XII-XIII (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1963),
XII, 34-8 (8 Oct., 1829). On Mill and the Saint-Simonians, see Mueller,
Mill and French Thought, 48-91, and Richard K.P. Pankhurst, The
Saint-Simonians, Mill and Carlyle: A Preface to Modern Thought (London:
Sidgwick and Jackson, 1957), passim. There is no direct evidence, but
one may suspect that he found the opening passages of the public
lectures unsettling. “C’est au milieu de ces deux armées que nous venons
apporter la paix, en annonçant une doctrine qui ne prêche pas seulement
l’horreur du sang, mais l’horreur de la lutte, sous quelque nom qu’elle
se déguise. Antagonisme, entre un pouvoir spirituel et un pouvoir
temporel, opposition, en l’honneur de la liberté, concurrence, pour le
plus grand bien de tous, nous ne croyons à la necessité éternelle
d’aucune de ces machines de guerre . . .” (Doctrine de Saint-Simon
Exposition, Première année, 1829, new ed., intro. and notes by C. Bouglé
and Elie Halévy [Paris: Rivière, 1924], 122.) Cf. Frank E. Manuel. The
Prophets of Paris (Cambridge: Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1962),
158-9. D.G. Charlton, Secular Religions in France, 1815-1870 (London:
Oxford University Press, 1963), 65-79, and Georg G. Iggers, The Cult of
Authority, The Political Philosophy of the Saint-Simonians: A Chapter in
the History of Totalitarianism (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1958), passim.

15
Letter to d’Eichthal, EL, CW, XII, 45-9 (9 Feb., 1830).

16
Letter to d’Eichthal, ibid., 49-50 (6 Mar., 1830).

17
Autobiography, CW, I, 137, 143, 169.

18
Letter to d’Eichthal, EL, CW, XII, 71 (1 Mar., 1831), Mill, “The Spirit
of the Age,” Examiner,9 Jan.-29 May, 1831, 20-1, 50-2, 82-4, 162-3,
210-11, 307, 339-41.

19
Letter to d’Eichthal, EL, CW, XII, 88-9 (30 Nov., 1831).

20
Summary of French news, Examiner, 29 Jan., 1832, 72-3.

21
Letter to Thomas Carlyle, EL, CW, XII, 106 (29 May, 1832), letter to
d’Eichthal and Duveyrier, ibid., 107-9 (30 May, 1832). On life at
Ménilmontant, see Sébastien Charléty, Histoire du Saint-Simonisme
(1825-1864) (Paris: Hartmann, 1931), 161-75.

22
Letter to Carlyle, EL, CW, XII, 120 (17 Sept., 1832); summary of French
news, Examiner, 9 Sept., 1832, 585. On the trial, see Charléty, Histoire
du Saint-Simonisme, 175-85, and Louis Blanc, Histoire de dix ans,
1830-1840, 12th ed., 5 vols. (Paris: Baillière, 1877), III, 319-38.

23
The empty chair beside Enfantin’s, reserved for the Mère-Messie, seems
to have been offered to George Sand, but, sympathetic as she was to the
movement, she had doubts about the place of women in it: “Je n’ai pas
encore trouvé une solution aux doutes de tout genre qui remplissent mon
esprit, et je ne saurais en accepter aucune que je n’eusse bien
examinée” (letter to Marie Talon of 10 Nov., 1834, in George Sand,
Correspondance, 17 vols. [Paris: Garnier, 1964-83], II, 739-40).

24
Letter to Carlyle, EL, CW, XII, 150-1 (11-12 Apr., 1833).

25
Review of St. Simonism in London, Examiner, 2 Feb., 1834, 68; Mueller,
Mill and French Thought, 48-91; cf. John M. Robson, The Improvement of
Mankind. The Social and Political Thought of John Stuart Mill (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 1968), 76-80.

26
Letter to Robert Barclay Fox, EL, CW, XIII, 473 (6 May, 1841).

27
“It is not enough,” Emile Péreire, thefuture banker and railway magnate,
is said to have told Armand Carrel when he left the National in 1835,
“to outline gigantic programs on paper, I must write my idea on the
earth” (Rondo E. Cameron, France and the Economic Development of Europe,
1800-1914. Conquest of Peace and Seeds of War [Princeton Princeton
University Press, 1961], 134, see Charléty, Histoire du Saint-Simonisme,
205-63).

28
Letter to d’Eichthal, EL, CW, XII, 45 (9 Feb., 1830), Autobiography, CW,
I, 171.

29
Letter to R.B. Fox, EL, CW, XIII, 563-4 (19 Dec., 1842).

30
Letters to d’Eichthal, ibid., XII, 34, 35-8 (15 May, 8 Oct., 1829), on
Comte and Mill, see Walter M. Simon, European Positivism in the
Nineteenth Century: An Essay in Intellectual History (Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1963), 172-201. Bruce Mazlish, James and John Stuart
Mill Father and Son in the Nineteenth Century (New York: Basic Books,
1975), 255-62.

31
Letter to John Pringle Nichol, CW, XII, 363 (2 Dec., 1837).

32
Letter to Alexander Bain, ibid., XIII, 487 (Autumn 1841), he read
Comte’s work, he recalled, “with avidity” (Autobiography, CW, I, 217).

33
“Auguste Comte and Positivism” (1865), Essays on Ethics, Religion, and
Society, CW, X (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1969), 308.

34
Letter to Auguste Comte,, CW, XIII, 585 (15 June, 1843). Mill did not
then send him any money; see letter to John Austin, ibid., 714 (13 Apr.,
1847). In December, 1848, however, he made a single contribution; see
letter to Emile Littré, ibid., 741 (22 Dec., 1848).

35
Ibid., 742, Simon, European Positivism, 186-90, Autobiography, CW, I,
173, 271-2.

36
Letter to Sarah Austin, EL, CW, XIII, 654 (18 Jan., 1845), Simon,
European Positivism, 186-91.

37
Harriet Taylor to Mill (c. 1844), in Friedrich A. Hayek, John Stuart
Mill and Harriet Taylor. Their Friendship and Subsequent Marriage
(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1951), 114.

38
Letter to Nichol, EL, CW, XIII, 739 (30 Sept., 1844). Cf. David H.
Lewisohn, “Mill and Comte on the Methods of Social Science,” Journal of
the History of Ideas, XXXIII (1972), 315-24.

39
Letter to Célestin de Blignières, LL, CW, XV, 768-9 (22 Jan., 1862).

40
“Auguste Comte and Positivism,” CW, X, 358, 343, 367.

41
On Liberty, in Essays on Politics and Society, CW, XVIII-XIX (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 1977), XVIII, 227. See also Mueller, Mill
and French Thought, 92-133, and cf. Robson. The Improvement of Mankind,
95-105, who stresses Mill’s slowness, by comparison with Grote, to see
the direction Comte had taken.

42
Autobiography, CW, I, 271. See also Pankhurst, The Saint-Simonians: Mill
and Carlyle, passim.

43
Letter to Harriet Mill, LL, CW, XV, 537 (16 Sept., 1857). Mill himself
has been accused of showing “more than a touch of something resembling
moral totalitarianism,” aggressively proselytizing to his own “religion
of humanity” (Maurice Cowling, Mill and Liberalism [Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1963], xii, 77-93), and exonerated as forthrightly as
“an unqualified liberal” (John Gray, Mill on Liberty A Defence [London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1983], 119).

44
Letter to Joseph Blanco White, EL, CW, XII, 259 (15 Apr., 1835).

45
Tocqueville to Mill, in Oeuvres, papiers, et correspondances d’Alexis de
Tocqueville, ed. J.P. Mayer, et al. (Paris: Gallimard, 1951- ), VI, 293
(June 1835). “I learnt the language in the country itself, and acquired
the colloquial part of it in greater perfection than most English do . .
.” (letter to Carlyle, EL, CW, XII, 180 [5 Oct., 1833]).

46
Letter to Tocqueville, EL, CW, XII, 272 (Sept., 1835), cf. Tocqueville
to Mill, Oeuvres, VI, 295-7 (12 Sept., 1835); Mill, “De Tocqueville on
Democracy in America [I]” (1835), CW, XVIII, 57.

47
“De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [I],” CW, XVIII, 50.

48
Tocqueville to Mill, Oeuvres, VI, 302 (3 Dec., 1835).

49
Letter to Tocqueville, EL, CW, XII, 304 (27 Apr., 1836), cf. J.P.
Mayer’s remarks in Tocqueville, Oeuvres, VI, 16.

50
Letter to Tocqueville, EL, CW, XII, 309 (9 Nov., 1836).

51
Mill to Tocqueville, ibid., 316 (7 Jan., 1837), Tocqueville to Mill,
Oeuvres, VI, 327, 329-30, 334 (3 May, 18 Oct., 1840, 18 Mar., 1841),
Mill to Tocqueville, EL, CW, XIII, 457 (30 Dec., 1840).

52
Letter to Tocqueville, EL, CW, XIII, 434 (11 May, 1840).

53
Letter to R.B. Fox, ibid., 441 (3 Aug., 1840).

54
Autobiography, CW, I, 199-201, Mueller, Mill and French Thought, 134-69
and the critical discussion of her interpretation in H.O. Pappe, “Mill
and Tocqueville,” Journal of the History of Ideas, XXV (1964), 217-34;
Robson, Improvement of Mankind, 105-14.

55
“Periodical Literature, Edinburgh Review,” CW, I, 307-11. “De
Tocqueville on Democracy in America [II]” (1840), CW, XVIII, 155.

56
Letter to Tocqueville, EL, CW, XII, 271 (Sept. 1835).

57
Autobiography, CW, I, 59-61.

58
“He always dealt gently with her faults, and liberally with her
virtues.” Bain said, adding that “his habitual way of speaking of
England, the English people, English society, as compared with other
nations, was positively unjust, and served no good end” (Alexander Bain,
John Stuart Mill: A Criticism with Personal Recollections [London:
Longmans, Green, 1882], 150, 78, 161). Cf. Tocqueville to Mill, Oeuvres,
VI, 291 (June 1835).

59
Letter to John Robertson, EL, CW, XII, 343 (28 July, 1837).

60
Diary, 14 Jan., 1854, in The Letters of John Stuart Mill, ed. Hugh S.R.
Elliot, 2 vols. (London: Longmans, Green, 1910), II, 359.

61
A long struggle and eventual war occurred between Turkey and its
Albanian vassal in Egypt, the Pasha Mohammed Ali. France favoured his
ambitions in large parts of the Ottoman Empire. Finally, Britain and
Russia, backed by Austria and Prussia, concluded the Treaty of London
(15 July, 1840), agreeing to force him to disgorge all but southern
Syria in return for hereditary possession of Egypt. This convention
effectively isolated France and led Mohammed Ali to appeal to the French
Prime Minister, Adolphe Thiers. The Foreign Secretary, Palmerston,
arranged for the Sultan to depose the Pasha, while Thiers was backed by
a violent press outcry in Paris that he support him and France’s
interests in Egypt by war, if necessary. By autumn, the situation turned
against Mohammed Ali. Louis Philippe chose the path of negotiation,
François Guizot returned to Paris from the Embassy in London, bent upon
a peaceful resolution of the crisis with England, Thiers was isolated,
and replaced by Marshal Soult with Guizot as Foreign Minister. But
Anglo-French disputes continued on through the decade, with intense
anti-English feeling on all sides in France. See Douglas Johnson, Guizot
Aspects of French History, 1787-1874 (Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, 1963), 263-85, R.W. Seton-Watson, Britain in Europe,1789-1914
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1937), 192-222; Charles K.
Webster, The Foreign Policy of Palmerston, 1830-1841, Britain, the
Liberal Movement and the Eastern Question, 2 vols. (London: Bell, 1951),
passim; Kenneth Bourne, Palmerston, the Early Years, 1784-1841 (London:
Lane, 1982), 550-620, Pierre Renouvin, Histoire des relations
internationales, V: Le XIXe siècle. Première partie de 1815 à 1871
(Paris: Hachette, 1954), 114-26; André Jardin and André Jean Tudesq, La
France des notables, 2 vols. (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1973), I,
184-90.

62
Letter to John Sterling, EL, CW, XIII, 446 (1 Oct., 1840).

63
Letter to R.B. Fox, ibid., 448 (25 Nov., 1840).

64
Letters to d’Eichthal, ibid., 456 (25 Dec., 1840), and to Sterling,
ibid., 451-2 (19 Dec., 1840). The “mischievous spirit” was more intense
on the left than on the right Louis Blanc, the Jacobin-Socialist with
whom Mill would strike up a friendship years later, was embittered by
what seemed to him the ignoble attitude of the ruling class toward the
bullying anti-French policies of England. “Mais dans la politique
étrangère comme dans la politique interieure, la bourgeoisie n’a eu ni
prudence voire ni coup d’oeil Voulant la paix d’une ardeur violente,
elle a eu l’etourderie de ne s’en point cacher Elle a mis à s’humilier
une affectation folle Aussi, les occasions de guerre se sont-elles
multiplieés à l’excès Que de provocations’ que de mepris’ . . . Voire
que la France ne peut plus sortir de chez elle sans être exposée à
l’outrage. . . . Ce silence est fatal, ce repos est sinistre. . . . Dix
ans de paix nous ont plus brisés que n’eût fait un demi-siècle de
guerres, et nous ne nous en apercevons seulement pas’” (Histoire de dix
ans, V, 457-60.) Blanc was to continue preaching this message. See Leo
A. Loubère, Louis Blanc. His Life and Contribution to the Rise of
Jacobin Socialism (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1961), 51-3.

65
Tocqueville to Mill, Oeuvres, VI, 330-1 (18 Dec., 1840), Mill to
Tocqueville, EL, CW, XIII, 459-60 (30 Dec., 1840).

66
Tocqueville to Mill, Oeuvres, VI, 335 (18 Mar., 1841). On the
repudiation of war by the haute bourgeoisie, see Adeline Daumard, La
bourgeoisie parisienne de 1815 a 1848 (Paris: SEVPEN, 1963), 633-41.

67
Letter to Tocqueville, EL, CW, XIII, 536 (9 Aug., 1842).

68
“Lord Brougham and M. de Tocqueville,” Morning Chronicle, 20 Feb., 1843,
3.

69
Letter to Tocqueville, EL, CW, XIII, 571 (20 Feb., 1843). Tocqueville’s
reply to Brougham is included in Tocqueville, Oeuvres, VI, 341-2,
Tocqueville to Mill, ibid., 339-40, 343-4 (9 Feb., 12 Mar., 1843), cf.
Seymour Drescher, Tocqueville and England (Cambridge: Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1964), 159-61.

70
Tocqueville to Mill, Oeuvres, VI, 345 (27 Oct., 1843). Mill to
Tocqueville, EL, CW, XIII, 612-13 (3 Nov., 1843).

71
“Elle ne fut pas, à vrai dire, une lutte politique (dans le sens que
nous avions donne jusque-la a ce mot) mais un combat de classe, une
sorte de guerre servile. Elle caractérisa la revolution de Février,
quant aux faits, de même que les théories socialistes avaient
caractérisé celle-ci, quant aux idées, ou plutôt elle sortit
naturellement de ces idées, comme le fils de la mère, et on ne doit y
voir qu’un effort brutal et aveugle, mais puissant des ouvriers pour
echapper aux necessites de leur condition qu’on leur avait dépeinte
comme une oppression illégitime et pour s’ouvrir par le fer un chemin
vers le bien-être imaginaire qu’on leur avait montre de loin comme un
droit.” (Souvenirs, Oeuvres, XII, 151.) The aftermath left him sorrowful
and apprehensive. If the June insurrectionaries had risen against “des
droits les plus sacrés,” not all were “le rebut de l’humanité”, many
were merely misled, believing society to be founded on injustice,
wishing to give it “une autre base C’est cette sorte de religion
révolutionnaire que nos baîonnettes et nos canons ne detruiront pas.”
(Letter from Tocqueville to Eugène Stoeffels of 21 July, 1848, Oeuvres
complètes d’Alexis de Tocqueville, ed. Mme de Tocqueville [and Gustave
de Beaumont], 9 vols. [Paris: Levy Frères, 1864-66], V, 458-9.)

72
Drescher, Tocqueville and England, 152, 159-61.

73
Tocqueville to Mill, Oeuvres, VI, 348-9, 350-1 (22 June, 19 Dec., 1856),
Mill to Tocqueville, LL, CW, XV, 517-18 (15 Dec., 1856).

74
Tocqueville to Mill, Oeuvres, VI, 351-2 (9 Feb., 1859).

75
Letters to R.B. Fox, EL, CW, XIII, 448 (21 Nov., 1840), to Sterling,
ibid., 451-2 (19 Dec., 1840); to d’Eichthal, ibid., 457 (25 Dec., 1840),
and to Tocqueville, ibid., 571 (20 Feb., 1843).

76
Letter to Pasquale Villari, LL, CW, XV, 534 (30 June, 1857), cf.
Theodore Zeldin, The Political System of Napoleon III (London:
Macmillan, 1958), 66-7.

77
“Centralisation” (1862), CW, XIX, 579-613, letter to John Elliot
Cairnes, LL, CW, XV, 917 (24 Jan., 1864). On public opinion and the
differences between it and press opinion, see Lynn M. Case, French
Public Opinion on War and Diplomacy during the Second Empire
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1954), 178-86.

78
See letter to d’Eichthal, LL, CW, XVII, 1718 (10 May, 1870).

79
Letters to Henry Fawcett, ibid., 1753-4 (26 July, 1870), and to
d’Eichthal, ibid., 1762 (27 Apr., 1870).

80
Letters to Charles Wentworth Dilke, ibid., 1766-7 (30 Sept., 1870), and
to Fawcett, ibid., 1777 (18 Nov., 1870).

81
“Stern justice is on the side of the Germans, & it is in the best
interests of France itself that a bitter lesson shd now be inflicted
upon it, such as it can neither deny nor forget in the future. The whole
writing, thinking, & talking portion of the people undoubtedly share the
guilt of L. Napoleon, the moral guilt of the war, & feel neither shame
nor contrition at anything but the unlucky result to themselves.
Undoubtedly the real nation, the whole mass of the people, are perfectly
guiltless of it, but then they are so ignorant that they will allow the
talkers & writers to lead them into just such corners again if they do
not learn by bitter experience what will be the practical consequences
of their political indifference. The peasantry of France like the women
of England have still to learn that politics concern themselves. The
loss of Alsace & Lorraine will perhaps be about as painless a way of
learning this lesson as could possibly be devised.” (Letter to John
Morley, ibid., 1774-5 [16 Nov., 1870].) In all, a rather cold and
extraordinary outburst of embitterment and suppressed hostility.

82
Letter to Charles Loring Brace, ibid., 1799-1800 (19 Jan., 1871).

83
Letter to Frederic Harrison, ibid., 1816 (May? 1871), see also letter to
Charles Dupont-White, ibid., 1863-5 (6 Dec., 1871).

84
Letter to William Thomas Thornton, ibid., 1913 (5 Oct., 1872), and
Thornton’s report of Blanc’s view, 1913n. On the incoming republican
tide, see Jacques Gouault, Comment la France est devenue républicaine:
Les élections générales et partielles de l’assemblée nationale,
1870-1875 (Paris: Colin, 1954). Concerning the lay schoolteacher, to
whom Helen Taylor apparently pointed, see Katherine Auspitz, The Radical
Bourgeoisie. The Ligue de l’enseignement and the Origins of the Third
Republic, 1866-1885 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982),
especially 123-60. Eugen J. Weber, Peasants into Frenchmen. The
Modernization of Rural France, 1870-1914 (Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 1976), 303-38, and Barnett Singer, Village Notables in
Nineteenth-Century France: Priests, Mayors, Schoolmasters (Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1982), 108-46.

85
Letter to Dupont-White, LL, CW, XVII, 1864-5 (6 Dec., 1871).

86
Letter to d’Eichthal, EL, CW, XIII, 465 (23 Feb., 1841).

87
Louis Halphen, L’histoire en France depuiscent ans (Paris: Colin, 1914),
6-7, Camille Jullian. Introduction, Extraits des historiens français du
XIXe siecle (Paris: Hachette, 1904), iii-vii. George Peabody Gooch,
History and Historians in the Nineteenth Century, 2nd ed. (London:
Longmans, Green, 1952), 151-6.

88
Anne Louise de Stael-Holstein, De la littérature consideree dans ses
rapports avec les institutions sociales (1800), in Oeuvres completes, 3
vols. (Paris: Didot, 1871), I, 232 (Chap. vi). François René de
Chateaubriand, Letter to the duchesse de Dura (1813), in Correspondance
generale de Chateaubriand, 5 vols., ed. Louis Thomas (Paris: Champion,
1912), I, 278.

89
Memorandum of 1808, quoted in Gooch, History and Historians, 153-4.
Jacques Godechot, Les institutions de la France sous la révolution et
l’empire, 2nd ed. (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1968), 756.
Ranke said that historical studies in his time had developed “in
opposition to the tyranny of Napoleonic ideas” (quoted in H.R.
Trevor-Roper, The Romantic Movement and the Study of History [London:
Athlone Press, 1969], 2).

90
Quoted in Gooch, History and Historians 267-8, cf. Ernest Llewellyn
Woodward, The Age of Reform, 1815-1870 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1938),
531-2.

91
Herbert Butterfield, Man on His Past. The Study of the History of
Historical Scholarship (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1955),
1-61, Hedva Ben-Israel, English Historians on the French Revolution
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1968), 3-62.

92
Autobiography, CW, I, 15-17;see also Appendix C, CW, I, 582-4.

93
This is the view of Michael St. John Packe, The Life of John Stuart Mill
(London: Secker and Warburg, 1954), 293. “Nothing,” Mill once noted,
“impresses one with a more vivid feeling of the shortness of life than
reading history” (Diary, 1 Feb., 1854, Letters of John Stuart Mill, ed.
Elliot, II, 365).

94
“Civilization” (1836), CW, XVIII, 145.

95
“De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [II],” ibid., 197. Mill’s view
that the history of England was “one of the least interesting” (letter
to Harriet Taylor, LL, CW, XIV, 6 [27 June, 1849]) anticipated the
opinion of a twentieth-century English historian who also concerned
himself with pattern in history “a stuffy little closet that had not had
an airing for years” (Arnold J. Toynbee, A Study of History, 12 vols.
[London: Oxford University Press, 1934-61], XII, 630).

96
“State of Society in America,” CW, XVIII, 93, “Grote’s History of Greece
[II],” Essays on Philosophy and the Classics, CW, XI (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 1978), 328.

97
“Grote’s History of Greece [I],” CW, XI, 303-4.

98
“Grote’s History of Greece [II],” ibid., 330.

99
“Civilization,” CW, XVIII, 145.

100
“Grote’s History of Greece [II],” CW, XI, 328. Mill was not more
concerned about fundamental historical research than were some of the
historians whose work he commented on Notoriously the Sorbonne offered
no leadership in this field. Ernest Lavisse was to say that its chairs
were looked on “comme un lieu de repos pour les professeurs fatigués de
l’enseignement secondaire” (quoted in Pierre Leguay, La Sorbonne [Paris:
Grasset, 1910], 11). The small, rather isolated world of the érudits in
the Ecole des Chartes (perhaps conceived in Napoleon’s mind in 1807, but
founded by royal ordinance in February 1821), whose archivistes were the
continuators of the Benedictine tradition, was outside Mill’s province
of observation. It was this Cinderella of French intellectual life—it is
Gabriel Hanotaux’s phrase—together with the young men returning from
study in German seminars, who would in the second half of the century
rescue historical studies from the spent philosophical school and the
eloquent orators of the Collège de France and the Faculté. If Guizot was
responsible for the pursuit of documents (“des faits, rien que des
faits, dúment établis, tel est désormais le mot d’ordre” [Halphen,
L’histoire en France depuis cent ans, 76]), it was only after 1865 that
serious emulation of the German historical method began in France. (See
Halphen, 57-9, 118, 143-5, Gabriel Hanotaux, Sur les chemins de
l’histoire, 2 vols. [Paris: Librairie Ancienne Edouard Champion, 1924],
I, 1-18, William R. Keylor. Academy and Community: The Foundation of the
French Historical Profession [Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1975], 19-89, Guy Bourdé and Hervé Martin, Les écoles historiques
[Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1983], 83-111, 137-70.)

101
Mill, “The Spirit of the Age,” Examiner, 9 and 23 Jan., 1831, 20, 50-2.
The view was close to that of Tocqueville: “c’est l’homme politique
qu’il faut faire en nous. Et. pour cela, c’est l’histoire des hommes et
surtout de ceux qui nous ont précédés le plus immédiatement dans ce
monde qu’il faut étudier. L’autre histoire n’est bonne qu’en ce qu’elle
donne quelques notions générales sur l’humanité tout entière et en ce
qu’elle prépare à celle-là.” (Letter to Gustave de Beaumont of 25 Oct.,
1829, Oeuvres, VIII, 1, 93.)

102
“State of Society in America,” CW, XVIII, 93.

103
“The Spirit of the Age,” Examiner, 9 and 23 Jan., 1831, 20, 50.

104
Ibid., 6 Feb., 15 and 29 May, 1831, 82, 83, 84, 307, 340.

105
A System of Logic Ratiocinative and Inductive, CW, VII-VIII (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 1974), VIII, 911-17 (Bk. VI, Chap. x).

106
Ibid., 926-30.

107
Ibid., 932-42 (Bk. VI, Chap. xi).

108
“Auguste Comte and Positivism” (1865), CW, X, 322. On Dilthey’s critique
of Mill concerning the role of the great man, see Jacques Kornberg,
“John Stuart Mill. A View from the Bismarckian Reich,” Mill News Letter,
XII, no. 1 (Winter, 1977), 10-16.

109
System of Logic, CW, VIII, 942 (Bk. VI, Chap. xi). The classic critique
of Mill and Comte in this matter is in K.R. Popper. The Open Society and
Its Enemies (1945), 2 vols., 4th rev. ed. (London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul, 1962) and the same author’s The Poverty of Historicism (1957),
rev. ed. (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1961). (On Mill’s Benthamite
eclecticism, however, see Lewisohn, “Mill and Comte on the Methods of
Social Science,” 315-24.) Popper holds that the “doctrine of historical
laws of succession is . . . little better than a collection of
misapplied metaphors” (Poverty of Historicism, 119), sees a “close
similarity between the historicism of Marx and that of J.S. Mill” (Open
Society, II, 87), and concludes that all such historicist philosophies,
like philosophies from Heraclitus and Plato down through Lamarck and
Darwin, “are characteristic products of their time—a time of social
change,” giving witness to “the tremendous and undoubtedly somewhat
terrifying impression made by a changing social environment on the minds
of those who live in this environment” (ibid., 212). “It almost looks,”
he says, “as if historicists were trying to compensate themselves for
the loss of an unchanging world by clinging to the faith that change can
be foreseen because it is ruled by an unchanging law” (Poverty of
Historicism, 161).

110
“Spirit of the Age,” Examiner, 6 Feb., 1831, 83.

111
“Auguste Comte and Positivism” (1865), CW, X, 322.

112
John Carlyle to Thomas Carlyle (12 Feb., 1831), in The Collected Letters
of Thomas and Jane Welsh Carlyle, ed. Charles Richard Sanders, et al.
(Durham, N.C., Duke University Press, 1970- ). V, 235n, Thomas Carlyle
to Jane Carlyle, ibid., 428 (14 Sept., 1831).

113
Letter to Carlyle, EL, CW, XII, 182 (5 Oct., 1833).

114
Presumably Carlyle meant such a response to the past as even Guizot, a
“philosophical historian” whom Mill thought the greatest of the time,
showed in a relaxed moment. “J’aime l’histoire. C’est la vie humaine
sans fatigue, comme spectacle et non comme affaire. Je m’y intéressé et
n’y suis pas intéressé. C’est une émotion mêlée de mouvement et de
repos. . . . En tout le passé me plaît et m’attache infiniment. Je le
contemple avec respect et compassion. Ils ont fait tout cela, ils ont
senti tout cela, et ils sont morts! Ce contraste si frappant, ou plutôt
cette union si intense de la vie et de la mort, de l’activité et de
l’immobilité, du bruit et du silence, ce sceau irrévocable pose sur ces
êtres jusque-là si animés et si mobiles, et l’impénétrable mystère de
leur destinée actuelle et définitive, cela m’émeut et m’attendrit
jusqu’au fond de l’âme.” (Letter to the princesse de Lieven of 4 Sept.,
1838, Lettres de François Guizot et de la princesse de Lieven, ed.
Jacques Naville, 3 vols. [Paris: Mercure de France, 1963-64], I, 186.)
Carlyle had given voice to much the same romantic fascination half a
dozen years before. “Rough Samuel and sleek wheedling James were, and
are not. . . . Gone! Gone!! . . . The mysterious River of Existence
rushes on. . . .” (“Boswell’s Life of Johnson,” Fraser’s Magazine, V
[Apr., 1832], 387.) If it was not an essential response on the part of
an historian, it was nonetheless widely shared, then and later, but it
does not appear to have been Mill’s.

115
Page references to material printed in this volume are given in the
text.

116
Letter to Macvey Napier, EL, CW, XIII, 431 (27 Apr., 1840).

117
Mill, “De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [II],” CW, XVIII, 155.

118
Macaulay was, of course, his exemplar. “He is very characteristic & so
is his book, of the English people & of his time.” The History of
England was readable, it would sell, but it was “without genius,” and he
found it “exactly au niveau of the ideal of shallow people with a touch
of the new ideas.” Even as “a work of art” it was wanting. (Letters to
Harriet Taylor, LL, CW, XIV, 6 [27 Jan., 1849], to William George Ward,
ibid., 29 [Spring 1849], and to Arthur Hardy, ibid., XV, 511 [29 Sept.,
1856].)

119
Letter to Harriet Taylor, ibid., XIV, 6 (27 Jan., 1849).

120
“State of Society in America” (1836), CW, XVIII, 94.

121
Jacques Antoine Dulaure, Histoire critique de la noblesse depuis le
commencement de la monarchie jusqu’à nos jours (Paris: Guillot, 1790),
cited in Stanley Mellon. The Political Uses of History: A Study of
French Historians in the French Restoration (Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 1958), 19-20.

122
Jean Rodolphe de Salis, Sismondi, 1773-1842 La vie et l’oeuvre d’un
cosmopolite philosophe (Paris: Librairie Ancienne Henri Champion, 1932),
1-41.

123
Godechot, Les institutions de la France, 756.

124
Salis, Sismondi, 1-41, François Mignet, “The Life and Opinions of
Sismondi,” North American Review, LXVI (Jan., 1848), 32-72.

125
Sismondi, Histoire des Français, 31 vols. (Paris: Treuttel and Würtz,
1821-44), I, xv. From a letter of 1835: “I have not given up any of my
youthful enthusiasm; I feel, perhaps, more strongly than ever the desire
for nations to become free, for the reform of governments, for the
progress of morality and happiness in human society” (quoted by Mignet,
“The Life and Opinions of Sismondi,” 69).

126
Benedetto Croce, History Its Theory and Practice, trans. Douglas Ainslie
(London: Harrap, 1921), 264.

127
In this, Mill was much more severe than Guizot, who translated and
admired Hallam, although he was critical of his lack of historicist
empathy for the plight of Strafford (see Stanley Mellon, Editor’s
Introduction, in François Guizot, Historical Essays and Lectures
[Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972], xxx).

128
Mignet, “The Life and Opinions of Sismondi,” 56, Salis, Sismondi, 435-6.

129
Jullian, Extraits des historiens français, xxiv, Michelet’s remark is
quoted in Pierre Moreau. L’histoire en France au XIXe siècle Etat
présent des travaux et esquisse d’un plan d’etudes (Paris: Les belles
lettres, [1935]), 35.

130
Autobiography, CW, I, 65-7, see John Coleman, “John Stuart Mill on the
French Revolution,” History of Political Thought, IV (Spring, 1983),
89-110.

131
Joseph Hamburger, James Mill and the Art of Revolution (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1963), 21.

132
The indirect evidence is in a letter from Mill to Charles Comte, EL, CW,
XII, 22 (25 Jan., 1828). On this “calm philosophic” historian, see Agnes
M. Smith, “François Emmanuel Toulongeon. Contemporaneous Historian of
the French Revolution,” in Bourgeois, Sans-Culottes, and Other Frenchmen
Essays on the French Revolution in Honour of John Hall Stewart, ed.
Morris Slavin and Agnes M. Smith (Waterloo, Ont., Wilfrid Laurier
University Press, 1981), 97-111.

133
See Michael J. Sydenham, The Girondins (London: Athlone Press, 1961),
1-16.

134
Letters to Charles Comte, EL, CW, XII, 21-2, 25 (25 Jan., and 27 June,
1828). “He is very well informed on the history of the French
Revolution,” d’Eichthal noted, “and we talked at length about recent
events in France whose importance for their own cause the English
liberals are well aware of” (d’Eichthal, A French Sociologist, 61
[Journal, 21 July, 1828]).

135
Autobiography, CW, I, 135.

136
Ibid., 137.

137
Carlyle to Mill, Collected Letters, VI, 174 (16 June, 1832). Mill to
Carlyle, EL, CW, XII, 110-11, 113 (17 July, 1832). See Ben-Israel,
English Historians on the French Revolution, 58-9.

138
Carlyle to Mill, Collected Letters, VI, 446 (24 Sept., 1833).

139
Letter to Tocqueville, EL, CW, XII, 271 (Sept., 1835).

140
Pierre Paul Royer-Collard, letter to Amable Guillaume Prosper de Barante
of 1 Aug., 1822, in Souvenirs du baron de Barante, ed. Claude de
Barante, 8 vols. (Paris: Calmann Lévy, 1890-1901), III, 29.

141
Yvonne Knibiehler, Naissance des sciences humaines. Mignet et l’histoire
philosophique au XIXe siècle (Paris: Flammarion, 1973), 130-1, Paul de
Rémusat, A. Thiers (Paris: Hachette, 1889), 34. The later volumes of
Thiers’ Histoire de la révolution française, judged superior to the
early ones, owed much to Mignet’s shorter work. Carlyle’s estimate was
unfriendly: “Thiers’s History in ten volumes foolscap-octavo, contains,
if we remember rightly, one reference. . . . A superficial air of order,
of clearness, calm candour, is spread over the work, but inwardly it is
waste, inorganic, no human head that honestly tries can conceive the
French Revolution so.” (“Parliamentary History of the Revolution,”
London and Westminster Review, V & XXVII [Apr., 1837], 234.) Mill was
evidently much less critical, since he passed on to Sarah Austin his
father’s suggestion that she should translate it, and noted that it
“would be sure to sell” (EL, CW, XII, 292 [9 Jan., 1836]). He had of
course sent it up to Carlyle in the first place, and he recommended it
to various people. Thiers, the politician, he despised.

142
Jules Simon, Mignet, Michelet, Henri Martin (Paris: Calman Lévy, 1890),
92. Halphen, L’histoire en France deputs cent ans, 38-9.

143
Sismondi, Histoire des Français, IX, 2.

144
Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve, “M. Mignet,” Revue des Deux Mondes, n.s.
XIII (15 Mar., 1846), 1097.

145
In the 1829 revision of his pamphlet of 1797, Constant remarked that “To
justify the reign of ’93, to picture its crimes and frenzies as a
necessity that weighs inevitably upon peoples when they seek freedom, is
to harm a sacred cause, to do it more damage than its most avowed
enemies” (Benjamin Henri Constant de Rebecque, Des effets du régime que
l’on a nomme revolutionnaire relativement au salut et à la liberté de la
France [1797, as revised in 1829], quoted in Mellon, Political Uses of
History, 22-3).

146
Sainte-Beuve, “M. Mignet,” 1096. Carlyle granted Mignet’s history was
more honest and thorough than Thiers’s, but derided its “philosophical
reflections” as “a quantity of mere abstractions and dead logical
formulas” which passed for “Thinking.” In one of his mixed verdicts, he
proclaimed that Mignet had produced an “eminently unsatisfactory” book,
without “life, without colour or verdure.” The “little book, though
abounding too in errors of detail, better deserves what place it has
than any other of recent date.” Mignet thus “takes his place at the head
of that brotherhood of his,” since he was “not a quack as well!”
(“Parliamentary History of the French Revolution,” 235-6.)

147
See Knibiehler, Naissance des sciences humaines, 118-65.

148
Quoted in James Westfall Thompson, et al., A History of Historical
Writing, 2 vols. (New York: Macmillan, 1942), II, 247.

149
The expression is Alice Gérard’s, La révolution française, mythes et
interprétations, 1789-1870 (Paris: Flammarion, 1970), 34.

150
Hippolyte Taine, H. Taine, sa vie et sa correspondance, 2nd ed., 4 vols.
(Paris: Hachette, 1902-07), II, 223-4.

151
Knibiehler, Naissance des sciences humaines, passim. “He is the Ranke of
France, and he disputes with Guizot the title of the greatest French
historian of the first half of the nineteenth century. . . . No
historian has done more to apply the methods and spirit of scientific
research to the life of states.” (Gooch, History and Historians, 188.)
Cf. Ben-Israel, English Historians on the French Revolution, 59-62.

152
Halphen, L’histoire en France depuis cent ans, 9-10, 17-18, Knibiehler.
Naissance des sciences humaines, 104.

153
Quoted in Rulon Nephi Smithson, Augustin Thierry Social and Political
Consciousness in the Evolution of a Historical Method (Geneva Droz,
1973), 81, 297, from Thierry’s review of Ivanhoe in the Censeur Européen
of 29 May, 1820.

154
Smithson, Augustin Thierry, 99n, from the Preface to Dix ans d’etudes
historiques (1835) Louis Maigron, Le roman historique à l’époque
romantique Essai sur l’influence de Walter Scott, new ed. (Paris:
Librairie Ancienne Henri Champion, 1912), 213-18. Thierry later
transferred some of the admiration he had for Scott to Armand Carrel,
his protége, for whose Resume de l’histoire de l’Ecosse (Paris: Lecointe
and Durey, 1825) he provided an introduction.

155
Quoted in Knibiehler, Naissance des sciences humaines, 104-5.

156
“Ce fut plus d’un succès; ce fut un engouement. Une génération tout
entière en demeura éblouie et séduite.” (Maigron, Le roman historique,
51.)

157
Autobiography, CW, I, 19; Mill, “Brodie’s History of the British Empire”
(1824), in Essays on England, Ireland, and the Empire, CW, VI (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 1982), 3.

158
“Periodical Literature: Edinburgh Review,” CW, I, 320; “Writings of
Alfred de Vigny” (1838), CW, I, 481, 472.

159
Autobiography, CW, I, 135.

160
Leslie Stephen, “Sir Walter Scott,” Dictionary of National Biography,
XVII. 1038, cf. Edgar Johnson, Sir Walter Scott, 2 vols. (New York:
Macmillan, 1970), II, 1064-6; Ben-Israel, English Historians and the
French Revolution, 56-9 “Superficial it must be,” Scott said, “but I do
not care for the charge. Better a superficial book which brings well and
strikingly together the known and acknowledged facts, than a dull boring
narrative pausing to see farther into a mill-stone at every moment than
the nature of the mill-stone admits.” (Quoted from Scott’s Diary, 22
Dec., 1825, in Thomas Preston Peardon, The Transition in English
Historical Writing, 1760-1830 [New York: Columbia University Press,
1933], 216.) But scholars one hundred and fifty years later, however
sympathetic and measured in their expression, have echoed something of
Mill’s severity “Allowing for the license of the romantic biographer or
historian, we are still justified in observing with surprise how Scott
tampers with his evidence, distorts his sources, in effect turns
perjurer on behalf of some of the wildest forces in Europe” (R. C.
Gordon, “Scott Among the Partisans. A Significant Bias in his Life of
Napoleon Buonaparte,” in Scott Bicentenary Essays Selected Papers Read
at the Sir Walter Scott Bicentenary Conference, ed. Alan Bell [Edinburgh
and London: Scottish Academic Press, 1973], 129).

161
Carlyle, “Memoirs of the Life of Scott,” London and Westminster Review,
VI & XXVIII (Jan. 1838), 337, Carlyle’s Journal, quoted in James Anthony
Froude, Thomas Carlyle: A History of the First Forty Years of His Life,
1795-1835, 2 vols. (London: Longman, et al., 1882), II, 310.

162
Quoted in Leslie Stephen, “Sir Archibald Alison,” Dictionary of National
Biography, I, 287-90.

163
Henry Adams to Charles Francis Adams, Jr., in The Letters of Henry
Adams, ed. Jacob Clavner Levenson, et al. (Cambridge, Mass., and London:
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1982- ), I, 330.

164
Quoted in Gooch, History and Historians, 304.

165
Letter to Carlyle, EL, CW, XII, 152 (11-12 Apr., 1833), Carlyle to Mill,
Collected Letters, VI, 373 (18 Apr., 1833).

166
Letter to Carlyle, EL, CW, XII, 155 (18 May, 1833). The reference is to
Macaulay’s review of Dumont’s Recollections of Mirabeau, Edinburgh
Review, LV (July, 1832), 552-76. (By compilations Mill means not
collections but what are now called secondary sources.)

167
Letter to W.J. Fox, EL, CW, XII, 157 (18 May, 1833).

168
Letters to W.J. Fox, ibid., 159 [June, 1833], and to Carlyle, ibid., 162
(5 July, 1833).

169
It may well have been Mill’s criticism in the review that caused Alison
to include a substantial list of his sources as a preface to the 2nd ed.
(1835), and to subsequent editions. Ben-Israel judges that “Alison knew
the sources but not how to use them. His bibliographical prefaces . . .
are now the best part of the book.” (English Historians and the French
Revolution, 150.)

170
“There is not a word in it that I do not subscribe to: it is really a
decided little utterance, with a quiet emphasis, a conscious
incontrovertibility, which (heretic that I am) I rejoice to see growing
in you” (Carlyle to Mill, Collected Letters, VI, 445 [24 Sept., 1833]).

171
Ben-Israel, English Historians and the French Revolution, 152-3.

172
Letters to Carlyle, EL, CW, XII, 181 (5 Oct., 1833), and to M. Napier,
ibid., XIII, 551-2 (15 Oct., 1842).

173
Carlyle to Mill, Collected Letters, VI, 373 (18 Apr., 1833).

174
Letter to Sterling, EL, CW, XII, 85 (20-22 Oct., 1831).

175
Letter to Carlyle, ibid., 113 (17 July, 1832). In general, on Carlyle’s
History, see Ben-Israel. English Historians and the French Revolution,
127-47. Alfred Cobban, Aspects of the French Revolution (New York:
Braziller, 1968), 243-55.

176
Carlyle to J.A. Carlyle, Collected Letters, VI, 196 (31 July, 1832),
Mill to Carlyle, EL, CW, XII, 116-21, 125-30, 132-5 (17 Sept., 22 Oct.,
27 Dec., 1832).

177
Carlyle to Mill, Collected Letters, VI, 303, 446 (12 Jan., 24 Sept.,
1833).

178
Ibid., VII, 276 (28 Aug., 1834). The sly complexity of Carlyle’s
reaction to Mill shows in a letter to his mother of 30 May, 1834. “By
far the sensiblest man I see is Mill, who seems almost fonder of me than
ever. The class he belongs to has the farther merit of being genuine and
honest so far as they go. . . .” (Ibid., 196.) And again to his mother,
25 Oct., 1834 “indeed nothing can exceed the obligingness of Mill . . .”
(ibid., 320).

179
Carlyle to J.A. Carlyle, ibid., 325 (28 Oct., 1834).

180
Letters to Carlyle, EL, CW, XII, 252-7 (7, 10, 23 Mar., 1835), Carlyle
to Mill, Collected Letters, VIII, 70-2 (7, 9 Mar., 1835).

181
Carlyle to James Fraser, Collected Letters, VIII, 66-9 (7 Mar., 1835).

182
Carlyle to Mill, ibid., 72-4 (9, 13, 17 Mar., 1835).

183
Carlyle to Margaret A. Carlyle, ibid., 84 (25 Mar., 1835).

184
Carlyle to Mill, ibid., 350 ([late May?], 1836).

185
Letter to Carlyle, EL, CW, XII, 307 (20 July?, 1836); Carlyle to Mill,
Collected Letters, IX, 14-15 (22 July, 1836).

186
S. Austin to Mill, quoted in EL, CW, XII, 334n (n.d.), Mill to S.
Austin, ibid., 333-4 (26 Apr., 1837).

187
Carlyle, his book delayed, had asked whether a later review might not be
better, “to have a friend lying back a little, to silence marauders?”
(Carlyle to Mill, Collected Letters, IX, 129 [28 Jan., 1837].) Obviously
Mill thought rather that he could turn the enemy back, and he always
believed he had routed them.

188
Carlyle had done his best to gain access to the first two instalments of
J.W. Croker’s large collection of printed materials then still
uncatalogued in the British Museum. As a consequence of this situation
and of his unsatisfactory relations with Anthony Panizzi (“the
respectable sublibrarian,” in Carlyle’s cutting phrase, then working on
the collection), he was able to consult only a few items in a cursory
manner (see Ben-Israel, English Historians and the French Revolution,
138-9, 198-201). From Panizzi’s point of view, however, Carlyle was
overbearing and unreasonable. “For all practical purposes,” Carlyle was
to complain years later to the Royal Commission investigating the
Museum’s library problems, “this collection of ours might as well have
been locked up in water-tight chests and sunk on the Dogger Bank as put
in the British Museum” (quoted in Edward Miller, Prince of Librarians:
The Life and Times of Antonio Panizzi of the British Museum [London:
Deutsch, 1967], 178-9, 183), Michelet, from the security of his former
privileged access to the Archives Nationales, did not rate Carlyle’s
loss highly. Criticizing Louis Blanc’s history of the Revolution,
written in exile in London, he asked. “ ‘Peut-on à Londres écrire
l’histoire du Paris révolutionnaire?’ Cela ne se peut qu’à Paris. A
Londres, il est vrai, il y a une jolie collection de pieces françaises,
imprimés, brochures et journaux qu’un amateur, M. Croker, vendait 12,000
francs au musée Britannique, et qu’on étend un peu depuis Mais une
collection d’amateur, des curiosités détachées ne remplacent nullement
les grands dépôts officiels où tout se suit, où l’on trouve et les faits
et leur liaison, où souvent un événement représenté vingt, trente,
quarante fois, en ses versions différentes, peut être étudié, jugé et
contrôlé C’est ce que nous permettent les trois grands corps d’archives
révolutionnaires à Paris.” (Histoire de la révolution française [Paris:
Gallimard, 1952], Préface de 1868, 17.) Naturally, the Archives in which
Michelet had spent his days thirty years before were not open to Carlyle
or anyone else at the time.

189
John Emerich Edward Dalberg-Acton, Lectures on the French Revolution,
ed. John Neville Figgis and Reginald Vere Laurence (London: Macmillan,
1910), 358-9.

190
Autobiography, CW, I, 225; Mill to R.B. Fox, EL, CW, XIII, 427 (16 Apr.,
1840).

191
Letter to Carlyle, EL, CW, XII, 339 (30 June, 1837).

192
Letter to George Henry Lewes, ibid., XIII, 449 (probably late 1840).

193
Irene Collins, The Government and the Newspaper Press in France,
1814-1881 (London: Oxford University Press, 1959), 1-59, Charles Ledré,
La presse à l’assaut de la monarchie, 1815-1848 (Paris: Colin, 1960),
5-122, Daniel L. Rader, The Journalists and the July Revolution in
France: The Role of the Political Press in the Overthrow of the Bourbon
Restoration, 1827-1830 (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1973), passim. On Mill and
the July Revolution, see Mueller, Mill and French Thought, 17-47.

194
Letter to d’Eichthal, EL, CW, XII, 38-9 (7 Nov., 1829).

195
Mill, “The French Elections,” Examiner, 18 July, 1830, 450.

196
David H. Pinkney, The French Revolution of 1830 (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1972), 73-195, Ledré, La presse à l’assaut de la
monarchie, 105-23; Rader, The Journalists and the July Revolution,
208-59.

197
In Macaulay’s dismissive phrase, “on a mission to preach up the Republic
and the physical check, I suppose.” But Macaulay was bent on a mission
similar to Mill’s “I have a plan of which I wish to know your opinion.
In ten days or thereabouts I set off for France where I hope to pass six
weeks. I shall be in the best society, that of the Duc de Broglie,
Guizot, and so on. I think of writing an article on the politics of
France since the Restoration, with characters of the principal public
men, and a parallel between the present state of France and that of
England.” (Letter to M. Napier of 19 Aug., 1830, The Letters of Thomas
Babington Macaulay, ed. Thomas Pinney, 6 vols. [Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1974-81], I, 281-2.)

198
Letter from Norton to Chauncey Wright of 13 Sept., 1870, Letters of
Charles Eliot Norton, ed. Sarah Norton and M.A. De Wolfe Howe, 2 vols.
(Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1913), I, 400.

199
Jean Lhomme, La grande bourgeoisie au pouvoir, 1830-1880 (Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1960), 13-123. Jardin and Tudesq, La France
des notables, I, 122-72, Pinkney, The Revolution of 1830, 274-95.

200
Letter to James Mill, EL, CW, XII, 54 (13 Aug., 1830).

201
Life and Letters of John Arthur Roebuck, ed. Robert E. Leader (London:
Arnold, 1897), 30.

202
Letters to James Mill of 13, 20, and 21 Aug., 1830, EL, CW, XII, 54-63
(the latter two also published in Examiner, 29 Aug., 1830, 547-8).
“Never since the beginning of the world was there seen in a people such
a heroic, such an unconquerable attachment to justice. The poorest of
the populace, with arms in their hands, were absolutely masters of Paris
and all that it contains, not a man went richer to his home that night.”
(Mill, “Attempt to Save the Ex-Ministers,” Examiner, 24 Oct., 1830,
674.) Cf. Edgar L. Newman, “What the Crowd Wanted in the French
Revolution of 1830,” in 1830 in France, ed. John M. Merriman (New York:
New Viewpoints, 1975), 17-40.

203
Mill, “Prospects of France, No. I,” Examiner, 19 Sept., 1830, 594-5. See
Pamela Pilbeam, “The ‘Three Glorious Days’, The Revolution of 1830 in
Provincial France,” The Historical Journal, XXVI (Dec., 1983), 831-44.

204
“Prospects of France, No. IV,” “Prospects of France, No. V,” “Attempt to
Save the Ex-Ministers,” “Ignorance of French Affairs by the English
Press,” Examiner, 10, 17, 24 Oct., 14 Nov., 1830, 642-4, 660-1, 673-4,
723-4, summaries of French news, 2 and 9 Jan., 1831, ibid., 8, 24-5.

205
Summaries of French news, ibid., 13 and 27 Feb., 1831, 105-6, 136, “The
Prospects of France,” ibid., 10 Apr., 1831, 225-6.

206
Summaries of French news, ibid., 4, 11, 18, 25, Dec., 1831, 776-7, 793,
808-9, 825, summaries of French news, ibid., 1, 8, 29 Jan., 12 Feb.,
1832, 9-11, 24-5, 72-3, 104-5. On the revolt, see Blanc, Histoire de dix
ans. III, 45-80, Fernand Rude, L’insurrection bonnaise de novembre 1831.
Le mouvement ouvrier de 1827-1832 (Paris: Editions Anthropos, 1969),
esp. 233ff., Robert Bezucha, The Lyon Uprising of 1834. Social and
Political Conflict in the Early July Monarchy (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1974), 48-72, Maurice Moissonnier, La révolte des
canuts: Lyon, novembre 1831, 2nd ed. (Paris: Editions Sociales, 1975),
passim.

207
Summary of French news, Examiner, 12 Feb., 1832, 104.

208
Summary of French news, ibid., 29 Apr., 1832, 280. “The Close of the
Session in France,” ibid., 6 May, 1832, 291-2, summary of French news,
ibid., 20 May, 1832, 329-30.

209
Summaries of French news, ibid., 10, 17, 24 June, 1832, 377, 392-4, 408,
cf. Blanc, Histoire de dix ans, III, 265-315.

210
Summaries of French news, Examiner, 21 Oct., 25 Nov., 2, 9 Dec., 1832,
680-1, 760, 777, 792, a young man named Bergeron was tried and acquitted
for lack of proof.

211
Summary of French news, Examiner, 31 Mar., 1833, 201, letters to William
Tait, EL, CW, XII, 148 (30 Mar., 1833), and to Carlyle, ibid, 150 (11-12
Apr., 1833).

212
Summaries of French news, Examiner, 5, 19 May, 21 July, 1833, 282, 313,
457.

213
Summary of French news, ibid., 12 Jan., 1834, 23, “State of Opinion in
France,” ibid., 30 Mar., 1834, 195-6.

214
Summaries of French news, ibid., 20, 27 Apr., 11 May, 1 June, 1834, 250,
265, 297-8, 345.

215
J. Tchneroff, Le parti républicain sous la monarchie de juillet, 2nd ed.
(Paris: Pedone, 1905), 34ff.; Georges Weill, Histoire du parti
républicain en France de 1814 à 1870, new ed. (Paris: Alcan, 1928),
53ff.; Ledré, La presse à l’assaut de la monarchie, 125ff.

216
The Tribune succumbed on 11 May, 1835, after 111 prosecutions and 20
convictions: see Weill, Histoire du parti républicain, 115; Ledré, La
presse à l’assaut de la monarchie, 161-2.

217
On the Lyon and Paris risings, see Blanc, Histoire de dix ans, IV,
223-85, Edouard Dolléans, Histoire du mouvement ouvrier, 3 vols. (Paris:
Colin. 1936-53), I, 93-107. Weill, Histoire du parti républicain, 101;
and the comprehensive study by Bezucha, who presents the confrontation
as the canuts’ (male weavers’) attempt “to establish a claim to control
over their work in the future” (The Lyon Uprising of 1834, ix; see
especially, 96-133, 149-74).

218
On the trial, see Blanc, Histoire de dix ans, IV, 355-423. Weill,
Histoire du parti republicain, 104-8, Bezucha, The Lyon Uprising of
1834, 175-92. Armand Carrel was chosen as one counsel for the defence,
but the Cour des Pairs refused to recognize such outsiders.

219
Letter to d’Eichthal, EL, CW, XII, 33 (15 May, 1829).

220
Letter to Carlyle, ibid., 278-9 (17 Oct., 1835). Sieyès, who was in his
eighty-eighth year, evidently thought only that the parliamentarians
“talk too much, and don’t act enough” (quoted in Glyndon G. Van Deusen,
Sieyes. His Life and His Nationalism [New York: Columbia University
Press, 1932], 142). For the rest, he would say, “Je ne vois plus, je
n’entends plus, je ne me souviens plus, je ne parle plus, je suis devenu
entièrement négatif” (quoted in Paul Bastid, Sieyès et sa pensée [Paris:
Hachette, 1970], 284). He died the following June.

221
Letter to Tocqueville, EL, CW, XII, 317 (7 Jan., 1837), Tocqueville to
Mill, Oeuvres, VI, 325-6 (24 June, 1837).

222
The previous year, Mill noted his reservations about Tocqueville’s
estimate of democracy and aristocracy, but it may be queried that he
discerned in Tocqueville’s “historiography which addresses the ‘whole
future’ ” an “essentially antilibertarian” bias (Hayden White,
Metahistory: The Historical Imagination in Nineteenth-Century Europe
[Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1973], 205).

223
National, 31 July, 1830, quoted in Ledré, La presse à l’assaut de la
monarchie, 117.

224
On Carrel, see R.G. Nobécourt, La vie d’Armand Carrel (Paris: Gallimard,
1930), for the early adventures characteristic of his impulsive,
changeable nature, see ibid., 23-60.

225
Ibid., 61-126. “Je ne voulais pas d’un gouvernement,” he told Jules
Simon, “qui prétendait être un minimum de république, et n’était qu’un
minimum de royauté” (Simon, Mignet, Michelet, Henri Martin, 94). “Le
balancement de sa démarche,” Louis Blanc noted of him at the height of
his powers, “son geste bref, ses habitudes d’élégance virile, son goût
pour les exercices du corps, et aussi une certaine âpreté qu’accusaient
les lignes heurtees de son visage et l’energie de son regard, tout cela
était plus militaire que de l’écrivain” (Histoire de dix ans, III, 128).

226
Nobécourt, La vie d’Armand Carrel, 126-75, Collins, The Government and
the Newspaper Press, 60-81, Mill, summaries of French news, Examiner, 25
Mar., 9 Sept., 1832, 200-1, 585.

227
Quoted in Ledré, La presse à l’assaut de la monarchie, 132. War was the
solution for all problems. “Quand la confiance publique est perdue,
quand il n’y a plus ni credit ni commerce possible, quand la détresse,
le désespoir, la passion ont mis les armes à la main de la classe qui
vit de son travail, il faut la guerre” (quoted in Tchneroff, Le parti
republicain, 135). On Carrel’s strongly nationalist views, see the
selections from his articles in R.G. Nobécourt, Armand Carrel,
journaliste, Documents inédits et textes oubliés (Rouen: Defontaine,
[1935]), esp. 93-115, 153-5, and Nobécourt, La vie d’Armand Carrel,
126-9, 277-8.

228
Summary of French news, Examiner, 3 June, 1832, 361.

229
“French and English Journals,” ibid., 2 Dec., 1832, 772-3.

230
“Nous avons une monarchie à renverser,” he wrote to a friend in
September 1833; “nous la renverserons, et puis il faudra lutter contre
d’autres ennemis” (letter of Carrel to Anselme Petetin of 5 Sept., 1833,
quoted in Weill. Histoire du parti républicain, 95). See also Nobécourt,
La vie d’Armand Carrel, 174-5.

231
Letter to Carlyle, EL, CW, XII, 197 (25 Nov., 1833).

232
Summaries of French news, Examiner, 19 Jan., 13 Apr., 31 Aug., 1834,
40-1, 232, 552 Carrel’s editorial of 15 June, 1834, is quoted in Ledré,
La presse à l’assaut de la monarchie, 156.

233
He was prosecuted and acquitted for “Ouverture de la session de 1834,”
Le National de 1834, 1 Aug., 1834, 1. On Carrel’s battles with the
regime, 1833-34, see Nobécourt, La vie d’Armand Carrel, 155-95. Of 520
press prosecutions in Paris, 1830-34, only 188 resulted in condemnations
(Collins, The Government and the Newspaper Press, 79). Carrel, however,
was condemned and sent to Sainte-Pélagie prison later in the year. He
remained there from 5 Oct., 1834, to 2 Apr., 1835, in the rather relaxed
conditions of access to visitors and journalistic activity which were
permitted to him. From there he launched further thunderbolts against
the Cour des Pairs, which was about to stage le procès monstre (Ledré,
La presse à l’assaut de la monarchie, 158, n94). He appeared before the
Cour on 15 December, 1834, to argue the case of the National’s chief
editor, creating a sensation (Blanc, Histoire de dix ans, IV, 327-34,
Nobécourt, La vie d’Armand Carrel, 195-216).

234
The legislation of September 1835 was so repressive that both opposition
and some majority deputies opposed it. Tocqueville believed the full
rigour of the law was not applied, but those who tested it could be
driven out of business; a new tone of moderation was prudent. See
Collins, The Government and the Newspaper Press, 82-99, Blanc, Histoire
de dix ans, IV, 445-8.

235
Quoted in Weill, Histoire du parti républicain, 116n. See Nobecourt. La
vie d’Armand Carrel 135-54, 269-77.

236
Letter from Carrel to Chateaubriand of 4 Oct., 1834, in Memoires
d’outre-tombe, 4 vols. (Paris: Flammarion, 1964), IV, 536.
Chateaubriand’s description of Carrel’s life in prison is ibid., 537-8.
See also Weill, Histoire du parti républicain, 116-17, Nobecourt. La vie
d’Armand Carrel, 195-202, 215-16.

237
Sainte-Beuve, “Armand Carrel” (17 May, 1852), Causeries du lundi, 15
vols. (Paris: Garnier, 1851-62), VI, 144-5, Chateaubriand, Memoires, IV,
538-9, Blanc, Histoire de dix ans, V, 54-63. Nobécourt, La vie d’Armand
Carrel, 282-304, Collins. The Government and the Newspaper Press, 88-9.

238
Carlyle to Mill, Collected Letters, IX, 28 (28 July, 1836).

239
Letter to Tocqueville, EL, CW, XII, 309 (9 Nov., 1836).

240
Mill, “Fonblanque’s England under Seven Administrations” (1837), CW, VI,
380. Carrel had visited England from 30 August to early October, 1834,
and again from the middle of May to mid-June, 1836, when (according to
his biographer), “il est très recherché par la société et les honorables
gentlemen le reçoivent somptueusement,” and saw Louis Napoleon
Bonaparte, but there is no record of his meeting on either occasion with
Mill (Nobécourt, La vie d’Armand Carrel, 197-9, 238).

241
Again, Blanc’s sketch contains more light and shade. “Quoique plein de
douceur et d’abandon dans l’intimité, il apparaissait, dans la vie
publique, dominateur et absolu. . . . Il était né chef de parti, chef
d’école, il n’aurait pu l’être. Il manquait de ce fanatisme froid qui
naît des études opiniâtres et fait les novateurs. Voltairien avant tout,
il ne paraissait pas avoir souci de marquer sa place dans l’histoire par
l’initiative de la pensée. . . . Il possédait au plus haut point le
commandement; il passionnait ses amis, c’était du caractère. . . . Il
fut longtemps girondin par sentiment; et il lui en coûta beaucoup pour
s’incliner devant la majesté de cette dictature révolutionnaire,
l’effroi, la gloire, le désespoir et le salut de la France. . . . Forcé
souvent d’éteindre dans ses amis le feu dont il était lui-même consumé,
il s’exaltait et se décourageait tour à tour dans cette lutte
intérieure. . . .” (Histoire de dix ans, III, 128-30.) “Un trouble
invincible l’agitait Car, tout en le saluant chef de parti, l’opinion ne
lui fournissait aucum point d’appui sérieux, et il le sentait amèrement.
. . . Il s’affligeait aussi du perpétuel refoulement de ses désirs. Il
lui aurait fallu les tourments de la gloire, la vie des camps, et il
n’avait, pour en employer son énergie, que le journalisme. . . .”
(Ibid., V, 56-7.) It was Carrel’s ambivalence concerning the state, his
hesitation as between Gallo-Roman decentralization and Bonapartist
centralization, that struck a twentieth-century commentator. “At the
time of his death,” Jacques Barzun remarked, “Carrel must be called a
harbinger at once of the Second Republic and of the Second Empire. To
which would he have remained faithful in the end? Mill thought, to the
Republic, an acute French critic [Jules Amédee Barbey d’Aurevilly]
thought, to Bonaparte. The speculation is instructive, for it leads us
into the heart of the intellectual malaise of the forties, and thence to
the final phase of Romantic historiography.” (Jacques Barzun, “Romantic
Historiography as a Political Force in France.” Journal of the History
of Ideas, II [June, 1941], 325.)

242
Letter to William Molesworth, LL, CW, XVII, 1978 (22 Sept., 1837).
Twenty-two years later, Mill refused to permit a translation of On
Liberty to appear with notes and preface by Emile de Girardin because
“il me répugne d’être associé de quelque manière que ce soit, avec
l’homme qui a tué Carrel” (letter to Dupont-White, LL, CW, XV, 642 [29
Oct., 1859]).

243
Mellon, Political Uses of History, 8-12; Gossman, “Augustin Thierry,”
6-19.

244
Quoted by Gossman, “Augustin Thierry,” 8.

245
“Vivant esprit de la France, où te saisirai-je, si ce n’est en moi?”
(Histoire de la révolution française, Préface de 1847, 1). Paul
Viallaneix, La voie royale. Essai sur l’idée de peuple dans l’oeuvre de
Michelet (Paris: Delagrave [1959]), 91ff, Stephen A. Kippur, Jules
Michelet: A Study of Mind and Sensibility (Albany: State University of
New York Press, 1981), 26ff.

246
Letter to M. Napier, EL, CW, XIII, 431 (27 Apr., 1840).

247
Letter to d’Eichthal, ibid., 432 (7 May, 1840).

248
Quoted ibid., 432n. Michelet’s letter appears in his Journal, ed. Paul
Viallaneix and Claude Digeon, 4 vols. (Paris: Gallimard, 1959-76), I,
814, where it is dated 24 Sept., 1841, i.e., some sixteen months after
the letter from Mill to Gustave d’Eichthal, to which Eugene d’Eichthal
appended the quotation.

249
Michelet’s chief complaint was of course the patent miseries of the
industrial revolution with which he here first became acquainted.
Travelling for a month, 5 August to 3 September, in England, Ireland,
and Scotland, he was disturbed by the “nouvelle féodalite” with its
enslavement of children in the factories: “C’est encore un spectacle de
voir au milieu de cette haute civilisation et chez le peuple où
l’instruction est le plus répandue, ces pieds nus, ces jambes sans bas.
L’aisance a augmenté, la simplicité, la durete, la patience n’ont pas
diminué.” (Michelet, Journal, I, 145 [22 Aug., 1834].) See also
Viallaneix, La voie royale, 40-1. Kippur, Jules Michelet, 74-6.

250
Letter to R.B. Fox, EL, CW, XIII, 442 (3 Aug., 1840).

251
This was a stock idea, Michelet firmly lodged it in French
historiography. After the coup d’état in December 1851, someone close to
Louis Napoleon told Harriet Grote that the recipe for securing popular
support was simple. “Two passions are predominant in the mass of the
people to which a ruler of France can always have recourse, the love of
glory and the hatred of England. On these foundations we can build
securely.” (Quoted in Nassau William Senior, Journals Kept in France and
Italy from 1848 to 1852, with A Sketch of the Revolution of 1848, ed.
M.C.M. Simpson, 2 vols. [London: King, 1871], II, 289-90.)

252
Letter to Bain, EL, CW, XIII, 612 (3 Nov., 1843).

253
Taine asked the question: “Devons-nous croire M. Michelet? Pour ma part,
après expérience faite, je réponds oui: car, lorsqu’on étudie les
documents d’une époque qu’il a étudiée, on éprouve une sensation
semblable à la sienne. . . .” (“M. Michelet” [1855], Essais de critique
et d’histoire, 6th ed. [Paris: Hachette, 1892], 107.)

254
Letter to Michelet, EL, CW, XIII, 596 (12 Sept., 1842). Michelet’s
Journal contains only a single reference to Mill by name, at I, 814 (24
Sept., 1841).

255
Identifying himself with his historical actors in a manner not entirely
different from the style affected by Carlyle two decades earlier,
Michelet reported his own harrowing revolutionary experiences to
correspondents. Hence his celebrated wish that he be remembered for
having discerned the goal of history: “Thierry l’appelait narration, et
M. Guizot, analyse. Je l’ai nomme résurrection, et ce nom lui restera.”
(“A.M. Edgar Quinet,” Le Peuple [Paris: Didier, 1946], 25.)

256
Letter to Thomas Smith, LL, CW, XVII, 1911 (4 Oct., 1872).

257
After the shattering of his hopes for the February Revolution, Michelet
was still more radicalized. He told his students in 1850 that his chair
at the College de France was “not only a magistrature but a
pontificate.” His classroom was the scene of demonstrations, his
lectures, reported a colleague, were “deplorable rhapsodies, mostly
sheer nonsense . . . attaining a sort of fantastic madness.” The faculty
and administration wanted him disciplined, the government harassed him,
the police attended his course. He was suspended in March 1851,
dismissed in April 1852, and deprived of his post at the Archives
Nationales in June. (Kippur, Jules Michelet, 116-37, esp. 131, 133.) On
his general development away from his earlier views, see Oscar H. Haac,
Les principes inspirateurs de Michelet (Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, 1951). On other aspects of his broad intellectual activity, see
Linda Orr, Jules Michelet: Nature, History, and Language (Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 1976).

258
Johnson, Guizot, 370-4, Mellon, Editor’s Introduction to Guizot,
Historical Essays and Lectures, xxxix-xliv.

259
Letter to R.B. Fox, EL, CW, XIII, 427 (16 Apr., 1840).

260
Summary of French news, Examiner, 21 Oct., 1832, 680.

261
Letter to James Mill, EL, CW, XII, 60-1 (21 Aug., 1830).

262
“Prospects of France,” Examiner, 17 Oct., 1830, 660-1.

263
Summary of French news, ibid., 9 Jan., 1831, 25.

264
Summary of French news, ibid., 21 Oct., 1832, 680.

265
“Thiers completely verifies the impression his history makes. Even among
French ministers he stands out, conspicuously unprincipled.” (Letter to
Carlyle, EL, CW, XII, 220 [2 Mar., 1834].) All the same, Mill was of two
minds about the historian. “We dislike M. Thiers’ politics much, and his
unbounded suffisance still more, but nobody [i.e., The Times] is
entitled to speak scornfully of the author of the best history in the
French language, and the best specimen of historical narrative, of any
length, perhaps in all modern literature” (summary of French news,
Examiner, 21 Oct., 1832, 680). Then, twelve years later. “Thiers is
inaccurate, but less so than Sir Walter Scott” (221). Of the
parliamentary events that brought Thiers and his followers into office
in March 1840, he wrote “It is a great event, & makes me recur to what I
have so often thought, les choses marchent vite en France (& in this
age, altogether one may add)” (letter to d’Eichthal, EL, CW, XIII, 433
[7 May, 1840]). His attacks on “ce petit fripon” (letter to Adolphe
Narcisse Thibaudeau, ibid., XII, 291 [1836?]) were to grow again during
the eastern crisis that summer of 1840.

266
Letter to d’Eichthal, EL, CW, XIII, 438-9 (17 June, 1840).

267
Letter to R.B. Fox, ibid., 454-5 (23 Dec., 1840). Mill was not alone in
succumbing. Jules Simon would say: “On était tout surpris et charmé,
quand on pénétrait dans son intimité, de le trouver simple, gai,
bienveillant, et même caressant” (Simon, Thiers, Guizot, Rémusat, 2nd
ed. [Paris: Calmann Lévy, 1855], 20). This was not Daumier’s view.

268
Letter to d’Eichthal, EL, CW, XIII, 457 (25 Dec., 1840).

269
Letter to A. Comte, ibid., 518-19 (6 May, 1842).

270
Letter to S. Austin, ibid., 653-4 (18 Jan., 1845).

271
Letters to J.B. White, ibid., XII, 259, 264, 280, 285 (15 Apr., 19 May,
21 Oct., 24 Nov., 1835).

272
Translated by Johnson, Guizot, 322, from Numa Denis Fustel de Coulanges,
“Chronique,” Revue des Deux Mondes, CI (1 Sept., 1872), 243. On Guizot
as historian, see Johnson’s balanced appraisal, Guizot, 320-76, and the
comments in Leonard Krieger’s Preface and Mellon’s Editor’s Introduction
to Guizot, Historical Essays and Lectures, ix-xlv. On Guizot’s
historiographical inheritance at the moment of his dismissal from the
Conseil d’Etat in 1820, see Shirley M. Gruner, “Political Historiography
in Restoration France,” History and Theory, VIII (1969), 346-65.

273
Quoted in E.L. Woodward, Three Studies in European Conservatism
Metternich, Guizot, the Catholic Church in the Nineteenth Century
(London: Constable, 1929), 133, from a letter to Charles de Rémusat
(1820).

274
Letter to Prosper de Barante of 22 Oct., 1822, Souvenirs du baron de
Barante, III, 50.

275
Guizot was adamant: “Je n’ai, de ma vie, prostitué l’histoire au service
de la politique. Mais quand l’histoire parle, il est bon que la
politique écoute.” (Quoted in Rut Keiser, Guizot als Historiker [n.p.:
Saint-Louis, 1925], 38n.) In the 1857 preface to his lectures, Guizot
wrote “C’est la rivalité aveugle des hautes classes sociales qui a fait
échouer parmi nous les essais de gouvernement libre. . . . Pour le
vulgaire plaisir de rester, les uns impertinents, les autres envieux,
nobles et bourgeois ont été infiniment moins libres, moins grands, moins
assurés dans leurs biens sociaux qu’ils n’auraient pu l’être avec un peu
plus de justice, de prévoyance et de soumission aux lois divines des
sociétés humaines. Ils n’ont pas su agir de concert pour être libres et
puissants ensemble, ils se sont livrés et ils ont livré la France aux
révolutions.” (Mémoires pour servir à l’histoire de mon temps, 8 vols.
in 4 [Paris: Michel Lévy, 1858-70]. I, 294-6.) “Guizot,” Faguet
remarked, “est un penseur réprimé par un homme d’Etat” (Emile Faguet,
Politiques et moralistes du dix-neuvième siècle, 1st ser [Paris: Société
française d’imprimerie et de librairie, 1901], 367).

276
François Guizot, Cours d’histoire moderne. Histoire de la civilisation
en France depuis la chute de l’empire romain jusqu’en 1789, 5 vols.
(Paris: Pichon and Didier, 1829-32), II, 267-8.

277
Ibid., I, 26.

278
Letter to Barante of 20 Oct., 1822, Souvenirs du baron de Barante, III,
49.

279
Quoted in Agénor Bardoux, Guizot (Paris: Hachette, 1894), 180.

280
Letter to the princesse de Lieven (1 Oct., 1833), Lettres de François
Guizot, II, 240.

281
François Guizot, Monk, Chute de la république et rétablissement de la
monarchie en Angleterre en 1660 (Paris: Didier, 1851), ix-xi.

282
Herbert Butterfield, Christianity and History (London: Bell, 1949),
19-25.

283
Edouard Fueter, Histoire de l’historiographie moderne (Paris: Alcan,
1914), 634, Cf. “L’idéal orléaniste tend à stériliser la curiosité
historique, 1830 a donné la solution définitive des conflits séculaires
entre les Français et leur dynastie, démontrent A. Thierry et Guizot:
une sorte de fin de l’histoire, compensée par l’autosatisfaction et les
honneurs officiels. Le finalisme bourgeois, après 1830, prend un
caractère tout rétrospectif.” (Gérard, La révolution française, 38.)
Guizot put it more personally and succinctly. “Je suis de ceux que
l’élan de 1789 a élevés et qui ne consentiront point à descendre”
(Mémoires pour servir à l’histoire de mon temps, I, 27).

284
“Il comprend beaucoup de choses,” Charles de Rémusat said, “et se pique
de comprendre tout.

Il a l’air de tout dominer, d’avoir vu le terme et le faible de tout,
approfondi toutes les questions et pris sur toutes des conclusions; mais
on voit bientôt ses limites.” (Mémoires de ma vie, 5 vols. [Paris: Plon,
1958-67], I, 440, 446.)

285
Halphen, L’histoire en France depuis cent ans, 34-5. He adds, “jamais
sans doute l’histoire n’a été à un pareil degré infestée de maximes
politiques ou de généralités philosophiques. . . . Philosopher était
devenu une mode à laquelle presque aucun historien ne croyait pouvoir se
soustraire.” (Ibid., 38-9.)

286
Sainte-Beuve, “Discours sur l’histoire de la révolution d’Angleterre par
M. Guizot” (4 Feb., 1850), Causeries du lundi, I, 317.

287
Faguet, Politiques et moralistes, 328.

288
Quoted in Bardoux, Guizot, 124.

289
Fernand Braudel, “Histoire et sciences sociales la longue durée,” in his
Ecruts sur l’histoire (Paris: Flammarion, 1969), 41-83.

290
He did so even when blaming him for the intrigue surrounding the Spanish
marriages in 1846. With Sir Robert Peel as Prime Minister and Lord
Aberdeen at the Foreign Office, Guizot had achieved relatively good
relations with England. The return of Palmerston in June 1846 altered
affairs. For years, Britain and France had jockeyed in Madrid to assert
their control and influence the marriage of the Queen Guizot had backed
the suit of the duc de Montpensier, Louis Philippe’s son, Aberdeen
supported a Coburg prince. Amidst a welter of intrigue, the French
ambassador proposed that Isabella marry an effeminate relative and,
simultaneously, her sister Luisa marry Montpensier Isabella would have
no children, and the throne would then pass to Louis Philippe’s
grandson. By late 1845, both Victoria and Louis Philippe and their
governments had thought neither the Coburg nor the Orleanist suitors of
Isabella would be put forward, but when Palmerston returned to office
and clumsily reintroduced Leopold of Coburg’s name, Louis Philippe and
Guizot concluded they had been duped, the Madrid scheme was approved,
and the marriages took place on 10 October, 1846. Naturally, the English
also believed they had been duped. Mill judged unfairly that Guizot “is
evidently not above low tricks & equivocations, which seem to be quite
excused to every Frenchman by their being for the supposed honour &
glory of France Guizot I wished to think better of, but after all this
only brings me back, and that not altogether, to my first opinion of
him, which some parts of his public conduct from 1839 downwards had
modified.” (Letter to J. Austin, EL, CW, XIII, 714 [13 Apr., 1847].) See
Johnson, Guizot, 300-9, Seton-Watson, Britain in Europe, 242-8, Muriel
E. Chamberlain, Lord Aberdeen. A Political Biography (London: Longman,
1983), 343-89, Jasper Ridley, Lord Palmerston (London: Constable, 1970),
303-20.

291
Collins, The Government and the Newspaper Press, 82-99; Ledré, La presse
à l’assaut de la monarchie, 125-95.

292
Letter to d’Eichthal, EL, CW, XII, 88-9 (30 Nov., 1831), letter to
d’Eichthal and Duveyrier, ibid., 108 (30 May, 1832).

293
Letter to Carlyle, ibid., 105-6 (29 May, 1832). “The poor
Saint-Simonians,” Carlyle wrote. “Figure Duveyrier, with waiter’s apron,
emptying slop pails,—for the salvation of a world” (letter to Mill,
Collected Letters, VI, 174-5 [16 June, 1832]). See also Manuel, Prophets
of Paris, 308-9.

294
Manuel, Prophets of Paris, 186, citing Procès en la cour d’assises de la
Seine, les 27 et 28 août (Paris, 1832), 194. See Pankhurst, The
Saint-Simonians, Mill and Carlyle, 84-100, Mill to Carlyle, EL, CW, XII,
119-20 (17 Sept., 1832).

295
Letter to Carlyle, EL, CW, XII, 150 (11-12 Apr., 1833).

296
Letters to Carlyle, ibid., 133, 139-40, 150 (27 Dec., 1832, 2 Feb.,
11-12 Apr., 1833).

297
Letter to Carlyle, ibid., 150 (11-12 Apr., 1833).

298
Letter to M. Napier, ibid., XIII, 684 (27 Oct., 1845).

299
Mill had a “passage controverting the warlike propensity of the French”
that Napier removed. He did not complain, but defended his point of view
(“avery old & firm one with me”) that the French did not necessarily
seek prestige through war, saying he thought the Edinburgh Review had
recently been “very unjust” (letter to M. Napier, ibid., 701 [1 May,
1846]). On Mill’s “realistic” views on international relations, see
Kenneth E. Miller, “John Stuart Mill’s Theory of International
Relations,” Journal of the History of Ideas, XXII, no. 4 (1961),
493-514.

300
Mill, “Recent Writers on Reform” (1859), CW, XIX, 352.

301
Letter to J. Austin, EL, CW, XIII, 713-14 (13 Apr., 1847).

302
Benjamin Rush, United States Minister in France, wrote in December 1847.
“If I looked to the country, instead of the newspapers or speeches at
political banquets. I should have thought I had come to a country
abounding in prosperity of every kind and full of contentment” (quoted
by Priscilla Robertson, Revolutions of 1848. A Social History
[Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1952], 13).

303
Fourierism, like Saint-Simonism, he found “totally free from the
objections usually urged against Communism.” He admired its “great
intellectual power” and its “large and philosophic treatment of some of
the fundamental problems of society and morality.” It was not in
contradiction with “any of the general laws by which human action, even
in the present imperfect state of moral and intellectual cultivation, is
influenced,” and needed “opportunity of trial.” (Principles of Political
Economy, CW, II-III [Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1965], II,
210, 213.) He thought, however, that “many of the details are, & all
appear, passablement ridicules,” and he had doubts about the missing
element of “moral sense” (“Nobody is ever to be made to do anything but
act just as they like. . . .”) Not fancifully, therefore, he asked
whether it was “a foundation on which people would be able to live & act
together” (letter to Harriet Taylor, CW, XIV, 21-2 [c. 31 Mar., 1849]).
In the same consideration, however, Mill made short shrift of Proudhon:
“I heartily wish Proudhon dead . . . there are few men whose state of
mind, taken as a whole, inspires me with so much aversion, & all his
influence seems to me mischievous except as a potent dissolvent which is
good so far, but every single thing which he would substitute seems to
me the worst possible in practice & mostly in principle” (ibid., 21).

304
Letter to Henry S. Chapman, EL, CW, XIII, 731-2 (29 Feb., 1848).

305
See Lawrence C. Jennings, France and Europe in 1848. A Study of French
Foreign Affairs in Time of Crisis (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973), 1-23.

306
Letters to S. Austin, EL, CW, XIII, 733-4 (7 and 2 Mar., 1848).

307
Letter to the editor of the Spectator, XXI, 18 Mar., 1848, 273.

308
Even professional revolution-watchers could miss the significance, thus
Friedrich Engels “In the National Assembly only one new element is to be
added—peasants, who constitute five-sevenths of the French nation and
are for the petty-bourgeois party of the National” (letter to Emil Blank
of 28 Mar., 1848, in Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Selected
Correspondence [Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, n.d.], 55).

309
The labour question “has been so well placed on the tapis by the noble
spectacle of France (’spite of Poll Ecoy blunders) that there is no
doubt of its continuing the great question until the hydra-headed
selfishness of the idle classes is crushed by the demands of the lower”
(letter from Harriet Taylor to W.J. Fox of 12 May, 1848, in Hayek, John
Stuart Mill and Harriet Taylor, 123-4).

310
Letter to Marrast, EL, CW, XIII, 735-6 (May, 1848). President of the
Assembly from June on, Marrast appeared to enjoy his arrival in power
Tocqueville, who saw him in the constitutional committee that autumn,
dismissed him as “un républicain à la façon de Barras et qui a toujours
préféré le luxe, la table et les femmes à la démocratie en guenilles.”
As Secretary of the committee, Marrast “mit fort à découvert la paresse,
l’étourderie et l’impudence qui faisaient le fond de son caractère.”
(Tocqueville, Souvenirs, Oeuvres, XII, 184, 192.)

311
Georges Duvau, 1848 (Paris: Gallimard, 1965), 136-7. Such was the
confusion and oddity of events this day that Armand Barbès was received
in a polite manner and shown by Marrast’s secretary to a room on the
same floor of the Hôtel de Ville as the mayor himself occupied. Before
the guard arrived to take him away, he set to work, drawing up a
hypothetical new provisional government “Tout cela,” he said later of
the questions and counter-questions, declarations and threats exchanged
with the officer who at length burst in on him, “est assez étrange et
mème un peu burlesque, mais j’affirme que ce fut ainsi” (Henri
Guillemin, La tragédie de quarante-huit [Geneva: Editions du Milieu du
Monde, 1948], 254).

312
See Frederick A. De Luna, The French Republic under Cavaignac, 1848
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969), 128-73.

313
Mill’s confidence was by no means entirely mistaken, despite the bloody
repression of the insurrection. Cavaignacfailed to prevent or punish the
subsequent fusillades that horrified and enraged Herzen and others, but
he was not, as Maurice Agulhon said, “une sorte de brute guerrière
ou—comme on dira cruellement dans les faubourgs—un ‘prince du sang.’ Ce
militaire etait le plus authentique et le plus fidèle des républicains
de la veille.” (1848, ou L’apprentissage de la république, 1848-1852
[Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1973], 74.) Cf. De Luna’s careful appraisal
in The French Republic under Cavaignac, 161-73.

314
French Affairs, Daily News, 9 Aug., 1848, 3.

315
The French Law against the Press, Spectator, XXI, 19 Aug., 1848, 800,
Collins, The Government and the Newspaper Press, 104-7.

316
Letter to Nichol, EL, CW, XIII, 739-40 (30 Sept., 1848).

317
See Loubère, Louis Blanc, 74-142; Donald Cope McKay, The National
Workshops: A Study in the French Revolution of 1848 (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1933), passim, for the view that the whole 15
May affair was “une opération de police bien menée” and “une manoeuvre
politique aussi, fort intelligente, et signée Marrast,” see Guillemin,
La tragédie de quarante-huit, 231-57. Of Blanc’s own account (Histoire
de la révolution de 1848, 2 vols. [Paris: Librairie Internationale,
1870], II, 66-97, 184-211), which combines his earlier recollections,
McKay notes that it is “often inaccurate and occasionally thoroughly
unreliable” (National Workshops, 177).

318
De Luna, The French Republic under Cavaignac, 395. Mill said it was “one
of the most striking instances in history of the power of a name”
(letter to H.S. Chapman, LL, CW, XIV, 32 [28 May, 1849]).

319
Letter to Nichol, EL, CW, XIII, 739 (30 Sept., 1848).

320
Blanc was vague when testifying before the parliamentary commission
d’enquête after the events, prior to his flight into exile, saying
rightly that nothing was “ready for the immediate solution of the
problem of poverty!” (McKay, National Workshops, 150.)

321
See his defence of Cabet in his letter in the Daily News, 30 Oct., 1849,
3. He did not readily see the importance of Proudhon, “a firebrand,”
“the most mischievous man in Europe, & who has nothing whatever of all
that I like & respect in the Socialists to whom he in no way belongs”
(letter to H.S. Chapman, LL, CW, XIV, 34 [28 May, 1849]).

322
Cf. Tocqueville’s harsh view. “Quant à Marrast, il appartenait à la race
ordinaire des révolutionnaires français qui, par liberté du peuple, ont
toujours entendu le despotisme exerce au nom du peuple” (Souvenirs,
Oeuvres, XII, 182).

323
Letter to H.S. Chapman, LL, CW, XIV, 33 (28 May, 1849).

324
Mill was not alone in mistaking him. Tocqueville said. “Il était très
supérieur à ce que sa vie antérieure et ses folles entreprises avaient
pu faire penser à bon droit de lui. Ce fut ma première impression en le
pratiquant. Il déçut sur ce point ses adversaires et peut-être plus
encore ses amis, si l’on peut donner ce nom aux hommes politiques qui
patronnèrent sa candidature.” (Souvenirs, Oeuvres, XII, 211.)

325
Letter to H.S. Chapman, LL, CW, XIV, 34 (28 May, 1849). Tocqueville saw
Considérant in the constitutional committee, judging him one of the
“rêveurs chimériques . . . qui aurait mérité d’être placé aux petites
maisons s’il eút été sincère, mais je crains qu’il ne méritât mieux”
(Souvenirs, Oeuvres, XII, 180).

326
See André Jean Tudesq, L’élection présidentielle de Louis Napoléon
Bonaparte, 10 décembre 1848 (Paris: Colin, 1965), passim; Collins, The
Government and the Newspaper Press, 100-35.

327
See the debate in Paul Bastid, Doctrines et institutions politiques de
la seconde république, 2 vols. (Paris: Hachette, 1945), II, 79-85. On
the constitution in general, see ibid., 70-149, and the summary account
in De Luna, The French Republic under Cavaignac, 329-35.

328
De Luna, The French Republic under Cavaignac, 395.

329
Constantine Henry Phipps, Marquis of Normanby, A Year of Revolution,
from a Journal Kept in Paris in 1848, 2 vols. (London: Longman, et al.,
1857), II, 375.

330
Letter to Bain, LL, CW, XIV, 76 (Summer 1851).

331
Letter to Louis Blanc, ibid., XV, 562 (9 July, 1858), Louis Blanc, 1848
Historical Revelations Inscribed to Lord Normanby (London: Chapman and
Hall, 1858), subsequently published as Révélations historiques en
réponse au livre de lord Normanby (Brussels Meline, Cans, 1859). Cf. cx
n below.

332
Mill to Giuseppe Mazzini, LL, CW, XV, 548 (21 Feb., 1858). Palmerston’s
government was defeated in February 1858 over the Conspiracy to Murder
Bill that would have permitted handing over political refugees to the
French authorities, closing off “the only impregnable asylum, in
Europe,” as Louis Blanc put it (1848 Historical Revelations, v). Mill
saw it as a failed attempt, in the aftermath of French pressure on
London following Orsini’s bomb attack against Napoleon III, to drag
England “dans la boue, en faisant d’elle une succursale de la police
française” (letter to Pasquale Villari, LL, CW, XV, 550 [9 Mar., 1858]).

1
Autobiography, CW, I, 63-5.

2
There also was published in 1840 his second review of Tocqueville’s
Democracy in America, which, with his first review in 1835 (both of
which are in CW, XVIII, 47-90, 153-204), provides much that is germane
to the themes of this volume.

3
Bain, John Stuart Mill, 31. For a fuller account of his activities in
these years, see the Introduction to CW, I, xii-xiii.

4
John Stuart Mill, 37.

5
Two other of Mill’s early Westminster articles also lead their numbers.
“Law of Libel and Liberty of the Press” in April 1825, and “The Game
Laws” in January 1826.

6
Autobiography, CW, I, 135. Cf. John Cairns’ Introduction, xxxix and li
above.

7
EL, CW, XII, 21-2, 217 (2 Mar., 1834). Mill was acquainted with much of
the contents of the Collection des mémoires, ed. Saint-Albin Berville
and Jean François Barrière, 68 vols. (Paris: Baudoin, 1820-28), though
even his voracious appetite may have failed before the end.

8
For praise of Scott’s novels as historical sources, see 184-5 and 226.

9
EL, CW, XII, 24-5 (27 June, 1828).

10
LL, CW, XVII, 1831 (20 Sept., 1871).

11
See the Introduction, pp. xlvi-l above, for a full discussion. Only the
first two volumes of Alison’s work were reviewed by Mill History of
Europe during the French Revolution. Embracing the Period from the
Assembly of the Notables, in MDCCLXXXIX, to the Establishment of the
Directory, in MDCCXCV, 2 vols. (Edinburgh: Blackwood, London, Cadell,
1833) Eight further volumes were published, III and IV (1835) with a
different subtitle, and V-X (1836-42) with the title History of Europe
from the Commencement of the French Revolution in 1789 to the
Restoration of the Bourbons.

12
EL, CW, XII, 158 (20 May, 1833), 159 (June, 1833), and 162 (5 July,
1833).

13
The variants between the two versions reflect merely the different house
styles of the Examiner and the Monthly Repository.

14
EL, CW, XII, 280.

15
Ibid., 284 (n.d., but certainly November 1835).

16
Ibid., 285 (24 Nov., 1835).

17
“The opinions of this review on the French Revolution not having yet
been expressed, the conductors feel it incumbent on them to enter a
caveat against any presumption respecting those opinions which may be
founded on the Newgate Calendar character of the above extracts. Some
attempt at a judgment of that great historical event, with its good and
its evil, will probably be attempted in the next number.” (CW, I,
603-4.) The disagreement here intimated, and more than hinted at in
Mill’s article (see, e.g., 157-8, 160-3), had reached serious
proportions when Carlyle’s “Memoirs of Mirabeau” in the number of the
review for January 1837 had repelled many of Mill’s friends and
political associates. Though Mill defended his choice of Carlyle as a
contributor, the “Parliamentary History” was actually Carlyle’s final
article in the London and Westminster, and while there seems not to have
been a break in their personal relations for some years, eventually they
came into stark and unrelenting opposition in public over Ireland and
the West Indies.

18
Carlyle to Mill, Collected Letters, IX, 113, 197-8 (9 Jan. and 27 Apr.,
1837).

19
EL, CW, XIII, 427 (16 Apr., 1840).

20
CW, I, 233-5.

21
EL, CW, XII, 197, 239, 254, 255, 262, and 281.

22
Ibid., 346. He subsequently returned the letter to Carlyle, the
manuscript being in Carlyle House.

23
Ibid., 349 and 353 (28 Sept., 1837, Mill’s italics).

24
At one point (196) Mill says, “We will not spoil by translation M.
Littré’s finely chosen phraseology”—and quotes part of a sentence in
French as it appeared seventeen years later.

25
EL, CW, XIII, 731-2 (29 Feb., 1848), LL, CW, XIV, 644 (5 Nov., 1859).
Mill’s attachment is hinted at also in his early suggestion to
Molesworth that he would “probably publish the article with [his] name
hereafter” (LL, CW, XVII, 1978 [22 Sept., 1837]). When “Armand Carrel”
was published in Dissertations and Discussions in 1859, it was already
known to be his, even in its first form it had appeared with his
habitual signature, “A,” and he had distributed some offprints. It is
interesting to note that Walter Bagehot (not claiming special knowledge)
was aware that Mill was the author of the article in its original form.
In the second of his “Letters on the French Coup d’Etat of 1851” he says
(and it is likely Mill would have been pleased at the comment). “I
remember reading, several years ago, an article in the Westminster
Review, on the lamented Armand Carrel, in which the author, well known
to be one of our most distinguished philosophers, took occasion to
observe, that what the French most wanted was ‘Un homme de caractère’ ”
(in Collected Works, ed. Norman St. John Stevas, IV [London: The
Economist, 1968], 38).

26
EL, CW, XIII, 431 (27 Apr., 1840).

27
See ibid., 498, 504-5, 529, 543, 548-9, and 551.

28
Ibid., 595 (Sept., 1843).

29
Ibid., 505, 602 (3 Mar., 1842, and 23 Oct., 1843).

30
Ibid., 612; Bain, John Stuart Mill, 78. Here Bain, like most of his
contemporaries, including Mill and others of Scottish origin and
residence, uses “English” rather than “British,” although the Edinburgh
Review in its origin and continuing force was true to its name.

31
See EL, CW, XIII, 629-30 (29 May, 1844), he wrote most of the Principles
in 1846 (see the Textual Introduction to CW, II, lxv-lxvii).

32
EL, CW, XIII, 618, 629-30, 646.

33
Letters to Macvey Napier of 8 and 13 Oct., 1845, in Macvey Napier (the
younger), Selections from the Correspondence of Macvey Napier (London:
Macmillan, 1897), 507, 509-10. Jeffrey had not entertained the same high
view of Mill’s “Michelet,” commenting to Napier on 27 December, 1843
(and thus indicating that the number appeared—as was common—before its
ostensible publication date). “There is thought and some clever
suggestions in Mill’s Michelet, but nothing systematic nor much well
made out. I cannot but think, too, that he has made a bad choice of
citations, the greater part of which are harsh, self-willed, and
affectedly dogmatic.” (Ibid., 455.)

34
EL, CW, XIII, 683 (20 Oct., 1845).

35
Ibid., 627 (May? 1844).

36
Ibid., 632-3, 634.

37
Ibid., 701.

38
He explicitly excluded from Dissertations and Discussions material of
passing interest, carrying the policy so far—if not always immediately
intelligibly—as to exclude all the essays gathered in Volume VI of the
Collected Works.

39
Autobiography, CW, I, 241.

40
Bain, John Stuart Mill, 93-4. Mill’s correspondence at the time further
supports these judgments. His view of Carrel’s relevance was not
idiosyncratic. In the immediate aftermath of the February Revolution, on
2 March, there was a procession to Carrel’s grave in the St. Maur
cemetery, as a preliminary to his remains being removed to the Pantheon.
Present were many “respectable young men, who walked arm-in-arm, wearing
sprigs of everlasting in their hats, and sung in chorus the ‘Chant des
Girondins,’ ” Marrast (now editor of the revived National, the voice of
the Provisional Government) delivered a eulogy. Then Emile de Girardin,
editor of La Presse, “by whose hand Carrel fell . . . bewailed his own
misfortune in having occasioned the death of so illustrious a citizen. .
. .” The French were more forgiving of Girardin than was Mill (see the
Introduction, lxvii n above), for he “was loudly applauded” and then
“embraced” by Marrast. (See “The Republic of France,” Daily News, 4
Mar., 1848, 4, and 6 Mar., 2.)

41
LL, CW, XIV, 13-14.

42
John Stuart Mill, 93.

43
LL, CW, XIV, 7, 10. He went to France about 20 April, returning about 12
May, and so perhaps this plan was fulfilled.

44
Ibid., 15.

45
Ibid., 23-4 (Apr. 1849).

46
Ibid., XV, 545 (11 Jan., 1858). Consequently Blanc quoted the long
passage on the droit du travail, prefacing it by saying it was
appropriate for him to leave his defence “in the hands of one whose
authority the English people have long since learned to respect,—a man
highly distinguished for his qualities both of head and heart, and
incontestably the first political economist of our day, Mr. John Stuart
Mill.” And he followed the quotation by describing Mill as “one of the
most eminent philosophers and writers of this country.” (Blanc, 1848,
Historical Revelations, 83-7. Blanc quoted the passage: “To one class of
thinkers . . . the present race of mankind” [348-50 below].)

47
See CW, X, cxix and 494.

48
Recurrences after the first such change, which may be taken to derive
from it, are like all similarly entailed revisions counted as type 4.
For further comment on this particular change, see John M. Robson, “
‘Joint Authorship’ Again: The Evidence of the Third Edition of Mill’s
Logic,” Mill News Letter, VI (Spring 1971), 15-20.

49
In two cases our reading of the letter to Carlyle differs from that in
Earlier Letters at 204j, a cancelled “at” appears more likely than “on”,
and at 204v-v the manuscript seems to agree with the reading in all
versions of “Armand Carrel,” i.e., “respect”.

50
One type 4 change, the addition of “de” to Lamartine’s name, is noted
only on its first appearance (338k-k).

51
The argument for this practice is given in my “Principles and Methods in
the Collected Edition of John Stuart Mill,” in Editing
Nineteenth-Century Texts, ed. John M. Robson (Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 1967), 96-122.

52
In a few cases my reading of the manuscript differs from that in the
edition by Ney MacMinn, J.M. McCrimmon, and J.R. Hainds, Bibliography of
the Published Writings of J.S. Mill (Evanston Northwestern University
Press, 1945), to which page references (as MacMinn) are given in the
headnotes. The corrected scribal errors (the erroneous reading first,
with the corrected one following in square brackets) are

168.15 intituled [entitled]

258.14 Lecture on history [Lectures on History]

296.7 Duveyriai’s [Duveyrier’s]

318.9 Bunghan’s [Brougham’s]

367.8 articles [article]

53
Following the page and line notation, the first reference is to Mill’s
identification, the corrected identification (that which appears in the
present text) follows in square brackets. There is no indication of the
places where a dash has been substituted for a comma to indicate
adjacent pages, where “P” or “Pp” replaces “p” or “pp” (or the reverse),
or where the volume number has been added to the reference

7.36 41 [41-5]

10.39 57 [60-6]

12.2 289 [289-92]

12.29 379 [379-81]

14.5 161 [160-1]

21n.1 xx [xx-xxi]

29n.1 142 [142n]

30n.1 10 [10-11]

31n.2 94 [94-5]

31n.4 136 [136-7]

35n.6 36 [36-7]

36n.1101 [101-2]

36n.2 111 [111-12]

36n.12 114 [114-15]

36n.18 120 [120-2]

44n.1 102 [101-3]

44n.1 203 [201-4]

44n.1 309 [308-9]

44n.2 240 [239-40]

48n.1 318 [318-19]

48n.2 347 [347-8]

48.27 297 [297-8]

50n.1 243 [242-3]

68n.14 xl [xx]

75n.3 215-16 [215n-17n]

75n.13 177 [174-7]

75n.23 127 [126-7]

85n.7 310, 318 [308, 316]

85n.10 236-7 [237-8]

85n.10 481 [482-8]

88.35 130 [130-1]

93n.12 25 [23]

94n.1 278 [277-8]

100n.7 389 [388-91]

104n.3 42 to 47 [46-7] [moved from text and reference divided to match
quotations]

106n.1 449 [450] [moved to footnote in this ed.]

106n.2 455 [454-6] [moved to footnote in this ed.]

140n.1 461 [461-2]

141n.17 256 [256-62] [full reference for the document cited]

142n.6 262 [262-76] [full reference for the document cited]

146n.1 324 [324-5]

146n.4 319 [318-20]

147n.3 267-306 [267-400]

148n.12 i [no vol. given, as 1st ed. in fact one volume, same change
throughout this essay]

149n.6 149, &c [149-51]

150n.1 12-48-84, &c [48, 12, 84, 48]

152n.1 141-166 [141-65]

151n.2 Note, p. 281 [p. 282n]

153n.1 310 [110]

153n.2 161 [160-1]

157n.2 ii, 75-87. [Vol. II, pp. 71-7.] [to conform to the ed. used
elsewhere in this volume, and to the events described]

237n.7 171 [171n]

244n.1 343 [343-4]

247n.1 297-302 [297-8, 300-2] [moved from text and reference divided to
match quotations]

250n.2 538-543 [537-43]

251n.3 607-8 [606-7]

272n.1 Vol. iv p. 191 [Vol. III, pp. 191-2]

281n.1 Vol. iii ad fin [Vol. II, pp. 451-2] [not at the end]

301.30 168 [168-70]

304.35 3-6 [4-6] [earlier reference to 3 added above]

310.35 69-84 [83-4] [the preceding quotations are given specific
references, JSM is presumably referring to the whole of the third
Letter, which begins on 69, but his first quotation from the Letter is
from 71, and the Letter ends on 100]

379n.2 vol. iii p. 165 [Vol. XIX, p. 239] [the given reference not being
verifiable (the passage is in Chap. 16 of Bk. 5, so perhaps the “p. 165”
is explicable), the actual reference in the SC ed. is given]

[*]
Thucydides (Greek and English), trans. Charles Forster Smith, 4 vols.
(London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1969),
Vol. I, pp. 3-7 (i-iii).

[*]
David Hume, The History of England from the Invasion of Julius Caesar to
the Revolution in 1688 (1754-62), 8 vols. (London: Cadell, Rivington, et
al., 1823).

[†]
Mill treated the subject at length in “Scott’s Life of Napoleon,”
Westminster Review, IX (Apr., 1828), 251-313 (reprinted at pp. 53-110
below).

[*]
Mill is referring, at least in part, to Collection des mémoires relatifs
à la révolution française, ed. Saint-Albin Berville and Jean François
Barrière, 68 vols. (Paris: Baudouin, 1820-28).

[*]
See Gazette Nationale, ou Le Moniteur Universel, 1789, Introduction, p.
235.

*
[Translated from] Mignet, pp. 41-5.

[*]
See Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau, speeches of 8 and 9 July,
1789, in Oeuvres de Mirabeau, 9 vols. (Paris: Dupont and
Brissot-Thivars, 1825-27), Vol. VII, pp. 148-58 and 158-63.

[†]
Louis XVI, “Réponse du roi à l’assemblée nationale” (11 July, 1789),
Gazette Nationale, ou Le Moniteur Universel, 10-13 July, 1789, p. 74.

[*]
Translated from Mignet, pp. 57-60.

*
Mignet, pp. 60-6.

[*]
See “Décret relatif aux troubles excités sous prétexte de religion” (16
Nov., 1791), in Gazette Nationale, ou Le Moniteur Universel, 17 Nov.,
1791, p. 1338, “Décret concernant les émigrans” (9 Nov., 1791), ibid.,
10 Nov., 1791, pp. 1310-11; “Décret d’augmentation de vingt mille hommes
pour l’armee” (8 June, 1792), ibid., 9 June, 1792, p. 668; Louis XVI,
“Refus de sanction au décret contre les prêtres non assermentés”;
“Proclamation du roi” (12 Nov., 1791), and untitled refusal, ibid., 20
Dec., 1791, p. 1481, 14 Nov., 1791, p. 1325, and 20 June, 1792, p. 716,
respectively.

*
[Translated from] Mignet, pp. 289-92.

[*]
François Bergoing, Antoine Bertrand, Jacques Boileau, Jean Baptiste
Boyer-Fonfrède, Jean François Martin Gardien, Jean René Gomaire, Pierre
François Joachim Henry-Larivière, Augustin Bernard François Legoazre de
Kervélégan, Etienne Mollevault, Jean Paul Rabaut Saint-Etienne, Charles
Vaissière de Saint-Martin-Valogne, and Louis François Sébastien Viger.

[†]
The “modérés” included Jean Jacques de Bréard-Duplessys, Louis Bernard
Guyton-Morveau, and Jean Baptiste Treilhard.

†
Mignet, pp. 379-81.

[*]
Richard Chenevix, “History and Prospects of English Industry,” Quarterly
Review, XXXIV (June, 1826), 47.

[*]
E.g., in John Stuart Mill, “Mignet’s French Revolution,” Westminster
Review, V (Apr., 1826), 385-98 (reprinted above, pp. 1-14), and in five
articles, probably by Henry Southern: “Court of Louis XIV and the
Regency,” ibid., II (July, 1824), 121-49; “Barante, Histoire des ducs de
Bourgogne,” ibid. (Oct., 1824), 442-62; “Montlosier’s French Monarchy,”
ibid., III (Jan., 1825), 35-48; “The Chronicles of Froissart,” ibid., IV
(July, 1825), 1-20; and “Private Memoirs of Madame du Hausset,” ibid., V
(Jan., 1826), 249-62.

[†]
Mill may have in mind such works as James Peller Malcolm, London
redivivum, 4 vols. (London: Rivington, et al., 1802-07), and David Pugh
(“David Hughson”), London: Being an Accurate History and Description, 6
vols. (London: Stratford, 1805-09), but he ignores other works, such as
Henry Hunter, The History of London, 2 vols. (London: Stockdale, 1811),
which is not a history merely “of buildings.”

[*]
The reference is almost certainly to David Hume, whose History of
England was frequently criticized by Mill on these grounds.

*
Introduction, pp. xx-xxi.

†
The following note appended to the preface of the second edition, may
serve as a specimen of the frantic rage which the work has kindled in
the ultra-royalist writers, and of the dignified calmness with which
their reproaches have been met by M. Dulaure.

“La passion de ces écrivains les a poussés fort au-delà des convenances,
de la raison et de la vérité.

“M. de Saint-Victor, auteur d’un Tableau Historique et Pittoresque de
Paris [3 vols. (Paris: Nicolle and Le Normant, 1808)], sans penser que
l’espèce de rivalité qui existe entre nous devait rendre son jugement
suspect, a publié un prospectus où il fait l’éloge de son Tableau
Historique, et parle ainsi de mon Histoire de Paris C’est un scandale
sans exemple, une longue et furieuse diatribe contre la religion et la
monarchie, un amas de mensonges grossiers, de calomnies impudentes. Il
assure que son Tableau de Paris servira de contrepoison aux mensonges et
aux infamies de toute espèce accumulees dans mon ouvrage.

“Je ne crois pas que, parmi tous les prospectus passés et présens, on
puisse en trouver un seul qui soit aussi riche en invectives, je ne veux
ni ne dois y répondre.

“Qu’opposer à la Gazette de France, qui en Octobre 1821, affirme
sérieusement, que je suis un prêtre défroqué échappé à la basilique de
Clermont, que lui opposer, si ce n’est un démenti? [The slighting
mention of Dulaure’s work in the Gazette de France, 18 Oct., 1821, p. 3,
does not contain the words here cited, nor does the earlier scathing
review of 30 Aug., 1821, pp. 3-4.]

“Que dire à cet homme de lettres, qui en 1821, a pris l’engagement
public de me convaincre d’imposture, et qui n’a pas encore satisfait à
cet engagement? Que lui dire, si ce n’est; j’attends?

“Que dire à ces journalistes, qui, pour trouver matière à leurs
censures, ont puisé dans mon propre errata des fautes que j’y ai
moi-même reconnues et corrigées?

“Ces hommes, pour lancer leurs traits sans danger, se rangent bravement
sous le boucher respectable de la puissance.” [Dulaure, Vol. I, pp. ii
n-iii n.]

[*]
Cicero, Epistolarae ad Atticum, in Opera, 10 vols. (Leyden: Elzevir,
1642), Vol. III, p. 111 (IV, vi, 2).

[*]
St. Gregory I, Homiliarum in Ezechielem prophetam, in Opera omnia, Vols.
LXXV-LXXIX of Patrologiae cursus completus, series latina, ed. Jacques
Paul Migne (Paris: Migne, 1849), Vol. LXXVI, col. 842.

*
[Dulaure,] Preface to the Second Edition. [Vol. I, pp. ii-vii. Mill’s
square-bracketed addition.]

*
Dulaure, Vol. I, p. 460.

*
Ibid., p. 461.

*
Ibid., Vol. II, p. 142n.

[*]
See Matthew Paris, Angli historia major, ed. William Wats (London:
Hodgkinson, 1640), p. 229.

*
[Translated from] Sismondi, Vol. V, pp. 10-11.

[*]
Guibert.

*
[Translated from] Sismondi, Vol. V, pp. 94-5.

[†]
Ibid., pp. 210-11.

†
Dulaure, Vol. II, pp. 136-7. [Dulaure refers to “l’abbé Suger et les
grandes Chroniques.”]

*
Dulaure, Vol. II, pp. 154-60.

†
Ibid., Vol. I, p. 462.

*
Ibid., Vol. II, p. 152.

†
Ibid., p. 343.

‡
See a recent work of considerable merit, intituled, Louis XII, et
François I, par P.L. Roederer, [2 vols. (Paris: Bossange, 1825),] Vol.
II, p. 252.

[*]
Samuel Richardson, The History of Sir Charles Grandison (1753-54), 3rd
ed., 7 vols. (London: Richardson, 1754).

[†]
Henry Hallam, View of the State of Europe during the Middle Ages, 2
vols. (London: Murray, 1818), p. 552.

*
M. Dulaure admits, that there were some estimable men; but he finds them
chiefly among the clergy. He mentions only one name among the barons;
Charles Count of Flanders, surnamed the Good. [Vol. II, p. 196.] M. de
Sismondi has given us some account of this personage; and a few
anecdotes concerning the most estimable nobleman of his day, may not be
uninteresting, as illustrative of the ideas of the times. He kept, we
are told, three doctors of theology in his house, who, every night,
after supper, read and expounded the Bible. He enacted severe laws
against profane swearing, and was “marvellously severe and rigorous” in
executing those which had already been enacted against witches and
necromancers. He banished all Jews and usurers from his territories;
declaring, in language oddly compounded of feudal and theological ideas,
“qu’il ne les voulait souffrir jusqu’à ce qu’ils eussent satisfait et
amendé le meurtre par eux commis du fils de leur seigneur.” ([Pierre d’]
Oudegherst, Annales et Chroniques de Flandre [2 vols. (Ghent: de
Goesin-Verhaeghe; Paris: Janet, [1789]), Vol. I, p. 360; Mill is quoting
from Sismondi, Vol. V, p. 205.]) We are next informed of the precautions
of this enlightened prince to obviate famine. These consisted in
prohibiting les cervoises, (probably beer), destroying all the dogs and
calves, and forcing the corn-dealers to open their granaries and sell
their corn at a reasonable price. This last act of despotism brought on
a quarrel between him and van der Strate, a great corn-dealer, and the
head of one of the most powerful families in Flanders. In the course of
the dispute, insulting doubts having been intimated concerning the title
of the van der Strates to be considered of free condition, that family
were so incensed at the affront, that they murdered the good count at
the foot of the altar. His successor [Guillaume Cliton] revenged his
death by causing a hundred and eleven persons to be precipitated from a
high tower. (Sismondi, Vol. V, pp. 205-7.)

*
Sismondi, Vol. VI, p. 36. See also p. 27.

†
[Jacques Nicolas Augustin] Thierry, Histoire de la Conquête de
l’Angleterre par les Normands [(1825), 2nd ed., 4 vols. (Paris:
Sautelet, 1826)], Vol. III, p. 337.

‡
Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 30. [See Roger (of Hoveden), Annalium pars prior et
posterior, in Rerum anglicarum scriptores, ed. Henry Savile (London:
Bishop, et al., 1596), p. 373.]

§
Thierry, Histoire, Vol. IV, pp. 36-7.

*
Sismondi, Vol. VI, pp. 101-2.

†
Ibid., pp. 111-12. It is worthy of remark, that the other great
historical example of royal chivalry, the Black Prince, also caused
several thousand persons to be massacred in cold blood at Limoges. The
circumstance is related by Froissart, by whom it is disapproved [Jean
Froissart, Chroniques, in Collection des chroniques nationales
françaises écrites en langue vulgaire du treizième au seizième siècle,
ed. Jean Alexandre Buchon, 48 vols. (Paris: Verdière, 1824-26), Vol. V,
p. 220.] In the later period of chivalry, which has never been
sufficiently distinguished from the earlier, increasing civilization had
mitigated considerably the horrors of knightly vengeance.

‡
Thierry, Histoire, Vol. IV, p. 84.

[*]
Hubert Walter.

§
Thierry, Histoire, Vol. IV, pp. 114-15. The words of an old writer
[Bertrand de Born] on this occasion, are characteristic: The two kings,
says he, after this truce, would no longer occupy themselves in war, but
only in hunting, amusements, and doing evil to their men: “E en far tort
à lor baros.” Choix des Poésies Originales des Troubadours, publié par
[François Just Marie] Raynouard [6 vols. (Paris: Didot, 1816-21),] Vol.
V, p. 93 (apud Thierry, ibid.).

¶
Ibid., pp. 120-2.

[*]
Edmund Burke, Reflections on the Revolution in France, in Works, 8 vols.
(London: Dodsley, et al., 1792-1827), Vol. III, p. 111.

*
It may not be impertinent here to remark, that when Bayard lived,
knighthood, in its original character, had long been extinct; that
Bayard himself had never received the accolade, but was a chevalier by
birth, like most of the noblemen of his day, that he was not even
called, during his life, the chevalier Bayard, but Captain Bayard, le
capitaine Bayard and that the title of knight without fear and without
reproach, supposed to have been conferred upon him by the suffrage of
his contemporaries as the peculiar reward of his eminent virtue, was in
reality a common title of courtesy, shared with him by many other
warriors of the time. (See the work of M. Roederer, already referred to
[Louis XII et François Ier, Vol. II, pp. 280-3].)

[†]
See Livy (Latin and English), 14 vols., trans. B.O. Foster, et al.
(London: Heinemann: New York: Putnam’s Sons; and [Vols. VI-XIV]
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1919-59), Vol. VII, pp.
190-4 (xxvi, 50, 1-14).

*
See an able chapter on chivalry in M. Roederer’s work. M. Roederer,
after quoting Mr. Hallam for the remark, that the battles of chivalry
were an affair of very little danger, reproaches his countrymen with
having suffered an Englishman to be the first man to whom this
observation occurred. If he had read further, he would have seen that
Mr. Hallam, though he made the remark, knew not how to apply it. We
believe, that M. Roederer himself is the first writer who has turned it
to the proper account. [Roederer, “De l’esprit chevaleresque attribué à
François Ier, et de la chevalerie,” Sect. 5 in Vol. II of Louis XII et
François Ier, pp. 238-94; for the reference to Hallam’s View (Vol. I,
pp. 358-60 in the 1st ed.) and Roederer’s comment, see pp. 260, 261n.]

*
Sismondi, Vol. VII, p. 108.

†
Ibid., pp. 122-3.

*
“Dans toutes les guerres du moyen âge,” says M. de Sismondi, “on aurait
pu dire que ce qu’on nommait bravoure était en raison inverse du vrai
courage; celui qui par ses armes était le plus redoutable, était aussi
celui qui risquait le moins.” (Vol. VI, p. 364.)

[*]
For both phrases, see Burke, Reflections, p. 111.

[†]
View, Vol. II, p. 549.

[‡]
Ibid., p. 551.

[§]
Ibid., p. 549.

*
The mild and respectful treatment of prisoners, so universal in modern
Europe, being in general ascribed to the refining influence of chivalry
on modern manners, we quote from M. de Sismondi the following anecdote,
which speaks for itself. The event related took place in the reign of
our Henry I, and was several years posterior to the first crusade. “Au
commencement de l’année 1119, le roi Henri se vit encore abandonné par
un autre de ses vassaux, sur la fidélité duquel il n’avait pas cru
pouvoir concevoir un doute. C’était Eustache de Breteuil, à qui il avait
donné en mariage Juliane, sa fille naturelle. Eustache profitant de
l’embarras où il voyait son beau-père, lui avait demandé en don la tour
d’Ivry, qui avait appartenu à ses prédécesseurs. Henri ne voulut pas
s’en dessaisir; mais afin de donner au comte de Breteuil une garantie
que cette tour ne serait jamais employée à lui nuire, il obligea Harenc
(c’était le nom de l’homme qui en avait le commandement) à remettre,
comme ôtage, son fils au comte de Breteuil, tandis qu’il se fit livrer à
lui-même les deux filles que le comte avait eues de sa fille Juliane. Il
semblait ainsi avoir établi entr’eux une garantie mutuelle, qui lui
aurait répondu de leur fidélité, si la violence des passions, chez ces
hommes féroces, avait pu être enchaînée, ou par les liens du sang, ou
par le danger de leurs proches. Eustache de Breteuil, qui ne pouvait
croire que ses filles courussent aucun danger entre les mains de leur
grand-père, somma le gouverneur de la tour d’Ivry de lui ouvrir cette
forteresse, s’il ne voulait pas que son fils fût livré sous ses yeux aux
plus horribles tourmens, et comme celui-ci se refusait à perdre son
château et à violer son serment, Eustache fit à l’instant arracher les
yeux du jeune homme, et les envoya au malheureux Raoul de Harenc. Raoul
vint se jeter aux pieds de Henri, et lui demander justice de l’outrage
qui lui avait été fait sous la foi royale. La pitié pour un brave et
fidèle chevalier, le ressentiment contre son gendre, l’emportèrent dans
le coeur du roi d’Angleterre sur l’amour de son sang; il abandonna à la
vengeance de Raoul ses propres petites-filles, qu’il gardait en ôtage,
et auxquelles, par de terribles représailles. Raoul fit arracher les
yeux et couper le nez. Le gouverneur d’Ivry annonça ensuite au comte de
Breteuil que sa barbarie était retombée sur ses enfans, qu’ils étaient
mutilés comme son fils l’avait été, mais que leur vie lui répondait
encore de la vie de son fils, et que la tour ne lui serait point livrée.
A la nouvelle de cette effroyable vengeance, le comte de Breteuil arbora
les drapeaux de France, et commença à faire la guerre à son beau-père.
Toutefois les habitans de Breteuil ne voulurent pas le seconder dans sa
rébellion; ils ouvrirent la ville à Henri. Juliane, qui s’y trouvait
alors, n’eut que le temps de se réfugier dans la citadelle, elle y fut
assiégée par le roi son père; les vivres lui manquaient, et elle fut
bientôt réduite à offrir de capituler. Son père ne voulut lui accorder
que des conditions honteuses: le pont qui unissait la citadelle à la
ville, avait été coupé; le roi d’Angleterre ne permit point qu’il fût
rétabli pour donner passage à Juliane. Il exigea qu’après avoir relevé
ses habits au-dessus de sa ceinture, exposée au froid du mois de
Février, à la vue et à la risée de toute l’armée, elle se fit dévaler
avec des cordes du haut des murs, jusque dans le fossé plein d’eau, où
il la fit reprendre.” (Sismondi, Vol. V, pp. 139-41.) This anecdote, as
the reader will perceive, illustrates several features of the times at
once.

*
Dulaure, Vol. III, p. 184 [citing Clement VI, Letter to King John and
Queen Joanna of France, in Luc d’Achery, Spicilegium (1655-77), new ed.,
3 vols. (Paris: Montalant, 1723), Vol. III, p. 724].

†
Roederer, Louis XII et François ler, Vol. II, p. 251.

‡
Ibid., p. 290.

§
Ibid., p. 268.

*
See Sismondi, Vol. VIII, pp. 101-3, and Vol. VII, pp. 201-4, 308-9.

†
See, among innumerable other examples, the description of the sacking of
Strasburg, in Sismondi, Vol. IV, p. 128.

[*]
John Millar, An Historical View of the English Government (London:
Strahan, Cadell, and Murray, 1787), pp. 36-7, 79-81.

*
See, for example, the account of the birth and parentage of William the
Conqueror, in Sismondi, Vol. IV, pp. 239-40. The story is curious, and
characteristic of the times. It resembles an anecdote related of the
Anglo-Saxon King Edgar [See William of Malmesbury, Gesta regum anglorum,
ed. Thomas Duffus Hardy, 2 vols. (London: English Historical Society,
1840), Vol. I, p. 236 (Bk. II, Sect. 148); Mill probably (see the next
footnote) took the reference from David Hume. The History of England
(1754-62), 8 vols. (London: Cadell, et al., 1823), Vol. I, pp. 122-3.]

*
Hume, Vol. I, pp. 318-19. See, in Dr. [Robert] Henry’s History of Great
Britain (1771-93), [2nd ed., 12 vols. (London: Strahan and Cadell,
1788-95),] Vol. VI, pp. 347-8, the remarkable words of a great council
of the clergy on this occasion.

*
Sismondi, Vol. VIII, p. 98.

†
Ibid., p. 219.

‡
Dulaure, Vol. III, p. 54.

§
Sismondi, Vol. IX, p. 412.

¶
Dulaure, Vol. III, p. 260.

*
See ibid., Vol. III, pp. 242-3, for a remarkable instance. See also
Sismondi, Vol. IX, p. 195. “Le siècle,” (says he) “dont nous faisons
l’histoire, est celui de la plus grande corruption de l’ordre
judiciaire; il n’y a pas un des procès intentés sous Philippe le Bel,
qui ne porte des marques intrinsèques de faux témoignage.”

†
See a striking instance of their servility even as early as the reign of
Philip Augustus (Sismondi, Vol. VI, p. 154.)

‡
Ibid., Vol. VIII, p. 428. He compares their condition to that of the
subjects of Turkey.

[*]
Pierre de Bourdeille, abbé de Brantôme, Mémoires, 6 vols. (Leyden:
Sambix, 1665-66).

*
It is a quality, however, by no means peculiar to M. Dulaure; several
other French writers of the present day are distinguished by it in an
equal, perhaps in a still greater degree. M. Roederer, in the work from
which we have had occasion to quote, is a striking example.

[*]
In addition to Millar’s Historical View, Mill may have in mind his
Observations Concerning the Distinction of Ranks in Society (London:
Richardson and Murray, 1771).

[*]
See, e.g., Anon., review of Scott, Life of Napoleon Buonaparte, Monthly
Review, n.s. VI (Sept., 1827), 92-5.

[†]
Pp. 85ff.

[‡]
Walter Scott, Waverley; or, ’Tis Sixty Years Since, 3 vols. (Edinburgh:
Constable, London: Longman, et al., 1814).

[*]
Scott, Old Mortality, in Tales of My Landlord, 4 vols. (Edinburgh:
Blackwood, London: Murray, 1816), Vols. II-IV; Malcolm Laing, The
History of Scotland, 2 vols. (London: Cadell and Davies; Edinburgh:
Manners and Miller, 1800); and John Galt, Ringan Gilhaize; or, The
Covenanters, 3 vols. (Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd, 1823).

[†]
François Auguste Marie Mignet, Histoire de la révolution française, 2
pts. (Paris: Didot, 1824); Jacques Charles Bailleul, Examen critique de
l’ouvrage posthume de Mme la baronne de Staël, 2 vols. (Paris: Bailleul,
1818).

*
On presenting Louis XVI with the keys of Paris, Bailly said, comparing
the entry of Louis with that of Henry IV, “Il avait reconquis son
peuple, aujourd’hui c’est le peuple qui a reconquis son roi.” Our author
places this in Bailly’s speech of the 6th October 1789, and moralizes on
the insulting irony of such an address on such an occasion. For this he
refers to the Mémoires de Bailly, Choix de ses Lettres et Discours; and
the speech is there, sure enough, but the expressions above alluded to
are not in it. Those expressions were used on a different occasion,
immediately after the capture of the Bastille, when they were neither
insulting nor inappropriate, but well suited, on the contrary, to
conciliate the vanquished, and soften the humiliation of defeat. [See
Jean Sylvain Bailly, Mémoires de Bailly, 3 vols. (Paris: Baudouin,
1821-22), Vol. II, p. 58; Scott, Vol. I, p. 199.]

[*]
For the Aeolic digamma, see Alexander Pope, The Dunciad (1728), in
Works, new ed., ed. Joseph Warton, et al., 10 vols. (London, Priestley,
and Hearn, 1822-25), Vol. V, p. 253 (Bk. IV, ll. 215-18); Richard Payne
Knight, An Analytical Essay on the Greek Alphabet (London: Elmsley,
1791); and (closer to the date of Mill’s comment) such works as Thomas
Burgess, A Letter to the Lord Bishop of Durham (Carmarthon: Evans,
1815), Burgess, Vindication of the Late Bishop of Asaph’s Edition of the
Lacedaemonian Decree (Durham: printed Walker, 1816); Herbert Marsh,
Horae Pelasgicae (London: Murray, 1815), and the edition published in
1820 of Knight’s Carmina Homerica, Ilias et Odyssia (London: Valpy). For
the Iron Mask, see, e.g., Joseph Delort, Histoire de l’homme au masque
de fer (Paris: Delaforest, 1825); and George Agar Ellis, The True
History of the State-Prisoner Commonly Called “The Iron Mask” (London:
Murray, 1826).

[*]
Scott, Vol. I, pp. 43-4.

[*]
See Livy (Latin and English), 14 vols., trans. B.O. Foster, et al.
(London: Heinemann: New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1919-59), Vol. III, p. 334
(vi. 39, 9-10), he records the sentiment as being that of two tribunes,
Gaius Licinius and Lucius Sextius.

[†]
Francis Bacon, The Essays or Counsels, Civile and Morall (1625), in The
Works of Francis Bacon, ed. James Spedding, et al., 14 vols. (London:
Longman, et al., 1857-74), Vol. VI, p. 373.

*
[Anne Louise Germaine Necker, baronne de Staël-Holstein,] Considérations
sur [les principaux événemens de] la Révolution Françoise, Pt. I, Chap.
vi [Vol. I, p. 79].

[‡]
Scott, Vol. I, pp. 30-1.

[*]
Travels during the Years 1787, 1788, and 1789 (1792), 2nd ed., 2 vols.
(London and Bury St. Edmunds: Richardson, 1794), Vol. I, pp. 597-629.

[†]
Scott, Vol. I, p. 61.

[‡]
Ibid., pp. 61, 59.

[§]
Marie Jean Antoine Nicolas Caritat, marquis de Condorcet, Vie de
Voltaire (1787), in Voltaire, Oeuvres complètes, 66 vols. (Paris:
Renouard, 1817-25), Vol. LXIV, p. 169.

[¶]
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot, “A Monsieur de C[ondorcet] sur le livre De
l’esprit” (1760?), in Oeuvres, 9 vols. (Paris: Delance, et al.,
1808-11), Vol. IX, pp. 288-98.

[*]
Scott, Vol. I, p. 53.

[†]
Encyclopédie, ou Dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des
métiers, ed. Denis Diderot and Jean Le Rond d’Alembert, 17 vols. (Paris:
Briasson, et al., 1751-65). Voltaire in fact contributed more than
twenty articles (in the E. F. and G sections), e.g., “Esprit,” Vol. V,
pp. 973-5; “Franchise,” Vol. VII, pp. 283-4; “Gens de lettres,” ibid.,
pp. 599-600; and “Histoire,” Vol. VIII, pp. 220-5.

*
With how much greater discrimination does the editor of Madame Campan’s
memoirs animadvert upon the same persons, and the same faults, which are
the subject of our author’s less judicious and less considerate
disapprobation. After censuring some of the philosophers, and in
particular Diderot by name, for participating practically in the
licentiousness of the times, he adds, “Non que je veuille assurément
jeter du blâme sur les philosophes: si leur conduite était légère, la
plupart de leurs doctrines étaient pures; elles ont passé de leurs
écrits dans nos moeurs. Si les liens de la famille se sont resserrés; si
nous sommes meilleurs époux, meilleurs pères, et plus hommes de bien; si
le vice est méprisé, si la jeunesse, avide d’études sérieuses, repousse
avec dégoût les ouvrages licencieux qu’accueillait le libertinage de ses
pères, nous le devons à un nouvel ordre de choses. En morale, comme en
politique, en législation, en finances, les philosophes ont préparé
d’utiles réformes.” ([Jean François Barrière, “Notice sur la vie de
madame Campan,” in Jeanne Louise Henriette Genest Campan, Mémoires sur
la vie privée de Marie Antoinette, 2 vols. (London: Colburn and
Bossange, 1823), Vol. I,] p. xx.)

The tone of this author, who, even while blaming the men, eagerly bears
testimony to the admirable moral effect of their writings, suggests,
when contrasted with the opposite language of Sir Walter Scott, an acute
sense of the difference between a writer who really knows his subject,
and one who has only dipped into it to find reasons for opinions which
he already held. That author must indeed know little of French
literature and history, who can accuse the philosophers of having
demoralized the French people! the philosophers, than whom, it may
safely be affirmed, no set of writers ever did one tenth part so much to
elevate the standard of morals among their countrymen.

For a powerful defence of the philosophers against these vulgar
imputations, see pp. 236 to 279 of the first volume of a most valuable
work recently published at Paris, and intituled, Histoire de France
depuis la fin du règne de Louis XVI jusqu’à l’année 1825, par l’abbé de
Montgaillard. [9 vols. (Paris: Moutardier, 1827).] The testimony of this
author in favour of the philosophers possesses the greater weight, as
their most prejudiced enemies may be defied to point out any one
well-founded accusation against them which he has disguised or
extenuated. Some of them, indeed, are treated by him with unmerited
severity. In further illustration of the same subject, see Bailleul’s
Examen Critique de l’ouvrage posthume de Madame de Staël, Vol. I, pp.
153-6.

While we are on a similar subject, we cannot pass unnoticed our author’s
childish remarks on certain passages in the memoirs of Madame Roland;
remarks which are in themselves sufficient to prove his complete
unfitness for the office of an historian, if incapacity to estimate the
modes of thinking and feeling of another state of society, and inability
to distinguish between differences of manners and differences of morals,
be a disqualification for writing history. We will appeal to every
candid person who has really read the autobiography of this admirable
woman, whether any thing can be conceived more opposite to the whole
tone and character of her mind, than “habitual impurity of language and
ideas,” [Scott, Vol. I, p. 56,] and whether the very passages in her
memoirs, which our author considers to be proofs of it, are not, on the
contrary, conclusive evidence of a more than common purity of
disposition? [Scott refers to the portrait of Louvet, in Marie Jeanne
Phlipon Roland de la Platière, Mémoires de madame Roland, 2 vols.
(Paris: Baudouin, 1820), Vol. II, pp. 190-2.] Of the private morals of
Madame Roland, our author hasnot the effrontery even to hint a
suspicion. With respect to the particulars which offend him in her
writings, and which would offend him justly in any woman of a country
where the conventional standard of propriety is a more rigorous one, we
may advise him to take a lesson of good sense and liberality from Morris
Birkbeck, whose observations on an occasion somewhat similar, have been
quoted in the sixth number of this journal [Peregrine Bingham (prob.),
“On Emigration,” Westminster Review, III (Apr., 1825)], p. 473.

[*]
Scott, Vol. I, p. 62.

*
Ibid. [The concluding quotation is from Thomas Otway, Venice Preserv’d,
or, A Plot Discover’d (London: Hindmarsh, 1682), p. 17 (Act II).]

[*]
Charles Louis de Secondat, baron de la Brède et de Montesquieu, De
l’esprit des loix, 2 vols. (Geneva: Barillot, [1748]).

*
Scott, Vol. I, pp. 69-71.

[*]
Ibid., pp. 84ff.

[†]
Ibid., p. 103.

[‡]
Ibid., p. 105.

*
[François Marie Arouet Voltaire, Charlot, ou La comtesse de Gevry
(1767), in Oeuvres complètes, Vol. VI, p. 108 (Act I, Scene vii).] There
occurs in the same chapter a signal instance of the almost incredible
inaccuracy which runs through the details of this work. Our author
asserts that the second assembly of Notables, which was called together
by Necker, recommended that the tiers-état might have a body of
representatives equal in number to those of the noblesse and clergy
united. [Scott, Vol. I, pp. 113-14.] Now, he would have found in the
commonest compilations [see, e.g., Montgaillard’s Histoire, Vol. I, p.
440], that this measure, commonly called the double representation of
the tiers, was recommended by one only of the seven bureaux into which
the Notables were divided, namely that over which Monsieur, afterwards
Louis XVIII presided; while the remaining six bureaux gave their
suffrages against it, and the point was conceded, not in consequence of,
but in spite of, the advice of that assembly.

We observe at the distance of a few pages from the above a still more
striking inaccuracy, which is the more remarkable, as it makes directly
against the partialities of the writer. [Scott, Vol. I, pp. 134ff.] It
occurs in his account of the memorable 23rd of June, 1789; the day of
the royal sitting, wherein the king annulled the early proceedings of
the National Assembly, and in which Mirabeau made that emphatic reply to
the satellite of despotism [Henri Evrard, marquis de Dreux-Brézé], which
will be remembered so long as the memory of past events shall be
preserved among men. [Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau, speech
of 23 June, 1789, in Oeuvres de Mirabeau, 9 vols. (Paris: Dupont and
Brissot-Thivars, 1825-27), Vol. VII, pp. 127-8.] In general, our author
is apt to extenuate or pass over in silence the arbitrary proceedings of
Louis XVI or his court; but on this occasion, writing as usual from
memory, he falls into a directly opposite error; for whereas Louis in
reality only cancelled the resolution constituting the Etats Généraux a
national assembly, and required them to separate for that day (in order
that there might be no deliberation), and to assemble on the morrow in
three chambers, as three separate orders, our author accuses him of
having gone to the length of dissolving the assembly, an excess of
despotism which he certainly did not meditate until the attempt to
frustrate their proceedings by milder means had been tried and had
failed. [See “Délibération relative à la manière dont l’assemblée doit
se constituer” (17 June, 1789), Gazette Nationale, ou Le Moniteur
Universel, 16-20 June, 1789, pp. 41-2; and “Déclaration du roi,
concernant la présente tenue des états-généraux” and “Déclaration des
intentions du roi” (both 23 June, 1789), ibid., 20-24 June, 1789, pp.
46-7 and 47-8.] This blunder must relieve our author from the suspicion
of bad faith, in the numerous instances in which his inaccuracies of
detail might appear to have a political purpose.

Since we are on the subject of his minor errors, we will mention several
more, which deserve notice, either from the carelessness which they
indicate, or from the support which they lend to some of the reigning
prejudices on the Revolution. Speaking of the revision of the
constitution in the year 1791, after the king was brought back from his
flight, our author says. “The Assembly clogged, however, the future
inviolability of the king with new penalties. If the king, after having
accepted the constitution, should retract, they decreed he should be
considered as abdicated. If he should order his army, or any part of it,
to act against the nation, this should in like manner be deemed an act
of abdication; and an abdicated monarch, it was farther decreed, should
become an ordinary citizen, answerable to the laws for every act he had
done before or since the act of abdication.” (Scott, Vol. I, p. 253.)
All that is invidious in the enactments here cited, consists solely in
the word before, which word is an interpolation of our author. The terms
of the decree are, pour tous les délits postérieurs à son abdication.
[See Constitution française (14 Sept., 1791), Lois, et actes du
gouvernement, Vol. IV, pp. 188-232; the quotation is from Art. VIII, p.
193.] What is most remarkable in this blunder is the ignorance which it
imports of the most universally and dramatically interesting portion of
the history of the Revolution. On the king’s trial, a great part of the
discussion turned upon this very provision of the very decree here
referred to, the speakers who contended against his condemnation taking
their stand upon that article of the constitution, which exempted the
king, even after his abdication, from any responsibility for acts
committed while he was king. Sir Walter Scott’s reading of the decree
would entirely exonerate the regicides, since Louis had certainly
committed actions which, in any other person than the king, would have
amounted to treason.

Our author is wrong in ascribing to the Constituent Assembly (Scott,
Vol. I, p. 216) the ridiculous affectation of changing the titles of
Monsieur and Madame, for Citoyen and Citoyenne. This piece of fanatical
absurdity originated with the commune of Paris, after the 10th of August
1792 (see the Histoire de la Révolution [de France] par Deux Amis de la
Liberté [by F.M. Kerverseau, G. Clavelin, et al., new ed., 19 vols.
(Paris: Garnery, and Bidault, 1792-1803), subsequently referred to as
Deux amis], Vol. IX, p. 24), and passed from them to the National
Convention.

A more serious misrepresentation is that of the motives of the
Constituent Assembly for adopting the Constitution Civile du Clergé.
[Loi sur la constitution civile du clergé (24 Aug., 1790), Lois, et
actes du gouvernement, Vol. I, pp. 372-3.] This measure, our author, in
the spirit which pervades the whole work, imputes to “the fanaticism of
the modern philosophers, who expected by this indirect course to have
degraded the Christian religion” (Scott, Vol. I, p. 226). It would
become Sir Walter Scott to be more careful of the evidence on which he
advances these sweeping charges of irreligion. As is observed by Mignet,
“La constitution civile ne fut pas l’ouvrage de philosophes, mais de
Chrétiens austères,” [Mignet, Histoire, p. 145.] The Constituent
Assembly, which is accused of pretending to reform the church only in
order to destroy it, this very assembly, when Mirabeau laid before them
for their adoption a proposed address to the people on the constitution
civile, which is deservedly ranked as one of the most eloquent
productions of that extraordinary man, would not even hear it out,
because, though written in a highly religious tone, it contained some
expressions reflecting too strongly upon the state and character of the
church previously to the reform. [Mirabeau, speech of 14 Jan., 1791, in
Oeuvres, Vol. IX, pp. 14-46.] Let Sir Walter Scott take the trouble to
refer, for his own refutation, to the mere names of those who composed
the Ecclesiastical Committee of the Assembly. The constitutional
church-establishment was devised by the Jansenists or rigid party, who
are in the Catholic church nearly what the Calvinists are among
Protestants; and especially by Camus, a leading Jansenist, well known in
the revolutionary annals. The influence of this party, as well as of the
Protestants, among whom Barnave, Rabaut-Saint-Etienne, and Boissy
d’Anglas, were conspicuous, was very powerful in the Revolution, though
little known in this country, where the stupidity of party prejudice
attributes all to infidels. It was not so in France, where, as we learn
from Ferrières, the non-juring priests imputed all the strong measures
of the Revolution to the Protestants, in the hope of arming the Catholic
peasantry against it by their religious animosities. [Charles Elie
Ferrières, Mémoires (1821), 2nd ed., 3 vols. (Paris: Baudouin, 1821-22),
Vol. II, p. 262.]

[*]
Scott, Vol. I, p. 114.

*
Of the eagerness, and we will add, the duplicity and treachery, with
which the deputies of the noblesse de campagne were caressed and cajoled
by the men and women of the court, we have an amusing account from one
of those deputies, the marquis de Ferrières (see his Memoirs, Vol. I,
pp. 34-7), who, though a decided royalist and anti-revolutionist, draws
a picture of the courtiers both in respect to head and heart, which,
indifferently as we think of courtiers in general, and of the French
court in particular, we cannot help believing to be somewhat
overcharged. Toulongeon describes these cajoleries in still stronger
terms ([François Emmanuel Toulongeon,] Histoire de France, depuis la
Révolution de 1789 [7 vols. (Paris: Treuttel and Würtz, 1801-10)], Vol.
I, p. 25), and adds that attempts were made to gain the principal
orators of the tiers-état, when it was afterwards found that this order
was likely to become formidable (p. 57). The court must therefore stand
acquitted from the imputation of not having made ample use of those
“usual ministerial arts” which our author fancies that they neglected,
and thinks they ought to have employed [Scott, Vol. I, pp. 116-17.] The
following anecdote to the same effect, related by the royalist
Dampmartin, is amusing. “Je dînai,” says he, “chez le duc de Luxembourg.
. . . Nous étions trop nombreux pour que l’entretien devînt général;
mais on appercevait sans peine les soins consacrés avec peu d’art à
séduire les provinciaux nouvellement débarqués Je reçus en mon
particulier des attentions qui ne me parurent pas naturelles. L’énigme
se trouva résolue par la demande que me fit la duchesse, de quel
bailliage j’étais député.” ([Anne Henri Cabet, vicomte de Dampmartin,]
Evénemens qui se sont passés sous mes yeux pendant la Révolution
Française [2 vols. (Berlin: n.p., 1799)], Vol. I, pp. 33-4.) [The
concluding reference is to Adélaïde Geneviève, duchesse de
Montmorency-Luxembourg.] The same writer hints that he exertions of
Cazalès, the leading church-and-king orator in the Constituent Assembly,
were partly the effect of similar allurements. “Cazalès, dont le riche
talent a depuis fixé l’admiration générale, ne laissait encore
appercevoir qu’une pétulance qui s’exaltait par les égards et les
cajoleries que les habitans des cours savent si bien employer vis-à-vis
des personnes dont ils pensent avoir besoin. Leurs charmes ont assez de
pouvoir pour que les caractères les plus prononcés en soient amollis.”
(Pp. 34-5.)

*
Our authority is the memoirs of the royalist Ferrieres, Vol. II, pp.
199, 259.

†
Our authority is the memoirs of the royalist Madame Campan, passim. See
also Deux Amis, Vol. IX, pp. 215n-17n.

‡
On this point, we may at least indicate a portion of that evidence which
we have not room to exhibit. That the privileged classes commenced the
Revolution, by resisting, in the Notables, the proposed new taxes, and
by demanding, in the assembly of the clergy and in the parliaments, the
convocation of the Etats Généraux, is matter of undisputed fact. That
they did so in the hope of getting the powers of government into their
hands by means of an aristocratical legislature, is asserted in express
terms by three royalists, [François Claude Amour, marquis de] Bouillé
(Mémoires, ed. 12mo [2 vols. (Paris: Giguet, 1802)], Vol. I, pp. 49, 67,
69), Ferrières (Vol. I, p. 2), and [Jean François] Marmontel (Mémoires
[1804], London ed. [4 vols. (Peltier, 1805)], Vol. IV, pp. 12-13), as
well as by Madame de Staël, in her Considerations, &c. (Vol. I, pp.
174-7.) The whole of the introductory portion of the History of the
Revolution by [Antoine Etienne Nicolas] Fantin Desodoards [Histoire
philosophique de la révolution de France, new rev. ed., 4 vols. (Paris:
Perlet, et al., 1797), Vol. I, esp. pp. 61-2 (Bk. I, Chap. xviii)], and
the Memoir of Necker, which M. Boissy d’Anglas has annexed to his Life
of Malesherbes, are filled with evidence of the same fact. [François
Antoine Boissy d’Anglas, “Sur M. Necker,” Essai sur la vie, les écrits
et les opinions de M. de Malesherbes, adressé à mes enfans, 3 pts.
(Paris: Treuttel and Würtz, 1819-21), Pt. 2, pp. 239-88.] For proof that
the ministers relied upon the tiers-état, and its influence in the Etats
Généraux, for support against the refractory nobles and parliaments, the
reader may refer to Toulongeon (Vol. I, pp. 15, 22), Madame de Staël
(Vol. I, pp. 126-7), Bouillé (Vol. I, Chap. iv [esp. p. 61]), Marmontel
(Vol. IV, p. 39). Bertrand de Moleville (Mémoires Particuliers pour
servir à l’Histoire de la fin du Règne de Louis XVI [2 vols. (Paris:
Michaud, 1816)], Vol. I, pp. 21-2).

The state of opinion at the opening of the Etats Généraux is well
described by the Abbé de Montgaillard (Histoire, Vol. I, pp. 235-6).

*
We had made references to an incredible number of passages, chiefly from
Bertrand de Moleville, Ferrières, Bouillé, Madame Campan, and other
royalist writers, bearing testimony to the abhorrence in which the
royalists held the very idea of a constitution even on the English
model, the pertinacity with which they clung to the ancien régime,
refusing to hear of the slightest modification or reform, and their
inveterate malignity towards all the moderate revolutionists, contrasted
with a sort of favour and partiality towards the furious Jacobins, whom,
according to Madame Campan, they declared that every true royalist ought
to cherish, because they were the enemies of their enemies, and because
their excesses tended to the ruin of the Revolution. [See, e.g., Campan,
Mémoires, Vol. II, pp. 154-5, 182.] But we have not room to insert these
extracts entire; while, if abridged, they would lose a great part of
their force; and what hope can we entertain of convincing any one, whom
the conduct of the royalist party since the restoration has not
convinced?

*
Lafayette, for example, who in his beautiful letter of thanks to the
chevalier d’Archenholz, written in the dungeons of Olmutz, takes credit
to himself for having sacrificed republican inclinations to the welfare
of his country [“Lettre du général La Fayette au chevalier d’Archenholz”
(Magdebourg, 27 Mar., 1793), in Jean Baptiste Regnault-Warin, Mémoires
pour servir à la vie du général La Fayette, 2 vols. (Paris: Hesse,
1824), Vol. II, p. 116.]

[*]
Frederick William II of Prussia.

[†]
George Canning and George Ellis, [“New Morality,”] Anti-Jacobin; or,
Weekly Examiner, II, 36 (9 July, 1798), 282-7, for Canning’s sarcasm on
William Ogden, see his Speech on the Indemnity Bill (11 Mar., 1818), PD,
1st ser., Vol. 37, cols. 1026-8.

*
We mean Barnave. For the truth of our assertion, see the furious Memoirs
of the Abbe Georgel [Jean François Georgel, Mémoires pour servir a
l’histoire des événemens de la tin du dix-huitième siècle, 6 vols.
(Paris: Eymery and Delaunay, 1817-18), Vol. II, e.g., p. 422]; and a
still more intemperate production (if that be possible), intituled
Conjuration d’Orléans, and attributed to the noted royalist writer,
Montjoie [Christophe Félix Louis Montjoie, Histoire de la conjuration de
L.P.J. d’Orléans, 6 vols. (Paris: Les marchands de nouveautés, 1800),
esp. Vol. II, pp. 65-140 (Book V)] See even the work, above cited, of
the Abbé de Montgaillard, Vol. II, p. 81.

It is extraordinary that our author, who is so incessantly harping upon
a republican party—an organized body, whose leaders were in the
Constituent Assembly, and who were perpetually busy in the active
prosecution of their designs—should never be able to name more than one
of these formidable persons, and that this one, by a curiosa
infelicitas, should be Barnave [Scott, Vol. I, p. 147n]. Barnave, than
whom few men ever gave more solid proofs of his attachment to
constitutional monarchy; Barnave, the very man who moved the
re-establishment of royalty after the return from Varennes, when, if he
had thrown his weight into the other scale, it is extremely probable,
that a republican government might have been established without
violence or danger. [See his speech of 15 July, 1791, Gazette Nationale,
ou Le Moniteur Universel, 17 July, 1791, p. 818.]

This blunder of our author can be surpassed by nothing except the
strange mental hallucination, for we will give it no harsher name, by
which he has accused the same individual of having been betrayed by
republican enthusiasm into palliating the massacres of September. We
have far too good an opinion of Sir Walter Scott to believe that he has
invented a story, which we are certain that he cannot have found in any
of the memorials of the times, and we will therefore only suppose that
in writing from memory, he has confounded Barnave with some other and
far different person. It would have been strange enough if Barnave had
palliated the massacres of September, when, if we believe Mignet [p.
278n], he was himself marked out to be included in them, a fate from
which he, as well as Duport and Charles Lameth, were only saved by
Danton. Long before this time Barnave had retired from public life in
disgust (see the Memoirs of Madame Campan, Vol. II, p. 192), and far
from considering the public good to center, as our author expresses it,
in a pure republic, he had been engaged up to the last moment in a most
bitter contest against the supposed partisans of a republic, and indeed
(for such are understood to have been the views of the feuillant party)
for the establishment of a second Chamber. It is even supposed that the
letter of the Emperor Leopold, denouncing the Jacobins, which produced
so much irritation at Paris, was the composition of Barnave and Duport.
[See Leopold II, Letter of 17 Feb., 1792, Gazette Nationale, ou Le
Moniteur Universel, 2 Mar., 1792, p. 254.

[*]
Mirabeau, speeches of 1 and 12 Sept., 1789, in Oeuvres, Vol. VII, pp.
244-63 and 266-9.

[†]
See Charles Durozoir, biography of Turgot, in Biographie universelle
ancienne et moderne, ed. Louis Gabriel Michaud, 52 vols. (Paris: Michaud
frères, 1811-28), Vol. XLVII, p. 81.

[*]
Scott, Vol. I, pp. 255-6.

*
Of the view which has been taken of the Orleanist party in the text, the
decisive evidence is of course to be sought for in the lives, the
speeches, and the writings of the men themselves. But in order to shew
that several of the most intelligent writers on the Revolution have
concurred substantially in the opinion above expressed, we may refer the
reader to Toulongeon (Histoire de France depuis la Révolution de 1789,
Vol. I, pp. 118-19), to Madame de Staël (Considérations sur la
Révolution Françoise, Vol. I, 2nd pt., Chap. vi, near the end [pp.
306-7]), and to a passage in Arthur Young (see, in his work on France,
the diary of his third tour in that country, ad diem 12th June, 1789
[2nd ed., Vol. I, p. 121]).

[*]
Scott, Vol. I, p. 140.

*
We are aware that the ostensible motive for their desertion of their
duty, was the horrors of the fifth and sixth of October; but it is
difficult to mention such an excuse with a grave face. Without doubt,
there was enough in the events of that day to disgust men, such as they
were, of feeling and humanity, but, after all, what could become of a
nation in troubled times, if the murder of two persons were sufficient
to frighten every well-meaning and virtuous man from his post?

[*]
Scott, Vol. I, pp. 141-2.

*
[François Louis, comte] D’Escherny, Philosophie de la Politique [2 vols.
(Paris: n.p., 1796)], quoted at great length in the Appendix to the
second volume of the Memoirs of Madame Campan [Vol. II, p. 444 (Note P),
quoted from d’Escherny, Vol. II, p. 297]. For the strongest and most
distinct testimony to the fact, that what appears the unnecessary
limitation of the king’s power was not occasioned by any fanaticism of
democracy, or bigotted attachment to system, but by real dread of the
use to which that power would be converted, vide Madame de Staël, (Vol.
I, pp. 308, 316,) who, being of the party of Mounier, and a perfect
idolator of the British constitution, cannot be here suspected of
partiality. Ferrières is, if possible, still more positive on the same
point; (see Vol. I, pp. 368, 391, Vol. II, pp. 236-7, 481), passages
which, although written by a royalist, and one who not only perceives
but exaggerates the faults of the constitution of 1791, contain the most
entire and honorable vindication of the authors of that constitution,
which has ever appeared. The same author says, that the constitutional
party were, perhaps, more deeply impressed than even the royalists, with
the necessity of giving efficiency to the executive, as well as more
sincerely attached to the person of the king, (Vol. III, p. 15.)

†
Examen Critique de l’Ouvrage Posthume de Madame de Staël, 2me partie,
chap. ix [Vol. I, p. 317].

‡
Ibid., Vol. II, p. 34.

[*]
Edmund Burke, Reflections on the Revolution in France, in Works, 8 vols.
(London: Dodsley, et al., 1792-1827), Vol. III, pp. 182-3.

[†]
Scott, Vol. I, pp. 140-6.

[‡]
Victor François, duc de Broglie.

[*]
For the names of the ministers dismissed and their replacements, see
above p. 9 in the quotation from Mignet.

*
His words were, “seul je ferai le bien de mes peuples, seul je me
considérerai comme leur véritable représentant; et connaissant vos
cahiers, &c. &c.” (See the Memoires de Bailly, Vol. I, p. 213.)

†
Ferrières also attests the fact, Vol. I, p. 122.

*
Scott, Vol. I, pp. 163-5. [For the fable referred to in the quotation,
see Jean de La Fontaine, Fables choisies mises en vers (Paris: Thierry,
1668), pp. 23-4 (Book I, Fable x).]

[*]
Scott, Vol. I, p. 154.

[†]
Mirabeau, Speech of 15 July, 1789, in Oeuvres, Vol. VII, pp. 167-8.

[‡]
“Mesdames” refers to Marie Adélaide and Victoire Louise, the surviving
daughters of Louis XV; “Madame” to Louise Marie Joséphine, comtesse de
Provence.

[§]
See above, p. 72n.

*
Considérations sur la Révolution Françoise, Vol. I, pp. 231-2.

†
Mémoires de Bailly, Vol. I, pp. 191, 299, 313, 342, 361, 391-2. Some of
these passages prove more, others less, but all are important.

‡
[Charles François Dumouriez, La vie et les] Memoires de Dumouriez [4
vols. (Paris: Baudouin, 1822-23)], Vol. II, p. 35.

[*]
The Spanish generals Juan Díaz Porlier and Louis de Lacy were put to
death by Ferdinand VII.

§
Vol. II, pp. 63-4 [where the letter is given].

¶
“Et dix ans plus tard,” the author indignantly adds, “ce despote de la
vieille roche (suivant son expression favorite), était dans les
antichambres de Cambacérès, et recevait de Napoléon une pension de douze
mille francs sur sa cassette!” There would bematter enough for
indignation here, if it were rational to be angry with the beasts of the
field for merely following their nature. Any act of baseness is credible
in a royalist of 1789. The court of Napoleon was thronged with émigrés
of the 14th of July. It was the despotism which they had valued, not the
despot. No one licked the dust before the parvenu emperor with greater
gusto than the abbé Maury, than whom a more unprincipled intrigant never
sold his conscience for gain.

*
[Montgaillard,] Histoire de France depuis la fin du règne de Louis XVI,
Vol. II, pp. 62-3.

†
[Charles Jean Dominique de Lacretelle, Histoire de l’assemblée
constituante, 2 vols. (Paris, Strasburg, and London: Treuttel and Würtz,
1821),] Vol. I, pp. 68-9.

*
Toulongeon, Vol. I, p. 18. The vicomte de Toulongeon was himself a
distinguished member of the minority of the noblesse, and his History is
equal in authority to the memoirs of an eye witness. It is by far the
most instructive and most philosophical work of its class. [Louis
Bénigne François de Bertier de Sauvigny was Intendant of Paris.]

†
[Joseph] Lavallée, Histoire [de l’origine, des progres, et de la
decadence] des [diverses] Factions de la Révolution Française, [3 vols.
(London: Murray, 1816),] Vol. I, p. 86.

‡
Montgaillard (Vol. II, p. 82) confirms the assertion.

§
Toulongeon, Vol. I, p. 78, &c. &c. The cause of the precipitate retreat
of the baron de Bezenval is thus stated by Montgaillard, on the
authority of the minister Breteuil, as before “Le baron de Bezenval
faisait achever des bains où toutes les recherches du luxe avaient été
prodiguées; il craignait leur dévastation, et ce favori, si brave à
Versailles, donna aux troupes placées sous ses ordres l’ordre de battre
en retraite, quoique le roi lui eût formellement prescrit d’avancer,
coûte qui couûte. M. de Breteuil s’exprimait publiquement de la sorte
sur cette particularité, pendant son séjour à Londres,” (Vol. II, p.
81.) The reader will recollect, that from this inaction of Bezenval, Sir
Walter Scott concludes, not only that Louis had not ordered him to
attack Paris, but that he had expressly ordered him not even to repel
force by force. [Scott, Vol. I, pp. 164-5.] No wonder; our author’s
knowledge of the events of this day being chiefly derived from the
Memoirs of the veridical baron de Bezenval himself. [Pierre Joseph
Victor, baron de Besenval, Mémoires, 4 vols. (Paris: Buisson, 1805-06);
see, e.g., Vol. III, p. 411.]

[*]
Scott, Vol. I, pp. 159-60.

*
Ibid., p. 154.

†
Staël, Considerations, &c., Vol. I, p. 228.

‡
In the Appendix to the first volume of Toulongeon. [P. 131; the Appendix
is separately paged.]

§
Vol. II, p. 48.

¶
Chap. iii. [Vol. I, p. 49.]

[*]
Jean Louis Soulavie, Mémoires historiques et politiques du règne de
Louis XVI, 6 vols. (Paris: Treuttel and Wurtz, 1801), Vol. VI, pp.
209-11, 268-9.

**
See also, on the sentiments of the army in general Madame de Stael,
Considerations, &c., Vol. I, pp. 208, 213; and the Memoirs of Bertrand
de Moleville, Vol. I, p. 23.

[†]
See Deux amis, Vol. I, pp. 346-51, and Vol. II, 308-17, e.g.

∥
Essai sur la Vie, les Ecrits, et les Opinions, de Malesherbes, par M. le
Comte Boissy d’Anglas, Vol. II, p. 191.

*
Mémoires, Vol. I, pp. 261, 263, 277-8, Vol. II, p. 177.

[*]
Bouillé, Chaps. ix-xi; Vol. I, pp. 146-88, Vol. II, pp. 5-90.

†
Montgaillard, Vol. II, p. 154.

[†]
Scott, Vol. I, p. 206n, quoting Ferrières, Vol. I, p. 307.

[‡]
Scott, Vol. I, p. 181.

[*]
Ibid., p. 184.

*
See Volumes II to VI of the Histoire de la Revolution, par Deux Amis de
la Liberte.

*
See, for many interesting particulars, the work of Dampmartin, above
referred to. [See, e.g., Vol. I, pp. 187ff.]

†
Ferrières, Vol. II, p. 99.

‡
Ibid., p. 100.

§
Ibid., Vol. I, p. 391.

¶
Ibid., Vol. II, p. 254.

[*]
“Discours prononcé par le roi à l’assemblée nationale” (4 Feb., 1790),
Gazette Nationale, ou Le Moniteur Universel, 6 Feb., 1790, pp. 147-8.

∥
Mémoires particuliers, &c. par Bertrand de Moleville, Vol. I, pp. 371,
373, 375, 377; Vol. II, pp. 309, 312-13, 317, 323ff., 329, 331-2.

*
Mémoires de Dumouriez, Vol. II, p. 111, &c. &c.

†
This letter may be found entire in the Appendix to the second volume
[pp. 419-22] of Dumouriez’s Memoirs, forming part of the collection of
Memoirs on the Revolution, now publishing at Paris. [Collection des
mémoires relatifs à la révolution française, ed. Saint-Albin Berville
and Jean François Barrière, 68 vols. (Paris: Baudoin, 1820-28).] It may
not be useless to remark, that our references to the pages of any work
forming part of this collection, are to be understood of that edition,
unless otherwise expressed.

[*]
“Proclamation du roi à tous les Français à sa sortie de Paris” (20 June,
1791), Gazette Nationale, ou Le Moniteur Universel, 22 June, 1791, p.
718.

*
Scott, Vol. I, pp. 264-6. [The concluding verse is Samuel Butler,
Hudibras (1678), ed. Zachary Grey, 2 vols. (London: Vernor and Hood, et
al., 1801), Vol. II, p. 307 (Pt. III, Canto ii, ll. 1043-6).]

†
Scott, Vol. I, p. 269.

‡
Ibid., p. 313.

*
Ibid., p. 307.

†
Ibid., p. 342.

[*]
Ibid., p. 255.

[†]
See Deux amis, Vol. VIII, p. 73.

[‡]
Mémoires, Vol. I, p. 351.

*
We are also assured by Ferrières, Vol. II, p. 347, that Brissot at this
time proposed a republican government in the Jacobin club; and a
proclamation to the same effect by his friend Achille Duchâtelet, which
was placarded in the streets of Paris, is given verbatim by the same
author, pp. 388-91.

[§]
Mignet, Histoire, p. 206. Mill’s words in square brackets.

[*]
Scott, Vol. I, p. 256.

[†]
Leopold II, Letter to Louis XVI (3 Dec., 1791), Gazette Nationale, ou Le
Moniteur Universel, 26 Dec., 1791, p. 1505.

[‡]
Mill is adapting a well-known description of Carnot, see Mémoires
historiques et militaires sur Carnot, ed. Saint-Albin Berville and Jean
François Barrière (Paris: Baudouin, 1824), pp. 69-70.

[§]
Louis Marie Jacques Amalric, comte de Narbonne-Lara.

[*]
Mémoires, Vol. I, p. 362.

*
[“Décret sur les prêtres non-sermentés” (27 May, 1792), Gazette
Nationale, ou Le Moniteur Universel, 4 June, 1792, p. 647, for Louis
XVI’s refusal to sanction it, see ibid., 20 June, 1792.] Sir Walter
Scott cannot refrain from imputing this decree, though purely political
in its object, to philosophic intolerance, and an intention of degrading
and subverting the national faith. [Scott, Vol. I, p. 300.] But it is
useless to expose in further detail these endless instances of blind and
obstinate prejudice.

[†]
“Décret d’augmentation de vingt mille hommes pour l’armée” (8 June,
1792), Gazette Nationale, ou Le Moniteur Universel, 9 June, 1792, p.
668; for Louis XVI’s refusal to sanction it, see ibid., 20 June, 1792,
p. 716.

†
To understand this allusion, it must be remembered, that Bailleul’s work
was suggested and occasioned by Madame de Staël’s Considerations.

[‡]
Staël, Considérations, Vol. II, p. 28.

[*]
Bailleul, Examen critique, Vol. II, pp. 42-6.

[†]
“Copie de la lettre écrite au citoyen Boze, par Guadet, Vergniaud et
Gensonné,” in Dumouriez, Vol. II, pp. 422-6.

[*]
Staël, Considérations, Vol. II, p. 28.

[†]
Ibid., pp. 28-9.

*
Bailleul, Examen Critique, Vol. II, pp. 46-7.

[*]
Mill’s reference is incorrect, and the passage has not been located.

*
Soulavie, Mémoires, Vol. VI, p. 450.

†
Ibid., pp. 454-6.

[*]
Ibid., pp. 463-5.

[†]
See Jean Baptiste Amar’s speech in presenting the “acte d’accusation”
against the Girondists (3 Oct., 1793), Procès-verbal de la convention
nationale, Vol. XXII, pp. 55-6.

[*]
Ibid.

*
Vol. II, p. 111.

*
Georgel, Mémoires, Vol. III, pp. 361-2, et passim [Jean François Georgel
and Augustin Barruel, Mémoires pour servir à l’histoire du jacobinisme,
4 vols. (London: Boussonnier, 1797-98)].

[*]
Considérations, Vol. II, pp. 28-31.

†
[Lavallée,] Histoire des Factions de la Révolution Française, Vol. I,
pp. 199-213.

*
Every one who knows what the liberaux of the present century are, is
aware that they comprise every shade of political opinion from Mounier
to Carnot. Our author, however, industriously identifies all of them
with the extinct, and now universally detested, sect of Jacobins. As an
example of his mode of dealing with individuals, we may instance his
treatment of Comte, known to all Europe as the intrepid writer who, at
great personal risk, vindicated the principles of constitutional freedom
in the Censeur Européen, at a time when there were few to aid him in the
glorious conflict; and who has suffered five years exile, and the
mean-spirited persecution of the Holy Alliance, in consequence of his
manly and stedfast adherence to liberal opinions. This individual, of
whom Sir Walter Scott is so consummately ignorant as to have discovered
the correct orthography of his name only time enough to insert it in the
Errata, he does not scruple to accuse of having been “a promoter of
Bonaparte’s return.” [Scott, Vol. VIII, p. 422, Comte’s name appears as
“Lecompte.”] Will it be believed, that when Napoleon was in full march
towards Paris, M. Comte published a pamphlet, which went through three
editions in as many days, denouncing the imperial government as
tyrannical, and calling upon the French people to resist the usurper!
[François Charles Louis Comte, De l’impossibilité d’établir un
gouvernement constitutionnel sous un chef militaire, et particulièrement
sous Napoléon (Paris: Les marchands de nouveautés, 1815).] This work (of
which we possess a copy) was translated and widely circulated in
Germany, as a proof that the enlightened portion of the French people
were hostile to Bonaparte. [Über die Unmöglichkeit einer
constitutionellen Regierung unter einem militärischen Oberhaupte,
besonders unter Napoleon, trans. T. von Haupt (Cologne Dumont, Bachmann,
1815).] Let the reader give credit after this to our author’s
imputations against men of whom he knows nothing.

[*]
Code Napoléon (Paris: Imprimerie impériale, 1807), see Scott, Vol. VI,
pp. 52-65.

[*]
Carlyle is referring to his own remark in “Thoughts on History,”
Fraser’s Magazine, II (Nov., 1830), 414.

[†]
See Ossian [James Macpherson], Fingal, an Ancient Epic Poem in Six
Books, with Several Other Poems (London: Becket and Hondt, 1762), p. 78
(Bk. VI).

*
Article [by Thomas Carlyle] on Biography, in Fraser’s Magazine [V] for
April, 1832, [254-5,] introductory to the admirable article [also by
Carlyle] on Boswell’s Johnson in the Number for the following month [V
(May, 1832), 379-413].

[*]
Cf. William Shakespeare, Hamlet, III, ii, 366 (in The Riverside
Shakespeare, ed. G. Blakemore Evans [Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1974], p.
1165).

[†]
Carlyle, “Biography,” p. 253.

[‡]
Taken from a letter of 12 Jan., 1833, from Carlyle to Mill; see The
Collected Letters of Thomas and Jane Carlyle, ed. Charles Richard
Sanders, et al., Vol. VI (Durham, N.C. Duke University Press, 1977), p.
302.

[*]
See John Wilson Croker and John Gibson Lockhart, “The Revolutions of
1640 and 1830,” Quarterly Review, XLVIII (Mar., 1832), 269, echoed in
Thomas Babington Macaulay, “Dumont’s Recollections of Mirabeau,”
Edinburgh Review, LV (July, 1832), 558-9: and re-echoed in Philip Henry
Stanhope, “Lord John Russell, The Causes of the French Revolution,”
Quarterly Review, XLIX (Apr., 1833), 156 and 171.

[†]
Alison, History, Vol. I, p. xvi.

[*]
François Auguste Marie Mignet, Histoire de la révolution française, 2
pts. (Paris: Didot, 1824), and Louis Adolphe Thiers, Histoire de la
révolution française, 10 vols. (Paris: Lecointe and Durey, 1823-27).

[†]
Alison, History, Vol. I, p. xvi.

*
M. Toulongeon, always spelt Toulangeon by Mr. Alison. [François Emmanuel
Toulongeon, Histoire de France, 7 vols. (Paris: Treuttel and Wurtz,
1801-10).]

[*]
Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau, speech of 15 July, 1789, in
Oeuvres de Mirabeau, 9 vols. (Paris: Dupont and Brissot-Thivars,
1825-27), Vol. VIII, p. 166.

[†]
Mirabeau, speech of 26 Sept., 1789, ibid., p. 301.

a-a
122[reprinted as A Few Observations on the French Revolution in D&D,
59,67]

b-b
59,67 scientific

c-c
59,67 moral

d-d
59,67 biographic

e-e
59,67 displays

f-f
59,67 sympathy, admiration, or censure

g-g
59,67 Without

h-h
59,67 scientific

i-i
59,67 transformation

j-j
-59,67

k-k
59,67 now

l-l
59,67 incident

m-m
59,67 beliefs

n-n
59,67 so far from being completed, that it is not yet clear, even to the
more advanced spirits, to what ultimate goal it is tending

o-o
59,67 (which . . . assume)

p-p
-59,67

q-q
59,67 moral

r-r
59,67 people’s

s-s
59, 67 nearer Does

t-t
-59,67

u-u
59,67 person

v-v
67 previous

w-w
59,67 risk

x-x
59,67 that Conservatives

y-y
59,67 not

z-z
59,67 practicable

a-a
59,67 has scarcely ever

b-b
59,67 all

c-c
59,67 nothing

d-d
59,67 every

e-e
59,67 They

f-f
59,67 not

g-g
59,67 begun

h
59,67 been

i-i
59,67 passed for

j-j
59,67 various subsequent

k
59,67 even

l-l
-59,67

m-m
59,67 save

n-n
67 that

[*]
Cf. Hamlet, I, v, 166-7 (in The Riverside Shakespeare, p. 1151).

o-o
59,67 either or

p-p
59,67 subsequent

[*]
Caleb Charles Colton.

[†]
Much of that commentary was by Mill himself.

[‡]
The term used for the trial in the National from 6 to 20 May, 1835.

a
34 [ellipsis indicates the following omission]. All experience justifies
us in the conviction that unless the ruling few can be made and kept
“uneasy,” the many need expect no good, and nothing will make the few
uneasy but fears for the security of their property. We are well
content, therefore, that there should be cause for such fears. We have
no anti-property doctrines ourselves, and therefore cannot honestly give
such doctrines any encouragement. But we are quite satisfied that their
promulgation has a most salutary effect

The Society of the Rights of Man cannot, however, be said to have put
forward any anti-property doctrines, and nothing can be more absurdly
calumnious than the accusations of confiscation, agrarian law, &c., &c.
If opinions adverse to the present constitution of property are secretly
held by any of the able and accomplished men who guide the proceedings
of the association, (which is certainly not to be believed on the
evidence of their enemies,) they have not put forward any such opinions.
They profess, indeed, democratic republicanism in its fullest extent,
and are far more impatient, and willing to take more violent means for
obtaining the form of government which they desire, than the more
moderate of the Republicans would approve. But on the subject of
property they have advanced no doctrines but such as, to an Englishman,
sound like the merest truisms, and that these should have been
considered dangerous in France, only shows how little peril there is
lest in that country anti-property doctrines should ever prevail

b-b
34 association

[*]
Déclaration des droits de l’homme et du citoyen ([Paris.] La société des
droits de l’homme, [1833]); Robespierre’s Déclaration first appeared in
1793 (Paris: Imprimerie nationale).

[†]
Acte constitutionnel de la république (24 June, 1793), Gazette
Nationale, ou Le Moniteur Universel, 27 June, 1793, pp. 765-6.

[*]
Déclaration (1833), p. 3 (Art. VI).

[†]
Ibid. (Art. IX).

c
34 [paragraph] In so far as the Society of the Rights of Man contends
against the narrow and superstitious notions of property which are
prevalent in France, and gives currency to more liberal and more
rational views, it can do nothing but good, and even if the speculative
truths, which it so energetically proclaims, are intended to serve as a
foundation for practical corollaries of a more questionable character,
we see no cause for alarm, none even for regret. Without infringing the
principle of property, much remains to be done, by morality and even by
law, to render the practical working of the principle productive of
greater good to society at large much may be done to mitigate the
inequalities of wealth which have as pernicious an effect on those whom
they seem to benefit, as upon those on whom they apparently press
hardest, and to promote all those tendencies in human affairs which
cause society to approximate to what, in the literal sense, must always
be an unattainable chimera, equality of fortunes. But all this we have
little hope to see done, until the rich shall feel that except by making
the law of property popular, they will have some difficulty in
maintaining it. Society will then only be on the most desirable footing,
when the proprietary class shall feel compelled to make a clear case to
the world in favour of the existing institutions of society, when they
shall act under an habitual sense of the necessity of convincing the
non-proprietary multitude, that the existing arrangement of property is
a real good to them as well as to the rich; and shall feel that the most
effectual way to make them think it so, is to make it more and more so
in fact.

[*]
John Stuart Mill, Summary of French News, Examiner, 26 Jan., 1834, pp.
56-7.

[†]
Loi sur les associations, Bulletin 115, No. 261 (10 Apr., 1834),
Bulletin des lois du royaume de France, 9th ser., Pt. 1, VI, 25-6.

[‡]
Including Godefroy Cavaignac, Auguste Guinard, and Guillard de
Kersausie.

[*]
Charte constitutionnelle, Bulletin 17, No. 133 (4 June, 1814), Bulletin
des lois du royaume de France, 5th ser., I, 205 (Arts, 55 and 56).

[*]
For one passage using these very common Carlylian terms, see Vol. II,
pp. 102-4.

[*]
David Hume, The History of England (1756-62), 8 vols. (London: Cadell,
et al., 1823); William Robertson, The History of America (1777), The
History of Scotland (1759), and The History of the Reign of the Emperor
Charles V (1769), in Works, 6 vols. (London: Longman, et al., 1851),
Vols. V-VI, I-II, and III-IV, respectively; and Edward Gibbon, The
History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, 6 vols. (London:
Strahan and Cadell, 1776-88).

[†]
Johann Christoph Friedrich von Schiller, Wallenstein, ein dramatisches
Gedicht (1798-99), in Sämmtliche Werke, 12 vols. (Stuttgart and
Tübingen: Cotta’schen Buchhandlung, 1818-19), Vol. IX, Pt. 2.

*
[Louis Vitet,] Les Barricades [(Paris: Brière, 1826)], Les Etats de
Blois [(Paris: Ponthieu, 1827)]; and La Mort de Henri III [(Paris:
Fournier jeune, 1829)], three prose plays or rather series of dramatic
scenes, illustrative of the League and the period of the religious wars
in France. A work scarcely heard of in this country, but which well
deserves to be so. The author, like so many of the rising literary
notabilities of France (from M. Guizot downwards), is now unhappily
withdrawn from literature, by place-hunting, and doctrinaire politics.

[*]
See Samuel Johnson, “Preface to Shakespeare,” in Works, 13 vols.
(London: Buckland, et al., 1787), Vol. IX, pp. 242-6.

[†]
William Shakespeare, A Midsummer Night’s Dream, V, i, 14-16 (in The
Riverside Shakespeare, ed. G. Blakemore Evans [Boston’ Houghton Mifflin,
1974], p. 242).

[*]
François Pierre Guillaume Guizot, “Du régime municipal dans l’empire
romain, au cinquième siècle de l’ère chrétienne, lors de la grande
invasion des Germains en occident,” Essais sur l’histoire de France, 2nd
ed. (Paris: Brière, 1824), pp. 1-51.

[†]
“Wallensteins Lager,” the first part of Schiller’s Wallenstein. Samuel
Taylor Coleridge translated. The Piccolomini, or The First Part of
Wallenstein; and The Death of Wallenstein, 2 vols. in 1 (London: Longman
and Rees, 1800).

[*]
Geschichte des dreissigjährigen Kriegs (1791-93), Vol. VI of Sammtliche
Werke.

[†]
See, e.g., “State of German Literature,” Edinburgh Review, XLVI (Oct.,
1827), 335, “Biography,” Fraser’s Magazine, V (Apr., 1832), 257, and
“Boswell’s Life of Johnson,” ibid. (May, 1832), 387.

[‡]
“Burns,” Edinburgh Review, XLVIII (Dec., 1828), 278.

[*]
John Milton, The Reason of Church Government Urged against Prelaty
(1641-42), in The Prose Works, ed. Charles Symmons, 7 vols. (London:
Johnson, et al., 1806), Vol. I, p. 119.

*
[TC] [Charles Jean François Hénault, Nouvel] Abrégé Chronologique de
l’Histoire de France [1744, 3 vols.] (Paris [ Prault, et al.], 1775),
[Vol. II,] p. 701.

†
[TC] Mémoires de M. le Baron Besenval, [4 vols.] (Paris [ Buisson],
1805-06), Vol. II, pp. 59-90 [the passage quoted in translation is from
p. 63].

[*]
Carlyle, Vol. I, pp. 3-4.

[†]
Ibid., p. 48.

*
[TC] Montgaillard, [Histoire de France, 9 vols. (Paris: Moutardier,
1827),] Vol. I, pp. 461-2.

[*]
Alexandre Lameth, Histoire de l’assemblée constituante, 2 vols. (Paris:
Moutardier, 1828-29), Vol. I, p. lxxiii (as rendered in English by
Carlyle).

†
[TC] [Joseph] Weber, [Mémoires concernant Marie Antoinette, 3 vols.
(London: the Author, 1804-09),] Vol. I, p. 347. [For the concluding
clause, see II Samuel, 4.22.]

‡
[TC] Weber, Vol. I, p. 360. [The reference is to Jean Baptiste Artaud.]

[†]
Besenval, Mémoires, Vol. III, p. 343.

*
[TC] [Louis Emmanuel de Launay, comte d’Antraigues.] Mémoire sur les
Etats-Généraux. See Montgaillard, Vol. I, pp. 457-9.

[*]
Jean Jacques Rousseau, Du contrat social, ou Principes du droit
politique (Amsterdam: Rey, 1762).

[†]
Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès, Qu’est-ce que le tiers état?, 3rd ed. ([Paris:]
n.p., 1789), p. 3.

†
[TC] “Délibérations à prendre dans les Assemblees des Bailliages”
[attributed to Sieyès, not Laclos, published in Louis Philippe Joseph,
duc d’Orléans, Instructions envoyées par M. le duc d’Orléans ([Paris:
n.p., 1788]), pp. 11-66].

[‡]
Pierre Ambroise François Choderlos de Laclos, Les liaisons dangereuses,
4 vols. (Amsterdam and Paris: Durand, 1782).

[§]
See, e.g., Sieyès, Qu’est-ce que le tiers état?, p. 154.

‡
[TC] Mémoire présenté au Roi par Monseigneur Comte d’Artois, M. le
Prince de Condé, M. le Duc de Bourbon, M. le Duc d’Enghien, et M. le
Prince de Conti (1788). (Given in Histoire parlementaire [de la
révolution française (HP), ed. Philippe Joseph Benjamin Buchez and
Prosper Charles Roux, 40 vols. (Paris: Paulin, 1834-38)], Vol. I, pp.
256-62.)

[*]
See Necker’s “Extrait du rapport fait au roi dans son conseil, le 27
décembre 1788,” in F.M. Kerverseau, G. Clavelin, et al., Histoire de la
révolution de France, par deux amis de la liberté, new ed., 19 vols.
(Paris: Garnery, and Bidault, 1792-1803), Vol. I, pp. 79-93. Carlyle
refers to this work, one of his main sources, as “Deux Amis.”

*
[TC] “Réglement du Roi pour la Convocation des Etats-Généraux à
Versailles” [24 Jan., 1789] (reprinted, wrong dated, in HP, Vol. I, pp.
262-76).

[†]
Carlyle, Vol. I, pp. 165-70, 172.

[‡]
“Réglement,” HP, Vol. I, p. 266.

[*]
Cf. Shakespeare, Macbeth, II, ii, 32 (in The Riverside Shakespeare, p.
1320).

*
[TC] “Réglement,” HP, Vol. I, pp. 267-307.

[†]
Carlyle, Vol. I, pp. 173-4.

†
It may be hoped; scarcely, we fear, expected. For considering the
extraordinary dramatic interest of the story of the Revolution, however
imperfectly told, it is really surprising how little, to English
readers, even the outline of the facts is known. Mr. Carlyle’s book is
less fitted for those who know nothing about the subject, than for those
who already know a little. We rejoice to see that a translation of
Thiers is announced. As a mere piece of narrative, we know nothing in
modern historical writing so nearly resembling the ancient models as
Thiers’ History, we hope he has met with a translator who can do him
justice. Whoever has read Thiers first, will be the better fitted both
to enjoy and to understand Carlyle. [Louis Adolphe Thiers, Histoire de
la revolution française, 10 vols. (Paris: Lecointe and Durey, 1823-27);
trans. Frederick Shoberl, History of the French Revolution, 5 vols.
(London: Bentley, 1838).]

[*]
Cf. Deux amis, Vol. I, p. 315.

[†]
Cf. ibid., pp. 317-18.

[*]
Cf. Shakespeare, Othello, III, iii, 93 (in The Riverside Shakespeare, p.
1221).

[†]
See Homer, The Iliad (Greek and English), trans. A.T. Murray, 2 vols.
(London: Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1924),
Vol. I, p. 116 (III, 1-7).

[‡]
The reference is to Phra Narai.

[§]
Cf. Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part I, III, iii, 80-1 (in The Riverside
Shakespeare, p. 870).

[¶]
Cf. Deux amis, Vol. I, p. 331.

[∥]
Cf. ibid., pp. 328-30.

[**]
See Isaiah, 30:33.

[††]
See Genesis, 11:9.

[‡‡]
Cf. Shakespeare, Macbeth, IV, i, 117 (in The Riverside Shakespeare, p.
1330).

*
[TC] Fauchet’s Narrative (Deux Amis, Vol. I, pp. 324-5).

[*]
Carlyle is combining the names of Ambrose Spinola, marquis de los
Balbases, a general, and Antoine Joseph Santerre, a brewer.

†
[TC] Deux Amis (Vol. I, pp. 318-20 [here a Greek, not a Turk, is
mentioned]); [Jean Joseph] Dusaulx, [De l’insurrection parisienne, et de
la prise de la Bastille, in Mémoires de Linguet, sur la Bastille, et de
Dusaulx, sur le 14 juillet, ed. Saint Albin Berville and Jean François
Barrière (Paris: Baudouin, 1821), passim, but including pp. 331n, 372n,
407-8,] &c.

[†]
Jean Béchade, Jean La Corrège, Bernard Laroche, Jean Antoine Pujade, le
comte de Solages, Tavernier, and one Whyte (or De Witt).

[‡]
Jean Paul Marat, Avis au peuple, ou Les ministres dévoilés (1789), in
HP, Vol. II, pp. 37-8.

[*]
This anecdote about Christoph Willibald von Gluck’s Iphigenia in Aulis
is told by Guillaume Olivier de Corancez, in Journal de Paris, 21 Aug.,
1788, pp. 1009-10.

*
[Carlyle, Vol. I, pp. 264-73.] [TC] Deux Amis, Vol. I, pp. 267-400.
Besenval. [Mémoires,] Vol. III, pp. 410-34, Dusaulx, “Prise de la
Bastille,” [in De l’insurrection parisienne,] pp. 291-301, Bailly,
Memoires (Collection de Berville et Barrière), Vol. I, pp. 322ff.

[†]
See Charles Durozoir, biography of Turgot, in Biographie universelle
ancienne et moderne, ed. Louis Gabriel Michaud, 42 vols. (Paris: Michaud
freres, 1811-28), Vol. XLVII, p. 78.

[*]
Jean Charles Dominique de Lacretelle, Histoire de France pendant le
dix-huitième siècle (1808-26), 5th ed., 3 vols. (Paris: Delaunay, 1819),
Vol. III, p. 175.

*
[TC] Fils Adoptif, Mémoires de Mirabeau, Vol. I, pp. 364-94. [Honoré
Gabriel Riqueti de Mirabeau, Mémoires biographiques, littéraires et
politiques de Mirabeau, écrits par lui-même, par son père, son oncle et
son fils adoptif, ed. Gabriel Lucas-Montigny, 8 vols. (Paris: Auffray,
et al., 1834-35); the concluding passage is Carlyle’s rendering of a
sentence on p. 394. The “Friend of Men” is Victor Riqueti, marquis de
Mirabeau, father of Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau; Gabriel
Lucas-Montigny is the “fils adoptif.”]

[†]
Carlyle is drawing on Victor Riqueti de Mirabeau, “Lettre à la comtesse
de Rochefort” (18 Aug., 1777), ibid., Vol. II, pp. 186-8.

†
[TC] See Arthur Young, [Travels during the Years 1787, 1788, and 1789
(Bury St. Edmunds: Richardson, 1792)], pp. 137-50, &c.

‡
[TC] Ibid., p. 134.

[*]
Cf. Nathaniel Lee, The Rival Queens, or, The Death of Alexander the
Great (London: Magnes and Bentley, 1677), p. 48 (IV).

[†]
Young, Travels, p. 141.

*
[TC] See HP, Vol. II, pp. 243-6.

[‡]
Cf. Shakespeare, Othello, V, ii, 344 (in The Riverside Shakespeare, p.
1240).

†
[TC] See Young, pp. 149-51.

[§]
Ibid., e.g., pp. 66, 198, 275, 511-16, 558-60.

*
[TC] Ibid., pp. 48, 12, 84, 48.

[*]
Carlyle, Vol. I, pp. 314-19.

[†]
Ibid., p. 133 (the title of Bk. VII); the following quotation is not
from the opening of Bk. VII, Chap. i, but from the opening of Bk. VII,
Chap. iv, “The Menads,” p. 351.

[‡]
François Marie Arouet Voltaire, “Discours aux Velches, par Antoine Vadé”
(1764), in Oeuvres complètes, 66 vols. (Paris: Renouard, 1817-25), Vol.
XLI, pp. 214-17, and passim.

[§]
Carlyle is drawing on Weber, Mémoires, Vol. I, p. 381.

[*]
See Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre (1795-96), in
Werke, 55 vols. in 36 (Stuttgart and Tubingen: Cotta’schen Buchhandlung,
1828-33), Vol. XVIII, p. 158 (II, iv), see also Carlyle, “Biography,” p.
253.

[†]
See Camille Desmoulin’s account in HP, Vol. III, pp. 108-10: see also in
the Apocrypha, Judith, 13:7-10.

*
[TC] Deux Amis, Vol. III, pp. 141-65.

†
[TC] Dusaulx, “Prise de la Bastille” [in De l’insurrection parisienne,]
p. 282n.

[*]
Carlyle, Vol. I, pp. 351-5.

‡
[TC] Deux Amis, Vol. III, p. 157.

*
[TC] HP, Vol. III, p. 110 [, 72, 121].

†
[TC] Deux Amis, Vol. III, p. 160-1.

[*]
Cf. ibid., p. 161.

[*]
Cf. ibid., p. 162.

[†]
Cf. ibid., p. 163.

[‡]
Cf. ibid., p. 164.

*
[TC] Ibid., p. 165.

[§]
Carlyle, Vol. I, pp. 356-8, 360-3. For the last quotation, see Deux
amis, Vol. III, p. 176.

[*]
See Deux amis, Vol. III, p. 178.

[†]
Carlyle, Vol. I, pp. 364-5.

[‡]
Cf. Isaiah, 60:2.

[§]
See HP, Vol. III, pp. 118-19.

*
[TC] Déposition de [Laurent] Lecointre, ibid., pp. 111-15. [The
quotations are on p. 115.]

[*]
Cf. Deux amis, Vol. III, p. 221.

[†]
Cf. ibid., p. 222.

[‡]
Cf. ibid., p. 225, and Ferrières; Vol. I, p. 324.

*
[TC] [Jeanne Louise Henriette Genest] Campan. Memoires [sur la vie
privée de Marie Antoinette, 2 vols. (London: Colburn and Bossange,
1823)], Vol. II, pp. 71-7.

†
[TC] Toulongeon, [Histoire de France, 7 vols. (Paris: Treuttel and
Wurtz, 1801-10).] Vol. I, p. 144.

[*]
Cf. Deux amis, Vol. III, p. 226.

[†]
Carlyle, Vol. I, pp. 385-6, 388-93.

[‡]
Cf. the title of William Godwin’s Things As They Are, or, The Adventures
of Caleb Williams (1794), 4th ed., 3 vols. (London: Simpkin and
Marshall, 1816).

*
A more definite, as well as, we think, a juster idea of this great man,
than we have met with elsewhere, may be found in Mr. Bulwer’s Athens; a
book which, if it be completed as it has been begun, will, by its effect
in correcting prejudices which have been most sedulously fostered, and
diffusing true notions on one of the most interesting of all parts of
the world’s history, entitle its author to no humble meed of praise.
[Edward Lytton Bulwer, Athens, Its Rise and Fall, with Views of the
Literature, Philosophy, and Social Life of the Athenian People, 2 vols.
(London: Saunders and Otley, 1837); on Solon, Vol. I, pp. 315-73.]

[*]
See, e.g., Carlyle’s letter to Mill (13 June, 1833), in The Collected
Letters of Thomas and Jane Welsh Carlyle, ed. Charles Richard Sanders,
et al., Vol. VI (Durham: N.C., Duke University Press, 1977), pp. 402-3.

[†]
Cf. Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part II, III, i, 29 (in The Riverside
Shakespeare, p. 902).

[‡]
Victor Riqueti de Mirabeau, “Lettre au bailli de Mirabeau” (16 Feb.,
1781), in Honoré Gabriel Riqueti de Mirabeau, Mémoires, Vol. III, pp.
151-2.

[*]
“Characteristics,” Edinburgh Review, LIV (Dec., 1831), 382.

[*]
Thomas Paine, The American Crisis, No. 1 (1776), in The Political and
Miscellaneous Works, 2 vols. (London: Carlile, 1819), Vol. I, p. 3.

[†]
Carlyle, Vol. III, p. 4.

[‡]
See Sydney Morgan, “The French Revolution,” Athenaeum, 20 May, 1837, p.
353.

[*]
In, respectively, Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part I and Part II, Henry
Fielding, Joseph Andrews, in Works, 12 vols. (London: Otridge and
Rackham, et al., 1824), Vols. V-VI; Laurence Sterne, The Life and
Opinions of Tristram Shandy, 9 vols. in 5 (London: Tonson and Millar,
1781), and Walter Scott, Old Mortality, in Tales of My Landlord, 4 vols.
(Edinburgh: Blackwood; London: Murray, 1816), Vols. II-IV, and Scott,
Waverley, 3 vols. (Edinburgh: Constable; London: Longman, et al., 1814).

[†]
Morgan, “The French Revolution,” p. 353.

*
A curious instance of this occurred lately. Mr. D’Israeli, a writer of
considerable literary daring, tried in his novel, Henrietta Temple, one
of the boldest experiments he had yet ventured upon; that of making his
lovers and his other characters speak naturally the language of real
talk, not dressed-up talk; such language as all persons talk who are not
in the presence of an audience. A questionable experiment—allowable as
an experiment, but scarcely otherwise; for the reader does not want pure
nature, but nature idealised; nobody wants the verbiage, the repetitions
and slovenlinesses, of real conversation, but only the substance of what
is interesting in such conversation, divested of these. There was much
which might have been said by critics against Mr. D’Israeli’s
experiment; but what did they say? “Affectation!”—that was their cry.
Natural conversation in print looked so unnatural to men of
artificiality; it was so unlike all their experience—of books! [For the
anonymous criticism of Benjamin Disraeli’s Henrietta Temple (London:
Colburn, 1837), see Literary Gazette (3 Dec., 1836), p. 771.]

[*]
See Isaiah, 40.3.

[†]
(1644), in The Prose Works, Vol. I, pp. 286-331.

[‡]
Histoire de France, Vol. IV, p. 241.

[§]
Edward Cocker, Cocker’s Decimal Arithmetick (London: Richardson and
Lacy, 1675); many later eds.

[*]
See p. 147n above.

[†]
Carlyle, Vol. III, pp. 433-5, the concluding allusion is to Luke, 10.37.