The Savings of the Middle and Working Classes

r. a. slaney: You are the Author of a work on Political Economy?[*] I
am.

In that work you have directed your attention to the improvement of the
condition of all classes? The working classes more particularly.

Have you considered any of the obstacles that you think may arise from
the present laws of partnership?[†] The laws of partnership oppose
obstacles of various kinds to the improvement of the working classes;
but perhaps the most important is the obstacle which they throw in the
way of combinations among the workmen engaged in any particular branch
of industry, for the purpose of carrying on that industry
co-operatively, either with their own capital or with capital which they
borrow.

With respect, first of all, to capital to be invested in industrial
enterprises, every person, by the present law of partnership, who
advances any portion of the capital, is liable to the whole amount of
his fortune, is he not? Except in the case of chartered companies; I
believe there is no other exception.

Do you think that such liability prevents many persons of prudence and
caution, who would otherwise be willing to advance capital to a certain
limited amount, from making such advances? I have no means of answering
that question from personal experience, but from the reason of the
thing, I think it must oppose a very great obstacle.

Another obstacle is the difficulty there is in parties combining
together for industrial purposes, to prevent fraud among themselves, is
it not? That I have understood is the most serious difficulty at
present, a still more serious one than that arising from unlimited
liability. With respect to the sort of combinations that I speak of, I
am not sure that limited liability, so far as regards the working
classes themselves, would make much difference; if they invest anything
we may be pretty sure that they invest nearly all they have, and if they
lose that they lose everything; but I am Edition: current; Page: [408]
quite aware from what I have heard stated by members of the working
classes, and by persons active and anxious for the improvement of their
condition, that they feel very great difficulty in establishing a proper
control over one another, and over the managers; and they ascribe to
that the failure of such enterprises hitherto, in the cases in which
they have failed.

At present, if any one of those humbler persons who join together in
partnership to carry on an industrial enterprise acts fraudulently,
there is no summary mode of punishing him, is there? I presume there is
hardly any certain mode of punishing a partner for almost any frauds,
for he is considered to be making use of his own property. The recent
fraud on the Globe Insurance Company affords a striking example of that.

Another thing that these industrious persons desire, is to be enabled to
enforce the rules made among themselves, before a magistrate, in a
summary manner, without going to the Court of Chancery? Exactly. That I
understand to be a very great inconvenience in the law of partnership,
even when there are but a few partners concerned. It is hardly possible
for them to obtain any decision of questions arising between themselves,
unless they consent to break up the partnership, and even then only by
the extremely expensive process of a proceeding in the Court of
Chancery.

Do not the difficulties which exist render it quite impracticable for
the humbler classes to join together for such purposes? I imagine they
do so at a very great risk. And with regard to the permanence of any
association consisting of great numbers, where the members cannot know
one another, nor have a sufficient guarantee for each other’s integrity
and good sense, it can be hardly possible for any association to keep
together long without providing some easy means of obtaining a
settlement of their disputes and of preventing frauds.

Do not you think it would be politic and wise to afford them some such
facilities as we have spoken of, with regard to preventing fraud between
themselves, and summarily enforcing the rules made by them? I have no
doubt that it would be of the greatest value, both in regard to such
associations and many others.

Putting aside all consideration of the law of partnership as to limited
liability, because you have stated that possibly that might not be
necessary, would it not be just and politic to give to those working
people associating together facilities, in the first instance, for
preventing fraud among themselves, by summary jurisdiction before a
magistrate; and, secondly, that of enforcing the rules before a
magistrate also? I should think that hardly anything which the
Legislature could do, in the present state of society, and the present
state of the feelings of the working classes, would be more useful than
that.

Both those powers are given by the Friendly Societies Acts[*] to certain
Edition: current; Page: [409] associations enrolled under those Acts,
are they not? I am not particularly acquainted with the provisions of
those Acts; but I have always understood that there are peculiar
facilities afforded, and that there is a Government referee in the case
of those societies, who is a judge in some degree, I do not know with
what powers, as to the rules which they establish, and which they are
governed by; so that he is in some measure both adviser and judge how
far the regulations of the societies are conducive to the objects they
have in view.

Would it be advantageous to the classes that have been referred to, to
give them facilities for enrolling themselves under the Friendly
Societies Acts, or to give them similar powers, without giving them any
peculiar advantage except that facility which the law gives? I think it
would be very useful. A limitation of the responsibility, so far as
relates to the working classes themselves, might not be essential; but
still I think that an alteration of the law in regard to the
responsibility of partners would be of great importance to those
associations, not for the sake of the responsibility of the operatives
who may be members of such associations, but in order to induce persons
of capital to advance it to them for those purposes. I think that the
great value of a limitation of responsiblity, as relates to the working
classes, would be not so much to facilitate the investment of their
savings, not so much to enable the poor to lend to those who are rich,
as to enable the rich to lend to those who are poor.

Do not you think that if such limited liability were introduced, under
reasonable safeguards, many benevolent persons, or persons desirous of
giving facilities to improve the condition of the working classes, would
be willing to lend moderate sums, say from 100l. to 200l. or 300l. to
put them in action? I have not the least doubt that many persons would
do so.

At present if they do so they have no security, for if they take any
share of the profits they become liable to the whole amount of their
fortunes? They do. It is true they might save themselves from unlimited
liability by advancing the money in the form of loans: but that would
not be of nearly so much use to the borrowers; because those who
advanced the money as loans would come in as creditors in common with
all other creditors, and therefore would diminish instead of increasing
the amount of credit to which the association is entitled; but if they
came in as commandite partners, that would enable the association to
benefit, not only by the capital advanced, but by the credit which that
capital would give them, and which would be equivalent to so much more
capital.

Do you think from what you have heard among the intelligent members of
the working classes and others friendly to them, that some such
regulations as those which have been mentioned would go far to promote
contentment amongst them, and to remove causes of discontent? I think it
would promote contentment in a very great degree, and that it ought to
Edition: current; Page: [410] do so; it would remove one great cause of
discontent, and a very just cause.

Do you not think, even supposing that the industrial combinations
referred to should not succeed, that it would be judicious to allow them
to try the experiment, and to undeceive themselves supposing they should
be disappointed in the expectations they had formed? I think even if it
were quite certain that they would not succeed, it would be of the
greatest importance that they should be allowed to try the experiment,
and that they should have every facility given to them, to convince
those who were trying the experiment, that it was tried fairly. Besides,
even if such experiments failed, the attempt to make them succeed would
be a very important matter in the way of education to the working
classes, both intellectually and morally. I may add that I see no reason
why they should not succeed; they are under some disadvantages, but they
have other advantages, and it is quite a question whether the advantages
do not preponderate. I think it is a matter which experience can alone
ascertain.

Are you aware that amongst a portion of the more intelligent of the
working classes, an opinion prevails that the present laws are unjust
and unequal, and prevent them having fair play in the use of their small
capitals, and which they think is afforded to persons possessing greater
wealth? Yes, and I certainly see great reason in that. The advantages
which the possession of large capital gives, which are very great, and
which are growing greater and greater inasmuch as it is the tendency of
business more and more to be conducted on a large scale; these
advantages are at present, not from any intention of the Legislature,
but arising from things into which intention does not enter at all, to a
great degree a monopoly in the hands of the rich, and it is natural that
the poor should desire to obtain those same advantages by association,
the only way in which they can do so. Perhaps I may add this also: I
think there is no way in which the working classes can make so
beneficial a use of their savings both to themselves and to society, as
by the formation of associations to carry on the business with which
they are acquainted, and in which they are themselves engaged as
workpeople, provided always that experience should show that these
associations can keep together. If the experiment should succeed, I
think there is much more advantage to be gained to the working classes
by this than by any other mode of investing their savings. I do not
speak of political or social considerations, but in a purely economical
sense. When it has happened to any one, as it must have happened to most
people, to have inquired or to have known in particular cases what
portion of the price paid at a shop for an article really goes to the
person who made it, and forms his remuneration, I think any one who has
had occasion to make inquiries into that fact, must often have been
astonished to find how small it is, and how much less a proportion the
remuneration of the real labourer Edition: current; Page: [411] bears to
the whole price than would be supposed beforehand; and it is of great
importance to consider what is the cause of this. Now one thing is very
important to remember in itself, and it is important that the working
classes should be aware of it; and that is, that this does not arise
from the extravagant remuneration of capital. Capital, when the security
is good, can be borrowed in any quantity at little more than three per
cent., and I imagine there is no co-operative association of
working-people who would find it their interest to allow less than that
remuneration, as an inducement to any of their members who, instead of
consuming their share of the proceeds, might choose to save it, and add
it to the capital of the association. Therefore it is not from the
remuneration of capital that the evil proceeds. I think it proceeds from
two causes: one of them (which does not fall strictly within the limits
of the inquiry which the Committee is carrying on) is the very great, I
may say, extravagant portion of the whole produce of the community that
now goes to mere distributors; the immense amount that is taken up by
the different classes of dealers, and especially by retailers.
Competition no doubt has some tendency to reduce this rate of
remuneration; still I am afraid that in most cases, looking at it on the
whole, the effect of competition is, as in the case of the fees of
professional people, rather to divide the amount among a larger number,
and so diminish the share of each, than to lower the scale of what is
obtained by the class generally. Another cause, more immediately
connected with the present inquiry, is the difference between interest
which is low, and profits which are high. Writers have very often set
down all which is not interest, all that portion of profit which is in
excess of interest, as the wages of superintendence, as Adam Smith terms
it, and, in one point of view, it is properly called so. But then it
should be added, that the wages of the labour of superintendence are not
regulated like other wages by demand and supply, but are in reality the
subject of a sort of monopoly; because the management of capital is a
thing which no person can command except the person who has capital of
his own, and therefore he is able, if he has a large capital, to obtain,
in addition to interest, often a very large profit, for one-tenth part
of which he could, and very often does, engage the services of some
competent person to transact the whole of the labour of management,
which would otherwise devolve upon himself. I do not say that this is
unjust in the present state of society, for it is a necessary
consequence of the law of property, and must exist while that law exists
in its present form; but it is very natural that the working classes
should wish to try whether they could not contrive to get this portion
of the produce of their labour for themselves, so that the whole of the
proceeds of an enterprize in which they were engaged might be theirs,
after deducting the real remuneration of the capital they may require
from others, Edition: current; Page: [412] which we know does not in
general, when the security is good, much exceed three per cent. This
seems to be an extremely legitimate purpose on the part of the working
classes, and one that it would be desirable to carry out, if it could be
effected; so that the enterprizes in which they would be engaged would
not be conducted, as they are now, by a capitalist, hiring labourers as
he wants them, but by the labourers themselves, mental as well as
manual, hiring the capital they require at the market rate.

You think, under the circumstances you have referred to, that at all
events the more intelligent of the working classes fully believe that it
would be a great advantage to them to be enabled to carry out this
experiment? They certainly do.

And that it would be but just and politic to allow them, under
reasonable safeguards, to do so, that if they are right they may receive
the benefit, and if they are wrong they may be undeceived in their
unreasonable expectations? Certainly; and there would be this great
advantage, that supposing those associations embraced only a small part
of the working classes, they would have almost the same salutary effect
on their minds as if they embraced the whole; because if a number of
those associations were in existence, and they were found to be able to
maintain their ground, and to compete well or tolerably, or to compete
under great disadvantages even, with individual capitalists, still the
whole of the working classes would see that all such disadvantages arose
not from the law, but from the nature of the case, or from the absence
of the necessary qualities in them; therefore those who might continue
to be receivers of wages in the service of individual capitalists, would
then feel that they were not doing so from compulsion but from choice,
and that taking all the circumstances into consideration their condition
appeared to them preferable as receivers of wages.

Putting aside the question as to the unlimited liability of partners,
but supposing that capital was found by any parties willing to lend it,
what the working classes would desire then would be simply to have laws
to prevent fraud amongst themselves, and to enforce the rules which they
might make in a simple and inexpensive manner? Those would be the
primary objects which I think they would chiefly desire.

w. ewart: Are the Committee to understand you to say, that the effect of
this co-operation on the part of the working classes would be to cut off
the cost of the intermediate agency between the producer and the
consumer? Exactly. I may mention that as long ago as the years 1837 and
1838 I have heard intelligent leaders of the working classes speak of
this state of the law as one of the greatest grievances which the
working classes had to endure.

f. peel: But the share that falls to the retail dealer must vary very
much in a small town and in a large town? No doubt, estimated by the
ordinary Edition: current; Page: [413] rule of per centage, the profits
where the market was small must be greater in order to afford any
remuneration whatever for trouble.

Would the effect of those associations be to reduce the cost of
commodities? Associations of workpeople for the purpose of co-operative
production would not necessarily have much effect in diminishing the
amount of the produce which now goes to the distributors; there might,
however, be co-operative shops or bazaars, and in that way the function
of distribution might be reduced to the employing of a much smaller
number of persons than at present. The greater the number of productive
labourers, the greater, in general, is the produce: but an increased
number of mere distributors has no tendency to increase the quantity of
wealth to be distributed, but only quarters an additional number of
persons upon it. For this reason, some of the writers and thinkers of
the co-operative school have thought it desirable that distribution
should be, as it were, a public function; in which case the distributors
might be reduced to a very small number; as the whole of the
distribution, that is, the buying and selling, which is required for a
village for instance, or a small town, might be performed at one office
by very few people. These speculations are not immediately applicable to
practice in present circumstances, but still they are not altogether
from the purpose.

j. ellis: Have you any good reason to suppose, that if these facilities
were offered, money could be borrowed at 3, or 3½ per cent., or 4 per
cent.; can you cite any case? I think it probable, certainly, that it
could not at present, or perhaps for a long time, be borrowed at such a
rate as that, because there would not be sufficient confidence in the
security.

r. a. slaney: If by any alteration of the law there was sufficient
confidence felt in the security, do you think then that it might be
borrowed at some such rate as that? We know that when the security is
good, that is the ordinary rate of interest now, and anything more than
that is compensation for risk, or for some peculiar disadvantage. I
suppose that money could be obtained at that rate if the security were
considered good, and if these associations did as much business as a
tradesman in good credit, or as merchants with a similar amount of
capital do now, they could borrow at the same rate in time.

Supposing the interest of the money to be gauged by the interest paid in
the public funds, then every increase of interest above that is in some
sort an insurance interest? Yes; I only mentioned that rate of interest
to show that it was not the extravagant remuneration of capital,
properly so called, which is the reason why less than is desirable goes
to the actual producer; because it is impossible to say, when capital
can be borrowed, as we know it can, at such a rate as that, and in
almost any quantity, that that is too great a remuneration for the
abstinence exercised in saving.

j. ellis: Are you aware that 4 and 4½ per cent. is now very freely
given, Edition: current; Page: [414] when the security is very ample
indeed, for very large sums of money? I am quite aware that the rates
vary. I have understood that when the lender can get his capital back
again upon short notice, it may sometimes be borrowed at as low an
interest as 2 per cent.

r. a. slaney: Do you not think it possible, without stating a confident
opinion, that for any of the industrial enterprises which we have spoken
of, and to which we have contemplated that facilities might be given in
the mode mentioned, if the intelligent minds of the working classes were
directed to such objects, that very likely there might be discoveries of
economical improvements where they had to manage their own affairs, such
as we have not yet seen, and which might produce considerable benefits?
I should think so.

Is it not well known that most of the many inventions for the
improvement of machinery from time to time have been made by the workmen
themselves? I believe they have very often.

Do you not think it is likely that the intelligence of those men
directed to the management of their own affairs would from time to time
suggest improvements in the objects to which their attention was
directed? I think we can hardly set limits to the consequences that
might arise in the way of improvements, from the feeling that would be
diffused through the whole of the persons employed in an undertaking, of
personal interest in its success.

At the present time, however, existing circumstances prevent that taking
place? To a great degree.

w. ewart: Have you had the advantage of the experience of any such
co-operative societies in America or Holland, or in other countries on
the Continent? There exist many such in several countries, especially in
France; but I believe they are of too recent origin to afford much
experience of their success; we shall probably have to wait some years
before the experiment can be considered as conclusive.

In the United States of America have such experiments been tried, to
your knowledge? I understand your question as applying to associations
of workpeople, and I believe there are in America a considerable number
of manufacturing associations in which all the workpeople have an
interest; I have understood that that is the case with many
manufacturing establishments in New England; that they are held in
shares, and that the operatives are almost all shareholders, and all may
expect to become so.

t. greene: With limited liability? I believe so.

r. a. slaney: In page 324 of your work, volume 2,[*] you refer to the
co-operative principle of capitalists and workmen as prevailing in
American trading ships, and among the Cornish miners also? Yes; I am not
particularly Edition: current; Page: [415] acquainted with the
circumstances as to the Cornish miners; I mentioned them as instances of
the advantage which was ascertained by experience to arise from allowing
an interest in the undertaking to all the persons employed; I do not
know that they are partners in all those cases, but they have an
interest, and that varies with the success.

You think under such circumstances that would be likely to stimulate
their activity and intelligence? It could not fail to do so; I believe
that the working people are generally found to be particularly
intelligent and zealous under such circumstances, and that has been
always remarked of the Cornish miners.

You have quoted in your work[*] Mr. Babbage’s example of the fishermen
on the south coast, and other examples, to show how applicable, under
certain circumstances, the same principle would be to manufactures? Yes.

That it would be quite practicable to give a moderate interest to the
workmen in such a way as to stimulate their good conduct and their
industry? A very interesting pamphlet has been published by a French
employer of labour, a house-painter, named Leclaire;[†] and I understand
his experiment still goes on, and goes on with great success. He speaks
very strongly of the moral improvement which it produced in his workmen;
an improvement in their conduct both when at work and even at other
times; they seemed to have assumed quite a different character, through
the feeling that they were not merely working for some one else but for
themselves. It seemed to raise them in their own estimation, and induced
them to cultivate careful habits of all sorts.

You have also stated in a passage in page 459, “the industrial economy
which divides society absolutely into two portions, the payers of wages
and the receivers, the first counted by thousands and the last by
millions, is not fit for indefinite duration.”[‡] Is that the opinion
you still entertain? I do.

You think that improvements may be made in those respects by carrying
out some of the plans that we have spoken of in such a way as, without
endangering property, would give greater contentment to many of those
persons? I think that the remuneration of capital, properly so called,
would not be felt under those circumstances by the intelligent among the
working people to be a grievance. And speaking generally, I do not think
that they feel so much, either in this country or in others, the
inequality of property, considered in itself, as they do the inequality
consequent upon it, which unhappily exists now, namely, that those who
already have property have Edition: current; Page: [416] so much greater
facilities for getting more, than those who have it not, have for
acquiring it.

At pages 469 and 470[*] of your work you have given the example of the
good working of the system in New England, and have enumerated the
benefits received from it as many and lasting, and amongst those
advantages you particularly mention that the workmen consider this
principle as a sort of stepping stones to enable them to raise their
condition, by little and little, according to their industry and
intelligence, and that it goes far to content them with their humble
situation? No doubt; because it makes their situation not a humble one.

w. ewart: You think that the possession of power by the working classes
to co-operate in the way you have mentioned, would satisfy them, at all
events, if the results did not equal their expectations? I think if the
experiment failed, they would see that it failed from some defect either
in the principle or in their qualifications for carrying out the
experiment.

Have you ever inquired into that association conducted on the
co-operative principle, called the “People’s Mill,” at Leeds? I have
heard of it; but I am not particularly acquainted with it.

j. a. smith: Are the Committee to understand you to suggest as one of
the most useful things in reference to these co-operative societies, an
alteration in the law, which may be called an alteration in the law of
partnership as affecting them, and should you advise that generally, or
confine it specially to the working classes? I think such an alteration
particularly important as regards the working classes at present, but I
would make it universal.

If there were a limitation, could you give the Committee any mode of
ascertaining to what extent the principle might practically be carried
in reference to those particular views at once? I think it would be
difficult; at any rate I have not considered that point, because I have
never seen a necessity for any limitation.

With regard to the limitation, is there any mode of arriving at that by
limiting the objects to which you would apply the co-operation? It would
be very difficult, I think, to draw any line, and to say that the
principle is fit for some objects and not for others; I do not see any
object for which it is unfit, though it may be more necessary for some
than for others.

In reference to the results in an economical point of view, if I
understand you rightly, you imagine that if it were generally adopted it
would very much limit the number of retail dealers? It is uncertain
whether any such effect would be produced at first, since the
co-operative associations of workpeople are associations for carrying on
production rather than distribution; still I do not doubt that retail
dealing might be carried on by Edition: current; Page: [417]
associations of shopmen and clerks without the assistance of great
capitalists.

Do not these societies, as far as we have any experience of them,
combine production and distribution? Some of them do.

If they do combine distribution and production, that would tend very
considerably to limit the number of distributors, would it not? No
doubt.

Should you consider that desirable, or the reverse? I should consider it
desirable, provided it were done without the assistance of any
restrictive laws or privileges.

Why should you consider it advantageous? On the same principle on which
it is advantageous to suppress any useless intermediate steps in the
process of production. If any of those who are employed in the
production of wealth can be rendered unnecessary by any new discovery,
it is thought an advantage to do so. If the business of distribution,
which now employs, taking the different classes of dealers and their
families, perhaps more than a million of the inhabitants of this
country—and that is a very large draught upon the total wealth of the
country—if all that they do could be done by a hundred thousand people,
I should think the other nine hundred thousand could be dispensed with,
and that would be the same sort of advantage as dispensing with labour
by any improvement in production.

w. ewart: Would not this illustrate your principle: In the town of
Liverpool formerly the consumers were supplied from shops; a few years
ago large markets were established in that town, and on a very splendid
scale. The consumers did not go any longer to the intermediate
distributors, but went to the markets, and therefore there was in that
instance, by the operation of improvement, a cutting off of the
intermediate agents between the producers and the consumers, of course
with much greater cheapness to the consumers than formerly? Exactly. I
understand that there are many branches of trade in which certain grades
and classes of middlemen have been dispensed with, a more direct
communication being established between either the wholesale dealers and
the consumers, or the wholesale dealers and some particular class of
retailers. I believe there was a much greater number of factors,
brokers, and such intermediate agents between the different classes of
dealers, formerly than there are now.

j. a. smith: You do not mean that it was an undecided question whether
the number of retail dealers or distributors would be diminished or not,
and that it was possible by this mode of co-operation that production
would take place at a less cost, and therefore consumption be largely
increased? I think that is an undecided question, certainly; there is a
good deal to be said in the way of probabilities on both sides, but it
could be clearly ascertained by the common law of competition. If this
mode of production Edition: current; Page: [418] was found more
advantageous and economical, it would undersell the others of course,
and if not it would be undersold.

Generally speaking, you think, as an economical question, that it would
be desirable to encourage associations of this co-operative character?
Decidedly.

r. a. slaney: To give them fair play, at all events? To give them all
possible facilities, but no premium.

j. a. smith: But it is to a certain degree an experiment, if the law of
partnership, as affecting them, is much to differ from the law of
partnership as affecting the community at large? Yes, that enters into
the question, whether the law as respects the community at large should
not be altered.

w. ewart: Do you think it would be advisable to make a special law, in
fact, for any particular class without considering the expediency of
altering the whole law with regard to partnership? If it were not
possible to alter the law of partnership generally, altering it in
favour of a particular class would be, I will not say objectionable, but
it would be a serious argument against it.

j. a. smith: Would any alteration of the law of partnership, inter se,
affecting the large transactions in the commercial world in England
necessarily involve a machinery of expense and delay, bearing in mind,
that however it might be simplified, it could hardly be made applicable
to small enterprises, such as those which have been spoken of? It would
give the smaller enterprises an advantage, certainly; but I am not aware
that that advantage would be greater than what arises from any
arrangement for the administration of justice, or the decision of
disputes by tribunals or by arbitrators.

Are you not rather looking to a tribunal of less authority and less
weight and less importance, in reference to the disputes of these
workmen amongst themselves when associated together co-operatively, than
to a tribunal of a higher order, with greater knowledge and experience,
and greater weight, which would be necessary to decide the various
difficult questions arising out of partnerships engaged in large
transactions in commerce? I have understood that there is great
difficulty and inconvenience felt in the case of ordinary partnerships
for want of a tribunal. If there were a tribunal properly constituted,
and adequate to decide such questions, which are often, and necessarily
so, of a very complicated nature, I should think that this class of
associations would rather be under a disadvantage than an advantage in
consequence of their great numbers.

There might be a more expensive tribunal than those people could afford
to go to? If it were made a general measure, probably it would be
thought that the State ought to supply the tribunal, as it does in all
other cases.

The State when it does give in other cases a tribunal of justice manages
Edition: current; Page: [419] to make it tolerably onerous? Yes, it
does; but many people, of whom I am one, think that one of the great
defects in the present institutions of all countries.

r. a. slaney: Would it be equal justice that a tribunal for the decision
of disputes between partners should be so costly that it would be
utterly impossible for the working men to go into it at all; and do not
you think that where the existing law is such as that humble persons
joining together as small capitalists are utterly deprived of any
tribunal, that is an unjust state of things? I think so.

j. a. smith: Inasmuch as that question as to the expense of law is of
very great importance, and an extensive question, which must involve
long consideration and long time in its settlement, would it not be
expedient, at all events in the meantime, that some means, even if it
were temporary, should be given to the working classes to settle
disputes amongst themselves in an easy, effectual, and cheap manner, by
reference to a tribunal to be appointed for that special purpose?
Perhaps so. It takes so long to frame, and so much longer to carry, a
general measure of improvement in the law, that it is sometimes
desirable to have a temporary measure applicable to particular classes
of cases.

Do you think there is anything in the present tone and temper of the
working classes which would make it now desirable to give attention to
this subject? I think there is at this moment more than there has ever
been before, and there is likely to be more and more, a feeling on their
part, against all the inequalities which exist in society. There is a
very growing feeling of that kind, and the only way of mitigating that
feeling is to remove all inequalities that can be removed without
preponderant disadvantages.

r. a. slaney: At all events, by that means you could give them
facilities for trying industrial associations, without giving them
privileges, but merely those facilities which you think would be
politic? Certainly.

w. ewart: Do not tribunals exist in France, self-formed among the
working classes, called, “Société de Prud’hommes”? The “Conseils de
Prud’hommes” are public institutions for the purpose of arbitrating in
disputes between the masters and the workpeople. Before the February
revolution they consisted entirely of masters; but by a law subsequently
enacted, they have been constituted on a different footing, and are now
composed of masters and workmen in equal numbers; including among
workmen the Chefs d’Ateliers.

r. a. slaney: Do they work pretty well? I have not much knowledge of
that; the law has not existed very long.

w. ewart: With regard to the Tribunal of Commerce, that is constituted,
is it not, of persons conversant in trade? Yes, the judges are elected
by the merchants of Paris.

j. a. smith: Have they anything to do with the settlement of disputes?
Edition: current; Page: [420] They are an established court of justice
in commercial cases; I do not know whether in all such cases, or only in
some. It is one of the principles of that branch of French law that
questions of mercantile law should be decided on by merchants, and not
by lawyers; the parties plead their own cause.

Do you think that is a sound principle? I think that still better
tribunals might be devised.

r. a. slaney: Without speaking of those industrial associations, but
with reference to the general law of partnership, and to some alteration
of the law of unlimited liability, do you not think that the existing
law of unlimited liability has a tendency to prevent persons of prudence
and position in their respective neighbourhoods from taking shares in
any local enterprises of moderate risk, on account of their being liable
to the whole amount of their properties? I should think it must have
that tendency.

Are you aware with reference to the proposition which was made in this
metropolis for the purpose of establishing model lodging-houses, which
were intended for the improvement of the condition of the working
classes, to be carried on by joint shares, and in which many noblemen
and gentlemen took shares, that the first thing that prevented its being
carried out was the law of unlimited liability? I have heard so.

And that they were obliged to apply for a charter? Yes.

And that the charter cost upwards of 1,000 l.? I have heard that it did,
but I do not know that personally.

Supposing that the cost of obtaining a charter is what I have stated, do
not you think that, and the law of unlimited liability, two
circumstances almost sufficient to prevent any parties from embarking in
such undertakings? We see that they do embark in them very often; but I
have no doubt they are often prevented by the circumstances that you
mention.

Do not you think that in many of the large towns in this country it is
probable that persons, if they had facilities given them of taking
shares with limited liability for local enterprises of public benefit,
would be willing to do so? Many persons no doubt would.

Are you aware that application has been already made from eight or ten
large towns to have the shelter of the charter given to this society for
improving the dwellings of the humble classes in London? I have heard it
mentioned.

Do you not think that if such advantages were conceded, either by
limited liability confined possibly to such enterprises, or by means of
limited liability given by a charter, without expense and delay, that it
would give great encouragement to such enterprises being carried out in
those large towns? There are two questions of limitation of liability;
one is that of allowing commandite partnerships, under which the
managing and acting Edition: current; Page: [421] partners are under
unlimited liability; and the liability that is limited is only as to
those who advance capital, but do not take part in the management. The
other is the question of allowing perfect freedom of forming joint-stock
companies with unlimited liability; and that is a question much more
difficult than the other. It there were a general law, by which persons
might form themselves into joint-stock companies with limited liability
whenever they pleased, I think you ought to allow individuals also to
limit their liability, giving due notice; in order that the competition
might be equal. It would be a very great alteration in the present state
of the law, but one to which general principles are favourable. On
general principles, one sees no sufficient reason why people should not
be allowed to employ their capital and labour on any terms that they
please, and to deal with others on any terms that they please, provided
those terms are known, and that they do not give themselves out for what
they are not. Still that is a more difficult question than the question
of commandite partnerships; and it is very possible that in the case of
joint-stock companies with unlimited liability, it might be better to
consider each particular case on its own merits; to facilitate the
obtaining of a charter where the purpose was of public utility, and to
take away the expense in cases where the public advantage was
recognised.

Supposing in the law of partnership, either for particular enterprises
or generally, there were introduced limited liability, are there any
safeguards which you think it would be right to introduce against fraud;
as, for instance, that the shares should be paid up, that the names of
the shareholders should be known, that there should be a public audit,
that the accounts should be open, and that the interest upon the shares
should be limited, or any such conditions as those which I have
mentioned? Does the question relate to companies with unlimited
responsibility of partners, or to commandite partnerships?

Either to one or the other, as you may think it right to apply the
limitation. In the case of commandite partnership there does not seem to
be a necessity for anything like the same amount of precautions that
might be necessary in the other case, but generally speaking I should
say that any security that could be taken for complete publicity would
be desirable; anything tending to prevent the terms of the business from
being held forth as different from what they really were.

Anything to prevent fraud upon the public, in short? Anything to prevent
people from being misled as to what they had to expect.

Do not you think that some kind of precaution to prevent uneducated or
incautious persons from being induced by the plausible representations
of projectors from entertaining too high an opinion of the speculation
that shall be entered into (for instance, as to the amount of capital to
be Edition: current; Page: [422] divided), might be advantageous? The
reason that you suggest, the danger that persons might be deceived by
projectors, is the same reason which was long given for maintaining the
Usury Laws;[*] and it seems to me that the prohibition of commandite
partnership belongs to the same kind of legislation as the Usury Laws.
It belongs to the idea that the law ought to regulate the terms on which
money shall be permitted to be lent, under the supposition that the
lenders are not capable of taking care of themselves. I look upon
commandite partnerships as a mode of lending. So long as it was the
principle of the law that you ought to prevent people from lending at
more than a limited rate of interest, it was necessary to prevent them
from evading the prohibition, and doing the same thing in an indirect
way; but that principle the law appears to have given up, with a single
exception, for which reasons other than those of public utility may be
assigned; the case of contracts relating to land. I think it an
inconsistency to say that people are free to lend money in the ordinary
way at any rates they like, but that there shall be one particular mode
of lending from which they are interdicted, namely, lending at a rate of
interest varying with the profits of a concern; which is the only
difference between commandite partnerships and any other loan, except
one other difference, which is greatly to the advantage of all parties,
namely, that the loan by commandite increases the security of all the
other creditors instead of diminishing it, because all the other
creditors must be paid out of the capital of the commanditaire before he
can recover anything.

Do you think, on the whole, that the introduction of the law of
commandite, with such safeguards, or regulations, or limitations as the
wisdom of the Legislature might introduce, would be advisable? I see no
reason against it.

Do you think that if it were introduced, with such regulations and such
safeguards, it would give additional facility for enterprises directed
by intelligence, and create additional facilities for the investments of
the middle and working classes? I think it would do both these things;
and above all, which is very important, it would enable personal
qualities to obtain in a greater degree than they can now the advantages
which the use and aid of capital affords. It would enable persons of
recognised integrity and capacity for business to obtain credit, and to
share more freely in the advantages which are now confined in a great
degree to those who have capital of their own.

j. a. smith: You do not think that in this country any enterprise that
offers a chance of more than an ordinary rate of profit is ever stopped
by want of capital? It is difficult to say; I think one can never tell
while a restrictive law exists, what number of useful things it
prevents. In the case Edition: current; Page: [423] of the duties which
have been taken off, a number of minor articles in the tariff, nobody
could have told before the duties were taken off whether they prevented
much commerce or not; I believe in many cases that branches of trade
have risen up since which promise to be of great importance. In the same
manner I do not think anybody can now appreciate the degree in which the
existence of restrictions on partnerships may prevent persons of
capacity for business from obtaining credit and the use of capital which
would be advantageous to the public and to them.

Does it seem an unreasonable inference from the existence of so many
enterprises of a very speculative and wild character, that no reasonable
enterprise has failed from want of capital? Perhaps, with regard to the
very same people who encourage rash enterprises, the same imperfection
of judgment might make them reject beneficial ones.

That would not arise from reluctance to embark capital, but from a want
of discretion in the selection of the mode of embarking it? It might
arise from this: there might be the promise of more brilliant success in
the enterprises they undertook, than in those which they rejected. There
may be many cases in which the promise of possible benefit is not so
tempting, but in which the chances of profit would on the whole be
better.

The danger of responsibility is not the motive or the reason why they
reject a sound scheme? It is possible that rash people now do advance
capital, and that the prudent do not in the same degree.

r. a. slaney: Do not you think that the existing law has rather a
tendency to give advantage to persons possessing large amounts of
capital, and disadvantage to those possessing small amounts of capital?
I think that is the tendency of the present law of partnership.

Do not you also think the unlimited liability of partnerships has a
tendency to keep out of partnerships persons of cautious and prudent
habits, who would be the very persons likely to direct many local
enterprises? I think it must have a great tendency to induce prudent
people, when they are no longer able to give personal attention to
business, to take their capital out of such enterprises.

And to abstain from investing it in them? Yes.

Are not enterprises guided by prudent and cautious persons, the very
enterprises one should seek for, for the investments of the middle and
industrious classes? In the case of persons of very small means, no
doubt security is the primary consideration, much more than profit, but
in the case of the middle classes very often the advantage to them would
be great of having a tolerably safe investment for their savings, which
would at the same time promise them a higher degree of interest than the
means which they must have recourse to at present.

Do you think that such local enterprises would be more cautiously and
Edition: current; Page: [424] properly guided, if limited liability were
introduced in them, so that more cautious persons would be willing to
embark in them? I should think so; I have not very specially considered
that part of the subject.

j. a. smith: Do not you think that the existence of limited liability
would render it probable that enterprizes would be undertaken with even
less scrutiny and less examination than under the present law? I do not
see that. At present it is in the power of anybody to commence these
businesses with borrowed capital. Now the same person who has sufficient
confidence in the undertaking to risk money en commandite upon it, would
probably advance the same amount on loan; which would be a less
advantageous mode both to the borrower and to all persons with whom he
might deal, because the lender would come into competition with the
other creditors in the event of failure, instead of supplying funds out
of which their claims might be satisfied. The Legislature does not think
it necessary to restrict people from carrying on business with borrowed
money, lest it should give a stimulus to speculation; and there seems no
reason why, when it permits borrowing in every other mode, it should
select for prohibition the one mode which is at the same time the most
useful to the borrower, and the most advantageous to the security of all
other creditors. A person to whom 5,000 l. have been advanced in
commandite, is in exactly the same position with regard to those who
have transactions with him as if he had inherited, or acquired that sum
in his own right.

You give an unqualified opinion in favour of commandite partnership, and
an undecided opinion with respect to joint-stock companies with limited
liability? Yes.

Is it easy to distinguish between a large commandite partnership and a
joint-stock company? The distinction in principle is clear enough,
because where the law of commandite exists no person whose
responsibility is limited is allowed to do any act whatever as a
partner; he may inspect the accounts and give his opinion and that
opinion will have weight, but he cannot act towards any third party as a
partner, nor even as an agent, nor can his name appear in the firm, nor
can be he held forth as a party concerned; so that he is in reality
merely a creditor; but he is a creditor on peculiar terms; that is to
say, he receives nothing at all unless the concern is profitable; if it
fails he is the last satisfied, and may lose all, when no other creditor
loses anything.

You consider that the great distinguishing feature and merit of the
commandite system is the unlimited liability, the complete
responsibility of the managers? And the facilities for publicity: though
even without publicity, I see no greater objection to commandite than to
any other mode of carrying on business with borrowed money. As long as a
person in business can borrow at all, persons may deal with him under a
supposition that the Edition: current; Page: [425] capital with which he
is trading is his, when in point of fact it may all have been borrowed.
Still the case of commandite partnership affords facilities for giving
publicity, which are taken advantage of in the American and French law.
Both in the law of New York and in the French law the amount of the sum
advanced en commandite must be registered, and the number of persons
from whom it comes; and the fact that the amount is registered enables
persons dealing with that firm to be acquainted with the resources of
the firm much more than with those of any other firm whatever.

r. a. slaney: You think on the whole that the law of commandite, with
such improvements as might be suggested upon deliberation, would be
advantageous? Very advantageous.

Do you think that it works well in Holland and America; and I believe it
prevails also in France and in Germany? I am not informed as to its
working anywhere but in France and in America. I believe the general
opinion there is, that it works very well.

j. a. smith: In reference to the economical interests of the middle and
industrious classes, do you conceive it is desirable that in choosing
their investments they should think more of perfect security or of a
high rate of profit? In the case of the working classes no doubt
security is the main object, and in the case generally of all those
whose savings are small.

Agreeing with you mainly in that view myself, would it not influence you
in your decision as to presenting this temptation or encouragement to
the working classes to engage in trade? In regard to the working classes
it could make very little difference; I think it would be neither an
encouragement nor a discouragement; the savings of those classes are
seldom so large as that they have much more to lose, if they lose what
they have invested.

Does not that make it still more important to them to keep what they
have? Only, if they are to invest it at all, they are equally liable to
lose it whether commandite is permitted or not; if they had unlimited
liability, it would be just the same.

My question meant this, would it not be a thing to be desired, for
instance, that they should rather put their savings into the Three per
cent. Consols than avail themselves of almost any other devisable means
of investment? With certain exceptions; for instance, the associations
referred to, the associations by the working classes to carry on, as
their own capitalists, their own employment. I think those have very
great advantages over any other investments for the working classes.
Those associations are on a very different footing in point of security
for good management from joint-stock associations generally. Ordinary
joint-stock management is management by directors only and the directors
are very often not chosen with the necessary degree of discrimination,
and are not sufficiently superintended, because Edition: current; Page:
[426] the shareholders have other occupations, and their attention is
otherwise taken up, and the sum they have invested is probably but a
small portion of what they have; but in the case of these associations,
in which the capital would be employed in carrying on a business with
which all the persons concerned are alike familiar, which they know
better than anything else, and which they are daily occupied about,
their whole attention being given to it, they would be likely to keep a
much better control over the managers, and to be much better judges of
who would be the best managers.

Would it not almost follow from that, that you would not wish, as far as
your desires went, to see the lower and working classes engaged in such
enterprises as the Honourable Chairman has alluded to, such as bridges
or roads? It is not very likely that they would engage in them. The
means for carrying on such enterprises would be more likely to be
supplied from the savings of the middle classes, and from sums which the
higher classes could spare, and which they would willingly invest,
though they would not willingly incur larger responsibility.

Have you any suggestions to make with regard to the working of savings
banks in reference to the mode of investments for the poorer classes as
now existing? I think it would be very useful to make the nation
responsible for the amount deposited. Certainly the general opinion
among the depositors hitherto was, that the nation was responsible; they
were not aware that they had only the responsibility of the trustees to
rely upon.

Are you aware that the Bill now before Parliament accomplishes that
object? I am not aware to what extent it accomplishes it.

r. a. slaney: Would it be advisable to devise some mode by which the
working classes might be enabled from their high gains at one period of
the year to provide against the time when they might be out of work? It
would be very useful.

Are you not aware that at the present time they have no safe investments
into which they can put such a fund so as to be able, from what they
gain at one period of the year, to make an allowance to those out of
work at another period of the year? I am not aware how far the law of
Benefit Societies affords them any advantages for that purpose.

j. a. smith: Are the Committee to understand you to mean that the
savings banks offer a mode of investment to those who, while in the
receipt of high wages, are willing to deny themselves and to save money
against the time when they may be out of employment, or when wages may
be much reduced; but that there ought to be greater facilities afforded
for establishing mutual insurance funds amongst the men for the purpose
of guarding against the contingencies arising from the chances of trade,
sickness, and other accidents to which they may be liable? There is an
association now projected, and I believe some progress has been made in
it, under the name of the Tailors’ Guild, which has that object among
others.

Edition: current; Page: [427]
r. a. slaney: Do you think that additional facilities should be afforded
for bodies of workmen under proper regulations to join together for the
purpose of insuring to those parties who are out of work an allowance
from their aggregated capital, or fund, laid together when they are in
work? I do.

Do you think that that would be useful, not merely referable to the
fluctuations of the demand for labour arising from the fluctuations in
commerce, but also from the changes of season in particular works? Yes,
and from changes of fashion.

The changes of seasons with regard to bricklayers and several trades
have the effect in the winter months of rendering the demand for their
services slacker than at other periods? In the case of those periodical
slacknesses of work, as they all undergo them nearly equally, in the
long run it must be from the individual’s own savings that he makes up
that loss. But even as individuals they might be induced to practise
greater economy, by forming themselves into an association and coming
under engagements to one another; as is found in the case of the
temperance societies, which primâ facie have the air of an absurdity,
being associations not for the purpose of doing, but of not doing
something; yet they are found very effectual in promoting their object.

Is not the principle of co-operation a very popular one among the
working classes, and one which they are very desirous to carry out? It
appears to be so.

Would it not be useful to direct that to good purposes? Even in the case
of personal conduct the fact of being associated is felt as a sort of
pledge that they will adhere to certain rules.

In the case of friendly societies, it seems to be carried out very
effectually in providing against illness, does it not? Yes.

j. a. smith: On the other hand, has not the spirit of union amongst the
working classes, or rather the expectation of benefit to be received
from the trades unions, very much diminished of late years? I am not
aware how far that has diminished of late years; but we so seldom hear
of strikes now, that I should think that is the case. I have found that
the intelligent members of the working classes have ceased to place the
confidence in the effect of strikes which they did formerly, and which
it was natural they should do as long as the Combination Laws were
unrepealed, and even for some time after. The repeal of the Combination
Laws[*] was I think one of the most useful things in its effect on the
minds of the working classes, and on the soundness of their judgment,
that the Legislature ever did.

r. a. slaney: You are aware generally that the proceedings regarding the
title and conveyance of real property are very complex and expensive?
Every one is aware of that.

Do you not think that that has the effect, as regards the middle and
Edition: current; Page: [428] working classes, of excluding that species
of investment in a great measure from their means? I think almost
entirely, and perhaps that is one reason why there is so little of that
taste among the poor for investments in land, which is so universal in
other countries.

Would it not be a great advantage if it were practicable to give
facilities for a simpler and less expensive mode of conveyance, and the
purchase of small portions of either real property, or divisions of
charges upon real property, in the way of mortgage? No doubt it would be
of great importance to do both. In regard to the last, that has been
found to be of great importance practically. In Germany, one of the
safest and most usual investments for small sums is in a kind of land
debentures. My information is derived from reading a report by an
officer who was sent by the French Government into Germany to study the
laws and practice of the different States there, with a view of
introducing improvements into the French law of crédit foncier, which
has long been a great object in France, but has not yet been
accomplished. This report was published, and contained a full account of
the whole system of the laws of mortgage in the different States of
Germany, from which it appeared that by a combination of the different
landed proprietors, making their joint security available for each
individual, a very convenient mode had been provided of raising money on
mortgages, but which were always temporary; there was always a provision
for redemption at the end of a certain time. Those mortgages were
divided into shares, and the documents which conveyed the right to those
shares, which attested the fact of the holder’s being a mortgagee to a
certain amount, were very generally in use as an investment by all
classes, and were found very convenient, and increased very much the
facilities of mortgaging land for its value.

j. a. smith: And also increased the value of land? Undoubtedly, they
must have had that effect.

You are also perhaps aware that an experiment with these land debentures
is about to be made in Ireland; you would be highly favourable to that
probably? Very much so.

Those debentures, sufficiently subdivided in amount, might give to the
lower classes a degree of interest in the land susceptible of no
question on the ground of subdivision? There could be no possible
objections of an economical nature to that kind of subdivision.

It would not meet all the results that you think follow to the landowner
by the possession of land? It would be a safe investment for small
savings, and no doubt would interest the possessor in the security of
landed tenure.

But it would not have the same effect upon his character and self-esteem
as the actual possession of the land? I think it would operate in quite
a different way; I do not think it would have any other moral effect
than the possession of the same sum in a savings bank might have.

Edition: current; Page: [429]
r. a. slaney: Do not you think that affording facilities to the middle
and humbler classes, without interfering with the rights of property,
for obtaining moderate portions of land, would also be of great
advantage? Yes, in many ways.

As under the existing laws referable to landed property the title is so
complex, and the difficulties connected with it are so great as that the
middle and humble classes are almost entirely precluded from such
investments, is it not the more necessary to give them facilities for
investments in other ways? The difficulty is always greatest in
investing small sums, and therefore the facilities are most necessary in
the case of small amounts.

Edition: current; Page: [430] Edition: current; Page: [431]


THE REGULATION OF THE LONDON WATER SUPPLY
 1851

Edition: current; Page: [432]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Public Agency v. Trading Companies: The Economical and Administrative
Principles of Water-Supply for the Metropolis. Correspondence between
John Stuart Mill, Esq., Author of “Principles of Political Economy,” and
the Metropolitan Sanitary Association on the Proper Agency for
Regulating the Water-Supply for the Metropolis, as a Question of
Economical and Administrative Principle. London: Metropolitan Sanitary
Association, [1851,] 19-23. Not republished. Headed “Letter by John
Stuart Mill, Esq.,” dated 15 February, 1851, and addressed “To the
Honorary Secretaries of the Metropolitan Sanitary Association” (M. W.
Lusignan and Adolphus Barnett). Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “A
letter to the Metropolitan Sanitary Association, in answer to an
application for my opinion on the Water supply of the Metropolis—dated
15 February 1851 and printed by the Association in a pamphlet entitled
‘Memorials on Sanitary Reform’ ” (MacMinn, 76). No corrections or
variants in Somerville College copy. The pamphlet consists of a
“Memorial” addressed to Lord John Russell, the Prime Minister, and Sir
George Grey, the Home Secretary, by the Honorary Secretaries of the
Association; a letter covering the Memorial; the letter asking for JSM’s
opinion; his letter, with a postscript by the Secretaries; and two
Appendixes.

In a letter to Edwin Chadwick, dated only “Thursday”, JSM says in part:
“I shall not give the Assn a long answer. If they want me as an
authority against the nonsense of the Economist &c. they will get what
they want.” (Letter in University College, London.)

Edition: current; Page: [433]


The Regulation of the London Water Supply

gentlemen,—The subject on which the Committee of the Metropolitan
Sanitary Association has done me the honour of asking my opinion is a
question of general policy rather than of political economy.

The water supply of London may be provided in three modes:—By trading
companies, as at present; by a functionary, or a board of functionaries,
appointed by Government; or by some local or municipal authority. Each
of these modes of supply has its advocates.

The defenders, on principle, of the existing system, rely mainly on
general arguments against the interference of public authority in
operations which can be adequately performed by the free agency of
individuals. They contend, that the supply of water is no more a fit
subject for Government interference, than the supply of food, and should
be left, as that is, to the ordinary operations of industry.

The maxim, that the supply of the physical wants of the community should
be left to private agency is, like other general maxims, liable to
mislead, if applied without consideration of the reasons on which it is
grounded. The policy of depending on individuals for the supply of the
markets, assumes the existence of competition. If the supply be in the
hands of an individual secured against competition, he will best promote
his interest and his ease by making the article dear and bad; and there
will be no escape from these influences but by laying on him a legal
obligation, that is, by making him a public functionary.

Now, in the case of water-supply, there is virtually no competition.
Even the possibility of it is limited to a very small number of
individuals or companies, whose interest prompts them, except during
occasional short periods, not to compete but to combine. In such a case,
the system of private supply loses all that, in other cases, forms its
recommendation. The article being one of indispensable necessity, the
arrangement between the companies and the consumer is as much compulsory
as if the rate were imposed by Government; and the only security for the
efficient performance Edition: current; Page: [434] by the companies of
what they undertake, is public opinion, a check which would operate much
more effectually on a public board.

To establish the alleged parity between the supply of water and that of
food, it would be necessary to suppose, that food could only be brought
to London at so great an expense, and by arrangements on so large a
scale, as to limit the supply to seven or eight associations. Were these
the necessary conditions of the supply of food, the public would
certainly require that either the article should be supplied, or the
terms of its supply fixed and controlled, by a public authority. The
question is not between free trade and a Government monopoly. The case
is one of those in which a practical monopoly is unavoidable; and the
possession of the monopoly by individuals constitutes not freedom but
slavery; it delivers over the public to the mercy of those individuals.

The cases to which the water-supply of towns bears most analogy, are
such as the making of roads and bridges, the paving, lighting, and
cleansing of streets. The nearest analogy of all is the drainage of
towns, with which the supply of water has a natural connexion. Of all
these operations it may reasonably be affirmed to be the duty of
Government, not necessarily to perform them itself, but to ensure their
being adequately performed. I do not say that it ought not to be lawful
to build a house without proper drainage and a proper water-supply; but
assuredly every one who owns or builds houses in a town should have the
means of effectual drainage and water-supply put in his power, at the
smallest practicable expense.

The principle, therefore, of Government regulations, I conceive to be
indisputable. But it remains to be considered whether the Government may
best discharge this function by itself undertaking the operations for
the supply of water, or by controlling the operations of others.

It is quite possible, especially when private companies have long since
established themselves, and have taken possession of the supply, that
the most eligible mode of proceeding might be to leave the operations in
the hands of the companies; prescribing such conditions as to quantity
and quality of water, convenience of supply, and rate of charge, as to
ensure the best provision at the cheapest rate which local facilities
and the state of science and engineering may admit of.

If the saving to be obtained by a consolidation of establishments and of
works be a sufficient reason against keeping up a plurality of
companies, it might be expedient to entrust the whole to a single
company, giving the preference to that which would undertake to conform
to the prescribed conditions at the lowest rates of charge.

It does not, however, appear to me that this last plan would have any
real advantage over that (for instance) of a board elected by the
ratepayers. Individuals acting for their own pecuniary interests are
likely to be in Edition: current; Page: [435] general more careful and
economical than a public board; but the Directors of a Joint Stock
Company are not acting for their own pecuniary interests, but for those
of their constituents. The management of a company is representative
management, as much as that of an elective public board, and experience
shows that it is quite as liable to be corrupt or negligent.

Whether the operations are actually conducted or merely controlled in
behalf of the public, an officer or officers would be required for the
purpose. It is, then, to be next considered, whether these should be
state or municipal officers; whether they should be appointed by, and
responsible to, the general government, or the local government of the
town.

In the case of London, unfortunately, this question is not at present a
practical one. There is no local government of London. There is a very
badly constituted and badly administered local government of one section
of London. Beyond this there are only parochial authorities.

The municipal administration of a town, whether great or small, ought to
be undivided. Most of the matters of business which belong to local
administration concern the whole town, not the separate parts of it, and
must be all taken in at one view, to enable any part to be well managed.
Such are the drainage, the water-supply, the police, the management of
the markets, and of the port. Besides, the administration of an entire
town, being a larger object, attracts more attention, excites more
discussion, and is carried on under greater responsibility to public
opinion; while, for the same reason, it will naturally be sought by a
far superior class of persons. Were there a General Council, or Board of
Administration for all London, invested with power over every branch of
its local affairs, a place in that Council or Board would, like a place
in the Municipal Commission of Paris, be sought and diligently filled by
persons of high character and standing, as men not only of business
capacity, but of general instruction and cultivation. The contrast
between such persons and those who usually compose parish vestries, or
the Common Council and Court of Aldermen, is too obvious to require
comment.

Were such a body in existence, I should have no hesitation in expressing
an opinion, that to it and not to Parliament or the general government
should be given the charge of the operations for the water-supply of the
capital. The jealousy which prevails in this country of any extension of
the coercive and compulsory powers of the general government I conceive
to be, though not always wisely directed, and often acting the most
strongly in the wrong places, yet, on the whole, a most salutary
sentiment, and one to which this country owes the chief points of
superiority which its government possesses over those of the Continent.
Nor does it appear to me that a government agency is by any means
peculiarly suited for conducting business of this character. A
Government board is an excellent organ for giving Edition: current;
Page: [436] the first start to an improved system. The time when an
improvement is introduced is always a time when much attention is
directed to the subject; and the interest felt in it by the public and
by the Government insures, in the first choice of officers, a certain
degree of attention to superior qualifications, and on the part of the
officers themselves a considerable amount of zeal and activity. In
ordinary times such boards are apt to become indifferent and inactive;
and little being required of them, those who appoint them soon think
that anybody is good enough for the office, and it becomes a mere job
for personal connexions or Parliamentary adherents. No doubt, the same
tendency exists, and perhaps to as great an extent, in appointments by
municipal authorities; but the mischief of local jobbing does not extend
much beyond the matter immediately concerned; while jobbing by a
minister or a political party helps to give undue influence in the
legislature. Besides, a body popularly elected for local business only
is likely to be held by the opinion of its constituents (if sufficiently
numerous and intelligent) to a stricter responsibility for the due
performance of its one business, than will usually be felt by the
general government, for what can after all be only one of its minor
occupations.

While, however, it appears to me preferable on the whole that the
Government should not habitually conduct the operations for local
purposes, there is no similar reason against its appointing persons to
watch and advise those who do. I consider no municipal government to be
complete without an accredited representative on the part of the general
government. I conceive it to be one of the duties of the general
government to hold the local government to the performance of its
duties. There are two modes in which the general government might
exercise this superintendance. It might have an officer attached to each
municipal corporation or county board, who, like the préfect in France,
but without his compulsory powers, might give advice and suggestions to
the local body in all things pertaining to its functions; and if it
failed of the due performance of them, might report to Parliament, that
the necessary means might be taken to compel performance. Or, instead of
a functionary attached to each local corporation, and taking cognizance
of all subjects, there might be a board for each distinct subject,
corresponding on that subject with all the corporations. There might be
a Drainage Board, a Waterworks Board, and so forth; or, rather, for the
sake of undivided responsibility, a General Commissioner of Waterworks
or of Drainage, whose business should be to make himself master of his
particular subject; to communicate his best ideas and information on
that subject to the various local elective bodies; to give his opinion
on all their plans; to suggest plans to them when they proposed none of
their own; and to report annually to Parliament the state of that
particular branch of local administration throughout the country.
Edition: current; Page: [437] This functionary should, I think, have no
power of over-ruling the decisions of the local bodies, but he might
recommend to Parliament to do so, if he saw need.

This would, I conceive, be in itself the best mode of providing for
questions of local administration, similar to that of water-supply; and
when a local body, such as I have described, shall exist in London, I am
of opinion that the water arrangements should, under some such
securities as I have suggested, be delivered up to its charge. For the
present it seems to me that the authority to which the work may most
fittingly be entrusted is a Commissioner, appointed by the Government,
and responsible to Parliament like the Commissioners of Poor Laws.[*]
Whether this officer should reform the water system of London by the
formation of new arrangements, or by employing, under a rigid system of
controul, the existing water companies is a question, not of principle,
but of practical expediency, which can only be decided on by those who
are accurately acquainted with the matters of fact on which it depends.

Edition: current; Page: [438] Edition: current; Page: [439]


NEWMAN’S POLITICAL ECONOMY
 1851

Edition: current; Page: [440]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Westminster Review, LVI (Oct., 1851), 83-101. Unsigned; not republished.
Originally headed: “Art. IV.—Lectures on Political Economy. By Francis
William Newman, formerly Fellow of Balliol College, Oxford.—London:
[Chapman,] 1851.” Running head: “Newman’s Political Economy.” Identified
in JSM’s bibliography as “A review of Newman’s Lectures on Political
Economy in the Westminster Review for October 1851” (MacMinn, 76). W. E.
Hickson, the editor of the Westminster, suggested the subject to JSM in
June, 1851, and he agreed to write on it on 20 July; after its
publication, he wrote to Hickson (15 Oct., 1851), saying in part: “The
article on Newman is spoilt by printer’s punctuation & typographical
errors.” (Letters in the Huntington Library.)

The substantive corrections and variants indicated in ink by JSM in the
Somerville College copy (an offprint paged 1-19, but otherwise
unaltered) are given in the text below. JSM also added nine commas and
deleted one; these alterations are accepted silently. His correction of
the typographical error at 457.20 is noted in the Textual Introduction,
as is the error at 451.24, which he did not correct.

Edition: current; Page: [441]


Newman’s Political Economy

a new treatise on Political Economy, whether professedly scientific, or,
like the one before us, discursive and popular, is now opened and read
with very different expectations from what would have been felt even a
few years ago. At that time, however polemical might be the performance,
and however great the author’s notion of the importance of what he had
to say, the reader might feel certain beforehand that all the leading
principles of the existing structure of European and even of English
society would be assumed, not discussed: or if occasionally a writer, to
satisfy his ideas of scientific completeness or didactic symmetry, gave
a place in his book to a few remarks in justification, for example, of
the institution of private property, there was a slightness in the
texture of his argument—an air of carelessness and aroutinea in the
bselectionb and treatment of his topics, showing plainly that the
contest was but a sham fight, with no serious adversary. Now, however,
in this, as in many other respects, there is a change perceptible, at
least in the higher regions of political and moral discussion. The days
of taking for granted are passing away: doctrines and principles, which
were lately deemed an infallible standard for the decision of disputed
questions, are now required to produce their own credentials. The minds
of thinkers and readers have become unsettled, and there is a growing
conviction that they have to be disturbed still more before they can be
again settled on any firm basis. The value of a treatise on social
subjects now principally depends on the worth of its treatment of
precisely those topics which, but recently, were not even made subjects
of discussion.

It is under this aspect, then, that we shall first consider Mr. Newman’s
book; these being also the topics on which he first enters, and forming
the principal subject of several of the thirteen lectures into which the
work is divided.

The business and relations of life, within the province of political
economy, are mainly constituted on the basis of private property and
competition. Another practical principle, commonly called association or
Edition: current; Page: [442] co-operation, also rules within certain
limits, which, as society advances, are progressively widening. Many
eminent reformers, being forcibly impressed with the mass of physical
and moral evils which are not only consistent with, but directly grow
out of the facts of competition and individual property, have adopted
the opinion, that these facts, so full of deplorable consequences,
should cease—that individual ownership, at least in the instruments of
production, should no more be suffered, but that all who are capable of
work, should form themselves into co-operative associations, work for
the common account, and share the produce with each other and with those
unable to work, not by competition, but on a prearranged principle of
justice. Opinions are not unanimous as to what this principle should be;
according to some, equality; others say that each should receive
according to his or her wants and requirements; others, again, hold that
quantity and quality of services should be considered, and that those
who do most for society should receive most from it. There is also a
great variety in the means proposed for holding the members of the
association to the fulfilment of its conditions. All the supporters of
association, as opposed to competition, however they may differ
respecting the rules of association, call themselves, or are called,
Socialists.

In this controversy, Mr. Newman takes part with things as they are; he
dislikes socialism, and is in favour of private property and
competition. He does not defend all the applications which are made of
the idea of property, nor deny that there are evils and injustice in the
present economical order of society, and that a great part of these may
be remedied; but his position is, on the whole, that of an apologist for
the existing social system.

His defence of private property and competition, against socialist
attacks, is not at all calculated to convince an opponent, or to remove
doubts or difficulties in the mind of a sincere inquirer. Some just and
valid reasons he of course brings forward. The benefits that flow from
private property and competition are, like the evils, too obvious to be
missed; and there is so much exaggeration, and often radical
misconception, in a great part of what is said on the other side, that
no advocate of private property against its opponents can help being
often in the right; but when Mr. Newman steps, even for an instant, out
of the veriest commonplaces of his subject, what he finds to say always
admits of a very obvious reply.

For example, an argument on which he lays great stress, is, that the
idea of property is not created by law, but exists anterior to law,
which only recognizes, sanctions, and in certain cases, limits it [pp.
29ff.]. From the beginning, he argues, people have a sense that what
they have called into existence by their skill and labour is their own,
and that they are wronged when they are deprived of it. The fact is
historically and psychologically true. A socialist, however, might say
that it is of small consequence what are a savage’s ideas of justice;
that if a savage thinks he has a property in Edition: current; Page:
[443] the weapon or the ornament which he has fashioned, he is, as Mr.
Newman admits, persuaded that he has a property as unquestionable and as
unlimited in human cbeings;c in the captives whom he has taken in war.
Socialists, however, can afford to admit the right of the savage to the
produce of his own industry, and they do so with perfect dconsistency.
Theyd are the last who can be accused of undervaluing the right of those
who work, as against those who take without eworking. Theire quarrel
with existing arrangements is precisely because that right is not, as
they contend, respected fsufficiently. Butf they do not deny that until
mankind have adopted a just rule for sharing the produce of their
combined labour, each should be protected in the fruits of his own; that
it is unjust to take from any one when he has, without also giving to
him when he has not; that so long as the individual cannot look to
society to compensate him for his bad chances, it is just to leave him
the benefit of the good. This is not, in the smallest degree,
inconsistent with desiring to do away with dependence gong chance, and
make reward depend on exertion alone; and this socialists assert to be
possible.

Mr. Newman thinks it a sufficient argument against socialism that
property is of natural right. It would be necessary to settle, in the
first instance, what this expression hmeans. Weh apprehend that what is
called natural right, would be more properly described as a first
appearance of right; it is a perception of fitness, grounded on some of
the more obvious circumstances of the case, and requires, quite as much
as any other first impression, to be corrected or controlled by the
considerate judgment. So partial and imperfect are these supposed
natural impressions of justice, that almost every disputed moral or
social question affords them on both sides. Mr. Newman appeals to a
natural feeling of the right of a person to what he has made; socialists
appeal to a natural feeling of the right of every one who is born, to be
born to as advantageous a lot as every other human being. The question
is a very complex one, into which the not offending these supposed
instincts about rights, may be allowed to enter as one consideration,
but not a principal one, of the many involved. The ultimate standard is
the tendency of things to promote or impede human happiness, and to this
even Mr. Newman is obliged to resort, though like others of his school,
he tries to show that he only does it when his other standards fail him.
Thus he says, that expediency must decide whether persons shall have
power by will to tie up their property to particular uses, because “by
nature, whatever property a man possesses, is his to keep or to give
away; Edition: current; Page: [444] and therefore, by his last will, he
may give it to whomsoever he pleases, but he has no natural power or
right to give it away under limitations.” [P. 32.] This restriction of
his assumed “natural right” is very arbitrary. If, by nature, he can
give the thing to whomsoever he pleases, absolutely and unconditionally,
why can he not, in the exercise of the same right, give it on condition
of a promise? and that admitted, everything else follows, even to an
entail in perpetuity. If the question is to be argued as one of natural
right, Mr. Newman would find it difficult to reply to the many moralists
and jurists who have said that there is no natural right whatever to
bestow property by iwill. Onei can only give (it may be said), what one
has; after death the thing has passed out of the possession of the
person who was the owner, and he can exercise no power over it. Bad as
this argument is, and deserving no better name than that of a lawyer’s
quibble, it is yet preferable to Mr. Newman’s.

jIt appears to us that nothing valid can be said against socialism in
principle; and that the attempts to assail it, or to defend private
property, on the ground of justice, must inevitably fail. The
distinction between rich and poor, so slightly connected as it is with
merit and demerit, or even with exertion and want of exertion in the
individual, is obviously unjust; such a feature could not be put into
the rudest imaginings of a perfectly just state of society; the present
capricious distribution of the means of life and enjoyment, could only
be defended as an admitted imperfection, submitted to as an effect of
causes in other respects beneficial. Again, the moral objection to
competition, as arming one human being against another, making the good
of each depend upon evil to others, making all who have anything to gain
or lose, live as in the midst of enemies, by no means deserves the
disdain with which it is treated by some of the adversaries of
socialism, and among the rest, by Mr. Newman. Socialism, as long as it
attacks the existing individualism, is easily triumphant; its weakness
hitherto is in what it proposes to ksubstitute. Thek reasonable
objections to socialism are altogether practical, consisting in
difficulties to be surmounted, and in the insufficiency of any scheme
yet promulgated to provide against them; their removal must be a work of
thought and discussion, aided by progressive experiments, and by the
general moral improvement of mankind, through good government and
education.

The following paragraph contains Mr. Newman’s summary of his criticisms
on socialism:—

Their errors I would classify as moral, political, and economical.
Moral:—1st, In speaking as though my duties were equal towards all
mankind; which is Edition: current; Page: [445] untrue. To have any but
a very secondary care for those who are unconnected with me in the
relations of life, would be a hurtful Quixotism. 2nd, In wonderfully
undervaluing the difficulty of subduing a ruinous selfishness in a
community that lived on common property. Political:—In imagining that
such a community, if men were allowed to choose their own occupations,
would not presently break in pieces from the rival preferences; or that
if it were subjected to the despotism of a single mind, it would fail to
degenerate into apathetic stupidity. But my peculiar business is with
the Economic error, which consists in blindness to the fact, that there
can be no such thing as price, except through the influence of
competition; and that if they mean to allow exchanges between community
and community, they ought to abandon this declamation against
competition.

(Pp. 10-11.)

Of these objections, the second alone touches a really vulnerable point.
The other three appear to us inconsistent with any just conception of
the subject, or any knowledge of the opinions of socialists; and the
first “moral objection,” in point of moral judgment and feeling,
thoroughly vulgar minded. To regard impartially the interests of all—to
be concerned in any but a very trifling degree for those who are not in
some special relation with self, is termed Quixotism! a word invented to
hold up to contempt any nobleness and generosity beyond the conception
of the common herd. With respect to “duties;” if at present our duties
are not “equal towards all mankind,” this is only true as a consequence
of the institutions which it is adduced to justify. The duty meant is,
of course, that of beneficence; for the duty of justice is “equal
towards all mankind.” If, then, we are more bound to good offices
towards certain persons than towards others, it can only be because
those persons are by position more dependent upon our good offices. The
argument therefore is in a circle. It is this—the system of private
property and insulated families, causes a certain group of persons to
have only each other to look to for help and sacrifice; therefore they
are more bound towards each other than towards other people; therefore
it would be wrong to take away the exclusive dependence, because, to do
so, would abolish the exclusive obligation!

As well might it be said, If I am a soldier, I am bound to fight against
those with whom my government is at war, therefore there ought to be
soldiers and war. If there is an established clergy, they are bound to
teach the doctrines of their church, therefore there ought to be an
established church. If the decisions of the judges ought to be according
to the laws as they are, therefore the laws ought to be as they are. The
answer is, that bad as well as good institutions create moral
obligations; but to erect these into a moral argument against changing
the institutions, is as bad morality as it is bad reasoning.

The “political” objection is, that the socialist community would break
in pieces if the members were allowed to choose their own occupations,
Edition: current; Page: [446] and stagnate if a single mind chose for
them. It shows a great lack, either of invention or of candour, to see
only this alternative, and admit no choice in human affairs between no
government at all, and the despotism of one. A teacher of political
economy, writing against socialism, should have known something of what
has been proposed by socialists, for getting over the difficulty.
According to Owen, the able-bodied would share by turns all kind of
necessary labour; the community deciding in general assembly, or by its
elected officers, what labours are necessary. According to Fourier, each
would select his or her own occupations; but if some employments were
chosen by too many persons, and others by too few, the remuneration of
the former would be lowered, and of the latter raised, so as to restore
the balance. Socialists may be over-confident, but they are no such
fools as Mr. Newman takes them for; they have foreseen many more
objections than he tells them of; and if there are others which they
have not foreseen, or have not effectually provided against, his
criticisms do not reach the depth even of ltheirl failures.

There remains the “economic” error: “blindness to the fact, that there
can be no such thing as price, except through the influence of
competition;” nor, therefore, without competition, can there be any
exchanges between community and community. Socialists would reply, that
they propose that exchanges between community and community should be at
cost price. If it were asked how the cost price is to be ascertained,
they would answer, that in the operations of communities, every element
of cost would be a matter of public record; mthat every dealer, on the
private system, is required and able to ascertain what price will
remunerate him for his goods, and the agents of the communities would
only be required to do the same thing. This would be, no doubt, one of
the practical difficulties, and we think it somewhat undervalued by
them; but the difficulty cannot be insurmountable.

The following is one of Mr. Newman’s arguments for competition:—

The truth is really plain, but needs to be enforced, that competition,
though, like all the laws of nature, often severe, is yet a beneficial,
as well as a necessary process. If I desire to get my garden dug, and am
about to pay a man 4s. for his day’s work, merely because I have been
accustomed to pay that sum; but before I have agreed with him, another
man offers to do the same work for 3s. 6d., the presumption is, that the
latter is in greater need, and, unless I am in some previous moral
relation to the former, which ought to be respected, I shall do a more
humane act by employing the one at 3s. 6d. than the other at 4s.

(P. 12.)

Humanity may be a reason for employing the man who will take 3s. 6d.,
but not for paying him only 3s. 6d. Humanity dictates giving the
preference Edition: current; Page: [447] to the most necessitous, but
does it dictate taking advantage of his necessities? Would not any
person, in a right moral state, pay to the necessitous as much as he
would have paid to the man who needed it less? If 4s. are the fit and
proper wages for a day’s digging, it is an evil that competition should
reduce wages below that amount. Mr. Newman may say that there is no mode
of deciding what are the fit and proper wages; but he cannot pretend
that competition decides it. The question, then, is resolved into the
possibility of determining by law, what wages society can afford to give
to those who do its work. Now, what there is to be said as to the
difficulty of deciding this, or of enforcing the decision, does not
apply to socialists; in their communities no such difficulties would
exist; there would be no doubt either what could be given, or that it
would be given. Socialists do not say that competition can be dispensed
with in society as it is. But they say it is a great defect in the
constitution of society, that it can only work by such an instrument.

As we are not on the present occasion discussing socialism, but Mr.
Newman’s book, these examples of his treatment of that subject may
suffice.

As a treatise on political economy, in the narrower sense—an exposition
of the working of existing economical laws, of the causes by which the
amount and distribution of the produce of labour are determined under
the conditions of the present social organization, Mr. Newman’s book
does not afford much to be said, either in commendation or in dispraise.
He has followed, in general, the best previous authors; not implicitly,
but his deviations from them in nourn opinion are seldom improvements.
Not a few of his criticisms on them are evidently grounded on imperfect
acquaintance with their works. For example, speaking of what is called
the Ricardo theory of rent, which he in the main agrees with, though a
number of his pages are employed in combating it in detail, he says, “it
assumes that wheat is the only agricultural product, and that the value
of land is to be measured by capacity of producing it.” (P. 153.) This
is a complete misapprehension. Ricardo’s numerical illustrations are
expressed in quarters of wheat; but any one, who will take the trouble,
can adapt the theory to all other products of land; his successors have
partially done so. Mr. Newman’s other objections to the doctrine, as a
practical representation of the facts, have reference chiefly to the
allowance which must be made in this as in all other theories of
political economy, for disturbing causes, and especially for fixed
habits, and the difficulty of removing capital to another employment,
which difficulty he deems peculiarly great in the case of agriculture.
We believe it would be more correct to say, that as far as regards rent
the influence of this disturbing cause is particularly small. A farmer
either has a lease, and in that case he makes his contract so as to be
repaid Edition: current; Page: [448] during the currency of his lease
for the sacrifice of that portion of his capital which he cannot remove;
or he has no lease, and in that case, if he has ordinary prudence, he
does not sink his capital, but keeps it in a form to be capable of
removal at six months’ notice. The only remark of Mr. Newman, tending to
a correction of the Ricardo theory, to which we can allow any value (and
that remark has been made by others before him) is, that there are many
small capitalist farmers, whose position, in respect of rent, is
analogous to the peasant farmers of Ireland, inasmuch as they cultivate
for subsistence, not for trading profit; and as long as they can live by
their farms, never think of changing their occupation, however their
profits may be reduced. If such persons, therefore, are numerous, habit
may keep up their rent, or competition may raise it, beyond what would
be the value of their farm on any mercantile principle.

A doctrine respecting price continually recurs in the book, apparently
without any knowledge of its being disputable, which a more careful
reading of former writers would have corrected. It is used (p. 25) as an
argument against protectionists, but is not the less, in our opinion,
erroneous; it is, that price (the price of food, for instance), can only
be raised by diminishing the supply. We apprehend it is quite possible
that the supply may be as great at a high as at a low price. We grant,
that if there were no power of diminishing the supply, the price would
not rise; but it is not necessary that the power should be exercised;
and even if it be exercised, the diminution of supply will not
necessarily be more than temporary. As much will be produced at the
increased price as can find a market at that price: there will be no
permanent diminution of quantity, unless the heightened price has placed
the article beyond the means or the inclination of some of the
consumers. In the case of an article of necessity like food, it might
easily happen that as much might be demanded and as much consequently
produced after the rise of price as before. The inconvenience to the
consumers would then consist in the privation of something else, a
greater part than before of their means of expenditure being required
for food.

The operation of tithes is discussed (pp. 165-175) without any apparent
knowledge of the view taken of it by the best writers since
Ricardo—namely, that a tax of a fixed proportion of the gross produce
raises the price of the produce in that proportion. The author displays,
with the minuteness of numerical examples, what he supposes to be the
effect of a tithe in discouraging improvement; tacitly supposing, that
when the farmer is taxed one-tenth of his produce, he obtains no higher
price than before for the remaining nine-tenths. If the price rises in
proportion to the tithe, all his conclusions are vitiated. A tithe
undoubtedly prevents many improvements, which would be made if there
were the same price without any tithe to pay; but all those which would
be profitable if there were no tithe, Edition: current; Page: [449] and
the price of produce were a tenth lower, will be profitable in spite of
the tithe.

On the population doctrine of Malthus, Mr. Newman’s opinion is, that
“when stated as an abstract theory,” it is “undeniably true; but that
every practical application, which either Malthus or his followers have
given it, is deplorably and perniciously false.” [P. 107.]

One of the “practical applications” which he seems to have in view, is
the objection at first made by Mr. Malthus against poor laws: thus far,
however, he is fighting shadows, since no Malthusian now condemns poor
laws when so administered as not to take away the inducement to
self-support. It is difficult to see, from any of Mr. Newman’s
explanations, in what consists the “Malthusianism” which he objects to.
He says “it is impossible for any poor man to hope that his individual
prudence in the delay or renunciation of marriage, will ever be
remunerated by a higher rate of wages. He knows that others will swamp
his market with their children if he live childless. If the good alone
are Malthusians, the bad families will outbreed them.” (Pp. 109-10).
oThis is perfectly true: what is wanted is, not that the good should
abstain in order that the selfish may indulge, but such a state of
opinion as may deter the selfish from this kind of intemperance by
stamping it as disgraceful. He next says (p. 111) “it does not appear
that Malthus, or any of his followers, have given us any test by which
we may ascertain that we are actually suffering under redundancy of
population.” They have given the only possible test: they say that
population is excessive when, in a country in which labour is tolerably
productive, wages are too low. “The only intelligible test,” according
to the author, of general over-population, “is that propounded by Mr.
Lawson[*]—viz., a people is then beginning to press on the limits of its
subsistence, when a larger and larger portion of its entire power is
needed to raise the food of the community.” [P. 111.] pIndependently of
all other objections to this criterion, it does not show whether the
pressure on the means of subsistence is too great, but only whether it
is increasing. No Malthusian, we believe, thinks that the pressure of
population is greater, relatively to the means of subsistence, than it
was thirty years ago. No one can think so who believes that there has
been any moral or mental improvement in the people. The complaint is,
not that there is no improvement, but that there is not improvement
enough—that wages which, with greater restraint on population, might be
as high as in America, are kept down by too rapid multiplication.
Malthusians would deplore that the advancement constantly Edition:
current; Page: [450] taking place in the arts of life, and the good
which may be expected from improved social institutions, and a better
distribution of the fruits of labour, should be nullified for practical
purposes, by serving, as such things have always hitherto done, to
increase the numbers of the labouring class much more than to improve
their condition.

The part of these lectures to which we can give most praise, is that
which treats of the limitations to the right of property, and especially
of property in land. We agree fully with Mr. Newman in the doctrine that
there can be, morally speaking, only a qualified property in things not
produced by labour, such as the raw material of the earth. We might go
further, and say, that there is only a qualified property in anything
not made by the individual’s own labour; but we confine ourselves at
present to property in land. We think this subject so important, and so
usefully (though not altogether unexceptionably) treated by the author,
that we shall make a rather long extract from his observations:—

If a solitary family land on the shores of an empty continent, like
Australia, and occupy a plot of desert land, prior occupation would
confer on them a right superior to that of any other claimant. After
they had cultivated it ten years, if a stranger tried to drive them off,
all bystanders would call it an invasion of right. Let him take a
portion of the unoccupied land if he please, but not eject them from
that which they have made their own by usage and by improvement. . . . .
.

If the stranger, on considering the labour which it will cost him to
clear copses, to make fences, to dig drains or wells, to build
outhouses, to make roads, or execute other works, to say nothing of the
dwelling-house, chooses to offer a price to the pioneers of civilization
for their improvements, on condition of their yielding up the farm to
him, it needs no proof that they are able to make over to him the whole
of their right, and that the price which they receive will have been
honestly earned. But thereby they abandon all further claim to it.

Should he not be rich enough to pay down what they regard as a fair
compensation for their labour, the contract may take the form of a
yearly payment on his part, which may perhaps be called a rent. But
supposing it to be intended as a remuneration for the trouble which they
have taken with the estate, the payment will, in fact, be a return of
profit to the capital sunk, exactly as in a common house rent. . . . . .
.

Let me alter my supposition. After the colonist has held his land for
some years, he removes and occupies a different spot. A new colonist
comes in, and seats himself on the vacated ground. Can we imagine the
first occupant hereupon to send him word, not to intrude on his private
property, but to go elsewhither? I think not. The new comer would reply,
that empty ground is open to all; that the first was free to use, to
occupy, to keep; but what he has left he cannot keep. At the utmost he
might hope to receive some thankoffering from the new comer, as soon as
it proved convenient, as an acknowledgment of the advantage derived from
his predecessor’s labours. But any claim on his part to be regarded as
the owner of the soil would be treated with contempt. ‘What!’ the
stranger would reply, ‘did you create the earth? or why is it yours? You
used it while convenient, you abandoned it when convenient; and it is
now mine as much as it then was yours.’ . . . . . .

Edition: current; Page: [451]
But what if a settler were to forbid a stranger to occupy land within a
mile of that which the former was cultivating, saying that he wished to
keep this for galloping and hunting ground, or that he expected it would
be useful to his children twenty years hence? This surely would be
greedy usurpation, not to be defended by the plea that he had set up
marks, or run a light trench, to denote the extent of his intended park,
or of his children’s future estate. Where land is so abundant and so
equally convenient, that each may exercise his caprice without
inconvenience to others, even caprices might be respected; but none
would be justified in thus excluding their neighbours from valuable
sites. If any one who pleases is allowed to carve out a park in the
wilderness, yet he cannot be allowed to take the river-side for it, so
as to shut others out from its conveniences. Over land that has never
been subdued and improved by labour, no individual has any moral claim.
Being wild, it is public.

Let me suppose that the English Crown, while it was the legal owner of
vast tracts in interior America, gave away an estate ten miles square to
some British subject, who succeeded in planting colonists on it, from
whom he received some trifling rent. This rent they are willing to pay,
in order to get security from molestation. Time goes on, and a political
revolution overthrows all power of England in those districts. The
increase of population and the industry of the farmers has gradually
improved the farms; a new generation has succeeded; and now the
representative of the first grantee, calling himself the owner of the
soil by gift of the King of England, claims to raise the rents of the
farmers, because of the increased value of the farms. Is this
conceivable? In England, undoubtedly such things are done: but if not
enacted by a most peculiar state of law, it certainly would never
suggest itself as right. In America such a claim would be a signal to
the farmers to pay no more rent. They would say, this man, who calls
himself landowner, has done nothing for the soil. By favour of an old
king, his predecessor was once invested with a nominal right over it;
that right was worth something at the time, and it was paid for: it is
worth nothing now, and we will pay no longer.

(Pp. 134-9.)

The conclusion is, that property in land is essentially subordinate to
public convenience; that the rights of the landed proprietor ought to be
construed strictly; that the law should not merely, as in the case of
moveable property, forbid him from using it to the injury of others, but
should compel him to allow to others all such use as is not incompatible
with the purposes for which he is permitted to exercise dominion over
it; and, finally, that it may at any time, if the public interest
requires, be taken by the legislature, on payment of compensation.

Imagine a continent like America to be gradually covered by tenant
freeholders, each of whom is recognized, for the present, as absolute
owner of the soil which he cultivates. You will yet see that an increase
of human population might hereafter take place, so great that the law
must refuse any longer to admit the right of the freeholders to be
absolute. For to allow anything to become a complete private property it
must either be needless to human life, as jewels; or practically
unlimited in quantity, as water; or brought into existence by human
labour, as the most important kinds of food; and it is rather as a
result of experience and wisdom than by direct moral perception that we
forbid all invasion of private property in food, even to alleviate
public famine. Now, as water, which is ordinarily allowed to be private,
becomes public property in time Edition: current; Page: [452] of siege,
so soon as its quantity is painfully limited; and as the possessors of
wells would then be indemnified for the expense of their well only and
not for water, so if at any time land becomes needed to live upon, the
right of private possessors to withhold it comes to an end, and the
State has merely to secure that they be liberally indemnified for their
actual expenses, and for any fixed capital which they are made to yield
up.

(Pp. 140-1.)

The concluding sentence is ambiguous, and if the writer means that
landowners have no claim to indemnity for the market value of their
land, but only for the capital which has been laid out on it, we cannot
admit that he awards full justice to them. It is true the original claim
to hold land as private property, was only valid in so far as it was
grounded on past, or conceded with a view to future, expenditure of
labour and capital. But when the law has given more than this—has
allowed the original powers of the soil to be permanently appropriated,
and to pass by purchase and sale to those who have paid full value for
it in things produced by labour—this property is no more a fit subject
of confiscation than any other. Society has no right to seize upon one
particular kind of property, and on the ground of a moral defect in the
first title, a thousand years ago, turn out the possessors with no
compensation except for actual expenses. For the sake of great public
reforms, sacrifices may have to be imposed on the possessors of
property, but not on one class or description of property peculiarly, no
more than on one individual; and the most proper time for demanding such
sacrifices is on the occasion of succession by death, that being the
mode which least interferes with the habits and expectations which have
grown up under the sanction of law.*

Edition: current; Page: [453]
The last two lectures relate to “Remedies for Pauperism,” distinguished
without much precision into “Public” and “Economical.” Most of these
“remedies” have no peculiar reference to pauperism, but apply generally
to what the author considers as evils in the present state of society;
with his conception of which, though we think at least as ill of the
present state of society as he does, we can by no means agree.

Mr. Newman considers as the great evil in society, that it is, what he
calls, morally “disorganized;” that it is “relapsing into a
disorganization similar to that of primitive barbarism.” [P. 292.] Many
other writers have said the same thing; it has been said, especially by
the various socialist schools of the continent, but they said it in a
different and a far deeper sense than his. They meant by it the gradual
wearing out of belief in the old creeds and doctrines, and the sort of
interregnum which precedes the growth and general acceptance of other
and higher convictions. This, however, is not what Mr. Newman means by
moral disorganization. His complaint is, virtually, that the old
doctrines and old institutions do not continue. He complains that human
beings are not bound together into fixed groups by an irrevocable bond;
that hardly any of the relations of life are permanent; that people do
not always hire the same labourers, buy and sell with the same persons,
work for the same employers, and so forth; which he not only thinks it
desirable they should do, but would have them permitted and encouraged
to bind themselves to do by a legal engagement.

He who buys once at a shop, or in a fair, enters into no permanent moral
relation with the seller nor conceives any particular interest in his
welfare; but if we, every day of our lives, see the same street-sweeper
at the same crossing, the repeated sight gives him some kind of lodgment
in our good will and good wishes. . . We all know that the sanctity of
marriage depends upon its Edition: current; Page: [454] permanence, and
the same is true of all other relations. But nearly all of these are apt
to be dissolved by change of place, hence a flitting population loses
internal coherence. The masses which meet externally in large towns have
lost all organization. They work at certain trades, or for certain
masters, and sell to certain shops, or in the open market or street; but
they have no fixed moral unions with any part of the community, except
the narrowest ties of family life. . . . Marriage, with the kinsmanship
arising out of it, is fast becoming the only permanent relation in
cultivated England, so grievously disorganized are we, so deplorably has
the temporal power forgot its moral mission.

(Pp. 291-2.)

Thus, while the thinking minds of Europe are tending more and more to
the opinion that the enforced adherence to a choice once made, the
irrevocability of an error once committed, is a vice and an immorality
in the institution of marriage, Mr. Newman, on the contrary, makes the
indissolubility of marriage the type of what he thinks desirable in
social relations generally. He would have labourers encouraged (pp.
322-3) to bind themselves by what he terms “labour-leases,” [p. 327] to
the same employer for long periods; and he would re-establish the
relation of patrons and clients (by a ceremoney at church!) between
domestic servants and their masters.

In the Hebrew law, if a servant loved his master and his family, and
desired to serve for ever, the master performed a symbolic act by which
the servant became nailed to the house as a permanent part of it, and
the same result would everywhere be a wholesome consummation. Our
difficulty is that custom needs to grow up as a guide to law before
enactments can be wise and profitable, while, in fact, custom has long
been moving in the opposite direction, making the union of master and
servant, as of buyer and seller, more and more transient. In ancient
times religion did for a nation what law could not do, and so it might
be with us if we would wink at some of our differences, and if the
ministers of religion were not bound in iron fetters. Else, if I had a
servant whom I esteemed, and who trusted me, why might I not come
forward with him before the Church and exchange solemn pledges with him;
I, declaring that I take him as my client, and promise to him a kindly
protection and care for his welfare; and he, avowing that he takes me as
his patron, and promises to me honour and respect? After such a mutual
public recognition, a neglect of duty on either side would incur moral
censure. Precedent would grow up, indicating and limiting the rights of
the parties, and it would ultimately appear whether the sanction of
legislation was also desirable. By the institution of clienship, every
family rich enough to have servants would be brought into nearer contact
with a number of poorer families. For when a client married, or on other
grounds left the patron’s house, the bond would not be broken; and that
result would in part be brought about, which is so very desirable in
large towns, a definite relation between certain richer and certain
poorer men.

(Pp. 304-6.)

Permanence in human relations is not a good, per qse. Permanenceq when
it is unforced, spontaneous, when the relation is permanent not because
the persons concerned cannot, but because they will not change, Edition:
current; Page: [455] is a proof or a presumption that the relation has
been found good by experience, and when thus voluntary, it doubtless
excites in the persons concerned a much greater degree of reciprocal
interest in the well-being of each other, than arises from a relation
known and intended on both sides to be transient. But because these are
the natural effects of a permanent connexion when it is permanent
because it is preferred, and when every month or year that it continues
affords additional proof of voluntary preference; this is no ground for
expecting that the same benefits will arise from making the connexion
permanent whether preferred or not. The only “moral relation” which
there is any certainty of establishing by such means, is one of moral
obligation, which in itself, and independently of the purposes for which
it exists, cannot be accounted a good. Ties are not desirable merely
because they are ties; duties ought not to be created merely that they
may be fulfilled; the only ties which are desirable in themselves are
those of love and attachment, and we are very sceptical respecting the
attachment to a position which is engendered by not being able to get
out of it. If the attachment would not exist without compulsion,
patience and resignation would be its more suitable epithets. There is
such a thing as making a virtue of necessity, but that is no reason for
creating as much necessity as possible, in order that there may be the
more virtue.

Mr. Newman seems to be under an historical delusion on the subject of
permanent union. He thinks that human beings began by being solitary and
isolated; that the first step out of barbarism was marriage, and that
every advance in civilization was marked by the greater number and
closeness of permanent ties. Accordingly the tendency which he now
perceives in a direction contrary to permanence, presents itself to his
mind as a relapse into barbarism. We find no warrant for this doctrine
in history. Whether there was ever a time when human beings lived in a
state of entire isolation, we have no means of knowing: but the rudest
men of whom we have any knowledge, either in past or in present times,
were bound by ties of great strength and permanency, either to their
family in the patriarchal rsenser, or, like North American Indians, to
their tribe: and in the earliest known nations which had industry and
laws, men were bound even to their hereditary occupations. There is a
period doubtless in the upward growth of society, during which there is
a tendency to bring every individual into permanent relations with some
other or others. The reason is that permanence is the earliest
contrivance for the tempering of oppression. When there is no law
capable of restraining the tyranny of a powerful man, his weaker
neighbours consent to become his vassals, that he may have an inducement
to protect them against all tyrants but himself, and that the degree of
interest which he may feel in them as his dependents, Edition: current;
Page: [456] may serve (instead of conscience or humanity) as a motive to
confine his own tyranny within some bounds.*

This particular phasis of social progress attained its greatest
development in the middle ages, which according to Mr. Newman’s theory,
should be the type of perfection in social life; since there was no one,
the king excepted, who was not bound by an indissoluble relation to some
superior, and no one save the lowest of serfs who was not tied by some
reciprocal obligation to a host of inferiors. When this social
organization had reached its height, all subsequent improvements
assisted in the gradual decomposition of it. As society emerged from a
state of mere compromise with lawlessness, and came to some extent under
the authority of impartial laws, each step in advance has set free a
less or greater part of the community from enforced ties. The workman no
longer needing the protection of his guild, is no longer tied to it; the
labourer has ceased to be the serf of any seigneur; the nation is no
longer entailed by hereditary right on a particular line of rulers.
These “permanent moral unions” have been dissolved, because in
themselves they were an evil, when the exigencies which alone rendered
them useful had ceased to exist. And since such exigencies are not
likely to return, it may safely be predicted, that whatever permanence
is to be looked for as the consequence of future improvement, will be
the effect of reason and free choice, not of irrevocable
engagements;—will be voluntary, and not in any shape compulsory.

Even putting compulsion out of the question, such fixity of relations as
Mr. Newman aims at, is inconsistent with a rapidly progressive state of
society and life. By his theory on this subject, he is an apostle of
Conservatism. His ideal could only be realised in an age of standing
still. The spirit of progress, the best and only hope of the world, is
incompatible with shutting the door, first here, then there, against
change for the better. Even physical progress, improvement in the
material arts of life, is not consistent with his system. If customers
were always to adhere to the same Edition: current; Page: [457] dealer
as long as they found him honest, it would doubtless be an encouragement
to honesty, but a great discouragement to improvement. To whom could the
producer or dealer who supplied better goods at lower prices, look for
his remuneration? Fixed personal relations, as a general rule, can only
belong to a fixed state of society. Until Mr. Newman or somebody else
can point out any existing state of society which it is desirable to
have stereotyped for perpetual use, we must regard as an evil, all
restraint put upon the spirit which never yet since society existed has
been in excess—that which bids us “try all things” as the only means by
which with knowledge and assurance we can “hold fast to that which is
good.”[*]

Some of the measures of political improvement which Mr. Newman
advocates, we recognize as useful, though not always for the reasons he
assigns. He insists much on the value of provincial legislatures, to
transact the local business now performed by private Acts of Parliament,
together with much other business not now performed at all. We are of
the same opinion; not however for the sake of remedying what he
deplores, “the loss of local patriotism;” [p. 293] for the provincial
spirit, in every country where it exists, is a mere hindrance to
improvement. In the United States, which Mr. Newman justly holds up as a
model of local self-government, the local institutions do not engender
local, but general patriotism; or (to call it by a better name, because
unconnected with ideas of narrowness,) public spirit, and intelligent
interest in public affairs.

The concluding chapters contain some useful observations in favour of
small landed properties, of commandite partnerships, of giving the
labourers a joint interest in the profits of the capitalist, and other
matters of considerable, though secondary importance, of which the
limits already attained by this article, forbid any more particular
notice.

Edition: current; Page: [458] Edition: current; Page: [459]


THE LAW OF PARTNERSHIP
 1851

Edition: current; Page: [460]


EDITOR’S NOTE

“Appendix to the Report from the Select Committee on the Law of
Partnership,” Parliamentary Papers, 1851, XVIII, 182. Signed; not
republished. Original heading: “1.—Reply to Queries by J. Stuart Mill,
Esq.” Not mentioned in JSM’s bibliography or Autobiography. No copy in
Somerville College.

JSM’s reply was to the following “Form of Queries” (ibid., 181), which
was sent to twelve respondents in all:

“It has been proposed to limit the liability of partners to the amount
of their respective subscription in certain companies or partnerships
duly registered.

It has been thought by some persons that such a measure, properly
guarded by regulations to prevent fraud and rash speculation, may assist
useful investments for the combination of capital of the middle classes,
and aid useful local enterprises.

It is proposed that this measure should not extend to banking,
insurance, or other employments for capital of a very speculative
nature.

Such partnerships of limited liability, under certain rules, are
established in France, Germany, Holland, and the United States of
America.

It is desired by some parties that such partnerships should be
introduced here.

Your opinion is requested on this subject, with such suggestions as you
may think useful.”

Edition: current; Page: [461]


The Law of Partnership

the liberty of entering into partnerships of limited liability, similar
to the commandite partnerships of France and other countries, appears to
me an important element in the general freedom of commercial
transactions, and in many cases a valuable aid to undertakings of
general usefulness.

I do not see any weight in the reasons which have been given for
confining the principle to certain kinds of business, or for making
certain employments an exception from it. The prohibition of commandite
is, I conceive, only tenable on the principles of the usury laws, and
may reasonably be abandoned since those principles have been given up.
Commandite partnership is merely one of the modes of lending money,
viz., at an interest dependent on, and varying with, the profits of the
concern; and subject to the condition, in case of failure, of receiving
nothing until other creditors have been paid in full. This mode of
lending capital is evidently more advantageous than any other mode to
all persons with whom the concern may have dealings; and to retain
restrictions on this mode after having abandoned them on all others,
appear to me inconsistent and inexpedient.

The only regulations on the subject of limited partnerships which seem
to me desirable, are such as may secure the public from falling into
error, by being led to believe that partners who have only a limited
responsibility, are liable to the whole extent of their property. For
this purpose, it would probably be expedient, that the names of the
limited partners, with the amount for which each was responsible, should
be recorded in a register, accessible to all persons; and it might also
be recorded, whether the whole, or if not, what portion of the amount,
had been paid up.

If these particulars were made generally accessible, concerns in which
there were limited partners would present in some respects a greater
security to the public than private firms now afford; since there are at
present no means of ascertaining what portion of the funds with which a
firm carries on business may consist of borrowed capital.

No one, I think, can consistently condemn these partnerships without
Edition: current; Page: [462] being prepared to maintain that it is
desirable that no one should carry on business with borrowed capital; in
other words, that the profits of business should be wholly monopolized
by those who have had time to accumulate, or the good fortune to inherit
capital: a proposition, in the present state of commerce and industry,
evidently absurd.

Edition: current; Page: [463]


THE INCOME AND PROPERTY TAX
 1852

Edition: current; Page: [464]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Parliamentary Papers, 1852, IX, 780-91, and 794-820. Not republished.
Original headings: “John Stuart Mill, Esq., called in; and Examined,”
and “John Stuart Mill, Esq. called in; and further Examined.” Running
heads: “Minutes of Evidence taken before the/Select Committee on Income
and Property Tax.” The evidence was taken on 17 and 20 May, 1852, with
Joseph Hume in the Chair, and the following members of the Committee
present on the 17th: Sir Francis Baring, Joseph Henley, Charles
Newdegate, John Lewis Ricardo, Harry Vane, Thomas Vesey, and Sir Charles
Wood. On the 20th the same members were present, except Baring,
Newdegate, and Vane, and in addition Benjamin Disraeli (Chancellor of
the Exchequer), Edward Horsman, T. Sotheron Estcourt, and James Wilson.
Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “Evidence before the Select
Committee of the House of Commons on the Income Tax, printed with their
Report, forming Vol. IX of the papers of the Session of 1852” (MacMinn,
77). No copy in Somerville College.

On 17 May, JSM’s examination includes questions 5222 to 5269 of the
evidence before the Committee; on 20 May, questions 5277 to 5447.

Edition: current; Page: [465]


The Income and Property Tax

j. hume: You have given considerable attention to the subject of
taxation, and have published your opinions upon the income and property
tax? On the general principles of the income and property tax.[*]

What is your opinion of the present income tax,[†] as regards its
fairness and equality to the different interests affected by it? It
seems to me to be the chief defect of the present tax, that it does not
make any distinction between permanent and temporary incomes, or between
precarious and certain incomes. I should not however be inclined to make
so great a distinction in either of those cases as is contended for by
many. The most popular of the plans for remedying the inequality or
injustice of the present tax in making no distinction between permanent
and temporary incomes, is the plan of capitalizing, as it is called, the
income, and taxing each income at what would be its selling value at the
moment when the tax is levied. Now this appears to me to involve an
arithmetical fallacy. Suppose, for instance, there were two incomes,
each of 1,000l. a year, the one a permanent income, and the other an
income for 10 years, or what is equivalent, a life income, the life
being supposed to be worth 10 years’ purchase. Supposing that the
permanent income would sell for 20 years’ purchase, it would be double
the value of the other, and, according to the maxim of taxing all
persons in proportion to their means without consideration of anything
else, all would admit that an income which is worth only half as much as
another income, should pay only half as much. Under cover, however, of
this principle, it is contended that an income of 1,000l. a year which
is to last for only 10 years, should be considered as equivalent to an
income of 500l. a year to last for ever, and should be taxed at only the
same rate at which a perpetual annuity of 500l. would be taxed. This
appears to me to be fallacious: because, after converting an income of
1,000l. a year for 10 years into an equivalent value in perpetuity, that
is to say, into 500l. a year in perpetuity, you do not tax it in
perpetuity, which you would do if it were really a permanent income of
that value, Edition: current; Page: [466] but you tax it only for 10
years. The fallacy lies in capitalizing the income without at the same
time capitalizing the tax. It appears to me that you ought to do both,
or neither. The point might be illustrated in this way. Supposing the
tax were to be paid only once, and assuming, as before, that a perpetual
income is worth 20 years’ purchase, it would be fair to take from a
perpetual income of 1,000l. a year exactly twice as much as you take
from an income of 1,000l. a year for 10 years; that is to say, an income
of 1,000l. in perpetuity being worth 20,000l., an income of 1,000l. a
year for life at 10 years’ purchase, would be worth only 10,000l., and
therefore ought to pay half as much as the other. Now supposing the tax
were levied once for all, and that it were a tax of five per cent., the
one income would pay 1,000l. once, and the other income would pay 500l.
once, because the one would be worth 20,000l., and the other only
10,000l.; that everybody would allow to be fair, the one being half the
selling value of the other. As that would be fair if the tax was to be
levied only once, I apprehend that it would be fair in whatever mode the
tax was levied; the one ought to pay what is equivalent to 1,000l., and
the other to pay what is equivalent to 500l. But it is proposed that an
income of 1,000l. a year for 10 years only, should be taxed as if it
were an income of 500l. a year, that it should be taxed therefore only
25l. a year, and should pay that for only 10 years. So that where the
perpetual income pays a perpetual tax equal in value to 1,000l., the
terminable income pays a terminable tax equivalent only to 250l., and
consequently pays a fourth, instead of a half, what the other pays.
This, I conceive, is not consistent with the principle of paying in
proportion to means, which is the principle of the tax as at present
levied. At the same time, I do not consider that to be the right
principle of taxation. I do not conceive that the tax should be in
proportion to the means only, but that it should take into consideration
the means, and also the wants. I would therefore tax temporary or
precarious incomes at a lower scale than permanent or certain incomes,
not because of their having a less selling value, but because the
possessors of those incomes have one want, which those who possess
permanent incomes have not; they are liable to be called upon in most
cases to save something out of that income to provide for their own
future years, or to provide for others who are dependent upon them;
while those who possess permanent incomes can spend the whole, and still
leave the property to their descendants or others. It is for this reason
that I would tax a temporary income at a lower rate than a permanent
income.

When you speak of temporary incomes, you include professional incomes?
Yes.

You say that in the case of temporary incomes, not only the means but
the wants should be taken into consideration in levying the tax. Are you
Edition: current; Page: [467] able to point out what those wants are, in
regard to any particular class of incomes, or to lay down a rule upon
the subject? It is impossible to lay down a rule with precision, and
entirely impossible to take into consideration the special circumstances
of individual cases; but it may be said generally of both classes of
incomes, that is, temporary and precarious, that the possessors will be
unable prudently to spend the whole of the incomes, as possessors of
permanent incomes might do. I think that this difference between those
classes of persons and persons having permanent incomes is a ground for
making a distinction between them in taxation. The true principle of the
equality of taxation, I conceive to be, not that it shall be equal in
proportion to means, but that it shall, as far as possible, demand an
equal sacrifice from all. If two persons have equal incomes, and one of
them can afford to spend the whole of that income, while the other is
called upon to make a certain reserve to meet future wants, to demand
from these two persons the same annual sum, is to require from them not
an equal, but an unequal sacrifice.

You consider that there would be an equality in the tax if the allowance
which you have now stated were made? I am only stating now what appears
to me to be the principal objection to the present tax, namely, that it
does not make any distinction between permanent and temporary incomes.
The distinction which I think it ought to make, would be to leave
untaxed such a proportion of the temporary income as it might reasonably
be expected that the individual possessing it should save. Of course you
cannot consider individual cases, you must consider classes of cases,
and obtain as good an average as you can.

In what manner would you be able to ascertain what those wants were? It
must be done to a considerable degree arbitrarily. No rule that can be
adopted is perfectly just, because no two persons are in the same
circumstances as to wants and means, but you may adopt a sort of general
standard. It seems to me that the suggestion of taxing incomes in
proportion to their capitalized value is a great deal too favourable to
temporary incomes. If you convert an income of 1,000l. a year for 10
years into a permanent income of an equivalent value, which we will
suppose to be 500l. a year, and tax the income as if it were 500l., you
leave untaxed 500l. out of 1,000l. According to the view I take, this
would be only justifiable if it was reasonable and just to suppose that
the person enjoying that income would save 500l. out of the 1,000l. as a
provision for future years or for his descendants, or any persons in
whom he is interested. Now this is much more than the owners of life
incomes generally do save, or can reasonably be expected to save. If a
person having an income of 1,000l. a year which he has to work for, and
which therefore depends on his life, were to put by as much as would
convert this into a perpetual income of an Edition: current; Page: [468]
unvarying amount, that is to say, on the present supposition, 500l. a
year, he would leave to his posterity as large an income in perpetuity
without work, as he allowed himself out of the produce of his labour,
which is a very exaggerated view of the obligations or the probabilities
of saving.

You think that an allowance should be made in all those cases according
to the prudential views of what it is necessary to lay by in order to
provide for the old age of the individual, or to provide for the family
which he may have? I do not think you could establish any minute
classification, but you might take an average of what those whose
incomes are for life, or for a shorter period than life, might be
reasonably expected to save, and that may, perhaps, be taken to be
one-fourth. I say one-fourth, without much consideration, and without
much means of judging, but you can only strike a general average. It
might, I think, be assumed, that on the average persons with temporary
incomes may prudently expend three-fourths and save the other fourth; if
that were a fair calculation I would tax them on three-fourths and leave
a fourth untaxed.

If I rightly understood you, what you mean is this, that supposing A
from landed property received 400l. a year and B from professional
income received 400l. a year, you would tax the one on 400l., and you
would tax the other on 300l. a year? Exactly.

That you put as the average, without being able mathematically to arrive
at the correct result, because the parties enjoying those incomes in
each class will require, in order to act with prudence, to lay by a
portion of their incomes to meet future wants? Of course it is a general
average, but it does not seem to me objectionable to take it as such an
average.

Would you apply that to salaries and all temporary incomes? I would
apply it to all temporary incomes. But in the case of professional
incomes, or incomes derived from trade or business, where, in addition
to being only temporary, they are precarious, I would make a further
distinction in favour of them. A precarious or variable sum which
averages 1,000l. a year is not to any one’s feelings of so great value
as 1,000l. a year of certain income. It would therefore be fair that
incomes of the precarious class should be taxed on a somewhat lower
scale, in addition to the exemption of one-fourth, or whatever other
proportion were adopted, on the score of its being a temporary income.
This would not apply to salaries, or any incomes of a fixed character,
but only to those which are precarious; to all incomes from commerce,
for instance.

On that view, probably half in a trade where considerable risk existed,
your proportion might go up to a half, whilst other incomes were charged
upon the three-fourths? To a certain extent regard is paid to that
consideration in the present system, by allowing losses to be deducted,
but it is not provided for completely, because under the present system
all losses are Edition: current; Page: [469] not allowed to be deducted;
it is only the loss in a particular year which is deducted. If for
several years in succession there has been a loss in business, though no
tax is levied in those years, yet nothing is given back; therefore it is
not, in the present mode of levying the tax, correct to say that losses
are allowed for; they are only partially allowed for.

sir c. wood: Is not loss allowed for in each and every year? If in one
year there is 1,000l. gained and 500l. lost, the tax is levied on 500l.,
but if in the succeeding year the profits are 500l. and the losses are
1,000l. the State is content with levying no tax in that year, but it
does not refund to the taxpayer, as I conceive in justice it ought to
do.

That is to say, the State does not indemnify a man for the loss of
income in any one year, by paying him a certain sum in that year,
although it received the tax from him in the year when he made a profit?
Precisely so; he has paid the tax in those years in which there was a
profit, but in those in which there was a loss he has not received
anything back, therefore taking a series of years he has paid the tax on
more than the surplus of his profits above his losses.

j. hume: You are aware that under Schedule (A.) for losses arising from
repairs, or other circumstances attending the management of real
property, no allowance is made. Do you consider that just? On principle
I should say it is not just; but I have not considered the subject very
particularly.

Then we understand you to speak of net income after making the
allowances which under each class might fairly be made? Yes. There is
something further which I think is not strictly just with reference to
losses. In consequence of the classification of the sources of income in
the return that each person makes under Schedule (D.), the whole of the
losses are not allowed for, even in the same year. As I understand the
matter, if under some of the heads he has received profits, and under
others he has sustained losses, the losses under one head are not
allowed to be deducted from the profits under another. For instance,
supposing a person in Schedule (D.) makes a return that he has lost
500l. by his business, but that he has gained during that year 500l. by
the sale of railway shares, he is called upon to pay on the 500l. he has
gained on railway shares, taking no account of the 500l. which he has
lost in his regular business; but I apprehend, in the case supposed, he
ought to pay nothing.

You would require each individual under Schedule (D.) to place his whole
receipts and his whole losses, so that he should pay only on the net
balance, if it was a profit? Exactly, and that I conceive must have been
the intention of the Legislature, but I believe it is not the practice.

c. newdegate: You have stated that it would be just in the case of
temporary incomes, and more especially in the case of professional
incomes, to allow for a reserve, and that amount allowed for a reserve
should be Edition: current; Page: [470] exempt from the tax; would not
that be equally just under Schedule (A.), in the case of estates, where
at certain periods buildings are required to be renewed as well as
repaired? I think so, on the principle that people ought to be taxed
only on their net receipts; on the income they receive after deducting
all the charges necessarily connected with it. They ought to be taxed on
that portion of the year’s income which they can afford to spend upon
themselves. That is the principle on which all my remarks have been
founded.

Making allowance in all cases for a necessary reserve? Yes.

Have you ever considered the case of the owners of mineral property who
receive what is termed a royalty, which includes rent for the use of the
mines and also the whole of their share of the coal or minerals in each
year? I have not considered that case particularly.

Is it not the case that those parties pay the tax upon their whole share
of the coal sold in each year, that coal being absolutely disposed of,
and, in fact, being so much capital? I apprehend that they ought only to
pay upon the surplus of their receipts beyond expenses, like other
people.

The case I put is this: under Schedule (A.) the coal-owner is taxed upon
the whole royalty which he receives, that royalty includes the sale of a
certain portion of his coal, which is so much capital; is it just that
he should be taxed upon the whole value of that sale? I can only
conceive that question to arise in contemplation of the ultimate
exhaustion of the coal mines, but as that must be at so very distant a
period, it does not seem to me that any deduction which could be
reasonably made with reference to that contingency, could make any
material difference.

Would you, then, tax the royalty, which includes the value of the coal
sold, at the same rate as you would tax rent, which is only an annual
payment for the user of the land? As far as I can see at present,
without much consideration, I should; but in regard to precarious
incomes, such as profits of trade, or professional incomes, which cease
altogether with the life of the person, and are liable to fluctuate from
illness, or varying success, or from a hundred other circumstances, I
think the tax is doubly unjust to the holders of those incomes. In the
first place, it taxes them on the whole of their receipts, but does not
deduct the whole of their losses. In the second place, I conceive that
even if you deduct the whole of their losses you will not do full
justice to them. Supposing a variable income which averages 1,000l. a
year after all losses were deducted, but which might cease altogether
any day, though on a series of years the income might be the same as
that of a person who had 1,000l. year from land, still it would not be
just to tax it on the same scale, because it is not the same to any
one’s feelings. A permanent income of the same amount is of more value
to any man’s feelings than an uncertain income, averaging that Edition:
current; Page: [471] amount, but which may at any time dwindle to
nothing. On that account, if all losses were allowed to be deducted, and
justice done in that respect, still some additional consideration would,
I think, be due to the possessor of a precarious income.

j. hume: Though you do not agree entirely in the principle that the
State should levy the tax by capitalizing the different incomes, still
you come to the conclusion that those who have precarious incomes should
not be taxed, as they now are, at the same rate with those who have
permanent incomes? Not only so, but I would make a double distinction:
in the first place, as regards those whose incomes are temporary, I
would tax only such a proportion of their income as it may be reasonably
supposed they can afford to spend upon themselves, and leave untaxed
that portion which they are bound, or may be reasonably expected to
save. In addition to that, where incomes were precarious, I would tax
even that reserved portion at a somewhat lower rate. For instance,
supposing that permanent incomes were taxed as at present, 7d. in the
pound, then in the case of temporary incomes I would levy 7d. in the
pound only upon three-fourths of the income; and in the case of
precarious or uncertain incomes, such as those derived from professions
and trades, I would take, perhaps, only 6d. in the pound upon the
three-fourths.

Do you think that those classes could be so arranged as to enable the
officers who were employed to levy the tax to collect it with fairness?
I do not think it would be possible to make nice distinctions in
particular cases, but it seems to me that there would be more justice in
drawing the line a little arbitrarily than in not drawing any line at
all.

Though you could not draw the line quite correctly in all cases, you are
of opinion that it would be better to attempt it than to continue the
present system, which you consider unjust? Decidedly.

c. newdegate: You stated in reference to the principle of taxation, that
means only should not be considered but wants also to a certain degree,
including under the term “wants” the necessity for making a reserve in
the case of persons who have limited interests. Is there not also this
further consideration, viz., the advantages derived by each from the
state, which are not the same in all cases; for instance, are not
professional incomes much more dependent upon the good order and
permanent condition of society than incomes derived from land? It seems
to me that all incomes are essentially dependent upon the protection of
government.

But are not professional incomes more so than the incomes derived from
land? Supposing society to be sufficiently ill governed, no property
whatever would be safe.

But would not professional men, in the case of society not being well
governed, suffer more than the owners of real property? It seems to me
very Edition: current; Page: [472] disputable whether they would, but
supposing they did, I do not conceive that to be a consideration on
which a principle of taxation can be grounded. The just principle of
taxation, I conceive to be, to impose as far as possible an equal
sacrifice on all.

According to their means? Yes.

Then, after all, the distinction you have established resolves itself
into the principle of taxation according to a person’s means? Taxation
in proportion to means, but with an allowance in certain cases where the
payment of the same proportion would be an equal sacrifice.

Without a consideration of the necessities of the enjoyment, or the
advantages derived? If you could ascertain the particular necessities of
every individual, which you cannot do, and if you could also distinguish
the necessities he brings upon himself by imprudence from those which
are inherent in his position, I think justice would require that you
should do so. But as that is clearly impossible, all you can do is to
consider classes of cases; and if you can in any particular class of
cases distinctly see that there is a necessity which does not exist in
another class of cases, and that if you took the same proportion of
income from both, it would impose a greater sacrifice upon the one than
upon the other, I think this should be avoided.

You admit that wants are to be taken into consideration in fixing the
tax, and that the tax is to be regulated according to certain classes
which you would establish? Yes.

Without consideration of the advantages derived by each class from the
institutions of the country? Exactly.

j. hume: I understood you to have said that taxation is raised for the
protection of all parties in the State; will you explain the words you
have now used, “equal sacrifice.” You say there ought to be an equal
sacrifice, but you do not look to the sacrifice which each individual
has to make, but you take it in classes? I hardly know how to give any
better explanation than is implied in the words themselves. If the
object was to raise from a number of persons a contribution for some
common object, the natural course would be not to take exactly the same
sum from each, because they can afford it in unequal degrees; and by
taking, not the same sum, but the same proportion, you would still take
from them what they could not afford in equal degrees. I would make an
allowance for that circumstance, and I would endeavour so to regulate
the sum taken from each, that each should be required to give up an
equal share, not of their means, but of their enjoyments.

j. l. ricardo: That each should make an equal sacrifice? Yes.

j. hume: You would not look altogether to the property possessed, but to
Edition: current; Page: [473] other circumstances connected with the
situation of the property? The amount of the property is one of the
principal circumstances to be looked to, but not the only one.

In a former answer you stated that you would make a certain allowance to
all; what do you mean by an allowance; is it for necessaries, not
luxuries? In order to answer that question, I must enter into another
part of the subject, which is, the expediency of leaving a certain
portion of all income untaxed. It seems to me right to exempt from
income tax, and from all taxes as far as you can, the amount of income
required for the necessaries of life. If, for instance, 50l. a year
would provide an individual and an average family, or rather a family
just sufficient to keep up the population, with necessaries of life, so
much should be left untaxed.

For rich and poor? Yes. I would not leave incomes of 50l. untaxed, and
tax incomes of 60l. upon the whole 60l.; I would tax them on the surplus
above 50l., in order to take a certain proportion of the surplus, and
not a certain proportion of the whole income.

Is it your view that all property, and all incomes should be taxed,
subject to the exception you have now stated? If the income tax was the
only tax, and the whole national revenue was raised by means of it, I
should say so, certainly; but as circumstances are now, one part of the
revenue system must be considered with reference to other parts. If I
were laying on an income tax to supply the whole of the national
expenditure, I would tax all incomes that yield more than the
necessaries of life, and tax them on the surplus above what would yield
the necessaries of life. But under the present system of taxation, it is
right to consider whether the remaining taxes do not press more on the
smaller than on the larger incomes. I conceive that they do, and that
this justifies the present exemption from the income tax of incomes
under 150l. a year. The excise and customs, and our indirect taxes in
general, are levied mostly on commodities of very general consumption,
other articles being seldom worth the expense of levying a tax: and thus
the great mass of our revenue is derived from the articles consumed by
the middle and lower classes. The consequence is, that probably the
people in this country who are most heavily taxed in proportion to their
incomes, are those receiving incomes of between 50l. and 150l. a year,
because all articles of general consumption are consumed in a greater
proportion by that class than by the rich.

c. newdegate: You consider that under the present system of taxation,
what may be termed luxuries are, in a great measure, exempt? The
luxuries of those whose incomes are small, are taxed much more heavily
than those of the rich; and that is carried so far, that the same amount
of tax is often levied on the lower qualities of the same articles as on
the highest qualities.

Edition: current; Page: [474]
If I understand you, the luxuries of the comparatively poorer classes
are more heavily taxed, under the present system, than the luxuries of
the richer classes? Yes; what I mean to say is this, that if there were
no tax but an income tax, it would be fair to commence at as small a sum
as 50l., which would cover the necessaries of life, and to tax in all
cases the excess above 50l., but under present circumstances it is
justifiable to begin as high as 150l. The class between 50l. and 150l.
now pay a disproportionate share of our indirect taxes, inasmuch as the
articles upon which those taxes principally fall, are articles upon
which a larger proportion of small incomes than of large incomes is
expended.

sir c. wood: Is not this what you mean, that you justify the exemption
of the lower incomes from the income tax, because in your opinion the
indirect taxation presses more heavily upon persons of smaller incomes
than upon persons of larger incomes? Yes.

c. newdegate: If I understand you rightly, you would recommend the
abolition of the exemption from the taxes upon incomes under 150l. a
year, if you were not of opinion that the other taxes of the country
pressed so heavily upon them; but you think the incomes which are most
heavily taxed, according to the present system, are the incomes between
50l. a year and 150l.? Yes.

j. l. ricardo: Most heavily taxed by indirect taxation? Yes; and in
order to re-establish the balance, as the other taxes press more heavily
upon the small incomes, it is just that the income tax should
exclusively upon the larger incomes.

You mean that the pressure upon the lower incomes is not from direct but
from indirect taxation? Exactly.

j. hume: Would you recommend a graduated scale in the plan which has
been recommended by Archdeacon Paley,[*] increasing the tax as the
amount of income increased, and as Mr. Pitt did in the first Act of
his?[†] I should not be favourable to taking a larger per centage from
the higher incomes than from the lower incomes.

Do we understand you to say that before the present income tax on any
class of the community can be fairly imposed, you must take into view
the general amount of taxation, and how far those who have smaller
incomes pay a larger proportion of their incomes under indirect taxation
than others who have larger incomes? Yes.

And therefore the absolute money payment from individuals in the middle
and lower classes of society does not indicate the pressure of taxation
on those classes? No, and an income tax which would not in itself be
Edition: current; Page: [475] just, may be rendered just by the
necessity of compensating for the undue pressure of other taxation.

[*]You were asked your opinion as to taxing property on a graduated
scale; you stated that you did not think that would be advisable. Do the
same objections, in your opinion, apply to taxing land or realized
property? I think there are the strongest objections to an income or
property tax exclusively on realized property. The objections are that,
in the first place, it is taxing people upon what they save, and leaving
them untaxed upon what they spend; and, further than that, it appears to
me to be taxing only the present owners of land or securities. By
realized property, I presume, is understood not property engaged in
business, but property which has been taken out of business if it was
ever in business, and invested in some permanent form. I am using the
term “realized” in the sense in which it is generally used by those who
contend for a tax on realized property only. Now, it seems to me that it
is absolutely impossible for the Legislature, by any income tax, to tax
future realizations. They can only tax present realizations. The
imposition of a tax on incomes from realized property, from which tax
other incomes were exempted, would lower the price of all realized
property of land and all securities, and all who hereafter bought such
property would buy it at a reduced price; so that they would escape the
tax, and it would be levied exclusively on those who at present hold
land or securities. The present holders would continue to pay the tax
after they had parted with the property, because they would have had to
sell it at a lower price. I conceive therefore that the tax would be
simple confiscation of a certain proportion of their property.

You stated that you would not make any exemption from charge in the case
of realized property? Yes.

Does the same rule apply to professional and variable incomes? With
reference to variable incomes, it appears to me that some allowance may
properly be made not only for their temporary nature, but also for their
precariousness.

sir c. wood: Would you apply your rule of taxing three-fourths only of
the income to temporary incomes derived from realized property, as well
as to other temporary incomes? Yes.

j. hume: Supposing the exemption to be made, to what amount would you
descend of income, both as regards income from landed property and
income from professional exertions? If there were no other tax than an
income tax, I would make that tax descend to the amount which might be
considered sufficient for necessaries. I mean necessaries not very
strictly interpreted, and not necessaries for the individual only who is
assessed to the tax, but for the whole of the existing population. At
that point, whatever Edition: current; Page: [476] it is, the income tax
should commence, if there were no other tax whatever; but when there are
other taxes existing, it is necessary to consider the incidence of those
taxes, and if they fall, as I think they do, with a much greater
proportional pressure on the smaller than on the larger incomes, it is a
fair compensation that the income tax should fall only on the larger
incomes. On that account I think the present limit of 150l. is
defensible.

We understand you to say, that in order to call for an equal sacrifice
from all parties, not the income tax only, but the other items of
taxation bearing on the different classes of the community, ought to be
taken into consideration before a judgment can be pronounced as to what
would be a fair and equal rate of taxation upon all classes? Certainly.

The plan you have stated you do not consider to be perfect justice, but
you consider it the nearest approximation to justice, and much better
than the present system? Certainly much better than the present system.
But in order to do complete justice, it seems to me, though it is not a
principle generally recognised, that the income tax ought to exempt all
that portion of income which is saved. I express this opinion not solely
on grounds of policy or expediency, with a view to encourage savings,
but as a simple question of arithmetic. If that portion of income which
is laid by is charged with income tax, it pays the income tax twice;
first on the capital, and then on the interest derived from it. For
instance, suppose that in one year I save 100l.: if I did not save that
100l. I should have to pay 3l. to the State, which would leave me 97l.
to expend on luxuries or indulgences: but if, instead of spending, I
save the 100l., I should not save it to lock it up, but to invest it;
and I should immediately begin to pay income tax on the income derived
from it, which would be equivalent to paying the tax on the 100l. If I
spend the 100l. I pay 3l. to the State, and have 97l. for my own use; if
I save it, I pay 3l. to the State, which reduces my future income from
it in the same proportion, and I also pay three per cent. on this
diminished income; so that, in reality, I pay the income tax twice,
first on the capital, and then on the interest. This could only be just,
on the supposition that I had the use and benefit both of the capital
and of the income; but I have not. If I have the use of the capital I
derive no income from it; and if I have the income, it is because I
abstain from using the capital.

sir c. wood: Your principle is this: if I had an income of 50,000l. a
year, and spent the whole of that income, I ought to pay income tax upon
the 50,000l.; but if I were a great miser, and lived on 1,000l. a year,
and saved 49,000l. I ought to pay the tax upon the 1,0000l. a year,
leaving the 49,000l. untaxed? The reason for exempting the 49,000l. is,
that it will hereafter pay the tax when invested. Instead of paying 7d.
in the pound at once, it will pay an annuity of 7d. in the pound on the
interest, the present Edition: current; Page: [477] value of which
annuity would be exactly equal to 7d. in the pound upon the 49,000l. At
present, the 49,000l., if spent, only pays the tax once, but if saved,
it pays it twice, although the person to whom it belongs has not the use
of it twice, but only once.

Is not the future tax upon the interest derived from the investment of
the capital which is so saved? Yes, but the interest is all the benefit
that by the supposition is derived from the investment by the owner. The
benefit of the capital is obtained by the labouring class whom he
employs, or who are employed by the person to whom he lends the money.

Do you think that the opinion which you have now expressed in favour of
exempting from the income tax all monies saved is consistent with the
opinion which you formerly gave,[*] that the wants of parties ought to
be considered as well as their means, in apportioning the income tax?
The consideration which ought to be given to wants, in modification of
the rule of taxing persons in proportion to their means, seems to me
quite compatible with interpreting that general rule in the mode which
appears to me arithmetically correct. If the portion of income which is
saved pays twice as much tax as that which is spent, this is not equal
taxation in proportion to means. The principle of making allowance for
wants, does not require that the same portion of income should pay the
tax twice when employed in one way, while if employed in another way it
would pay it only once.

j. wilson: When you say it is taxed twice, you mean that first of all it
is taxed as income in the year when the income arises, and that
afterwards it is not taxed once only, but annually, as the interest of
that capital accrues? Yes, that is equivalent to being taxed twice;
first of all, it pays three per cent., supposing that to be the amount
of the income tax, and afterwards it pays in a perpetual annuity, what
is equivalent to another three per cent., so that in fact it pays as
much as if it had had to pay six per cent. at once.

sir c. wood: Is not the principle for which you contend of exempting
savings from incomes, equally applicable to increases of all capital in
the country derived from gradual accumulation? Certainly; but if that
portion of the income which was saved was exempted from the tax, it
would still be called upon to pay income tax in proportion as it came to
be expended and used for the benefit of the owner.

Therefore all additions to incomes derived from the investment of
savings ought, in your opinion, to be exempt from income tax? I am not
entering into the question of what is now practicable, but what would be
necessary to make an income tax a strictly just tax.

Is it your principle that, in strict justice, all income derived from
the investment of accumulated savings ought to be exempted from the
income Edition: current; Page: [478] tax? I would tax the income; what I
would exempt would be the investment itself. I would not tax the
investment and then the income derived from it; in fact, I would make
the tax a tax upon expenditure, and not upon income.

j. wilson: You would only tax the portion of the income which the man
expended, and not the income which he actually made? Yes; and if he
saved any portion of his income, and afterwards derived income from it,
I would tax that income according as it came into use by expenditure.

sir c. wood: Would you call upon every person under Schedule (D.) to
make a return, not of his income, but of his expenditure? That is a
question of expediency and practicability, and depends on the reliance
to be placed on conscience. I do not think that such a mode of levying
the tax would be practicable; but it is necessary to keep in view the
requisites of exact justice, whether they can be completely realized or
not, in order that we may at least approach as near to them as we can.

j. hume: But you state that you do not think it would be practicable? I
do not see any means by which you can secure the correctness of such
returns, especially if it is borne in mind, that if a person saves a
certain sum in one year, that same sum may be squandered in the next
year, and it would not be possible in such a case to take back the boon
which had been conceded.

sir c. wood: However just the tax would be, you do not regard it as
being very practicable? That is a question for persons of greater
experience of details than myself, but I do not see how it would be
practicable.

e. horsman: After all you have said, does it not resolve itself into
this, that a person pays a higher tax because he is a richer man from
his accumulation? He would equally pay a higher tax because he was
richer if the distinction which I propose were made. In consequence of
his savings, he would have a greater income next year than this year;
and he would be taxed on the whole of that greater income except any
part of it which he saved in that year.

sir c. wood: In the case of the miser, who saved 49,000l., you would
never get the additional tax from him, however rich he might be? That,
no doubt, as far as it goes, is an objection to what I suggest; but the
less he paid, the more would be paid by those who succeeded to his
accumulations.

If the tax is at all imposed in proportion to the advantage derived from
the State in the shape of protection, is it not fair that this party
should pay in proportion to that which is protected? That is an
objection which if it exist applies to all taxes on expenditure, and
therefore to all existing taxation.

All taxes are not imposed on the same principle as income tax? No; on
the opposite principle, I conceive.

Is not the general principle of income or property tax, that a person
should pay in proportion to the property which he has, and which derives
protection from the State? I would rather say that the equitable
principle of Edition: current; Page: [479] taxation is to require from
each the same proportional sacrifice of his enjoyments.

Is not the principle which you have laid down, that each person should
be taxed to the income tax according to the amount of his expenditure?
Yes.

j. wilson: The principle which you lay down with regard to income tax
you consider to be exactly analogous to indirect taxes upon articles of
consumption; you would substitute an income tax for Customs and Excise
taxes and all other indirect taxes, and tax a man in proportion to his
expenditure and not in proportion to his income; and your idea is that
that would make the income tax analogous in its operations to indirect
taxation? Yes; except that it would be a tax on all expenditure, and not
a tax on expenditure of some particular kind.

sir c. wood: Do you remember whether a tax on expenditure was the
principle of Mr. Pitt’s original scheme? I rather think it was.

Do you remember what the result of that was? No, but I should be quite
prepared to find that it was a complete failure.

Are you not aware that the principle of a tax upon expenditure was
abandoned in consequence of its being an utter failure, and the tax on
income substituted as the only means of getting a fair amount of tax? It
is very probable, and I never expressed an opinion how far that mode of
levying the income tax would be practicable; but it seems to me the
fairest mode if it were practicable, and therefore any approach to it in
practice would be desirable.

j. hume: You have, in your publication, expressed an opinion as to how
far you consider the land tax should be reckoned at the present moment
as a tax paid to the State? As far as I am acquainted with the nature of
the land tax, it seems to me simply a reserve made by the State of a
certain portion of the rent of the land, which never properly belonged
to the present owners. They or their predecessors were liable to feudal
obligations which, if fairly commuted, would have required from them a
payment of a much greater amount than the present land tax.

Do you consider that Mr. Pitt, in making the land tax perpetual,[*] laid
it on the land as a substitute for all the feudal charges which had
existed on the land before that time? Undoubtedly he did not, because
the feudal charges had been taken away previously; but they had been
taken away without commutation, which I think was a gross injustice; to
abolish charges upon land which had been previously held subject to
those obligations, and to render it free of those obligations.

At what period do you consider those feudal charges on land to have been
abolished? The last of them were abolished in the time of Charles
Edition: current; Page: [480] the Second, therefore only a short time
before the first imposition of the land tax,[*] the proportion of which
was larger than it is now, having been since reduced.

sir charles wood: Has not the land tax varied from time to time in
amount? Yes, but chiefly in the way of reduction.

j. henley: You say that the feudal charges would have been heavier than
the existing land tax; what per centage do you apprehend the feudal
charges would have been? I am not competent to say.

How, then, do you form your opinion that they would have been higher
than the present land tax? Because the land tax bears a very small ratio
to the value of the land: and as the land was granted for the purpose of
feudal service, it cannot well be supposed that the burthen of that
service was only a twentieth or a thirtieth part of the value of the
land.

What do you suppose to be the amount of the land tax? I have not the
facts in my memory at the present moment, and therefore I cannot say.

You neither know the amount of the land tax, nor have you formed an
estimate of the amount of the feudal charges? No, I am not in a position
to form any estimate upon the subject; I did formerly make estimates
upon the subject, but what they were I cannot at this moment say.

Do you give that opinion from an examination of estimates formed upon
the subject, or is it merely a general opinion? I give the opinion upon
general grounds, and upon details which I do not now recollect; but I
have formerly read many discussions on the subject of the land tax.

Feudal charges were applicable to all lands held from the Crown by
military service? Yes.

Many lands in the country were not so held? Not very many.

There were some, were there not? In this country there were very few;
there were more in other countries.

Do you mean to assert that there were no lands held in England except on
terms of military service? No, I do not mean to say that; but the
general rule in this country was a feudal tenure; there was scarcely any
allodial tenure remaining in this country in the middle ages, though in
still earlier times tenure was allodial here as elsewhere.

If the imposition of the land tax was, as you state, in substitution of
feudal tenures, how happens it that it was not imposed equally over the
whole kingdom? It is very difficult to say, without a minute
investigation of the history of taxation, what is the explanation of the
caprices of taxation that have existed in this as in all other
countries. There have been many more such irregularities in all
countries than are justifiable on any good grounds.

Have you ever seen any estimate of what the cost of those feudal charges
Edition: current; Page: [481] was in the time of Charles the First? I
imagine in the time of Charles the First they were already very much
diminished, but I cannot offer any particular estimate; any estimates
that may have been made must in a great measure have been conjectural.

The whole of this matter is very conjectural, is it not? Yes.

Were there, as well as burdens, any privileges which the lands enjoyed
formerly under the feudal system which they have since lost? I am not
aware of any which they have since lost; the possession of land has
always been a source of importance and power.

Take, for instance, manorial rights; were there not many manorial rights
dependent upon the feudal tenures, which were very much more valuable at
the time that those tenures existed than they are now? I should doubt
very much whether any of that description of rights were more valuable
in a poor state of society than in a rich one. Manorial rights have
generally become limited in the course of time, by customs of different
kinds, by which indefinite obligations were exchanged for definite ones,
but I do not think that on the whole it can be supposed that the value
of manorial rights has diminished with the growth of society.

Have any rights been wholly swept away? I dare say some have.

Wardship for instance? Wardship was a privilege to the vassal, with
regard to sub-vassals; but a burden to the tenants in capite, in
relation to the Crown.

Do you consider that, on the whole, it was a gain or a loss to the
landed interest when that was done away? I am unable to say.

You have not looked into that part of the subject? I have not looked
into any part of the subject for several years.

Do you consider that there are any other rights analogous to wardship
which have been swept away? It is possible there may have been.

You have, then, given a general opinion, without having looked into the
subject in all its bearings? I cannot say whether or not I have
considered it in all its bearings, but I think it would be very
difficult for any one to maintain that the whole of the feudal
obligations, taking those to which the tenants and sub-tenants of the
Crown were liable, did not amount to fully as much as the land tax now
amounts to.

Then, having given that opinion to the Committee, have you taken all
those elements into consideration? I have not entered into the minutiæ
of the subject very accurately. I have gone on general probabilities and
presumptions.

Do you know what the land tax is in the county of Lancaster, and what it
is in some of the Southern and Midland counties in England? I cannot say
particularly.

If you heard that, in the Midland counties, the land tax was 1s. in the
Edition: current; Page: [482] pound upon the rental, and that in
Lancashire it was not 1d. in the pound, should you say that it was a tax
imposed as a substitution for military service, equally applicable to
both counties? I never said that it was imposed as a substitute for
military service; I said that the fact of these lands having been
subject to military service would have justified the tax being imposed;
and, therefore, when the land tax was afterwards imposed, it appears to
me just on the principle of substitution, even though there were no
coincidence in point of time, or in the amount of the tax.

According to your view, to make it just, it would be necessary to
equalise it? I should not be prepared to admit that consequence. I
should rather regard it as a deduction from the rent of the land, which
might be considered as having been reserved by the Government. I would
put it on the ground of prescription. If an express commutation had been
made, there probably would not have been the great inequality which
there is now; still, that inequality existing, I should not be inclined
to increase the amount on the lands which are most lightly taxed.

You would regard it as prescriptive, although its origin is statutory
and known? I would; it does not appear to me that its origin being
statutory makes any difference in that respect.

Not in the use of the word “prescription”? In the legal use of the word
“prescription” it may make a difference, but not, I conceive, in the
moral sense of that word.

Why not? Because it seems to me that prescription in regard to property
consists in allowing that to continue in possession which has been very
long held, and under reasonable expectation of being held permanently.

Without reference to its origin? With reference to its origin only in so
far as that might affect the reasonableness of the expectation that it
would be continued.

Then if the origin was clearly known, and was of a nature adverse to
that view, your reasoning would not hold good? That would be matter of
opinion in each case.

It would wholly depend in your opinion upon the ground of the origin
justifying the conclusion that you had come to? Yes.

If the origin was entirely adverse, all the superstructure you had
raised upon it would fall to the ground? Of course it would.

Do you know at all the history of the alterations of the land tax from
time to time? I know that the tax has been several times reduced, but at
what precise times I am not aware; I know that at one time it was as
high as 4s. in the pound, and that afterwards it was reduced to 1s. in
the pound.

Do you happen to know what it was at its origin? I did know those facts,
but I have not got them in my recollection.

Edition: current; Page: [483]
Was it originally put on at more or less than 4s. in the pound? At less,
I believe.

Then it has been subject to increases as well as decreases? Yes.

According to your belief now, is it at 1s. in the pound? It is extremely
variable; it is very unequal in different situations.

It was always irregular; that irregularity depending upon the amount of
the charge, and not upon the amount in the pound to be raised upon the
assessment? I am not sufficiently acquainted with the facts to be able
to answer any questions with certainty upon the subject; but the total
amount at any time which has been raised by means of the land tax, if it
were distributed equally over all the lands of the kingdom, would
certainly be a small equivalent for the feudal obligations upon those
lands in respect of military service.

But not being so distributed, it may press very heavily upon some lands,
and amount to 2s. in the pound upon their rack rents? I should consider
the case to be very similar to the commutation of tithes. It may appear
hard that some persons should have to pay a larger amount as commutation
of tithes than other persons of equal income have to pay, but it does
not at all follow that what they have to pay is unjust. The question is,
whether they can be considered to have been ever entitled to the tithes;
and in the present case, to have been ever entitled to that portion of
the rent of the land which is taken from them by the land tax.

In the case of title it is a prescriptive payment, of which we do not
know the origin, but in the case of the land tax it is a statutory
payment, of which we know the origin and the circumstances? The origin
was statutory, but it may be considered to have been, at the time it was
imposed, morally, though not legally, an equivalent, or a partial
equivalent, for the obligations to which the land was previously
subjected; and in that view, even if some lands were dealt with more
leniently than others, still if that comparative lenity has continued
for generations, it does not appear to me that it can be made a subject
of complaint now.

Then the justice of your comparison would depend altogether upon the
identity of the origin, would it not? The only way in which it could be
affected would be, if the land tax now levied on the land of the
community, or on any portion of that land, could be considered as more
than a fair equivalent for the obligation of military service, and for
whatever other feudal obligations of an expensive nature the land was
subject to.

What you mean to contend for is this, that if A. B. were taxed ever so
highly to the land tax, and could not show that that was more than he
ought to have paid for military service, he would have no right to
complaint? It appears questionable whether it would be just to impose on
the present Edition: current; Page: [484] generation an increased charge
as land tax, on the ground that the present land tax was an insufficient
equivalent for the burthens which the land of their forefathers was
subject to. After a certain duration of such an arrangement, even though
made by statute; after the property has passed through several
generations, and the expectations of families have been founded upon the
arrangement, it appears to me that the Government could not equitably
take advantage of a defect in the origin of it, for the purpose of
laying on upon that ground any higher tax.

However unjustly the tax may bear at a particular time on particular
parties, on account of the length of the time for which it has existed,
and the change of circumstances, whatever they may be, that have taken
place, in your opinion it would be unjust now to make an alteration in
the tax? Yes. I might illustrate my meaning by saying that it is my
opinion, and the opinion of many other persons, that it was an
exceedingly improper act of Hen. 8th to give away the lands of the
monasteries to individuals, whose successors now possess those lands;
but I conceive it would be now unjust to take those lands, or any
portion of them, from the present possessors.

How do you establish an analogy between a grant of the Crown and a tax
upon the subject, which has always varied and been dealt with from time
to time according to the circumstance of the State? It is a question of
degree, in my view of the matter. In proportion as the State has adhered
to a particular mode of taxation, as in the case of the land tax, and
made no alteration in it for a long period, just in that proportion the
arrangement of landed property which has grown out of that system of
taxation, approximates more and more in its character to the case of
property held under direct gift. It seems to me, though I would not lay
down any fixed principle on the subject, that the same principles are to
a certain degree applicable to the two cases.

sir c. wood: May not a tax which has been unjust in its first imposition
become just in the case of the person succeeding to the property as far
as regards the subsequent holders? Certainly; it may become just as
regards subsequent buyers, because if the land is under any disadvantage
it tells on the price for which the land is sold.

j. henley: But in the case of the present holders it would not be just?
All you have to consider in the case of those who have inherited
property and not acquired it, is the reasonable expectations which they
were justified in forming, and those expectations necessarily depend
upon the state of the law. It is not to be supposed by a person who
inherits land that he is to have the land altogether, free from the
burdens to which his ancestors who held that land were subject.

If a tax of that sort by the State has continued for a considerable
length Edition: current; Page: [485] of time, you think that that class
has no right to complain of that tax or to consider it a hardship? After
a tax has existed for a considerable time, so as to be attached to a
particular property, and to be considered in all settlements and all
bequests of that property, and in all sales of it, though it may be on
the ground of policy expedient and desirable to make an alteration in
the tax, it has been never contended for on the ground of justice to the
possessors of the property.

You consider that that applies to every species of taxation? Every
species of taxation that is of the same nature as this. I can never
suppose that taking away the malt tax, or the tax on any other
commodity, is required by justice to the particular class that
immediately pay it, though it may be advisable on grounds of policy.

You apply that to municipal taxes as well as imperial? I apply it to all
taxes which fall upon particular kinds of property, and which have been
for some time imposed; it can never be said that on the ground of
justice to the possessors of those particular kinds of property, it is
necessary to take the tax off.

j. wilson: I understand you to say in your answers, that whatever
irregularities may exist in the tax where it is first imposed, as the
property is dealt with in reference to the tax which is so imposed, the
subsequent holders of the property have no right to complain? I think
so.

There was an answer which you made with reference to direct taxes, that
a new tax imposed upon realized capital in any shape or form would not
be just, because it would be an act of confiscation, the present owners
of that capital only paying the tax and not the future owners? Yes.

Would not the same objection apply to any tax which is imposed now for
the first time; take for instance the house tax?[*] If a tax were
imposed on one description of property and no other, I think it would be
liable to that objection. I apprehend that according to all received
opinions, the imposition of a tax on one particular description of
property, is only just supposing the general system of taxation to tax
other kinds of property in a proportionate degree.

The same observation would apply to taxing capital, if all realized
property were taxed in whatever shape it was found. You described it as
an act of confiscation, because the tax would be paid by the existing
owner, the future owner paying less for the property in consideration of
its being subject to that tax? Yes.

That would apply whether it was general or partial? I apprehend not if
the possessors of all property paid equally, and not merely the
possessors of land and securities. Supposing, for instance, property
engaged in trade paid the same tax as land and securities, a person
would not subject Edition: current; Page: [486] himself to any peculiar
tax by buying land and securities, and therefore there would be no
reason why he should give a less price for them.

That would be a reason for saying that the owner of the property for the
time being would not suffer from the tax; but the argument you put
forward was, that the present holder of the property would pay the tax,
and that the future holder of it would pay no tax? I do not conceive
that would be the case if the tax were imposed upon all property;
because as all property would stand in the same situation, the buyer of
any particular description of property would not pay a lower price for
it in consideration of the tax. If a person by buying land subjects
himself to a particular tax, he will pay so much less for the land; but
if he subjects himself, by buying the land, to no further tax than he
would have to pay if he derived income from the purchase money in any
other manner, the tax would constitute no reason why he should pay a
less price for the land.

Your remark with regard to confiscation applied to the case of the tax
being imposed partially and not generally? Yes.

j. hume: You were asked to give your grounds for the opinion you have
held; have you not published your opinions on the principles of general
taxation; and did you not, before publishing those opinions, have the
whole question of the several taxes of this country before you in order
to enable you to judge? In the book which I published,[*] my object was
to give my view of the general principles of taxation, and to enter into
the consideration of hypothetical taxes rather than into the
complication of the taxes of any particular country, and I do not
consider myself bound by the opinions which I have expressed on such
details, in the same degree as on the general principles, because
opinions upon particular taxes are liable to vary.

Does not the land tax form one of the points on which you have given a
decided opinion, that opinion being founded on researches made at the
time? It was founded on general considerations rather than on the
special details of the case, but certainly with a full conviction of its
justice.

You have been asked with reference to the origin of the land tax; are
you aware that Mr. Pitt, on the general valuation of the land in
England, fixed the quota for each county? I have no doubt that was so,
but I cannot say that I remember the facts with respect to the history
of the land tax, except in a very general way.

You are not aware that Mr. Pitt’s valuation, and the quota which was
fixed for each county, were with reference to the rent of cultivated
land at the time, and that all wild lands were excluded? I was not aware
of that.

You have not been able to account for the irregularity of the tax as
laid on property, which is now of great value, by the circumstance of
its being in a wild and unproductive state at the time the tax was
fixed? That, I Edition: current; Page: [487] conceive, is only one of a
great number of inequalities which must necessarily grow up in any such
case. If, for example, a tax is laid on in reference to the value of
land at the time, and the tax is not afterwards altered, but the land
afterwards changes from being employed in cultivation to being employed
in building, the tax must necessarily become unequal.

Are you aware that the whole of Marylebone parish, and various parts
round the metropolis, do not pay one twentieth of a penny land tax,
while there are portions in the city and in the country which pay
several shillings in the pound to the land tax? I am aware that there
are great inequalities, as great as those which you mention, but in what
particular cases they occur I do not know.

sir c. wood: Is not the present inequality of the tax mainly, if not
entirely, owing to the changes which have taken place in the value of
land in different parts of the country at the present moment, as
compared with the value at the time the tax was imposed? Yes; it is
owing to the fact that the tax was imposed on a fixed assessment, which
was not altered with the subsequent increase in the value of the land.

j. wilson: The inequality is precisely similar to the inequalities which
have arisen, and which will further arise in the commutation of tithes?
No doubt it is.

j. hume: You have stated your opinion respecting taxing incomes. Have
you formed any opinion as to how far what may be called unproductive
capital, such as pictures, jewels, coins, or any other matters, which
may be of great value but produce no income, should be subject to a
fixed taxation? Though I have not very much considered the subject, it
seems to me that there is no reason why expenditure on durable articles
should be taxed in preference to expenditure on articles of daily
consumption. On the contrary, I should say that it is more desirable to
encourage people to expend money on things which last, and which will be
of benefit to future generations, than to expend it on articles which
are consumed by the person himself, and from which no other person
derives any benefit. Buildings, paintings, sculptures, and other matters
of that kind, have an indefinite duration, and money so expended gives
pleasure to others as well as to the individual concerned; and it
appears to me that such expenditure ought rather to be encouraged than
to be subjected to any peculiar tax.

Do we understand you to say that capital invested in such articles ought
to be altogether without taxation, or more lightly taxed than any other
capital? I conceive that the tax should in all cases be levied on
income, and not on the capital from which the income proceeds; property
which does not yield an income being exempt. The income expended in the
purchase of those articles will have paid its share of the taxation when
it was received.

In fact, the tax should be on income and not on property? Certainly.

Edition: current; Page: [488]
Are you able to state upon what amount of capital the income tax in this
country has been assessed? I have read various estimates of the amount,
but, as I was not aware that I should be questioned on the subject, I am
not able to say anything about it. One thing, however, has always struck
me in looking at the estimates, viz., the very small amount of capital
which pays income tax under Schedule (D.). This seems to me a strong
proof of the evasion of the tax. In a country like this, where trade is
carried on to so large an extent, it is difficult to believe that there
is not a much larger amount of income derived from professions and
trades than the amount shown under that schedule.

You are aware that the amount, according to the Parliamentary papers
before us, upon which the tax is assessed, is 193,000,000l.,[*]
including all the schedules. Do you consider that a small amount? No; I
was speaking of the proportion which the income assessed under Schedule
(D.) bears to the other schedules, and which I presume to be much less
than the true proportion of those incomes in this country.

The tax is assessed under Schedule (D.) upon the amount of 58,000,000l.
out of 193,000,000l.; and your opinion is that that is a small
proportion? Yes; I have no particular knowledge upon the subject, but I
think it must appear to any one to be a small proportion.

In speaking of the fairness of this tax, do you not consider that if the
Government would make the income tax and the property tax more equitable
and just, that would remove many of the objections that now exist to
that tax being made a permanent tax? Undoubtedly it would remove a large
class of objections.

In speaking of the present system as being palpably unjust, are you able
to state what particular parts strike you, besides those that you have
mentioned, with regard to permanent and variable incomes? I believe I
have mentioned all the points which I consider decidedly unjust in the
present income tax.

Those objections you mentioned in the first part of the evidence which
you gave.[†] If those objections were removed in the way you suggest,
you think that the tax would be more equitable to the payer, and would
be collected with less dissatisfation? It would certainly be much more
equitable, but whether it would be collected with less dissatisfaction I
am not sure; especially as a number of those who are of the same opinion
with me, that the tax at present presses unjustly on temporary and
professional incomes, carry that opinion much further than I do, and
contend for a much greater distinction in favour of temporary incomes
than I advocate. There would probably remain a considerable amount of
dissatisfaction, in whatever way the tax might be regulated.

Edition: current; Page: [489]
You were asked a question respecting the tax on houses. Do you consider
the tax at present levied on houses to be fair, on the principle you
have advocated of each class being called upon to make an equal
sacrifice towards the support of the State? I conceive that the house
tax justly assessed is a very fair tax. No tax is exactly fair in all
cases; but what a person spends in house rent is generally a fair
criterion of what he can afford to spend altogether. But in order to
make it just, it appears to me that a different rule from the present
should be adopted with reference to houses not let, but retained in the
hands of the proprietor, including some of the largest and most valuable
houses in the country. Those houses are considerably under-taxed when
they are taxed, as they are under the present house tax, on the rent
which they might be supposed to let for, because that would bear no
proportion to what they cost to the proprietor. I am not aware what may
be the practical difficulties in making a fair assessment of such
houses, but I imagine that they could not be great.

In reference to the equal sacrifice which every individual ought to be
called upon to make for the support of the State, take the houses in
Hanover-square and the houses in Hoxton-square; in the one case they may
average 150l. a year, and in the other they may average 25l. a year. Do
you consider that the parties occupying those houses pay an equal rent
in proportion to their several incomes? Of course there can be no exact
correspondence, but I think there would be a nearer correspondence than
in most of the other modes that could be adopted of taxing expenditure.

Supposing house rent in St. George’s parish to be on the average 150l.,
and that no person could occupy any house there with an income of less
than 1,500l., paying therefore one-tenth of the income in house rent,
are you not aware that persons occupying houses in the surrounding
districts pay 20l. or 25l. a year rent for those houses, which is equal
to paying one-seventh or one-eighth of their incomes instead of
one-tenth; and would it not be unjust in your view to tax both parties
equally? I should conceive that persons generally expend in house rent
something bearing a more equal proportion to their general means of
expenditure than almost any other criterion that can be selected.

Are you not aware that many persons living on from 150l. to 200l. a year
live in houses of 20l. and 25l. a year, and is not that, generally
speaking, in this metropolis a much larger proportion of rent to income
than rich men pay? But rich men have very often more than one house,
which makes a sort of equivalent.

You consider that the liability of the rich man elsewhere to the same
tax, may be regarded as an equivalent? Yes.

Have you expressed any opinion as to how far the house tax should be
continued, and whether any exemption should be made, as at present, of
houses under 20l.? I have not particularly considered whether in the
present Edition: current; Page: [490] state of our general taxation, I
would make any exemption of low-rented houses.

In offering the opinion which you have offered, as to the principles of
an income tax, do you consider it necessary, according to your principle
of an equal sacrifice by all classes for the support of the State, that
the whole question of indirect as well as of direct taxation should be
considered by Parliament? I certainly think that the justice of any one
tax can only be estimated as part of the general financial system of the
country; because that which might be unjust if it were the only tax,
might be a just compensation for other inequalities in the general
taxes.

Seeing that the taxes of this country have been from time to time levied
according to particular emergencies, do you consider that before a tax,
such as the income or property tax as now levied, ought to be made
permanent, the whole system of our indirect and direct taxation, as well
as the facility of collection, and the mode of collection, and other
matters, ought to be considered? Decidedly.

You have expressed the opinion very decidedly that it is the duty of the
Government to act upon the principle of requiring an equal sacrifice
from all parties? Yes.

In fact, the Government cannot, in your opinion, do justice to its
subjects paying taxes, without having before it the other taxes, in
addition to the income tax, as bearing upon each class of the community?
Without that they cannot, in my opinion, form any rational opinion of
the fairness of any particular tax.

It is on that principle that, in the early part of your evidence,[*]
when you were asked whether an income tax was a fair tax upon particular
classes, you said that you could not offer an opinion unless you
considered all the other taxes and burdens which each class had to pay?
I said, that any opinion which I should express would be dependent upon
what other taxes are retained, and that if you retain the indirect taxes
which bear more heavily upon the smaller incomes than upon the larger
ones, it would be just to exempt those smaller incomes from the income
tax, although it would not be just under other circumstances.

The opinion you have expressed is, that the tax should be upon the net
income, allowance being made in each class for the necessary deduction
in producing that income? Certainly.

You think that that would be better than making it a tax on property,
instead of making it a tax on income? A tax on property, as
distinguished from a tax on income, I should say, is only just under
certain circumstances. It seems to me not just or politic to make a
distinction between property saved from income obtained by personal
exertions, and that which is spent Edition: current; Page: [491] as
income, and not converted into property; that it is not just, in fact,
to tax persons on property saved from their personal exertions, which
would remain untaxed if they expended it on their own indulgences. But I
think it is just to make a distinction between property acquired by
exertion and that which is inherited, and I would make that distinction
very broadly by imposing a tax on inheritance and bequest.

You would draw a distinction between savings handed down by a person’s
ancestor and savings by a person living? Yes, and especially if the
savings were of a great amount. The principle of graduation I do not
think is just as applied to incomes derived from personal exertions, or
to the savings from incomes derived from personal exertions; but I do
not think that the same objection holds good to the principle of
graduation when applied to inherited property.

Ought not the principle of taxation to be the same, whether the property
is large or small, agreeably to your former evidence, or would you draw
the line, and say that the tax should be graduated in the case of large
property, and not of small? In the income tax you cannot make any
distinction, and I would not attempt to make it; but that degree of
distinction which I think ought in justice to be made between inherited
property, and property acquired by personal exertions, may be made by
means of a tax on succession.

Would you make any distinction whether it was real or personal property?
No, I would not make any distinction; whatever might be the kind of
property transmitted by succession, I would tax it all; but I should be
inclined to make a distinction by imposing higher rates on larger than
on smaller inheritances.

Why would you make that distinction? On the principle that it is much
more important to spare small inheritances than large ones. There are
not by any means the same reasons against peculiar taxation on property
acquired by gift or bequest, that there are in reference to property
which people earn by their own exertions. It is unjust to tax a person
because, by his own savings, he acquires a large fortune, and to tax him
in a larger proportion than if he had squandered more and saved less;
but there is no injustice in taxing persons who have not acquired what
they have by their own exertions, but have had it bestowed them in free
gift; and there are no reasons of justice or policy against taxing
enormously large inheritances more highly than smaller inheritances.

sir c. wood: You would impose in point of fact a graduated succession
tax as a legacy duty? I would do so to the utmost extent to which the
means could be found for imposing it without its being frustrated. The
larger the sum demanded by the tax, the more would people try to evade
it; but that is the only limitation I would apply to the principle.

Edition: current; Page: [492]
j. hume: Having expressed a decided opinion that a graduated income tax
on the man who earned that income is unjust, you say that a graduated
tax on property acquired by succession would not be equally injust? A
graduated legacy duty would not be unjust in my opinion.

In that case do you consider that properties, though not likely to be
productive of profit, such as pictures, cabinets, and other valuable
matters, ought to be subject to legacy duty? Certainly.

Your opinion is, that all property exempted from the present legacy tax
ought in that way to be brought in? All property which could be sold for
money should pay legacy duty in proportion to its present value.

j. henley: I understood you to say that you would not tax a man, and
that you do not think he ought to be taxed for capital that he saved? I
have expressed the opinion that, if possible, savings for investment
should be exempted from income tax, and that the tax should only be
levied on the proceeds of the investment when made; but that is not the
particular point in question now.

But with reference to the point now in question, do I understand you
rightly, that you would not tax a man during his lifetime upon the
amount of his savings? I have said that in assessing an income tax it
would be just to exempt savings altogether. But a graduated property
tax, in so far as it bears on property acquired by a man’s own
exertions, does the extreme contrary; it imposes an extra tax on
savings. If a person is taxed a fifth of his income because he has
increased that income by saving, while he would have been taxed only a
tenth if he had not saved, it seems to me that the extra tenth so
imposed upon him is a penalty on saving.

You would not tax a man upon his savings? Strict justice would require
that he should not be taxed at all on his savings: but the plan under
consideration now, namely, a graduated property tax, does much more than
tax his savings: it lays a heavier tax on what he saves than on what he
spends.

Will you be good enough to answer the question, whether you would tax a
man at all upon that property which he saves out of his own exertions? I
have already said, that I do not think it would be practicable, though I
do think it would be just that the portion of a person’s income which he
saved should be exempt from taxation. But even assuming that he ought to
be taxed on that which he saves exactly as if he spent it, a graduated
property tax not only taxes him upon what he saves, but makes his
savings a reason for taxing him in a higher proportion.

I cannot collect from you whether I have rightly understood or not that
your proposal is that the amount which a man saves from his industrial
exertions should not be liable to taxation according to your view of
justice? Edition: current; Page: [493] According to my view of strict
justice it ought not, but according to my view of expediency it probably
ought.

Though you would not tax those savings during the lifetime of the man
who saved them, you would, by means of the tax on succession, tax the
man who succeeded him? Yes.

Consequently you would mulct the son for the virtues of the father? I do
not conceive that it is mulcting the son. It is not mulcting him to
prevent him from receiving what he has not exerted himself to earn. If
you were to retain the property, and not allow him to receive it as a
free gift from another, you would not do any injustice to him; if there
were any injustice, it would be an injustice to the giver, by limiting
him in his right of property.

You would deduct from the son by means of a succession tax, that amount
which you did not levy from the father? Yes; I would make taxation bear
upon that which people acquire without exertion and talent, rather than
upon that which they acquire by exertion and talent.

Do you conceive it is an advantage for the State that a miser should put
by money, or that he should spend what he has? It depends upon the mode
of spending. There are ways of spending money which are more useful than
saving it. But if people invest their money in some mode in which it is
rendered productive, it is more useful than if they spent it upon
themselves. If 1,000l. a year were expended even in alms, it would be
soon spent, and the benefit of it would remain only so long as it
lasted; but if the same sum were employed productively, by being lent to
a manufacturer or an agriculturist, it would become a fund in perpetuity
for maintaining labour; so that the miser, when he invests money,
employs it usefully. But there are methods of expending this 1,000l.
which would be still more useful than saving it.

When I used the term “miser’s savings,” I did not suppose that you would
understand me as referring to a man laying out his money in
manufactures, or any other useful employment that does not ordinarily
come within the notion of savings, but is the employment of capital in
industrial pursuits. Whatever any one saves, unless it is locked up, is,
generally speaking, employed in industrial pursuits. If he buys
securities, the person who has sold those securities lends the money to
some one else for productive employment; in fact, all, or almost all
savings, go into productive employment and become a permanent source of
employment for labour.

Then we are to understand that you are of opinion, that a man who saves
money and invests it in any security, does more benefit to the country
than the man who spends that money? Yes, than the man who spends that
money on his own enjoyments. But there are many ways of spending the
money which are still more beneficial to the public. If, for example,
Edition: current; Page: [494] he endowed a school, with proper
precautions for its being useful, I think the money would be still more
usefully employed than by being saved and employed productively.

To what degree would you carry that proposition? To this degree: if the
money is spent on the man’s personal indulgences, the most that it can
do, even on the most favourable supposition, is to support those who
derive employment from it, while it lasts; whereas, if it is invested
and employed productively, it reproduces itself, and becomes a means of
supporting a number of persons in perpetual succession.

Do you think that the consideration of the natural benefit derived from
such investment requires that it should go to a quarter, or half, or
three-fourths, or to what proportion of a man’s income? I do not
consider it a duty to save for those purposes; all I would say is that,
ordinarily speaking, a person does a work of public utility who saves
money to employ it productively.

To increase the capital of the country? Yes.

You have expressed an opinion with regard to the taxation of money which
is saved which is acquired by a man’s own industrial pursuits; but with
regard to the capital which a man inherits, you propose that that should
be taxed upon the succession; do you apply the same principle to the
further taxation upon that after it has been so taxed upon succession;
do you put it in the same category as capital saved by industrial
exertions? I certainly think it is the income of capital, and not the
capital itself that should be taxed. I do not clearly understand what
principle you speak of when you ask whether I would apply the same
principle to inherited capital.

I have understood you to say, that in the case where a man saves out of
his industrial occupation, you would not subject it to taxation till the
succession? I would not tax the capital, but I would tax the income
which he derives from the capital.

In both cases? Yes.

Then we misunderstand you; you would not impose a tax on realized saved
capital? All I said was, that if it were possible, it would be just to
exempt from taxation that portion of income which a man saves; and if he
saved it, and invested it, and derived an income from it, I would tax
that income, except again such portion as he saved. And I would apply
that same principle to inherited capital; that is, having taxed it on
the inheritance when it came into the possession of the inheritor, I
would afterwards tax only such part of the income as the possessor did
not save.

Whatever principle you applied to savings of a man from his industrial
earnings, you would apply to the savings of a man from inherited
property; in the same proportion as you taxed the one you would tax the
other? Yes; savings from whatever source derived.

Edition: current; Page: [495]
t. vesey: Would you capitalize income derived from land and tax that
capital in the case of inheritance? In the case of land, in the same way
as with any other saleable property, whatever tax is levied I would levy
on the saleable value; the mode of estimating different kinds of
property might be different, but what it would sell for I would tax.

With regard to inherited property, you would tax all that property at
the marketable value? Yes.

sir c. wood: Did I rightly understand you in the former part of your
evidence to say, “That you did not think that the claim to taxation on
the part of the State was owing only to the protection which it
afforded”?[*] I do not think that the proper test by which to determine
the proportional amount of taxation to be paid by different persons. It
seems to me to have nothing definite in it. It is not possible to say
that one person derives more benefit than another from the protection of
the Government; it is necessary for all.

Did I understand you to say that the claim of the State to support by
means of taxation was not in return for the protection afforded by the
State to the different classes? It is in return for good government,
which includes that and much beyond it.

What do you include beyond the protection of person and property which
the State gives to parties? In answering that question it would be
necessary to enter into a large consideration of what the Government can
do for the benefit of those subject to it, and that is a very wide
question, on which people may differ.

Will you state what, in your opinion, that includes? I should say that
it includes the improvement and benefit of the community in all ways in
which those objects can be promoted by legislation.

Will you state any instances so as to make clear what you mean? For
example, the establishment of schools and universities; that cannot be
called the protection of person or property; it is not in all cases a
thing which I think the Government should do; but in many cases it is.
It seems to me a matter of judicious discrimination in each case, what
the Government can do for the benefit of the community. Whatever it can
do usefully, which will be different in different circumstances, it
ought to do.

e. horsman: With reference to what you said about Schedule (D.), you
seemed to think that the returns under Schedule (D.) were very much less
than they ought to be? I have no very good means of judging of that, but
they do seem to me very much less than I should have expected them to
be.

You followed that up by saying, that most probably there were very great
evasions under the schedule? Yes; and that appears to be a very great
objection, and the only great objection that cannot be got rid of, to an
income tax. It seems impossible, without a degree of inquisitorialness
which Edition: current; Page: [496] no free community will submit to, to
dispense with relying mainly upon the returns made by individuals; and
those returns, even in the most honourable community which has ever yet
existed, could not be implicitly relied upon.

That is the result of secrecy in making the returns? No doubt if there
were not secrecy there would be a greater check, but the check would not
be complete even then.

It is the secrecy which is observed which gives the facility to evasion?
Yes.

Therefore the correctness of the return depends, to a great extent, upon
the man’s own conscience? Yes.

It becomes a tax on conscience rather than on income? Yes, and that
appears to me to be a very great objection to the income tax in any
case. It seems the only objection which it is impossible to get rid of.
Whether it is such an objection as to render the income tax inadvisable
in a country which has to raise by taxation so large a sum as this
country has to raise, I should not venture to give an opinion upon.
There are many worse taxes than the income tax, but there are many
better.

But would you say that the income tax was the fairest of all taxes,
provided you could carry it out justly? I should say that the house tax
was a much fairer tax than the income tax, because the house tax makes
its own allowances, which must be made artificially in the case of the
income tax. The house tax, being proportioned to an item of expenditure
which approximates to a correct measure of the general scale of a
person’s expenses, has the advantage that what he saves is spontaneously
and naturally excluded, and you are not obliged to exclude it by special
regulations.

In the case of a man with 1,000l. a year, the proportion of expenditure
which his house costs him is very much larger than in the case of a man
with an income of 50,000l. a year? That would be the case; but then a
person with 50,000l. a year has usually several houses; and if you
include the whole sum which his houses cost him in taxation, together
with the grounds attached to them, and suppose an equitable assessment
of the house tax, which does not exist at present, it would probably
make up the difference.

Your view is, that the objection arising from the income tax is to be
attributed to the secrecy? Not exactly that, because, in the first
place, publicity, if there were publicity, would be an additional
objection, and even if there were publicity it would not altogether
check the evasion. It would do so to a certain extent; but if there were
publicity the objection that people have to the inquisitorial nature of
the tax would be necessarily increased.

j. l. ricardo: Do I understand you to say, that you hold the doctrine of
direct taxation is the true principle of taxation? Not in that
unqualified manner, certainly.

Edition: current; Page: [497]
Can you state what qualification you would place upon that doctrine? It
seems to me that all direct taxation must necessarily recognise some
limit; that is, you must leave a certain amount of income untaxed, on
the supposition that that income is required for necessaries. Now it is
quite possible, when a liberal allowance is made for necessaries, that
some part of it may be applied to indulgences instead of necessaries. I
would not restrict the allowance to that which was just sufficient to
prevent starvation. If, for instance, you began to impose the tax at
50l., which you might suppose, on a liberal allowance, to be the sum
required for necessaries, it is quite possible that a portion of that
might be expended on indulgences, and not used for the purpose for which
the exemption was intended, and in that case I think it is just that
those indulgences should be taxed.

I understand you that your proposition was that there should be a
certain limit calculated upon the amount required to procure the
necessaries of life; and that with that exception you would consider
that direct taxation was the proper mode of raising the revenue of the
country? I am not aware that I gave any general opinion that direct
taxation was the proper mode of raising the whole of our large revenue.

Do you consider it the fairest and most equitable mode? I should hardly
say that; for a house or income tax, or any other tax, however imposed,
has inequalities which are inevitable; and since there are inequalities
in all taxes, it seems to me desirable to have several different modes
of taxation, in order that the inequalities of taxation may not all fall
in the same place.

Your proposal was, that the direct taxation should not bear on the
poorer classes? Yes, because the articles which are taxed by indirect
taxation are consumed in larger proportions by the poorer classes than
by the richer classes.

Would you hold the doctrine that all direct taxation should be coupled
with a graduated scale? I should say not. I would have no graduated
scale on any kind of direct taxes, except taxes on succession. It seems
to me that the just claims to graduation are sufficiently satisfied by
taxing only the surplus above the minimum allowance to cover
necessaries. No doubt, supposing 150l. to be the minimum allowance,
those who have an income of 160l., if they are taxed on the whole of
that, have an injustice to complain of; but if they were taxed only on
10l. they would have nothing to complain of.

Did I not understand you, a short time ago, to state that you consider
that the property tax should be a graduated tax? I was speaking of taxes
on succession.

You made a distinction, if I understood you rightly, between capital
inherited and capital realized from personal exertions? Yes.

It is only on capital inherited that you consider that there should be a
Edition: current; Page: [498] graduated scale of taxation? Yes; and for
this reason, that if there is a graduated scale of taxation on capital
acquired by saving, people are taxed more heavily for saving than they
are for squandering.

Under the present system the capital realized by personal exertions is
taxed, not merely upon the interest it produces but upon the capital
itself, before it is actually put aside? Yes; and that, as I have
already said, if you can prevent it, appears to me not just.

j. hume: Have you any other observations to make? I do not remember
anything further.

Edition: current; Page: [499]


THE BANK ACTS
 1857

Edition: current; Page: [500]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Parliamentary Papers, 1857 (Session 2), X.i., 189-218. Not republished.
Original heading: “John Stuart Mill, Esq., called in; and Examined.”
Running heads: “Minutes of Evidence taken before the/Select Committee on
the Bank Acts.” The evidence was taken on 12 June, 1857, with Sir George
Cornwall Lewis, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, in the Chair, and the
following members of the Committee present: Edward Ball, Sir Francis
Baring, Peter Blackburn, Benjamin Disraeli, John Fergus, George G. Glyn,
Sir James Graham, Thomson Hankey, Robert Hildyard, Hope Johnstone,
Christopher Puller, Martin Smith, Richard Spooner, William Tite, John
Vance, Thomas Weguelin, James Wilson, and Sir Charles Wood. Not
mentioned in JSM’s bibliography or Autobiography. No copy in Somerville
College.

JSM’s examination includes questions 2010 to 2318 of the evidence before
the Committee.

Edition: current; Page: [501]


The Bank Acts

sir g. c. lewis: Have you had occasion to consider the provisions and
the operation of the Bank Act of 1844?[*] As much so as any person can
do who has no practical acquaintance with commercial business, and knows
only at second hand facts which are known at first hand by those
concerned in business.

In the first place, what is your opinion as to the policy of imposing by
law any restriction upon the Directors of the Bank of England with
respect to the issue of notes? My opinion is that there should not be
any restriction by law, except that of convertibility, which appears to
me to be sufficient for all the purposes for which restriction is
intended.

Are you aware of the nature of the limit which Mr. Tooke has proposed in
his book[†] with respect to the bullion reserve of the Bank? Mr. Tooke,
I believe, proposes what cannot possibly be imposed by law, namely, a
limit which should consist in the Bank’s retaining a much larger average
reserve than it has hitherto done, an average reserve of 12,000,000l.
Public opinion might enforce a restriction of that sort, but it is
incapable in its terms of being enforced by law.

Does not he recommend that it should be made to depend upon an agreement
with the Government, that they should have a discretion as to relaxing
the limit, if they thought fit? I was not aware that he had recommended
that there should be any positive minimum, but I know he recommends that
the Bank should keep an average reserve of 12,000,000l., which of course
would be kept for the purpose of being allowed partially to run out when
necessary. Now, the difficulty would be, how to bind the Bank otherwise
than by general considerations of policy.

If the Bank were in any way bound to keep an average amount of bullion,
would not the effect be that if the reserve was below that average in
certain times, it would be necessary that the Bank should keep more than
the average at certain other times? Yes; there might be an honourable
Edition: current; Page: [502] understanding to that effect, but I do not
see how it could be anything more.

Would there be any advantage in a rule, which required the Bank to keep
more than was necessary at certain times, because it had kept less than
was desirable at other times? It is desirable, I think, that the Bank
should keep a larger reserve than the average at some times, as well as
a smaller at others, in order to prevent the Bank, at times when there
is a tendency to over-speculation, from encouraging that tendency by
making loans at a much lower rate of interest than the average rate. I
am not prepared to say that I would impose on the Bank any compulsory
rule in respect to the amount of its reserve. It might probably be
better done by fixing a rate of interest below which they should not be
permitted to lend. I am not giving an opinion in favour of any
restriction, but if any were necessary, I think that would be the best
restriction to impose.

At present, the Bank of England are not required by law to keep any
fixed amount of bullion? The Bank is not required to keep any fixed
amount of bullion. The only restriction is, that the Bank cannot issue
notes beyond a certain amount, except on bullion; therefore, under the
Act, for all the notes which they issue beyond that amount, they have a
corresponding quantity of bullion in their coffers.

Under the present law, if the circulation of the Bank did not exceed
14,500,000l., it would not be required to keep a single sovereign in its
reserve? No.

Therefore, a limit such as Mr. Tooke proposes, would tie up the hands of
the Bank much more than the limit fixed by the existing law, would it
not? I do not know whether it would tie them up more or less, but it
would tie them up more usefully, and less hurtfully.

Then your opinion is, that if a limit is to be fixed by law, it would be
better to fix it on some such principle as that proposed by Mr. Tooke
than on the principle embodied in the present Act? Decidedly.

Have you observed the operation of the present Act in such a manner as
to enable you to form any opinion whether the mode of fixing the limit
which the Act prescribes has worked well, or in a mischievous manner in
practice? I think it has worked well in one particular case only; viz.,
in a certain stage of a period of over speculation and over trading. At
all other times I think it has either had no effect at all, or a bad
effect.

Do you believe that the effect of the present law has been to induce the
Bank Directors to keep a larger reserve of bullion than they would
otherwise have kept? To give any answer to that question which would be
of use, it would be necessary to enter into particulars. It would be
necessary first to distinguish between the two departments of the Bank,
the issue and the banking department.

But taking the bullion of both departments as a whole, do you think
Edition: current; Page: [503] that the Bank has kept a larger reserve of
bullion since 1844 than it would have kept if the Act of that year had
not passed? Taking both branches together, I would not undertake to say;
but this I will undertake to say, that under the Act the Bank has kept a
much less reserve of bullion than the Act makes necessary, because I
think it can be shown that in order to prevent the Act from operating
very perniciously in certain cases, it would be necessary that the
banking department alone should keep as large a reserve as, but for the
Act, need have been kept in both departments together.

Will you be so good as to cast your eye over that Table (Paper No. 19,
Appendix),[*] and to say whether, comparing the greatest and the least
of the average amounts of bullion in the 10 years before 1844 and in the
years since 1844, it does not appear probable that the operation of the
Act has been such as to induce the Bank to keep a larger bullion reserve
than it would have kept if the Act had not been in existence? This Table
leaves no doubt that they have kept a much larger reserve than they kept
previously to 1844; but whether larger than they would have kept, in
consequence of the increased knowledge of the subject which now exists,
if the Act had never existed, I cannot say. I think the tendency of the
opinion of competent persons of late years has been in favour of the
necessity of keeping a much larger reserve than was formerly thought
necessary; and the circumstances of trade have really required a larger
amount of reserve, because the great increase in the magnitude of
transactions, and particularly the unexampled drains of bullion which
have occurred, have rendered it necessary to keep a larger reserve in
order to meet those drains.

If the change in the practice of the Bank had taken place in consequence
of a change of opinion on the part of the Bank Directors, in the
exercise of their discretion, would it not have been likely that the
change would have been gradual, whereas it appears from that Table that
the change was sudden, and took place exactly in the year 1844? In the
years 1844 and 1845 there was a great quantity of gold coming into this
country, therefore there would naturally have been a much larger
quantity of bullion in the Bank at that time than there was before; and
after 1847 the change of opinion had begun, because the drain of that
year was such as had never been known before.

Then your opinion is that, as respects the total amount of bullion found
in the Bank, in both branches, its quantity has not been affected to any
considerable amount by the operation of the Act of 1844? I do not give
any opinion on that subject; I am not prepared to say either that it has
or that it has not.

You expressed an opinion that the operation of the Act of 1844 had
Edition: current; Page: [504] been detrimental in causing the Bank to
keep an unnecessary large amount of bullion in the banking department?
Not in causing them to do so. If it had really caused them to do so, I
think the Act would not have been so mischievous as it has been. It is
precisely because, to make their position safe under the Act, or to make
the Act work well, it would have been necessary for them to keep a much
larger reserve than they did, that I think the Act has worked
mischievously. Those who framed the Act do not seem to have adverted to
what may be called the double action of drains. They provided against
drains, just as if drains acted upon the issue department only. Now
every drain, as a general rule, is drawn from the deposits. Therefore,
when the two departments are separated, the drain comes first on the
deposits. Notes are drawn out of the deposits, and those notes are
presented to the issue department to obtain bullion for exportation. The
consequence is, that supposing there is a drain of 3,000,000l. only, the
effect on the Bank previously to the Act would have been that of a drain
of 3,000,000l.; but now, when the two departments are separated, and
neither of them can in the most extreme case help the other, the effect
on the Bank is the same as if there were a drain of 6,000,000l., because
the banking reserve is diminished 3,000,000l., and the issue department
has parted with 3,000,000l. of gold from its reserve also. Now, it
appears to me that one convertible currency differs from another mainly
in the degree in which it tends to produce frequent and violent
revulsions of credit; and inasmuch as all the circumstances which lead
to revulsions of credit, operate upon the banking department of the Bank
of England before they can get to the issue department, the violence of
the shock is almost always first felt by the amount of reserve available
to meet the demands on the banking department. If, therefore, the Bank
cannot help its banking department by sending notes or gold from its
issue department, it must either keep in the banking department as great
a reserve as it would otherwise be requisite to keep for both
departments together; or if not, having a much smaller reserve available
to meet the demands on the banking department, it must necessarily, the
moment there is the smallest drain, contract its discounts and raise its
rate of interest. It thus appears to me that the effect of the Act is,
that whenever any drain, however small or temporary, commences, the Bank
will be likely, with its present reserve in the banking department, at
once to contract its discounts, or to sell securities, in a manner
which, if the Act had not existed, it would only do in the case of a
very considerable drain.

Are you of opinion that the separation of the two departments has an
influence upon the Bank’s rate of interest? A very great influence. I
should think that it produces much more violent and frequent
fluctuations in the Edition: current; Page: [505] rate of discount; and
there is no doubt that the variations have been much more frequent, in
point of fact, than they were before.

Do you hold that the Bank rate of discount determines the general rate
of discount in the market? No; not that it determines it, but it is
certainly a very important element in determining it, because the Bank
is so large an establishment, and its loans form so large a portion of
the total amount of loans.

c. puller: Do you say that the variations have been in the Bank rate of
discount, or in the general rate of discount? In the Bank rate of
discount.

sir g. c. lewis: Is it your opinion that the separation of the two
departments, created by the Act of 1844, is prejudicial, as well as the
fixing a limit upon the issues? Yes; I think the separation of the two
departments is the most prejudicial part of the whole. I think the
fixing a limit to the issues is also prejudicial; but I may perhaps be
permitted to explain what I said on this point in answer to a former
question.[*] I do not think the effect prejudicial in all cases; I think
it useful in one particular case; I think it is useful at a certain
stage in the progress of a revulsion of credit which has been the effect
of a previous over extension of it.

In what way do you think it operates well in those circumstances? In
this way. One particular kind of commercial crisis, and perhaps the
worst kind, is occasioned by previous over speculation and over trading,
which is always accompanied by an undue extension of credit, and by a
rise of prices of a speculative character, having no sufficient
justification in the circumstances of the markets. Now when this is the
case, there must necessarily come a revulsion, which is normally brought
about by an increase of imports owing to the rise of prices, and by a
diminution of exports. That produces a drain of bullion and a collapse
of prices, and this collapse of prices is generally brought about by the
necessity which the speculators are in of selling in order to fulfil
their engagements. Now this speculative rise of prices, I apprehend, is
usually attended by an increased quantity of bank notes. It does not
follow that it is caused by it, because the speculative purchases
generally take place on credit for a certain term; and even if they did
not, the transactions between dealers are generally not liquidated by
means of bank notes. However, there comes a time in this series of
phenomena when the dealers begin to be pressed, when the rise of prices
has stopped, but when the speculators do not yet despair of their rising
again. At such a time there are generally great applications to bankers
for loans, in order to enable the speculators to hold on; and I think
the effect of the Act of 1844 is to prevent them from getting those
loans to the extent to which they might do but for the Act. And I think
that very often the speculative rise of prices is upheld, and has been
upheld, as a matter of Edition: current; Page: [506] history, by loans
which the Bank of England and other banks have made to merchants and
holders of goods, the effect of which has been to prevent them from
being under the necessity of selling so soon as they otherwise must have
done. The consequence of this is, that the fall of prices is retarded,
that the drain of gold continues longer, and that therefore the reserve
of the Bank comes nearer to being exhausted; and when the time comes
that they are really alarmed about their reserve, they are obliged to
pull up more suddenly, and to make a greater reduction of discounts or a
larger sale of securities then they otherwise need do, and thereby
produce a greater alarm, sometimes amounting to panic, and a greater
destruction of credit in the country, and the whole thing is rendered
more calamitous than it otherwise would be. In that case, I think, the
provisions of the Act do good, because there is no doubt that before the
Act existed, the Bank used often in such cases to make loans by the
reissue of notes which had been returned to it in exchange for bullion.
This appears to me to be the great advantage of the Act; but against it
there are two things to be set. One is, I do not think that this mode of
operation is so much required now as it perhaps was at one time, because
the commercial public generally, and the Bank Directors, understand much
better than they did the nature of a commercial crisis, and the extreme
mischief which they do both to themselves and to the public by upholding
over speculation, and I do not think that they at all need the
provisions of the Act in order to induce them in that case to conduct
themselves as the Act would make them. In the next place, I think that
if in the first stage of this process the Act operates usefully, it
operates exceedingly injuriously in the latter stage; that is to say,
when the revulsion has actually come, and when, instead of there being
an inflated state of credit, there has been an extraordinary destruction
of credit, and there is nothing like the usual amount of credit that
there is at other times. At such a time the Bank can hardly lend too
much; it can hardly make advances to too great an extent, as long as it
is to solvent firms, because its advances only supply the place of the
ordinary and wholesome amount of credit, which is then in deficiency.
But the Bank, under the operation of the Act, can only make those
advances at such a time from their deposits. Now it is very true that
the deposits are likely to be large at those times, because at those
times people leave their money in deposit; they leave it within call, to
be able to have it at any moment when they want it, and therefore the
Bank deposits are larger than usual. But still this resource is not
sufficient, as was proved in 1847, when the Bank Directors, after doing
the very utmost which they could do from their deposits to relieve the
distressed state of trade by advances to solvent firms, were obliged to
go to the Government to ask for a suspension of the Act, and the
Government were obliged to grant it.

Edition: current; Page: [507]
Is it your opinion that the measures of the Bank, during the last two
years with respect to high rate of discount and the duration of bills,
have been more restrictive than was judicious? I think the Bank has
acted on the principle which was laid down for them by great authorities
at the time when the Act of 1844 was passed, viz., that in the
management of their banking department they had nothing whatever to
consider but their interest as a bank. I think they have taken that view
of their position. They have thought, therefore, that they were not
under the necessity of keeping a much larger reserve than ordinary
banking principles required. I think they at first began, after the Act
of 1844, to act entirely upon that principle; they took the word of Sir
Robert Peel, the author of the Act, anything they did as mere bankers,
in the management of their deposits, was no concern of the public, but
only their own concern. I think that in 1847 that error was, to a great
degree, corrected. I think that since that time the Bank have been quite
aware, and the public have been aware, that that view of the theory of
the Act of 1844 is not sustainable; and that an establishment like the
Bank is not like other bankers, who are at liberty to think that their
single transactions cannot affect the commercial world generally, and
that they have only their own position to consider. The transactions of
the Bank necessarily affect the whole transactions of the country, and
it is incumbent upon them to do all that a bank can do to prevent or to
mitigate a commercial crisis. This being the position of the Bank, and
the Bank being much more aware of it since 1847 than they were before,
they have not acted so entirely as before on the principle that they had
nothing to consider but their own safety. Still, however, as bankers,
they have not kept in the banking department the whole reserve necessary
to meet a drain, and being obliged, as bankers, to consider the solvency
of their banking department, they have been obliged to vary their rates
of discount more violently and more frequently than they did before;
which, I think, is owing to the Act.

Do not you believe that, although the law requires the accounts of the
Bank to be kept in a certain form, and to be exhibited to the public as
partly in the banking department and partly in the issue department, the
Bank Directors who manage both look at them as a whole, and consider the
bullion in both departments as one quantity? I think that if they do so,
they commit a very great mistake. They have to consider, on the
contrary, that each of their two reserves is now liable to all the
demands to which the joint reserve was liable before. The reserve of the
Bank can only be acted upon to any great extent by a drain of bullion.
When this drain of bullion took place before the Act of 1844, they had a
single reserve, and if that reserve was sufficient to meet the drain, it
was enough; but now the drain acts doubly, first on the banking reserve,
and afterwards on the Edition: current; Page: [508] reserve in the issue
department. Therefore, it seems to me that, in order that there might
not be more violent fluctuations of credit than before, it would be
necessary that they should now have in each department as large a
reserve as previously sufficed for both.

Then you believe that the Bank Directors administer the Bank as if the
issue and the banking departments were not only legally but practically
distinct? Certainly, I think they are practically distinct. I think the
fact that under no circumstances can the issue department afford either
notes or coin to the banking department, makes them as completely
distinct as if they belonged to separate establishments; and it is
undoubtedly the intention of the Act that they should be as distinct as
if they belonged to separate establishments.

Are you of opinion that if the Act of 1844 had never passed, the Bank
rates of discount would have been lower during the last two years than
they have actually been? I do not know whether they would have been
lower; I think they would have fluctuated less; I think they have been
both lower and higher than they would have been but for the Act.

If you compare the rates of discount on the Continent during the last
two years, do you not find that they bear a very close resemblance to
the rates of discount in this country, and that whatever difference
there is between them is in favour of this country, and not against it?
The commercial world is so much one world now, that whatever acts upon
one country acts upon another.

Then if we find that there is an uniform rate of discount in London and
Amsterdam and Paris and Hamburgh, inasmuch as the Bank Act of 1844 is
not in force on the Continent, does not that rather raise a presumption
that the rate of discount in London is independent of that Act? It does
not follow that the Act may not, by operating on so important a market
for securities as the London market is, have influenced all the other
markets also. In fact, it could not materially affect the English market
without affecting in something like a corresponding degree all others,
because securities of an equal degree of safety in one country cannot
fall below their rate in others without attracting capital to buy them
from other countries.

That answer assumes that the Bank of England has very great power over
the rate of discount in this country? I do not think that in ordinary
times, either the Act or the operations of the Bank have much influence
on the rate of interest, but only that under the Act the Bank is obliged
to follow the variations in the rate of interest much more closely than
it otherwise would do. The occasions on which the operation of the Act
seems to me to be decidedly mischievous, are those cases of drain which
do not arise from previous over speculation; such as those arising from
a great import of corn, or a greatly increased price of raw materials of
Edition: current; Page: [509] manufacture, such as cotton, or great
foreign remittances by the government, or exportations of capital.

You know that the Act of 1844 imposes a limit upon the issues of all
country banks which existed in that year, founded upon an account taken
of their circulation, and that it also prohibits the establishment of
any new banks of issue in England. Do you approve of that regulation? I
do not think it is of very much consequence whether there is one bank of
issue or many in the country. It seems to me quite a minor question; but
inasmuch as there have always been many, and I believe the local feeling
is always in favour of having many, it probably is desirable that there
should be.

The Act of 1844 seems to have contemplated the voluntary extinction of
country banks of issue in England, does it not? Yes.

Hitherto the operation of the voluntary clause has been but limited; do
you think it would be desirable to accelerate its operation by taking
stronger measures for either suppressing or diminishing the issues of
country notes in England? I see no reason for thinking so.

Does it appear to you that the law at present is in a satisfactory state
with regard to country banks of issue in England? Not in a satisfactory
state theoretically, certainly, because it is grounded on a principle
which it does not carry fully out; but as I think the principle a wrong
one, I am not desirous that it should be carried out.

Then you would be in favour of removing the present restriction upon
country issues? I would remove it both from the Bank of England and from
all other banks.

Does it appear to you desirable that the country banks in England should
have a power of issue unlimited by law, and limited merely by the
convertibility of the note, and that they should not be required to
issue against either securities or bullion to any extent? As far as
excess of issues is concerned, I think there is no reason for any
restriction. There might be a reason in consequence of the probability
of insolvency, which is not to be apprehended in the case of the Bank of
England. There have been lately instances of such gross mismanagement
and consequent insolvency of banks, that I cannot give a positive
opinion against requiring special security to be given for the notes;
but I am not inclined to think that it is necessary, now that there are
no small notes. As long as there are no notes in England below 5l., the
probability is that the holders of 5l. notes can as well take care of
themselves as the depositors, who have generally been the greatest
sufferers by those mismanagements.

Do you think that there would be any advantage in the issue of any
denomination of notes under 5l., in England? I think it is much better
that there should be no notes below 5l., because this retains a quantity
of gold in the country which may be used to replenish the banking
reserve in case Edition: current; Page: [510] of necessity, without
waiting for the slower process of its importation. Besides, 1l. notes
are liable to be used in the payment of wages, and a currency which is
used in payment of wages is much more liable to produce evils from over
issue, than any currency which is only issued to the mercantile public.

Then, on the whole, your opinion is in favour of maintaining the present
law with respect to the denomination of bank notes in England? Yes.

What would you say with respect to the expediency of a single bank of
issue, either for England or for the whole country? The principal
advantage of it would be, that the profit of the issue might be to a
great degree secured by the public. I do not think that as to the
working of the currency, it would make any material difference whether
it came from one issuer or more.

Is it your opinion that the profit to the public of a bank of issue
would be considerable, or that there would be any profit at all,
assuming that it was a bank of issue and nothing else? Supposing the
wants of the country require 30,000,000l. of notes, and those were
supplied by the public, the public would obtain a loan to that amount
without interest; that is the extent of the advantage that the public
would gain.

But then you would have to set against that advantage to the public the
expense of the establishment and the expense of management? Yes.

Would not the nation be obliged to establish a great number of branch
banks? Yes, certainly.

Is it your belief that the expenses of the central establishment in
London, together with the expense of a large number of branches in the
country, would not be greater than the profit derived from the issue of
the paper? It is not so, I presume, in the case of the Bank of England,
although that does not supply the whole country.

The Bank of England has a banking business besides its business of
issue? Yes; but I presume that it derives profit from its business of
issue, and that it would not be in a better position pecuniarily if it
were not permitted to issue.

Is it not conceivable that the Bank of England may derive profit from
the issue business and the banking business combined, when it might
derive no profit from the issue business separate from the banking
business? If an establishment which has the power of lending
30,000,000l., for which it pays nothing, cannot make that a source of
profit, I cannot conceive how money-lending can, under any
circumstances, yield a profit.

You are of opinion that the only benefit which the public would derive
from having a single bank of issue in the hands of the Government would
be the profit of the circulation, and nothing else? Nothing else.

As far as the management and control of the circulation itself is
concerned, Edition: current; Page: [511] you think that would be as well
left in private hands? Yes. I would add, that if it were thought that
there should be only one bank of issue, I do not think that bank of
issue should be the Government itself. I think the currency should not
be provided by the Government, but by such an establishment as the Bank
of England, the public making a bargain with it for so much of the
profit as they thought they could reasonably require.

With regard to Scotland and Ireland, you are aware that in Ireland and
Scotland the same law prevails as in England with respect to the country
banks, but that the banks can issue against bullion in excess of their
fixed circulation? In that respect they are in the position of the Bank
of England, not in the position of the English country banks.

Only that their limit is fixed upon their average circulation, and they
are not required to hold securities against the fixed credit
circulation? I have not paid any particular attention to the Scotch and
Irish Acts,[*] and I would rather not give any opinion upon them.

Do you approve of the action of the Acts with regard to Ireland and
Scotland? I apprehend that the Acts with respect to Ireland and Scotland
have for their object and effect to extend to those countries, making
allowance for local circumstances, the provisions of the Act of 1844;
and as I think that the Act of 1844 is more hurtful than useful with
respect to England, I think that the Scotch and Irish Acts are so too.

In Ireland and Scotland there are notes under 5l. circulated; do you
approve of allowing 1l. as capital to continue to be circulated in
Scotland and Ireland? I believe that in Scotland it is perfectly safe;
that there are no failures of banks there, or very rarely, and that if
they did happen the notes would probably be taken up by other banks.
Therefore I do not believe that there is there that danger of insolvency
which constituted so great an evil in the case of the poor holders of
1l. notes when they existed in England. And that being the case I think
it very likely that 1l. notes may do more good than harm in Scotland. In
Ireland probably it is the reverse, because there are bank failures,
sometimes of a very bad kind.

j. vance: Are you not aware that the joint stock banks in Ireland
possess a very large capital, and that they are in a high state of
solvency at the present moment? Yes, I believe so; and I believe the
same is the case with the joint stock banks in England. At the same time
we know that there have been, both in England and in Ireland, very bad
cases of insolvency of joint stock banks, and it is to provide against
those exceptional cases that it seems to me necessary to have some
restriction on 1l. notes.

Do you think you are justified in saying that the Scotch banks are in a
higher position of solvency than the Irish ones at the present moment? I
do not mean to say that the Irish banks are generally less solvent; but
it is the Edition: current; Page: [512] fact that nobody has lost
anything for a long while, I believe for a century almost, by the
non-payment of notes of Scotch banks. I believe that cannot be said to
the same degree of the Irish.

What failures do you refer to in Ireland? The Tipperary Bank is the most
notorious instance.

Are you aware that the Tipperary Bank was not a bank of issue? I was not
aware of that; but I do not know that if it had been a bank of issue, it
would have been on that account the less liable to fail, or the less
liable to be mismanaged.

Have you a recollection of what bank failure has taken place in Ireland
previously to that of the Tipperary Bank? I have no particular
recollection on the subject. I know so little about Irish banks, that I
would rather not be asked for an opinion upon them. What I said was
merely that I might not be supposed to speak of the Irish banks as I did
of the Scotch, and not from a wish to say anything against the Irish
banks; which I have no ground for doing.

sir f. baring: You stated that you objected to an issue of 1l. notes,
because it was more liable to over-issue. What do you mean by
over-issue? In order to explain that, it is necessary to go into some
particulars. I think that as long as the Bank confines its advances to
merchants and general dealers, to what is called the mercantile public,
people who deal in goods but who do not pay wages, its issues never
originate a rise of prices, because a dealer only uses notes for the
purpose of fulfilling previous engagements. Dealers never make purchases
in the first instance with Bank notes; the dealers to whom Bank notes
are paid usually either send them into deposit, or pay them to persons
who send them into deposit. But the operation is different when advances
are made to manufacturers or others who pay wages. When that is the
case, the notes do or may get into the hands of labourers and others who
expend them for consumption, and in that case the notes do constitute in
themselves a demand for commodities, and may for some time tend to
promote a rise of prices; and when they do so, and there is not any
other cause for that rise of prices than the issue of notes, that
constitutes over-issue, that is to say, an issue that will be followed
by a revulsion.

In that case the Bank would have been the moving power to raise the
prices? The notes would have been the moving power to raise the prices:
but that I do not think is ever the case now.

w. tite: I understand you to say that you attribute to the operation of
the present Bank Act, the sudden and rather violent fluctuations in the
rate of interest which have occurred of late years? I think the natural
effect of the Act is to necessitate more frequent and more violent
fluctuations in the rate of interest than would otherwise take place.

Edition: current; Page: [513]
That in your opinion is due to the division into the issue department
and the banking department, and the necessity involved of keeping up two
reserves? Yes; there is a double action of drains, which, instead of
acting upon the joint reserve, act to their full extent, first upon the
one, and then through that upon the other.

Is it your opinion that the Bank should in any manner be limited to a
minimum rate of discount according to the practice that existed before
the passing of the Act of 1844? I think that since the Act of 1844, the
Bank have lowered their rate of interest very unnecessarily and
undesirably, at times when they might have foreseen that the low rate of
interest would not last, that the then replenished state of their
reserve which induced them to lower the rate of discount was only
temporary, and that there would soon be a demand on their reserve again.
I think the Bank has several times made that mistake. Whether it would
be desirable to cut them off from ever lowering their rate of discount
below a certain rate, is a question upon which I have not made up my
mind.

You are not able to say whether or not they should be fettered in the
discretion which an ordinary banker exercises of doing as he pleases
with his own money and taking any rate of interest that he thinks fit? I
think that the Bank, as being a great public body, exercising public
functions, cannot in all respects be properly guided only by its banking
interest. Whether it should be subject to restriction by law in this
particular I do not know; but I think that it cannot rightly be governed
by its pecuniary interest, in circumstances in which a private banker
might reasonably be so; that the Directors ought not always, when the
market rate of interest is temporarily low, to conform their rate to it,
but rather to allow their reserve to accumulate at those times, in order
not to minister to a spirit of speculation, which a low rate of interest
does.

I understood you to say, that all that you would seek with regard to a
change in the law, under which the management of the Bank is now
conducted is, that there should be a sort of understanding that the
capital of the Bank should range from 10,000,000l. to 12,000,000l. on
the average? Something like that.

What would be the enactment you would propose? There is a distinction to
be drawn between two kinds of drains. One may be called an unlimited,
another a limited drain. A drain occasioned by a revulsion from a state
of over-speculation is in its nature unlimited; unless there be
something done to stop it, it will go on. If the high state of prices,
occasioned by an inflated state of credit, continues, the drain will
continue; and it can only be stopped when the high prices have ceased by
a diminution of the currency, or a diminution of loans. But the case is
different with all other drains; for instance, a drain occasioned by
payments for the import of Edition: current; Page: [514] corn, or by
foreign payments by Government, or the exportation of capital for
foreign investment. That drain stops of itself as soon as the purpose is
effected which caused it; and, therefore, it seems to me that the
reserve should always be such as may be equal to the probable demand on
account of a drain of this sort; and that in the case of such a drain,
bullion may be allowed to run out from the reserve, without any violent
action on credit to stop it. For that reason it seems to me necessary
now, when drains to a large amount are liable to arise from causes of
that sort, that the Bank should keep habitually a much larger reserve
than it used to keep, in order to meet a drain.

That seems to involve a sort of foreknowledge on the part of the Bank as
to how long a drain is to continue; but, with knowing that, surely they
must exercise some power of controlling it? Of course they have that
power; and they may in any case be obliged at last to contract their
discounts; but if they have a large reserve, and if, from the
circumstances of the times, and from the knowledge which they have, and
which the public have, of the causes producing the drain, they think
that the drain that is existing is of the one kind, and not of the
other, they will act accordingly. If they find that the drain exceeds
their provision for it, notwithstanding their having kept so large a
reserve, then they must take measures to replenish their reserve; but
the effect of this would only be, that they would be then obliged to
bring on the public in a smaller degree, and at a later period,
inconveniences which, under the present system, they must bring on at
once, and much more frequently, and in a much greater degree.

I understand you to say that you would recommend the Committee to return
to the provisions of the law as it was before 1844, only with some
understanding as to the amount of the reserve that the Bank should keep?
That would be my idea. Although, as I have already stated, I think in
the commencement of a revulsion from a state of over speculation the Act
at times has operated beneficially, yet I am of opinion that with the
experience that we now have, and the principles on which the Bank of
England is likely to continue to act, even if the Act were repealed the
Directors would probably do spontaneously, in that particular case, what
the Act now compels them to do; that is, they would not reissue notes
sent back to them in exchange for bullion.

With regard to relieving their reserve by the sale of securities, do you
think that much could be done in that way in the event of a drain? It
could be done. The effect of it upon the money market would be the same
as that of a refusal to make advances, because the money paid by the
buyer of those securities would be so much withdrawn from the loan
market.

You spoke of an issue of 30,000,000l. of money as being in the nature of
a loan. Supposing it were issued by one body, and that body the Bank
Edition: current; Page: [515] of England, is it possible to state
approximately what the profit of the loan might be; would it be 2 or 2½
per cent., or any other appreciable per-centage? The value of the
difference between getting a loan for nothing and having to pay interest
upon it, of course depends upon what the rate of interest at the time
might be, and it must be different in every different condition of the
money market. I think it is fair to take it at the lowest rate; it may
perhaps be taken at 3 per cent.

Then the first element of the profit would be the market rate of
interest of such a loan, against which would have to be set the expense
of the establishment and the machinery necessary for the issuing of the
money? Yes, the expense of management.

Three per cent. on 30,000,000l. would be 900,000l.? Yes, which is not a
very great object to a great country.

Do you imagine that although these principles are tolerably accurate
theoretically, in point of fact there are no disturbing elements in
their consideration? There are disturbing elements in almost every
question relating to commerce, but what they are in this case I do not
exactly see.

In point of fact you do not know what profit the Bank do make out of the
issue which is placed in their hands? No.

Does your position in the East India House give you any opportunities of
knowing the amount of the exportation of silver which has been going on
for some years past to India and China? I am not acquainted with the
details; but I have seen a calculation which makes out that for a
certain number of years the average export of silver to India has been
6,000,000l. sterling.

That amount of drain is in excess of commodities brought back? Yes; it
is a payment for commodities imported from England, and it is probably
in a great measure the result of the great gold discoveries; the gold
discoveries having raised the price of silver in many countries in
Europe beyond the mint valuation as compared with gold; and having thus
made gold the standard in those countries, and the medium of payments.
For instance, in France gold was always at a premium before the gold
discoveries, and therefore silver was practically the standard; but
since the gold discoveries, gold has practically been the standard,
because it has been cheaper to pay debts in gold. Therefore the gold
coinage has immensely increased in France, and has taken the place of
silver; which silver having retained its bullion value in reference to
commodities, became an advantageous remittance.

What is your notion as to the cause of what is called popularly the
drain of silver which has been going on to the extent of 6,000,000l.
annually to India? The cause is the great increase of production and
exportation from the East, and the habit of the people of India of
hoarding. A large portion Edition: current; Page: [516] of whatever
increase of wealth comes into the hands of a native of India, he usually
either hoards, or if he expends it, he expends it in ornaments, which
are generally silver ornaments, and hoards it in that shape. In fact,
the reserved funds, similar to those which a person in this country
invests at interest, are generally by a native of the East converted
into ornaments; and therefore, any increase of money payments, from any
other country to India, usually, to a very great extent, takes the form
of ornaments; the remainder being mostly hoarded as treasure. Now, as
the currency of India is mainly silver, at present they hoard in silver
chiefly; but, no doubt, if they had a gold currency, they would be as
ready to hoard in gold, and there would still be a considerable
swallowing up either of gold or silver in the East, just as there always
has been since the beginning of history. The general tendency from the
earliest period was a flow of the precious metals towards the East, not
from it, on account of this practice of hoarding.

Then this practice of hoarding is no new practice? It is no new
practice, but it is a very general practice. Everybody who has the means
of hoarding does hoard, and whenever they get more they hoard more.

m. t. smith: Has not the price of the great articles of production in
the east risen very much throughout Europe, more particularly sugar,
indigo, silk, and spices? Latterly.

Is not it natural that an increased quantity should be sent to this
country on account of the increased price in these markets? Yes, but I
think the drain to the East had commenced before this rise of price
happened in either sugar or silk.

But not to the extent to which it exists at this moment; not to the
extent of 7,000,000l. or 8,000,000l.; but of course the best that goes
is from England? It is natural to suppose that the rise of prices must
cause a much greater debt to be due to India.

Is not it equally true that the same cause, namely, an increased
production of gold in Australia and California, which has caused a rise
in the prices of Asiatic goods in this country, has also caused a rise
in the price of manufactured goods in this country, and has thereby
prevented the same quantity of manufactured goods going back to India in
return for the productions imported from India as used to go before? It
is so unsettled a point yet, to what extent general prices in this
country have been raised by the gold discoveries, that I should hardly
feel able to answer that question.

Should you be disposed to attribute the increased efflux of silver from
this country to India to the increased production in India, stimulated
by the higher prices in this country? Yes, I should think so, or at all
events to the increased production, and the greatly increased
importation from India; which naturally produces a great balance of
trade in favour of India, Edition: current; Page: [517] unless there
were an equal demand there for English goods, which there is not.

Is not that, in a great degree, on account of the prices being higher
than they used to be? Opinions differ on that subject.

sir c. wood: Do you conceive that there is a much greater quantity of
goods coming from India either to England direct, or to other countries
through England, than the quantity which is sent from this country to
India; so that there is a balance of trade against this country, which
is sent in bullion? Yes; that is the normal state of affairs between
this country and India.

Do you conceive that that has been increased of late years? Yes, I think
it has.

Then there has been of late years a necessity for sending a larger
quantity of bullion to India than was the case in former years? Yes.

Do you conceive that the demand for expenditure on railways in India has
much to do with the necessity of exporting bullion from this country?
The export of capital, for the purpose of constructing railways, must
have contributed to it.

Do you suppose that that is the case to any great extent? The amount of
capital which has gone from this country to India for that purpose is
already considerable. Of course that is, so far, an addition to the
export of bullion.

Do I rightly understand you to say that you attribute the necessity of
sending silver partly to the demand in India for that metal in
preference to gold, and partly to the diminished value of gold as
compared with silver in Europe? Yes.

Do you suppose that a considerable portion of the export from this
country to India, for the purpose of railways, has gone out in iron-work
and other materials for the construction of railways, rather than in
coin? A great deal of it, no doubt.

Do you suppose that the quantity of coin and bullion sent to India for
the purpose of the construction of railways has been of very
considerable amount? I am not able to say; I have not made myself
acquainted with those particulars; I have no practical acquaintance with
that department of Indian affairs, and I have no other knowledge of it
than anybody else has.

sir f. baring: You do not know whether the quantity of silver has
increased considerably? It must have increased considerably by the
continued import. It is known from the returns that there has been a
very great importation of silver into India, but where it goes is only
matter of speculation. It is generally supposed to go into hoards; it
has not told upon prices there to the degree that might have been
expected.

Edition: current; Page: [518]
sir c. wood: Do you recollect the circumstance that at a period of great
commercial distress in Madras the natives sent in their silver ornaments
to be coined? I believe such things have happened. Money which goes into
the form of ornaments, and is hoarded in that form, is brought out when
there is a high rate of interest, and goes back again when the rate of
interest falls.

You stated that in your opinion the variations in the rate of interest
charged by the Bank of England had been increased by the operation of
the Act of 1844. In what way do you attribute that effect to the Act of
1844? In this way. At present all drains operate, in the first place,
upon the banking department of the Bank of England. As the private
bankers now keep the bulk of their deposits at the Bank of England, the
deposits at the Bank of England comprise the bulk of the disposable
capital of the country, the bulk of that which is available for
exportation in case of a drain of bullion for that purpose. Hence,
whenever there is a drain, this drain operates in the first place on the
reserve of bullion in the banking department. As long as the banking
department and the issue department were one, the whole reserve of the
Bank was available to meet these demands on its deposits; and so it
would still be, notwithstanding the separation of the departments as a
matter of account, if in an extremity the issue department was allowed
to come to the assistance of the banking department; because in that
case, supposing, for example, that 3,000,000l. were drawn out of the
reserve of the deposit department, the Bank, instead of selling
securities, or contracting its discounts in order to replenish its
reserve, would simply transfer the necessary number of millions from the
issue department, either in notes or in gold, to the reserve of the
banking department; not for the purpose of lending it to the public, but
simply to meet the demands of its depositors if they should continue to
draw their deposits out. In that case, therefore, the Bank would not be
obliged to take immediate means for contracting its credit in order to
replenish its reserve; but now it must. The Bank is now exactly in the
position, with regard to the solvency of its banking department, that it
would be in if the issue department were annihilated altogether. The
Bank is obliged to depend for the solvency of its banking department
upon what it can do to replenish the reserve in that department; and
therefore as soon as it finds that there is any drain in progress, it is
obliged to look to the safety of its reserve, and to commence
contracting its discounts, or selling securities.

Is not the operation which you contemplate in your answer an issue of
notes from the issue department at a time when a drain is going on, and
when, if the circulation is to be viewed as a metallic circulation, the
quantity of Bank notes ought to be diminished rather than increased?
Yes, according to the principle of the Act of 1844; but I think that
principle a wrong one.

Edition: current; Page: [519]
Would not such an operation as that take place exactly at a time when
you stated that you thought the operation of the Act of 1844 had been
beneficial, namely, to prevent the continuance of a large circulation of
paper, so as to keep up prices when it would be more advantageous that
they should fall? I think the operation of the Act is beneficial when
the drain arises from one particular cause, viz., previous over
speculation. When that is the case, it appears to me desirable not only
that the Bank should not re-issue notes that are returned to it, but
also that it should take measures moderately and discreetly to reduce
its discounts, in order, by action on the rate of interest in a moderate
degree, to prevent that violent operation on discounts which would
otherwise become inevitable, in order to put a stop to the drain.

Would not an issue of notes from the issue department, in the manner you
stated in your last answer but one, operate precisely in contravention
of what you stated to be desirable, viz., would it not operate to
maintain a rise of prices, originally produced by speculation, after the
exchanges had taken an unfavourable turn, when, according to your last
answer, the Bank ought to take moderate measures to restrain
speculation? It would, or at least it might, and therefore I admit that
the Act, in that particular case and stage of drain, is beneficial; but
that is not the most usual cause of drain; other causes are much more
frequent, namely, unusual foreign payments that have not originated in
any undue extension of credit or general rise of prices; and in those
cases, I think, it is desirable that the Bank should be able to
replenish the reserve of its banking department from its issue
department.

Do you think that the Bank can, with sufficient certainty, distinguish
between the separate causes of drain, so as to be able to pursue a
different course according to the cause which, in their opinion,
produces the drain? The causes are matters of public notoriety.
Everybody knows whether there has been a bad harvest, or whether the
price of cotton has risen in America to a great extent, and generally
whether a considerable export of capital is taking place. Then, on the
other side of the question, all persons who pay attention to commercial
transactions know well when there has been an inflation of credit, and,
great speculation going on in goods; therefore, I think, the Bank have
very sufficient means of distinguishing between the causes of a drain.
The only case in which there can be any difficulty is, when there are
causes of both sorts operating; in which case it may be difficult to
determine exactly how much of the effect is due to each; but still, even
in such a case as that, a course of action founded upon the judgment
that experienced men can form upon the subject, seems to me much better
than deciding by a mechanical rule that is only applicable to the
extreme of one case, and pernicious in every other.

Edition: current; Page: [520]
At certain times the Bank of England raises its rate of interest in
order to maintain its reserve of notes; and in that case you think the
operation of the Act of 1844 has tended to increase the rate of interest
charged at certain times? Yes.

Do you think it has had the effect of lowering the rate of interest at
other times? It has had that effect in point of fact, but I am not sure
that it is fair to charge it upon the Act, because it is rather the
effect of the doctrines put forth by the supporters of the Act than of
the Act itself. When the Act was introduced, the language usually held
by its supporters was, that the Bank in the management of its deposits
was no more bound to consider the public interest than any other bank,
and that it was to regulate its conduct with a view solely to its own
safety; and so far as the Bank have acted upon that opinion, they have
no doubt been led by it, not only to contract their discounts when they
otherwise might not have been obliged to do so, but also to extend them
at periods when probably otherwise they would not have done so; because
seeing that they were at liberty, like other bankers, to lend their
money to any extent that they thought prudent for their own interest, at
the market rate, that they have lent money at less than 4 per cent., and
upon some occasions at as little as 2 per cent. But that is not a
necessary effect of the Act. The Act does not oblige them to do that,
and the Bank may, if they please, abandon the doctrine that they are at
liberty to act in the same way as other bankers; and seeing that such a
body as the Bank must, in the management of its ordinary banking
business, produce so great an effect upon the public interest, they may
come to the conclusion that they are bound to consider that, and
therefore ought not to lend below 4 per cent. or some such rate.

Then so far as the lowering the rate of interest is concerned, that has
been the effect of the course taken by the Bank Directors, rather than
any effect produced by the Act itself? I think it is more the effect of
the mistaken grounds upon which the Act was first defended, and which
have been partly abandoned by its defenders, than any effect of the Act
itself.

Are you acquainted with the constitution of the banks of Hamburgh and
Amsterdam? I have a general acquaintance with them.

In the case of both of those banks, are not all the notes which they
issue represented by bullion actually existing in their coffers? Yes;
that was the supposition, but it was found not to be the case in the
bank of Amsterdam at the time of the events which followed the French
Revolution; the bullion in deposit in the bank of Amsterdam was found to
have been deficient.

Was not that supposed to be an accidental circumstance owing to the
pressure of the revolutionary war at the time? I think it was supposed
that the deficiency had existed long before that time.

Edition: current; Page: [521]
But it was a principle in the constitution of those two banks, that all
the notes were actually represented by bullion in their coffers? Yes.

Therefore, their circulation must have varied exactly upon the principle
which has been laid down in the Act of 1844, viz., that it should vary
exactly as a metallic circulation would vary? Yes.

Are you aware whether they were ever unable to afford the requisite
accommodation to the trade, either of Hamburgh and its neighbourhood, or
of Holland, in consequence of that regulation? I cannot answer that
question; I should think it would require a very minute acquaintance
with the history of commerce to be able to answer it.

You are not aware of any complaints having been made of want of
accommodation, such as we have heard of in this country, in consequence
of that state of things? Even if there were no such complaints, it might
have been owing to their having never been accustomed to a different
system.

Are you at all acquainted with the variations in the rate of interest,
either in Holland or at Hamburgh? I cannot say that I am.

You cannot say whether they have been greater or less than the
variations in the rate of interest charged by the Bank of England? I
should expect that they were less; commercial transactions are now upon
so much larger a scale, that we must expect more violent variations.

Do you not suppose that the variations in the rate of interest charged
by the Bank of England latterly, are very much due to great influxes of
bullion at one time, and an export of it at another, which must have had
the effect of making practically a considerable difference in the amount
of capital available for discounts at different times? Certainly, but if
that were the only cause in operation, there would probably be very few
variations, because the gold comes with tolerable regularity. I do not
suppose that there are often considerable fluctuations in the rate of
interest owing to the arrivals of gold, unless there is an unexpected
retardation of an arrival; then of course that may operate for a short
time on the money market, but not to any violent degree.

You are in favour of the Bank retaining a large reserve, but without the
restriction of the Act of 1844. Would any amount of reserve secure the
Bank against the effect of a drain, unless measures were taken by the
Bank in reference to the amount of its circulation? The Bank may be
driven to such measures ultimately. Even if the Bank has a reserve that
is equal to the probable amount of the drain, it may undoubtedly happen
that the drain may exceed that probable amount and if so, the Bank will
at last be obliged to have recourse to other measures; but it is plain
that if the Bank may allow 10,000,000l. of gold to run out without
taking measures, it will not be obliged to resort to such violent
measures to stop the drain, as if it were necessary to stop it at the
beginning.

Edition: current; Page: [522]
Do not you think that earlier measures of a moderate degree may check an
incipient drain, which if suffered to go on, would require much stronger
measures in the end? Yes, in the case of a drain arising from over
speculation; but in the case of a drain arising from no cause affecting
prices generally, it seems to me a great deal better that the drain
should be provided for by bullion kept in reserve to meet it, rather
than that the bullion to meet it should be obtained by a violent action
on credit or on prices.

Do you recollect the drain of 1839? Yes, I think that was the occasion
on which the Bank was obliged to have recourse to the Bank of France.

Was not it the fact that that drain of gold, unchecked by any measures
on the part of the Bank, went to such a length that the Bank was saved
only by borrowing 2,000,000l. from the Bank of France? Yes.

In point of fact, the ultimate measures that the Bank had to take after
having suffered it to go on for some time, were of a more stringent
nature than anything they had done in former days? That will naturally
be the case if the Bank does not keep a sufficient reserve.

Do you recollect whether the reserve of the Bank of England previously
to the commencement of that drain was not of an adequate amount
according to the then received notions? I have not the details in my
memory.

Will you look at Paper 19 before the Committee,[*] and state the amount
of bullion which appears to have been in the Bank in December 1838? In
Decembeer 1838 it was 9,683,000l.

Will you state in what month in 1839 it was lowest? It appears to have
been lowest in August 1838.

The drain appears to have commenced from December 1838? Yes.

What was the lowest point to which the bullion was reduced in the course
of 1839? 2,444,000l., in the month of August.

Does it not appear that the drain actually went to the extent of
7,000,000l. of bullion, gone from the coffers of the Bank of England?
Yes.

I understood you to say, that after the experience we have had of the
discretion of the Bank of England, you think it might be thoroughly
trusted not to re-issue notes in cases when they might be called for to
strengthen the banking department? Not to re-issue notes in cases in
which the return of those notes upon their hands was the effect of
previous over-speculation.

Have not almost all the great drains in this country, the drain in 1847,
the drain in 1849, the drain in 1839, and the drain in 1836 all been, if
not entirely, in a great measure caused by over-speculation previously
occurring? That can hardly be said, I think, in the case of the drain of
1847, because the over-speculation which there had been at that time was
principally in railway shares, which had very little tendency to produce
a drain.

Do not you recollect the evidence which was given as to the system of
Edition: current; Page: [523] drawing bills creating fictitious credits
to a most inordinate amount, particularly at Manchester and Liverpool?
To whatever extent that might be the case, unless it was for the purpose
of making speculative purchases in goods, it would have no tendency to
produce a drain.

Did not it produce very great discredit, and when the means of paying
those bills failed, did not it cause great demands upon the Bank to
furnish accommodation to those persons who could not obtain it in any
other way? Accommodation in notes, but not necessarily in gold.

w. tite: May we take it, that the distinction which you intend to make
between the different kinds of drain may be described by the expressions
used in the Committee in 1848, namely, “a home drain,” and “a foreign
drain”?[*] Yes.

With regard to a foreign drain, would not the state of the exchanges
show very much what was operating upon the English market? The state of
the exchanges would show whether there was, or whether there was likely
to be, a drain; but it would not show from what cause the drain
proceeded.

Do you think that the causes operating to produce either a home drain or
a foreign drain, may be accurately distinguished? Yes.

With regard to the banks of Hamburgh and Amsterdam, do you know whether
they were bound by law to keep bullion equal to their circulation, or
whether it was left in the discretion of the Government? I always
understood that they were bound by law, or by the constitution of those
banks.

But I believe it is an historical fact that at the time of the failure
of the Amsterdam bank, at the time of the French Revolution, it was
found very deficient? Yes.

You do not know the amount of deficiency? No.

t. weguelin: In a question that was put to you with regard to the drain
in 1839, it was said that it was unchecked by any measures on the part
of the Bank. Are you aware that the circulation of the Bank in the hands
of the public, which was the only circulation then known, in 1839 was
reduced lower than ever it was known before or since in modern times? I
remember that the variations in the circulation in the hands of the
public did not at all correspond with the state of the Bank reserve.

Does it not appear that at that time the bullion in December 1838 in the
Bank of England was 9,686,000l.? Yes.

The circulation in the hands of the public was then 17,718,750l.? Yes.

In December 1839 the bullion in the Bank of England was 4,139,400l., and
the circulation in the hands of the public was 15,823,000l.? Yes.

Then, whatever measures were taken, they had the effect of reducing the
circulation in the hands of the public at that period? Yes; it had been
from some cause or other reduced.

Edition: current; Page: [524]
You conceive that the circulation in the hands of the public is not
always affected by the measures which the Bank may take? Not always.

Was not the drain of 1839 caused almost entirely by a demand for corn to
supply a deficiency in consequence of a bad harvest? I have not the
circumstances in my recollection, but I believe that was the main cause.

You state that the Bank, by a low rate of interest, increased their
discounts; do you state that as a matter of theory or as a matter of
fact? I believe, on the contrary, that as a matter of fact, the
discounts are usually greatest when the rate of interest is highest; but
that is accounted for by this circumstance, that the Bank’s discounts
are greatest at times when, in consequence of general commercial
distress, there is greatest difficulty in obtaining assistance from
other quarters; consequently, at the very time when the rate of interest
is highest, the demands on the Bank are the greatest.

Therefore as far as the action of the Bank upon its securities is
concerned, it is exactly the opposite to what the theory would induce
you to suppose that it would be? It seems to me that the fact just
mentioned is perfectly consistent with the theory; because although the
Bank, not being the sole lenders, would be likely at the time when they
get the lowest rate of interest (the facility of obtaining loans from
other quarters being greater) to have a less demand upon them than at
other times, and therefore might find it necessary to lower their rate
of interest in order to employ their funds at all, still it does not
follow that if they were to stop their loans till the rate of interest
rose again, it would not have a very considerable effect on the money
market generally. I believe that their refusal to lower their rate at
such a time would be sufficient to have a very considerable effect on
the rate of interest.

Does a reduction of the rate of discount on the part of the Bank
necessarily increase the securities? Not necessarily.

Nor does a rise in the rate of discount necessarily diminish the
securities? No; but perhaps I may be allowed to say that that does not
affect the question about the operation of the Act; because in a time of
difficulty when the Bank, in order to replenish their reserve, raise
their rate of discount, if that rise in the rate of discount does not
suffice to diminish their advances, they must do more, they must
actually refuse to make advances; because their object is not to get a
greater rate of interest, not to make more of their money, but to
increase their reserve, and that is to be done either by their refusing
to make advances, or by their selling securities, which will prevent
somebody else from making advances to an equal amount.

Does selling securities increase the reserve of the Bank? Selling
securities for the purpose of replenishing the reserve would do so.

Does not the reserve of the Bank consist of the notes unemployed? The
Edition: current; Page: [525] notes, generally, that the Bank holds for
the purpose of meeting the demands of the depositors.

Is not the reserve of the Bank affected only by a diminution of its
bullion? The reserve of the Bank may be affected by any drawing out of
their deposits.

The purpose of drawing out deposits is to meet a foreign drain, as
expressed by a diminution of bullion? Yes.

Therefore any measures which the Bank take must be to increase its stock
of bullion? It must be so now, but it need not be so but for the Act.

If the Act did not exist, the whole reserve would be in bullion, and the
same effect might take place upon the bullion as does now? The whole
reserve, in that sense, would be in bullion, but there would still be
virtually a banking reserve that might exceed the amount of the bullion,
or the Bank might, independently of the bullion that it kept to meet a
foreign drain, keep in reserve notes also to meet the demands of
depositors.

Notes unrepresented by bullion? Notes unrepresented by bullion; because
the demands of depositors do not necessarily result from a demand for
bullion, although they very commonly do.

You are aware that in consequence of the position which the Bank holds,
being, as it were, the ultimate resort of all the banking expedients of
the country, what it loses on one account it usually gains upon another,
and the deposits usually remain pretty nearly equal under all
circumstances? In a quiescent state of trade no doubt they do.

The principal fluctuation being in Government accounts, which increase
from a certain period of the quarter up to the time of the payment of
the dividends? In ordinary times that is the case.

Are you aware that the mode in which the expenditure on railways is
conducted in India is by the Indian Government expending what is
necessary for labour in India and placing it to the account of the
Indian Government on this side? I do not know in what form those
advances are made.

And that the amount so debited to the East India House here is between
3,000,000l. and 4,000,000l.? I cannot answer that question.

You stated that a high rate of discount charged in this country,
attracts capital from the Continent? Yes.

The rate of discount on the Continent is for bills due upon the
Continent? Yes; but I presume it may also be for bills due from this
country.

But then there must be a question of exchange entering into it? Yes.

Therefore, when you talk of the rate of discount in London, and of the
rate of discount in Paris, it is for two different articles; one is for
a bill due in London, the other is for a bill due in Paris? Yes.

Before you can convert the one into the other, there must be an
operation on the exchange? Yes; but that operation will very often
consist in Edition: current; Page: [526] rectifying a previous
operation; that is to say, supposing there was previously an exchange
adverse to this country in consequence of foreign payments, a rise in
the rate of interest here, by inducing those to whom those payments are
due to invest their capital here, will tend to rectify the exchange.

You think that a high rate of discount here will cause investments to be
made in this country? Yes.

Investments in permanent securities? Investments in permanent securities
certainly, but very often, no doubt, not intended to be held
permanently, but intended to be sold again after they have risen in
price.

Do you think that a high rate of discount in London would induce bankers
to send money over here to be employed in discounts? I think it is very
likely to induce such a house as Rothschild’s to buy any quantity of
securities here.

But not bills? It would come to the same thing, because, if Rothschild
bought securities, the sellers of those securities would sell them for
the purpose of employing the money here in other modes; they would be
very likely to be either themselves discounting or sending their money
to bankers, by whom it would be employed in discounts.

Then the operation would be, that foreign capitalists would be attracted
by the low price of securities, not by the high rate of discount here?
The two always come together.

Does a high rate of discount necessarily accompany a low price of public
securities or of commodities, generally speaking? Not necessarily a low
price of commodities. It is possible that the prices of commodities
might not vary; but in most cases the prices of commodities are
ultimately affected. When the low price of securities is owing to
commercial difficulties, if those commercial difficulties continue, and
there is great difficulty in raising money by discount or otherwise for
temporary exigencies, the natural effect is to lower the prices of
commodities, because the holders of goods, being unable to get money in
any other way, are obliged to sell at a forced reduction of price.

But is it not the fact, that practically the rate of discount in the
money market has upon very few occasions had any more than a limited
effect upon the price of public securities? I do not imagine how that
can possibly be.

The price of consols is now 94, and the rate of discount is 6 per cent.
Is there any relation between those two rates that you can trace?
Probably Exchequer bills would be a more suitable comparison, because it
is generally Exchequer bills that are held by bankers, not consols. Of
consols there is a very great proportion held by persons who keep them
as permanent holders for the income they yield, and not as a reserve to
meet their engagements.

Edition: current; Page: [527]
But my question refers to the attraction which the high rate of discount
affords to foreign capitalists to send their capital over to this
country. You stated that you thought that a high rate of discount
necessarily implied a low price of public securities? I am speaking of
the high rate of discount that takes place in times of commercial
difficulty. I apprehend that when there is a state of commercial
difficulty there is always, as one of the features of that state, a
considerable fall in the price of securities both private and public,
and that all sorts of securities, railway shares for instance, fall very
much. That is one of the forms in which these transfers from foreign
countries take place; foreigners send over to buy railway shares in this
country, or English holders of foreign railway shares sell their foreign
railway shares abroad. That is one way in which the transfer takes
place, and there is so much transfer of bullion prevented.

You say, that you think that a considerable rise in the rate of discount
necessarily causes foreign capitalists to invest in securities in this
country, and English capitalists to sell the securities which they hold
in foreign countries? I do not say necessarily; I think that it is a
probable and natural result, and that by means of this, which is under
the circumstances supposed a profitable investment, the necessity of so
great an exportation of bullion as would otherwise be required is in
some degree saved. I have understood that in 1847 this occurred to a
considerable extent.

You think that large investments were made by foreigners in this country
in 1847? I believe there were considerable purchases by foreigners,
either of English or foreign securities, which were previously held by
persons in England.

Do you think they invested in consols much at that time? I should not
think they invested much in consols, because consols are always at a
much higher price than other securities, and, what is more important,
there is not so much to be made by speculating in them, because the
prices do not fluctuate so much. Those investments, I suppose, were made
on speculation, with a view to sell again afterwards.

In a general way, when the market for securities is going down in this
country, does not the market for securities on the Continent go down
also? Yes, in some degree it does; but still it does not go down in the
same degree. I apprehend that the country in which the cause of the fall
originates, is always that in which it is greatest. And when it
originates in a great payment of money from this country to foreign
countries, it is natural to suppose that so far from the same phenomena
taking place in the foreign country, to a certain extent, phenomena of a
contrary description may be expected to take place there.

Do you think that the merchants in this country hold many foreign
securities? I should think not as a general rule, though they may
occasionally, on speculation.

Edition: current; Page: [528]
Are those speculations, in your opinion, mainly confined to the
capitalists, who upon occasions of commercial distress, are inclined to
transfer their capital to foreign countries? There is a large and rich
class of bankers and dealers in securities, through whom the
equalization of the rate of interest and the equalization of commercial
pressure between different countries usually takes place; and when
disposable capital is to be transferred from one country to another, it
is usually through the agency of these people that the transaction takes
place. We know they are always on the look out to buy securities which
are likely to rise; therefore if securities have fallen in one country
from circumstances leading to an export of bullion, while in other
countries bullion is coming in, the place for them to buy securities
will be the country which is sending bullion away.

In point of fact the transfer of capital is a speculation in the
permanent investments of that country, rather than in the rate of
discount? Yes; but I apprehend the rate of discount is always affected
by it, because those who buy securities buy them from somebody who
previously held them, and who after the sale has the price of them
instead, and he has probably sold his securities because he intends to
make use of the price in a more profitable manner than the securities
afford. This, at such a time, he would be best able to do by employing
the money in discounts. Or he perhaps uses it to pay a debt of his own,
and in that case the person to whom he pays the debt is probably a
monied man, and employs it in discounts.

Of course the whole force of the argument depends upon the amount to
which those investments are made in foreign countries. You think they
are very large? I always understood that they took place to a very
considerable extent in 1847, to a sufficient extent to have relieved the
drain considerably.

r. hildyard: I understand you to state that, in your judgment, there
ought to be no legislative restriction upon the Bank, but that the Bank
Directors ought, as a general principle, to endeavour to keep a large
reserve of bullion, amounting to the sum of about 12,000,000l., which
you specified? Yes.

Do you advocate that they should keep that reserve with a view of
meeting any sudden emergency that may come upon them, without being
obliged to have recourse to extreme measures injurious to the commerce
of the country? Just so.

Is the effect, in your opinion, of the Act of 1844 to deprive the Bank
of the use of a large portion of the bullion actually in its hands, and
to compel it to meet the requirements of the public out of the
diminished portion over which they are permitted to have control? I
think they are obliged in any case to meet all the demands of the
public, or the greater part of those demands, from their banking
reserve, and that if they could have recourse to their issue department,
either for bullion or for notes, Edition: current; Page: [529] they
would often not be obliged to limit their advances from the banking
department, when now they are obliged to do so; or if they were obliged,
it would not be to the same extent.

Would you illustrate your view by what occurred in 1847. Was it not the
fact that the active circulation of the Bank of England during the
crisis of 1847 was never below 20,000,000l. sterling? I presume that in
1847 the amount given as the circulation of the Bank of England
represents all the notes out of the issue department, and therefore
includes the banking reserve of notes. It appears to have been at the
lowest, a little below 19,000,000l., in the month of September.

But the crisis did not occur till after September; will you state what
the actual circulation was in October? On the 9th of October the
circulation is stated to have been 19,182,000l.

Then, subtracting from the active circulation the credit circulation of
the Bank, the Act compelled the Bank of England to hold bullion
representing the difference between the active circulation and the
credit circulation of 14,000,000l.? Yes; the Bank was obliged to retain
bullion to represent the surplus of 19,000,000l. above 14,000,000l.; but
they might still have been compelled to keep this bullion, and yet the
inconvenience might have been prevented if the restriction on the issue
of notes had not existed; because they might have made an advance to the
banking department of notes from the issue department, which would not
necessarily have been lent to the public at all.

But under the Act of Parliament they had no such power as that which you
say would have obviated the difficulty? No.

Then were we not near experiencing this phenomena, that the Bank of
England might have been compelled to declare its inability to comply
with the Act at a time when it had between 6,000,000l. and 7,000,000l.
of bullion in its coffers? What it might have been compelled to do would
have been to stop payment in its banking department.

If on the Monday following the Saturday when the Chancellor of the
Exchequer thought proper to give way, the bankers had chosen to withdraw
their deposits, the Bank of England must have stopped payment, although
it had at the time 6,000,000l. of bullion in its coffers? Yes; in the
case of an internal panic that evil is liable to arise, because there is
no knowing how far the panic may reach; the longer it goes on the longer
it is likely to go on, because panic creates panic. Any amount of issue
of notes which the Bank could possibly make at such a time could not
under any circumstances do any harm, because all that people would want
them for would be to keep by them; they would never go into circulation.

You stated that in your opinion, in every case but one, the action of
the Act of 1844 has been prejudicial; but that in one case you think it
is beneficial, that it to say, in the case of a drain resulting from an
inflation Edition: current; Page: [530] of credit and over speculation?
Yes; and even in that case, I think it is beneficial only in the first
stage, and extremely injurious in the last stage.

Are you sure that you are right in saying that any merit exists in the
Act of 1844, even in that particular; have not the Bank Directors, from
their position, ample means of ascertaining that that over speculation
and that inflation of credit is going on? Do not the character of the
bills presented to them and their general knowledge of the commercial
affairs of the country enable them to arrive at that conclusion? I
should say that there never has been a time of over speculation to any
great extent, when the fact has not been notorious to persons accustomed
to attend to commercial affairs.

Must it not be particularly within the knowledge of the Bank Directors
if they are men of intelligence? Undoubtedly.

Then would it not be their duty to check that over speculation by their
own spontaneous action, even if they were not compelled to do so by the
Act of 1844? I think it would be, and that they would probably do it
with their present lights, but they certainly did not always do it.

You have stated that they would have a knowledge of what ought to be
done and that they would be able to do it, and you think that now, with
the experience they have had, they would do it? Yes.

If they did not do it would it not simply amount to this, that the Bank
Direction is not properly constituted, and not that there is any
necessity for any legislative enactment to effect it? I think so,
certainly.

Therefore the Act of 1844 has really no merit, inasmuch as this one
beneficial action which you ascribe to it, might and ought to follow
from the intelligence and discretion of the Directors? At the same time
I must say, that I am not aware that the Bank Directors have ever been
in intelligence of commercial affairs behind the commercial public
generally. I think they have always had quite as enlightened views as
the bulk of the public had. They have not always had the best views.
They had not in the time of the Bank restriction; but then neither had
the public. They had improved views quite as soon as the public. When
Sir Robert Peel found that the Bank of England had not been observing
the requisite caution in checking speculation in its commencement, he
might very naturally think that it would be beneficial to compel them to
do so. But whether compulsion was required or not at that time, I think
that the effect has now been produced. The feeling of the public is now
even of an exaggerated kind on the subject of the necessity of checking
speculation. The alarm is sounded very early, sometimes earlier than is
necessary; and I do not think it is to be apprehended that, under the
present constitution, the Bank of England is ever likely to be less
alive than the commercial world in general are to that object, so as to
require the restraint of the Act.

Edition: current; Page: [531]
Therefore you would not recommend the continuance of this Act of 1844 in
order to accomplish that beneficial action, which you say it may have
produced in certain cases, but which you believe would be effected
without the Act by the spontaneous action of the Bank Direction, with
the improved intelligence and the experience that they now possess?
Decidedly. I think that the degree of enlightenment of the Bank
Directors has been constantly progressive; that they have advanced with
the public, and are likely still to do so. I think they are now kept
back more by the false theory upon which this Act rests, than by
anything else; and that they would act in a more judicious way than the
Act prescribes, if they had larger discretion entrusted to them.

Is not one mode, if not the only mode, of checking a drain, gradually
raising the rate of discounts. Is not that the most important, if not
the only engine which they possess for the purpose? And the limitation
of their advances.

Do you remember the precise date of the repeal of the Usury Laws?[*]
They have been repealed by degrees.

Have not the Bank since the year 1844, by the repeal of the Usury Laws,
possessed an engine by which they can check the efflux of bullion and
arrest over speculation, which was not possessed by their predecessors
during the period that elapsed between 1819 and 1844? The Usury Laws
were relaxed, as far as regarded bills of exchange, long before 1844.

That relaxation was confined to bills of exchange? Yes, and to bills of
less than three months’ date; but those are the bills which the Bank
discount, I believe, exclusively.

You have been asked whether larger reserves of bullion have not been
held by the Bank in the 10 years subsequent to 1844 than were held in
the 10 years previous to 1844. Will you look at the paper[†] before the
Committee and see whether that appears to be a necessary consequence of
the Act of 1844, or whether you do not find that the bullion in the Bank
had actually risen previously to that Act. What was it in 1844? In
January 1844 it exceeded 14,000,000l. In March it exceeded 16,000,000l.;
then it began to diminish.

But previously to 1844, what was it? During the whole of 1843 it was
from 10,000,000l. to 13,000,000l.; never so much as 13,000,000l.

When did the Act itself come into operation? In 1844; and that confirms
what I stated, that during those years gold was flowing in in large
quantities; therefore the quantity of bullion in the Bank would
naturally have been very much greater, even if the Act had never passed.

Is it not evident that that great amount of bullion in 1844 could not by
Edition: current; Page: [532] possibility be the effect of the Act of
1844, but must have been the result of previous causes in action? So
much so, that in all probability no one would have thought of venturing
to separate the reserve into two parts, if it had not been so large. If
the reserve had been no more than 7,000,000l., it is highly probable
that Parliament would not have thought it safe to enact that only part
of it should be available in each department.

It has been stated in this Committee that the supposed reason for
adopting 14,000,000l. as the amount of circulation on securities, as
fixed by the Act of 1844, was, that the minimum active circulation
previously to 1844 was 15,600,000l.; of which 15,600,000l., 1,000,000l.
consisted of bank post bills, not under the operation of the Act, and
600,000l. of lost notes which have subsequently been written off.
Deducting therefore those two sums from the minimum circulation, we get
at the 14,000,000l. which is made the amount of the credit circulation
of the Bank. The Legislature, therefore, having regard simply to the
then existing amount of the circulation, and not at all to the
regulation of the banking department, seems to have assumed, that if
they made provision for bullion against every note issued above the
lowest amount that had ever been out in active circulation, they had
secured convertibility? Yes.

Without asking you whether you agree in that view, but assuming that the
minimum circulation since the passing of the Act has not been less than
16,700,000l., exclusive of bank post bills; and there being no amount
worth speaking of of lost notes to write off, ought not the Legislature,
if it follows the principle of 1844, to make 16,500,000l., or about that
amount, the amount of the credit circulation which should be permitted
to be issued? It is evident, that proceeding on that principle, if the
framers of the Act had been framing it now, they would have fixed the
larger amount instead of the smaller.

Upon the same principle they would have said, as we cannot contemplate a
lower circulation than 16,500,000l., if we provide bullion for
everything beyond that amount we provide for convertibility? That would
have been their course probably.

Still, not asking you to pledge yourself to the principle, would not it
seem a more rational thing to have the credit circulation expanding
according to the wants of the country, as indicated by the minimum
active circulation, than to adopt an arbitrary amount of 14,000,000l.,
as fixed in 1844, although the industrial operations of the country
might increase to any extent? I am not sure that it would operate in
that way, because the only difference that would exist as compared with
the present state of things is, that the Bank would be obliged to hold
bullion against 2,000,000l. of its circulation, which now it may issue
on securities.

If you increased its credit circulation from 14,000,000l. to
16,500,000l., it would dispense with the legislative necessity on the
part of the Bank to Edition: current; Page: [533] hold 2,000,000l. of
gold? Yes, it would enable the country to part with 2,000,000l. of
bullion which now it must hold.

It would therefore so far relax the operation of the Act of 1844? Yes.

If you think that the restriction of the Act of 1844 ought not to exist
at all, I imagine you would advocate its relaxation to that extent, as
going part of the way that you would propose to go? Provided that this
permission to the Bank to issue 2,000,000l. more on securities than they
can now do, did not cause their reserve in bullion to be less than what
I think requisite for meeting the probable or possible drains.

You have already stated that you think that the principle of the Act of
1844 is defective, because it pays no regard to a drain that will fall
upon the banking department (which you say is the first effect of a
drain), but simply has reference to the issue department. Now adopting
the principle of the Act of 1844, for the sake of the argument (without
asking you to acquiesce in it, and to say that it is a right principle),
if that principle is to be adopted by Parliament with respect to the
legislation we are about to enter upon, ought it not consistently with
what was done in 1844, to make this relaxation of 2,000,000l.? On the
principle of the Act of 1844, I see no reason whatever against it.

You have been asked whether the Bank at Amsterdam and the Bank at
Hamburgh were not bound to hold bullion to the full extent of every note
issued; assuming that that was so, and that that was their habit (which
you say you believe in the case of the Bank of Amsterdam was not
practically their habit), what economy of capital would be gained if
every note is represented by bullion? Of course none; the only
advantage, then, of the paper currency would be its convenience.

It would be encountering the evils which are urged as objections against
a paper currency, namely, liability to forgery and loss without any
economy of capital whatever? None whatever.

And no profit resulting to the Bank which had to make the issue? No
profit from the issues, of course; only expense.

You say you consider that, having reference simply to the question of
circulation, it is a matter of importance whether the issue of notes is
from one bank or from several banks; you qualified that remark by
saying, “As a question of circulation”?[*] Yes; I consider that it may
be of consequence with reference to the probability of forgery; the
probability of forgery is, no doubt, greater when the same notes
circulate all over the country, than when notes circulate only locally
in a small district. At the same time that might possibly, in the case
of the Bank of England, be provided against by means of branch banks,
and by making the notes of those banks supply the whole local
circulation.

Do you believe that, in fact, there are many districts where it would
Edition: current; Page: [534] not answer the purpose of a bank, like the
Bank of England, to establish branch banks for the purpose of
distributing its notes, and where the notes of private bankers are now
circulated, affording great conveniences to the district? Yes; but the
notes of branch banks would get distributed too. However, they would
probably circulate over a much larger district than the notes of private
bankers; and therefore the danger of forgery would be considerably
greater.

But do you think that they would of necessity be distributed so
conveniently as they now are, assuming that country bankers were
prohibited altogether from issuing them? Possibly not.

Do you know the fact that the Bank of England has found it to be
inexpedient, as a mercantile operation, to have branch banks even in
such places as Norwich and Gloucester, and that they have withdrawn
their branch banks from those places? It is not within my knowledge. It
is a striking fact, certainly, but it does not follow that the notes of
a central bank would not circulate in those districts just as much as if
there were branch banks.

Can you not conceive that great practical inconvenience would result to
many outlying districts if there were not the conveniences at present
afforded by country banks? I think it is very useful to such districts,
perhaps to less opulent districts even more than to opulent ones, that
there should exist bankers ready to make advances of money on proper
security. In some districts it is probable that a bank could not
maintain itself by its deposits only, unless it had a profit on its
issues also; and so far the inconvenience referred to in the question
would certainly be produced, if there were only one bank of issue.

Do you not also know that in practice, if a farmer comes into a country
bank and wants to draw 100l. from his deposit, he is asked, “In which
will you have them?” and he invariably takes the notes of the district,
and prefers them to Bank of England notes? Perhaps he does so only
because he is more used to them.

Assuming that he is satisfied of the solvency of the bank, is not the
danger of forgery less, in the case of a private note? Unquestionably
that is the strongest argument for having private notes.

t. hankey: You said that you considered that it would be injurious to
the public interest that the Bank of England should be managed in the
same way as other banking establishments? I think that the operations of
the Bank produce much too great and important effects on the general
business of the country to admit of its considering, as other bankers
may do, only its own safety and pecuniary interest.

You stated that you considered that the deposits of the Bank of England
were the reserves of the disposable money, generally, throughout the
Edition: current; Page: [535] country, and that that was one of the
reasons why you thought it was not desirable that the Bank of England
should act as any private banker would do? The private bankers keep all
that portion of their reserves, which they do not immediately want, with
the Bank of England; the consequence is, that the deposits of the Bank
of England are the bulk of all the deposits in the country; and as the
deposits of the Bank of England consist of the whole capital that is
lying waiting for employment, they necessarily constitute the fund which
is drawn upon when bullion is wanted for exportation.

Do you think that that remark applies to any other account of the Bank
of England, except the account of the London bankers with the Bank of
England? Possibly not; but at the same time the private country bankers
are brought very much into connexion with the Bank of England through
their London agents. I imagine that there are very few private country
bankers that had not a portion of their funds in the hands of London
agents.

If we exclude the account of the London bankers at the Bank of England,
are not all the other deposits of the Bank of England very much of the
same nature as those which are kept in any other banking establishment
in London? Except that another London banker does not keep the whole of
his reserve by him; he only keeps that portion which he thinks liable to
be called for immediately. He keeps the rest with the Bank of England.

But my question is excluding the deposit account of the London banker at
the Bank of England; are you aware of any other accounts which require a
peculiar action on the part of the Bank of England different from that
of any other ordinary well managed bank? I apprehend that the Bank is
obliged so to conduct the management of its banking concerns, that it
shall always be able to meet from its banking reserve any probable drain
of bullion for exportation; because any drain for exportation comes as a
general rule upon the banking branch, before it can reach the issue
branch; and the Bank being under this obligation, and knowing that
whatever drain of bullion takes place from the country will almost all
come out of its banking reserve, is obliged to consider the
probabilities of drains, and their probable extent, in its banking
operations, as well as in its issue operations.

Are you aware whether, when there is a drain of bullion, any other
deposit accounts in the Bank of England are withdrawn or diminished,
except those which are of the nature to which I have alluded, namely,
the deposit accounts of the London bankers? The accounts of the
Government certainly are not generally liable to be diminished in that
way.

Then it is only those other accounts, which you would not consider the
public accounts, which are liable to be diminished by a drain of bullion
Edition: current; Page: [536] from abroad? Yes; but there are cases in
which the Government accounts also may be liable to be drawn upon,
namely, when the Government itself has payments to make abroad.

If I could show you that the accounts at the Bank, other than the public
accounts (excluding those of the bankers), have not varied materially
with any drain of bullion, you would not perhaps attach so much
importance to the argument? I imagine that if the deposits of the
bankers vary, that is sufficient to make a very great action on the part
of the Bank necessary to maintain its reserve.

Excluding the account of the London bankers, can you point out any other
account at the Bank of England which is liable to diminution in
consequence of a drain for bullion; have you ever observed any
indication of any such thing in any accounts that you have seen? If any
private merchant or dealer banks with the Bank of England, I apprehend
that he may have foreign payments to make, and therefore his deposits
may be drawn out in case of a demand for exportation; and I suppose that
the public accounts and the bankers’ accounts, and the accounts of
merchants and dealers, compose nearly the whole of the deposits of the
Bank.

At times when the rate of interest was very low, do you imagine that the
amount of deposits in the Bank of England, of an ordinary character, was
larger or smaller than at other times? I cannot say.

Do you think that the amount of deposits in London is in any way
affected by the current rate of interest at which people can employ
their money? When the current rate of interest is unusually high, I
should expect that, cæteris paribus, the deposits would be low; because
the very fact of money bearing a high value proves that people want it
either to meet their engagements, or because they are able to make
unusual profit by the use of it.

Have you observed[*] that at the time when money was worth 7 per cent.,
the private deposits in the Bank of England were about 12,600,000l. Will
you see what was the amount of private deposits in the Bank of England
in the first week of January 1856? In the first week in January 1856 the
public deposits were 5,500,000l.; the other deposits were rather more
than 12,500,000l.

Now, will you refer to the amount of deposits on the 1st of January
1852, which is the period when money was extremely abundant? At that
time the private deposits were 9,371,000l.

Then, at a time when money was extremely abundant, and the rate of
interest very low, and when you would have expected there to have been
an unusual amount of money unemployed, it appears from the return of the
Bank of England that the deposits were considerably less than they
Edition: current; Page: [537] were at a time when the interest of money
was extremely high, and when you would have expected a very considerable
diminution of the deposits. Is not that the fact as it appears from the
paper? Yes.

Therefore, as far as those facts go, there is no indication that the
private deposits have been materially affected by a higher rate of
interest? No.

The question is, whether it is true that the deposits generally,
otherwise than those of the bankers, are of a nature which require any
peculiar action on the part of the Bank of England? The Government
deposits do not.

Therefore it is only the private deposits that do? Yes.

And in fact it would apply to no other account than that of the London
bankers? Or the London merchants and dealers.

But we have seen from the account before the Committee that the amount
of deposits in the Bank of England did not materially vary, according to
the scarcity or abundance of money; and does it not follow, therefore,
that it can only be the private bankers’ accounts at the Bank of England
which are of that peculiar nature which requires a different action from
that which would be pursued by every other bank? It strikes me, that
when bankers withdraw their deposits it is because their customers are
likely to withdraw their deposits for the purpose of meeting the demands
to which they are liable in the peculiar state of the market.

You stated that you thought that since 1844 the Bank has lent money at
lower rates of interest than it did previously? Yes.

And that that was partly caused by the Act of 1844? I said that I did
not think the Act could be held responsible for it, because it is rather
a circumstance which has accompanied the Act than the direct effect of
the Act itself.

You believe it to be a matter of fact? Yes.

Is it not a notorious fact that the Bank of England lent money in 1843,
at 1½ per cent.? That must have been under very peculiar circumstances.

Previously to 1844 the Bank never lowered their rate of discount below 4
per cent., but you are aware that the Bank when they had large amounts
of money at their disposal made use of it, and were consequently obliged
to employ it at the current rates of interest? Yes, they have I know
been charged with having almost caused some commercial crises, by the
use they have made of their large funds at certain periods of
speculation and of consequent revulsion: I mean by the use which they
made of extraordinary public deposits which they had for a time.

You think that at a time when the Bank of England has large deposits in
its hands, and when the current rate of interest is from any causes
below 4 per cent., it is not expedient for the Bank to enter into
competition in the money market, or to employ that money at all? I would
not lay down any general rule, but I think they are bound not to do it
without great Edition: current; Page: [538] consideration of the
circumstances; that is to say, not without considering whether there is
likely to be a demand on their reserve; in fact, whether their
superfluity of reserve is likely to last.

Would it not be rather difficult for the Bank Directors to foresee what
may happen two or three months hence? Do you think that the Bank, having
a large amount of money which had been paid in from taxation, ought to
be prevented from circulating it among the public because the the rate
of interest was not 4 per cent? Do you think that would be a wise, a
wholesome action on the part of the Bank Directors? I should think that
it would be necessary that they should consider a great many
circumstances in order to decide that. I do not think any general rule
can be laid down.

But without laying down a general rule, do you not think there are many
cases which would justify the Bank in lending out money at the current
rate of interest? I think they are bound to consider well the
disadvantage which would be occasioned, at a time when there was a low
rate of interest, by lending a very large sum of money in addition to
what had been lent before, which would tend to encourage speculation,
and whether that would be a greater evil than leaving a portion of their
deposits for a time in their coffers.

You think that in those particular times they ought to depart from such
principles of action as would guide any ordinary banking establishment?
I think so, because a private banker may fairly think that his
operations cannot produce any great effect upon the general
circumstances of the money market, and that, therefore, it is enough if
he considers himself.

Do you consider that the rates of interest have varied more frequently
since the Act of 1844, than they did before? Yes.

Can you refer to any statement which shows that the variations in the
rate of interest in London have been greater or more frequent since 1844
than they were previously to 1844? It is matter of notoriety that the
variations in the Bank’s rates of discount have been much more frequent
than they were before.

But seeing that before 1844 the Bank of England never discounted below
four per cent., but employed their money in other ways below four per
cent., would it be a fair thing to take the Bank’s rate of interest at
that period as an indication of the value of money, and to found an
argument upon it, that the variations in the rates of interest have been
more frequent since 1844 than previously to 1844; would it not be more
fair to take the current rates of interest in London, as indicated by
the rates adopted by the great money dealers, such as Messrs. Overend &
Co., whose money is generally employed in discounting bills? I have not
doubt that the rate at which Overend & Co. lent would be a very correct
indication of what the rate of interest was, but it would not at all
show to what extent the general rate had been affected by the
circumstance of the Bank lending or not Edition: current; Page: [539]
lending at a low rate of interest, which cannot fail to affect it very
materially.

The rate to which you are alluding is merely the rate at which the Bank
have themselves lent money, having no reference whatever to the current
rates of interest in London? Just so; but this distinction is not always
important, because everybody feels that the operations of the Bank do
very materially affect the general rate of interest in a period of
commercial difficulty; and it is in a period of commercial difficulty,
brought about by other causes than over speculation, that the
restrictions imposed by the Act are particularly noxious. Although the
Bank does even in ordinary times vary its rate of interest much more
frequently than it did, no doubt it does so, merely following the market
rate of interest, and I do not attach any great importance to the effect
of what it does then. It is what it does in times of difficulty, that is
of importance, and the restrictions under which it is then placed appear
to me to be a source of evil.

As there has been a very large increase in the production of gold, which
has been principally coined, and has therefore added to that extent to
the circulating medium of the world, should you not expect that in the
general distribution of the precious metals a great proportion of that
increase would find its way to India? Certainly.

Would it not naturally continue to do so until India had received its
share in its general distribution? Yes; but I apprehend that it will be
found that the export of bullion to the East has been greater in
proportion than to other countries.

Is not the alteration in the relative value of gold and silver which has
taken place in consequence of the enormous increase in the production of
gold, quite sufficient of itself to account for this large export of
silver from Europe to India? It would no doubt account for the export of
silver to the East to the same proportionate extent as to other places,
but not for the greater proportional exportation, which I imagine has
taken place to the East, than to other places.

Is it not natural that in this process of equalising the general
increase of the precious metals all over the world, that increase should
find its way in the shape of silver to the East, where silver alone is
used as the circulating medium to a greater degree than to any country
where gold and silver are used jointly as the circulating medium?
Certainly.

Then it is natural to suppose that the large export of bullion which we
have sent to India would have taken place quite irrespectively of any
action of trade, or railways, or anything else? Not independently of any
action of trade, because it must take place through the medium of that
action.

But independently of any extraordinary action, different from the
ordinary action of the trade of the country? Yes; but if it had not been
for the practice of hoarding in the East, the probability is, that in a
country Edition: current; Page: [540] like India, where prices depend
much more on the metals than on any of those contrivances of credit
which affect them so greatly here, the effect of this influx would have
been felt much more upon prices than it has been; and in proportion as
it affected prices, it would have diminished the export of the precious
metals to India, which it has not done.

w. tite: I have now before me the statistics with regard to silver which
were given to the Committee in March last,[*] from which it appears that
the exports of silver to India and China in six years have been
36,530,000l., and the imports from the producing countries have been
25,820,000l., making the amount of silver abstracted from the European
stock in the six years 10,700,000l., which is at the rate of about
1,600,000l. in a year. Do you apprehend that that drain of 1,600,000l.
from Europe to the East is likely to continue? I should think that a
drain to that extent or more is likely to continue.

Do you know the amount of circulation in France? I have not the figures
in my possession, but there has been a great substitution of gold for
silver in the French circulation, and a great part of the silver which
has gone to the East has come from France.

It was suggested that the circulation of silver in France is about
120,000,000l. sterling? Not now, I think.

Supposing that drain to the East should go on to the extent of
1,500,000l. above the silver imported from the silver producing
countries, would the effect be very important upon the commerce of the
country, or what effect would it have, in your opinion? The probable
effect will be to oblige countries whose standard is now silver to adopt
a gold standard. If this took place in India, the effect would be in a
great degree to stop the influx of silver, and to substitute an influx
of gold.

No other effect? No other effect, that I know of.

r. spooner: Some questions have been put to you about country bankers
being required to give securities for their notes; I understood you to
say that you do not think that at all necessary as long as the issue of
notes is limited to 5l. and upwards? I hardly think so; I admit that it
is a question on which there may be a difference of opinion, but,
inasmuch as the amount of deposits is generally greater than the amount
of notes, and the holders of notes, when they are confined to 5l. notes,
are much the same class of persons as the depositors, there probably is
no reason for placing the holders of notes in a different position, or
giving them any security which cannot be given to depositors.

Would it not be unjust and unfair towards one creditor of the Bank to
give a better security to another creditor of the Bank? Not if it were
known beforehand on what security they took the notes or made the
deposits.

Edition: current; Page: [541]
In what way could the security be given; how could it be practically
worked out? The banker might be compelled to hold public securities of
some description to the amount of his notes, which should not be liable
to be taken to pay other debts.

Where should those securities be deposited? They might be entered in the
books of the Bank, in such a manner as to secure them against other
creditors. Means could easily be provided in some way equivalent to a
distringas upon stock which is not permitted to be sold.

Suppose that were done, a banker must still keep in his possession a
large reserve to meet the daily demands of his customers in respect of
those notes? Certainly, he must, and he would hold, besides, a certain
amount of securities which would be a pledge for his notes.

Would not that, in point of fact, be requiring the banker to provide for
his notes in two places? He would not be required to provide so much for
his depositors if his notes were otherwise provided for.

But you mean still to make the banker liable to pay his notes on demand
in gold, although he has given security? Certainly.

Then you would make him provide for his notes in two ways, namely, by
giving security for them, and by providing for the daily demands which
are coming upon him? Yes, undoubtedly he must; but the securities which
he was obliged to provide on account of his notes would be bringing him
interest.

Would it not be in a time of panic or disturbance that he would require
to realise his securities to meet his notes? That might be the case; and
it might be necessary that some public officer should have power to
authorise sales of the securities that were given for the notes.

At such a time, would not the securities most probably fall very much in
value? Yes, undoubtedly they would.

Then while you ask security from the banker, would not you give him
indemnity against that possible loss? That is a loss to which bankers
are always subject; they are always liable to invest their money in
securities when securities are dear, and to have to sell them out when
they are cheap.

They change them according to the best of their judgment? Yes; but they
invest what they receive in deposit, and the deposits are likely to come
in to them in the greatest abundance when there is not much to be made
by keeping them.

I understood you to say that your opinion is, that the theory upon which
the Act of 1844 was grounded has been proved by experience to be
completely erroneous? I think that some parts of the theory have been
proved, by practical experience since, to be erroneous, and that they
are mostly given up, even by the defenders of the Act.

What part do you say is not proved to be erroneous? I think the whole
Edition: current; Page: [542] of the theory erroneous; but I think the
part which experience has overset is chiefly that which turned upon
inattention to the effects which the Bank produces by its deposits, the
importance of which certainly, before 1844, was not sufficiently
appreciated either by the Bank Directors or by the public generally.

I understand you to say that you are of opinion that the Act of 1844 has
not answered the purposes which its promoters had in view, and that it
would be better to repeal it? That is my opinion.

Do not you think that the convertibility of the note might be as well
secured, or perhaps better secured, without the Act than under its
provisions? I think the convertibility of the note is safe in any case,
and Lord Overstone, in his evidence,[*] said as much. He said the Bank
can always take care of itself, but it is at the expense of the public.
I have no doubt the Bank always would take care of itself.

The convertibility of the note would, in your opinion, be as safe
without the Act of 1844 as with it? Yes; while at the same time a much
greater evil than the convertibility of the note, namely, suspension of
payments by the banking department, is much more possible with the Act
than it was before.

c. puller: You stated that, with respect to a drain of gold, since the
Act of 1844 every drain had a sort of double action; that in the case of
a drain extending, say to 3,000,000l., its first operation is upon the
banking department, by drawing out 3,000,000l. of notes; and that then
it acts upon the issue department, by the presentation of those notes,
in drawing out 3,000,000l. of gold? Yes.

You went on to add those two sums together, as if they constituted a
drain of 6,000,000l. upon the Bank? Yes; what I said was, that the two
departments cannot help one another, but the Bank is obliged to take
separate measures for the security of both. As to the issue department,
the security of that is provided for by the Act; but, in addition, the
Bank are now obliged, as the drain would come out of the deposits, to
take measures for the security of the deposit department, which can only
be done by a contraction of their credit.

Is it fair to add those two sums together, as representing a drain upon
the resources of the Bank to the amount of 6,000,000l., the notes being,
in fact, certificates of so much gold deposited in the issue department?
If it were a question that concerned the solvency of the Bank, I admit
that it would only operate to the extent of 3,000,000l.; but in as far
as the operation upon the money market is concerned, I apprehend it
operates virtually as a drain of 6,000,000l. would do upon the Bank.

Edition: current; Page: [543]
But the 3,000,000l. of notes that are drawn out of the banking
department are, in fact, the same identical portion of the resources of
the Bank as the 3,000,000l. of gold which are afterwards drawn out of
the issue department to meet those notes? It is as if a man having to
lift a weight were restricted from using both hands to do it, and were
only allowed to use one hand at a time; in which case it would be
necessary that each of his hands should be as strong as the two
together.

You say that, since the Act of 1844, the Bank has not kept so large a
reserve in their banking department as was necessary? Not so large a
reserve as would have been necessary to make the Act innocuous. To have
prevented the Act from producing more violent revulsions of credit than
would take place without it, it would be necessary for the Bank to keep
in the deposit department alone, a reserve sufficient to meet any
probable drain.

Was not the intention of the Act to make the circulation fluctuate
exactly as a metallic circulation? Yes.

Has not that effect been successfully carried out? That effect has been
carried out; but, I apprehend, that effect is not of the smallest
consequence.

Do you think that the Act has the effect of causing the Bank to keep a
less banking reserve now than it would have kept if we had had a purely
metallic circulation at work, and therefore the Bank of England had been
a mere bank of deposit? If the Bank had been a mere bank of deposit, and
had continued to act as it has acted under the present system, namely,
to consider only its own banking interest, it would have done just as it
has done.

Therefore, there is nothing in the Act to cause less caution on the part
of the Directors than they would have exercised if there had been a
purely metallic circulation? Exactly so; but I think, in a system of
credit like what we have in this country, you may have a very much more
steady currency than a purely metallic currency would be.

But if there has been a less banking reserve kept than was necessary to
meet the banking engagements, that result is due, not to the Act of
1844, but to the want of sufficient caution and discretion on the part
of the Bank Directors? They have had a sufficient reserve to meet their
liabilities; that is, they have always been able to replenish it in
time; but they have been able to do so only by selling securities or
diminishing their discounts very rapidly and suddenly, because of the
insufficiency of their reserve to meet the whole of the drain. Now it
appears to me that this is not a necessary evil, but an evil owing to
the Act of 1844. By the authors of the Act it is laid down as a broad
principle, that the paper currency should conform to a metallic
currency. I apprehend the meaning of that is, that the permanent or
standard value of the paper currency should be the Edition: current;
Page: [544] same as that of a metallic currency; but not that it should
have the same fluctuations. It does not follow, because we ought to make
the permanent value of the paper currency conform to the value of a
metallic currency, that therefore we ought to have the same fluctuations
which occur in the value of a metallic currency. The fluctuations to
which the value of a convertible currency is subject, depend not upon
anything that affects either the metals or the bank notes, but upon
general extensions or contractions of credit. The currency which is the
least liable to violent contractions of credit, will be the currency
with the fewest fluctuations. Therefore, if a convertible paper
currency, issued by bankers and not restricted by Act of Parliament, is
likely to lead to fewer variations in credit than a metallic currency,
it appears to me better than a metallic currency, and better than a
paper currency which is obliged to conform to a metallic currency.

Then I understand that the ill effect which you ascribe to the Act of
1844, is by comparing the actual state of things, not with any actual
metallic currency, but with some imaginary system which you think would
be more perfect? Not exactly so; what I mean is, that no currency can be
good of which the permanent average value does not conform to the
permanent average value of a metallic currency; but I do not admit the
inference that in order to enable it to do this, its fluctuations in
value must conform to the fluctuations in the value of a metallic
currency; because it appears to me, that fluctuations in value are
liable to occur from anything that affects credit; and I think that a
metallic currency is liable to more severe revulsions of credit, than a
mixed currency, such as ours was before the Act of 1844; and therefore,
that a paper currency of the permanent value of a metallic currency, and
convertible, but without any other restriction, is liable to less
fluctuation than we now have under the Act of 1844.

I understand your opinion to be, that the great advantage of
unrestricted issues, as compared with the existing system, would be
this; that in times of great commercial difficulty the Bank might draw
upon the additional quantity of bullion which it keeps as a security for
its notes for the purpose of sustaining credit in times of panic? I
should rather state it in this way, that they will not be obliged to
contract credit in cases in which there had been no previous undue
expansion of it.

I am supposing the case of a drain in consequence of over speculation;
in that case I understood you to say that the advantage of the system of
unrestricted issue which you advocated, would be this; that when a panic
did come after periods of over speculation, the Bank then would be able
to use its whole reserve, consisting of the bullion that is now in its
banking department, and so much of the bullion as is now in the issue
department, as it would keep under such circumstances; and that it would
therefore have Edition: current; Page: [545] a larger fund to draw upon
to sustain credit than it has now? I would state it even more strongly;
because in the case you are supposing, which is not a case where there
is any doubt about the convertibility of the Bank note, the Bank might
issue notes to any extent they were asked for, as they did after 1825.

You admit that there might be a very great extension of its issues under
those circumstances? I think there ought to be in those circumstances,
because there is such a destruction of ordinary credit, that it is
necessary that some credit should come in to take the place of what is
destroyed, in order to prevent great calamities.

Such extension of issues would increase the total amount of circulation
much beyond what it would be, if it were a purely metallic currency?
Very much beyond. That is a great advantage, because one of the great
inconveniences of a metallic currency is, that it is impossible for it
to come to the assistance of a drain in those emergencies.

You do not agree with Mr. Tooke in thinking that a mixed circulation of
convertible paper must fluctuate always as a metallic currency? I am not
aware that Mr. Tooke thinks that it must fluctuate in quantity as a
metallic currency would; I think it is a great advantage of our
currency, as it would be without the Act, that it does not fluctuate
exactly as a metallic currency would.

In stating the advantages that would be obtained in a time of extreme
panic by the system you recommend, you admit that they would be
purchased at the expense of a certain disadvantage, namely, that the
commercial crisis, when it did come, would be more violent than it would
be if it was checked in time, as it is now checked by the operation of
the Act of 1844? I think the Act does check it in its earlier stages,
when the crisis has proceeded from over speculation. At the same time, I
think there is every probability that the Bank would now act in such
cases exactly as the Act prescribes, even if the Act did not exist.

Would there not also be this possible great disadvantage, that under a
system of unrestricted issues, if notwithstanding the assistance which
the Bank rendered to the public they were unable to stop the panic, it
would be enormously aggravated by the alarm of every note-holder
throughout the country? That is supposing a case that is not likely to
happen, unless the country were in possession of a foreign army. I can
hardly imagine any other case in which there could be any doubt as to
the sufficiency of the notes of the Bank of England to secure anybody
who possessed them. We know that at the time of the panic in 1825, there
was never a doubt for a single instant about the notes of the Bank of
England.

But sometimes a panic is not always governed by reason? No; but in such
an extreme case any system of credit or banking must break down.

Edition: current; Page: [546]
With respect to a foreign drain, such a drain as is produced by a bad
harvest, or by foreign remittances of the Government, of course turns
the exchange against this country? Yes.

Must not that amount of drain ultimately be paid for and the exchanges
corrected by the operation of the trade of the country? Not necessarily;
it may be by mere transactions in securities, by transfers of securities
from one country to another.

But as a general rule, would you not say that you must look to the trade
of the country? It is of very great consequence, I apprehend, whether
the effect is produced through an action on the prices of commodities,
or without that action; because that affects a much larger class of
persons than could be affected by changes in the price of securities.

You have expressed an opinion that such a drain ought to be met by the
reserve of bullion in the Bank rather than by an action on discounts;
now, supposing the reserve of bullion to be nearly drained out, would
you think that such a state of things ought to be allowed to continue;
or is it not desirable that the Bank should have every motive so to act,
by contracting its discounts, as to correct the exchanges? It would
always have that motive when its reserve got low; it would necessarily
be obliged to take such measures; the only difference would be, that it
need not take them so violently; because if the drain should be a
limited drain, a drain arising from a cause not permanent, of course as
to so much of the drain as had already taken place, it would be
unnecessary for the Bank to provide for it by restricting its discounts.

Under a system of metallic currency all these matters would be regulated
by the natural laws which govern the distribution of the precious
metals? Yes.

Do not you think that upon the whole that system is more likely to be
safe and right than by entrusting the regulation of them to the
discretion of any body of men whatever? It seems to me that natural laws
would equally operate in the other case. The course that would naturally
be followed in a case of panic, for instance, is exactly the one which
the Act prevents, namely, to come to the assistance of trade at a time
when there is a great destruction of credit, which the Bank would always
do if it were not prevented, but which it cannot do now in those cases,
unless the Act is suspended.

You said that you were in favour of allowing country banks, as well as
the Bank of England, to issue notes without any other restriction than
convertibility,[*] or, at all events, that you saw no need of
restriction from the fear of over-issues; will you state what you mean
by “over-issues,” because you have already told us that you admit that
it is possible that Edition: current; Page: [547] issues of paper may be
in excess of that which a metallic circulation would supply? By
over-issues, I mean such as create undue speculation, or maintain it
when it ought to be checked. In any other sense I do not conceive that
there can be over-issues so long as convertibility is maintained.

Then your opinion is a theoretical opinion; it is not deduced from the
fact that there have been no such issues? It is my interpretation of the
facts that have taken place.

Do you remember the case of the American banks in 1835, when the issues
rose from about 100,000,000l. to about 150,000,000l. in the course of
one year? Yes, but I have always understood that there was not practical
convertibility at that time.

They were legally convertible, were they not? The fact was, that either
through the influence of the banks, or for some other reason, they were
not convertible. In the next place, I admit that in a period of violent
speculation, that speculation may be ministered to by banks; not that
they do so in the commencement, at least not by means of their notes,
but they may prevent speculation from being early checked by the
necessity of re-selling goods that had been speculated upon.

t. weguelin: Has not your examination to-day turned entirely upon the
management of the Bank as a bank of deposit? It seems to me to involve
the whole management of the Bank, as far as the currency is affected by
it.

Has it not turned mainly upon the management of its deposits? I think it
has turned mainly upon the deposits, for this reason, that it is
chiefly, in my opinion, by not attending to the management of the
deposits that the promoters of the Act have been led to what I consider
a wrong conclusion.

Edition: current; Page: [548] Edition: current; Page: [549]


THE INCOME AND PROPERTY TAX
 1861

Edition: current; Page: [550]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Parliamentary Papers, 1861, VII, 244-64. Not republished. Original
heading: “John Stuart Mill, Esq., called in; and Examined.” Running
heads: “Minutes of Evidence taken before the/Select Committee on Income
and Property Tax.” The evidence was taken on 18 June, 1861, with John
Hubbard in the Chair, and the following members of the Committee
present: Walter Buchanan, Stephen Cave, William Gladstone (Chancellor of
the Exchequer), T. Sotheron Estcourt, Sir William Heathcote, Sir
Frederick Heygate, Robert Lowe, Sir Stafford Northcote, James Turner,
William Pollard-Urquhart. Not mentioned in JSM’s bibliography or
Autobiography. No copy in Somerville College.

On 19 Sept., 1861 JSM wrote to Leonard Courtney, in answer to the
latter’s “intelligent objections” to his arguments before the Committee,
saying in part: “It so happened that none of my cross-examiners in the
Committee took the same view of the subject which you, and the
actuaries, take; and their questions, therefore, drew out very little of
what I could have said in opposition to that view. I will merely place
before you one form of the argument, which appears to me very simple and
conclusive. The actuaries argue that income of equal capitalized value
should pay equal amounts to the tax. Granted: that is, equal total
amounts. But if these equal total amounts are to be made up by equal
annual payments, it is implied that the payments are of equal duration,
and the owner of the terminable income would be required to go on paying
his quota to the tax after his income had ceased.

If you will only consider what would be the payments required from the
two supposed taxpayers if each of them was required or empowered to
redeem the tax by paying down a gross sum once for all, you would, I
think, see that the opinion of the actuaries has no ground whatever to
stand on.” (Letter in the British Library of Political and Economic
Science.)

JSM’s examination includes questions 3538 to 3804 of the evidence before
the Committee.

Edition: current; Page: [551]


The Income and Property Tax

j. hubbard: You have given considerable attention, have you not, to the
subject of taxation in its different forms? I have given considerable
attention to that subject.

Would you have the kindness to state to the Committee what are the
principles upon which you would recommend the construction of a tax of
the nature of an income tax, levied for the purpose of providing a
portion of the annual supplies of the country, and therefore differing
in that respect from a property tax, which is levied upon the corpus of
the property at its change of possessor or transfer? It seems necessary,
I think, to begin by considering what would be the conditions of a
perfectly just income tax, although those conditions may not be, and are
not, entirely realizable; in order to have a standard of absolute
justice before one, which one must endeavour to carry out so far as
insuperable practical obstacles do not interfere with it. Unless we set
before ourselves an idea of what would be perfectly just, we are unable
to make any fair approximation to justice in the practical application.
I should say that the first rule is the general rule of taxation,
namely, equality; that is to say, taxation in proportion to means. But
this does not, I think, necessarily imply taxation in proportion to the
whole of a person’s receipts; because the whole of his receipts may
greatly exceed what he can, with any propriety, expend upon himself. It
seems to me, therefore, that two kinds of allowances are necessary; an
allowance for small incomes, and an allowance for incomes that are of
temporary duration, or precarious; and I think that the present income
tax fails of justice under both those heads, though I do not go nearly
so far as many people in my estimate of the amount of that injustice.

Would you state what are the special features in the present income
tax[*] which appear to you to conflict with those two principles which
you have laid down? Perhaps I had better begin with the one of the two
cases which will take the shortest time to state, and that is the
allowance due to small incomes. It seems to be admitted that a just
income tax ought never to fall on necessaries; and accordingly all
income taxes fix a certain minimum Edition: current; Page: [552] up to
which no tax is paid. That I think perfectly right; but the present
income tax taxes incomes which exceed that minimum on their full amount,
and that seems to me not just. Justice, I conceive, requires that any
income exceeding the minimum should be taxed only on the excess, and not
on the whole amount; because otherwise those who are immediately above
the minimum are placed in a worse position than if they were at the
minimum. The rule of equality and of fair proportion seems to me to be
that people should be taxed in an equal ratio on their superfluities;
necessaries being untaxed, and surplus paying in all cases an equal
percentage. This satisfies entirely the small amount of justice that
there is in the theory of a graduated income tax, which appears to me to
be otherwise an entirely unjust mode of taxation, and in fact, a
graduated robbery. What gives it plausibility is the fact, that at
present the lowest incomes which are taxed at all are overtaxed. If an
income above 100l. a year, supposing that to be the minimum, as at
present, were only taxed upon the excess above 100l. a year, I think
everybody would see that the ratio was in that case fair, and that the
lower incomes were exempted as much as they had any just right to be.

Following out for a moment the last inference which the Committee might
draw from your reply, you are aware, are you not, that the objection to
taxing upon the excess beyond a certain sum, if applied strictly, would
involve the collection of sums so small, and spread over so wide a
surface, that they would not be worth collecting; do you think that any
adjustment in a middle form might be taken which would reconcile those
difficulties; for instance, instead of taxing 101l. at 1l., or 105l. at
5l., a certain minimum, say 60l., should be deducted from incomes of
100l. up to 150l., so as to leave 40l. as the sum which should be
assessed? That seems to leave too large a margin. I know that there
would be an objection to assessing incomes of 101l. upon 1l.; the income
tax upon 1l. would not be worth collecting; but I presume that the
income tax upon 5l. might be so. A 6d. income tax on 1l. would be 2s.
6d., and I imagine that the tax-gatherer does collect as small sums as
that. At any rate that is only a question of degree. You might tax every
income on its excess above 100l.; that is, you might make the taxable
amount the excess above 100l., but might only begin to collect the tax
at the point of 105l., or 110l. Or if it is thought necessary to begin
the actual collection at 100l., you might tax only the excess above
90l., or the excess above 80l. But I have no very decided opinion upon
that point.

To settle the principle of your remark, it implies that a certain sum
would be adjusted as an equivalent for the necessary maintenance, and
that above that all should be taxed, releasing then only sums so small
as not to be worth collecting? Just so.

Edition: current; Page: [553]
Then, passing to the other point of your remark, which was the mode in
which the present tax falls upon precarious incomes; in what way would
you describe the present inequality of the tax in that respect, and in
what way would you propose to remedy it? The injustice of the present
tax as it affects permanent and temporary incomes, and fixed and
precarious incomes, seems to me to result from this: that incomes which
are nominally equal, are not equal for the purpose of expenditure. Those
whose income is either temporary or precarious are under obligations, or
necessities, one may say, which others are not under, to save a portion
of their income; and that I conceive to be the only claim in equity that
there is to any remission of taxation in the case of temporary incomes.
The plan of capitalising incomes and taxing them on their value as
capital, I confess, seems to me to be not merely impracticable, but,
even if it were practicable, thoroughly unjust and unequal, and to
involve such arithmetical fallacies, that it is to me a matter of
astonishment that good arithmeticians should have fallen into them. But
what I should lay down as a perfectly unexceptionable and just principle
of income tax, if it were capable of being practically realised, would
be to exempt all savings; that the portion of an income which was saved,
and converted into capital, should be untaxed. I would leave this
untaxed, because otherwise, as it pays income tax again after being
invested, as it pays income tax on its produce after having paid it on
the capital, it really pays twice, whereas the portion of income, which
is devoted to personal expenditure, pays only once. By the adoption (if
it were practicable) of the principle of not taxing savings, all the
claims of justice towards individuals would be included and covered.
Inasmuch as the only claim which any income has to be taxed more lightly
than others consists in the greater necessity for saving; if you could
exempt from taxation what any person does save, you would have done him
full justice in that respect, and if he does not actually save it, he
has no claim to any exemption. I am laying this down merely as the
theory of a perfectly just income tax. I am quite aware that it cannot
be fully carried out; that you cannot consider individual cases, and you
are therefore obliged to consider, not what people actually do save, but
what are their necessities and obligations to save; with merely a
general consideration whether, on the average, it is practically the
fact that as a class they do it, or not.

In the attempt to carry out that theory, if you are unable to consider
individual cases, would you make it a portion of your design to consider
classes of incomes, so as to ascertain as nearly as you might, those
incomes which are subject to the demands of saving to a greater degree
than others? Certainly; and the impossibility of doing full justice in
every case would be no good reason with me against doing it whenever I
could.

Would you describe to the Committee what characteristics you would
Edition: current; Page: [554] demand in incomes which you would conceive
to be entitled to concession in the matter of taxation, seeing that the
present law levies the same tax upon all receipts under the shape of
income which came into the possession of an individual during the year?
I beg to be understood as speaking positively only on the claims of
justice, and the scientific principle on which the tax should rest. On
the question of practicability, or of the administrative difficulties
which might arise in applying the principle, I must be understood as
always speaking under correction from many who are much more competent
than I am to judge of those administrative difficulties. But in
principle, I would say that all life incomes, with certain exceptions
which I could specify, have a claim to some consideration as compared
with permanent incomes; and that all precarious incomes, without any
exception that I know of, have a claim to some consideration as compared
with those which are not precarious, but fixed. Those which, like
industrial incomes generally, are both precarious as to amount and also
temporary as to duration, having thus a double claim, have the strongest
claim of any. By industrial incomes, I mean, as the Honourable Chairman
means in his memorandum,[*] professional and trading incomes; but
trading have not quite so strong a claim as professional incomes,
because traders, at least those who are trading on their own capital, in
some degree combine the two characters, and hold an intermediate
position between those who depend on property and those who depend on
labour.

When you state that you would place life incomes in a different category
from permanent incomes, do you state that with regard to the tenure of
the owners, and without consideration of the nature of the income itself
or of the property which produces it? I state it without any distinction
as to the nature of the property from which the income emanates: but I
am quite aware that the source from which it emanates makes a great many
practical differences, some of which are such as in my opinion ought to
exclude some life incomes from the consideration which I would give to
them in other cases.

If you look at the schedule[†] which is in the paper lying before you on
the table, you will find that in the scheme which is there presented to
the Committee, it is proposed to range in one class only all the incomes
derived from property which may be invested; the Committee now, I think,
understand you as wishing, if possible, to discriminate between the
different tenures under which portions of that income might be held? As
far as possible; as far as is consistent with administrative
impracticabilities.

That is to say, that land, or the rental of land, might be held under
some Edition: current; Page: [555] charges or tenures to which you would
grant an indulgent measure of taxation, while the rental of land held
under other tenures you would tax to the full amount which might be
imposed? Exactly.

The consequence of the application of that rule would also apply, would
it not, to the dividends of funded property, or to any of the products
of money invested? Yes. In principle, and as a general rule, I would
exempt merely life incomes from a portion of the tax, by taxing them
only on a part of their gross amount. But in some cases, I do not think
that they possess this claim for exemption: particularly in cases of
life incomes derived from settled property. There are a number of
interests, which are life interests, one may say, only in name, and in a
sense which is quite consistent with the tenant in possession being able
to spend the whole of the income without imprudence. For instance, a
tenant in possession of settled property, though he may be only a tenant
for life, has, I should say, no claim to exemption, because the reason
on which I would give an exemption in other cases does not apply to him.
It may be fairly presumed that if he has any person whom he is bound to
provide for, that is, if he has any children, for that is the only case
that can be laid down as a case of obligation, they are probably
provided for by the same settlement under which he is a tenant for life.
The same reason applies to the next heir, the person who, under the
settlement, will come in next. He may have an allowance by the
settlement, which is of course liable to income tax, and I do not think
that he has any claim to be taxed on less than its entire amount;
because as he is to come into the whole property ultimately, he is not
obliged to save out of his income, the amount of which, probably, has
been adapted to his present needs and expenditure, and nothing else. I
do not undertake to say positively how far the exceptions to the rule of
partially exempting life incomes should extend. For instance, the case
of a widow’s jointure is a case in which doubt might arise. But upon the
whole, I should say that a widow’s jointure is not entitled to any
exemption; because in almost every case in which a jointure is settled
on a widow, either she has no children, or if she has, they are provided
for by the same settlement; and therefore, generally speaking (of course
you cannot allow for individual cases) she is under no extraordinary
obligation to save anything for children from her jointure. Therefore,
taking cases in classes, and without considering individual cases, these
are life interests, and yet have no claim. I do not think that the same
reasons apply to collaterals. I think that charges for younger children,
for instance, though they have not quite so strong a claim as industrial
incomes, still have a claim to exemption to a certain extent.

The motive, as I understand, for the concession of which you are now
speaking, as desirable for the purpose of carrying out a perfectly just
theory of taxation, is the view of the necessity of saving? It is so.

Would you allow to be introduced, with regard to that necessity of
Edition: current; Page: [556] saving, other considerations beyond that
of mere tenure; for instance, would you allow the introduction of the
consideration of whether other property might be held by the person in
question, and what children he either had or might have; whether he were
married or unmarried, in what degree the relations who were next of kin
might stand to him, as influencing his desire of accumulating on their
behalf; all those circumstances would, of course, form elements which
would weigh upon a man with regard to his disposition to save; are you
prepared to admit that those considerations should be ascertained for
the purpose of qualifying or establishing the concessions that you think
would be desirable? I do not think it would be possible to enter into
those minutiæ, or into the particular circumstances of individuals. I
think you can only proceed on a general and rough classification of
incomes. Besides, if it were possible to enter into those minutiæ, I
apprehend that there would be just the same reason for entering into
them in the case of industrial incomes, as in that of incomes from land,
or the funds.

Then you would, by the concession which you think might be required
here, imply a new interpretation of the tenure of the owner? Yes.

Have you at all considered whether, in legal form, that tenure could be
so described as to carry out the object which you have in view, without
giving rise to doubt or litigation? The only way which has occurred to
me (but it is possible that better ways may occur to others) is, that
all incomes which are for life, or for terms of years, shall be entitled
to exemption, except an enumerated list. The list of exceptions would
perhaps comprise three-fourths of all those which are nominally life
tenures. For instance; if it were enacted that the case of a tenant in
possession of settled property, the case of the future possessor, and
the case of widows’ jointures, should be excepted cases, to which no
exemption should be allowed, these alone would cover, I imagine, the
great mass of the nominal life interests in property. Thus a very small
list of exceptions would include such a mass of incomes as would make it
comparatively unimportant, whether or not you specified all the
exceptions that might be with justice made. If you except those great
classes of cases in which there could be no claim to exemption, I think
an exemption might be allowed in all unmentioned and unenumerated cases
of temporary incomes.

Would you allow the same indulgence to take effect upon the execution of
a deed of trust by the owner of an estate, as you would in the event of
that disposition having become a legal document, and being subject to
its legal results; would you, for instance, allow a man of middle age to
make by deed a disposition of his property which he would ordinarily
make by will, so as to involve the same consequences with regard to a
claim for concession in the incidence of the tax? Yes; for instance, if
he chose to bind Edition: current; Page: [557] himself to give a
provision of so much a year to one of his younger children in his
lifetime, instead of postponing it until his death, you have a right to
consider that from the time the income is out of his control it belongs
to his younger son, and the younger son must be treated like any other
life annuitant, I should say, from that time.

Supposing a large landowner of middle age, who holds an estate in fee,
of course naturally subject to the incidence of the tax, to make a trust
deed, under which he provides for his several children, reserving to
himself only a life interest in the estate, and giving to them a
contingent reversion in the property in various shares, and supposing
that that disposition in no degree fettered the amount of expenditure
which he had previously been commanding, do you think that there is
anything in the mere legal determination of that property which should
exonerate the estate from a portion of its liability to the Exchequer?
His power of expenditure is now fettered in a degree in which it was not
before, because he has, by a special bond, bound himself legally to make
certain allowances to certain people; and has it not in his power to
expend that part of his income on anything else. It has become the
property of the person to whom he has given it; it has become the income
of that person, and is no longer part of his own income. Therefore, in
considering how it should be taxed, we ought to consider the
circumstances of the person receiving it, and not those of the person
paying it.

If, for instance, a person having an estate of 10,000l. a year, with the
property tax at the rate of 9d., amounting to 375l. a year, were to
place it entirely in trust in that way, he might diminish the liability
of the estate by one-half; as regards the income tax, do you think that
the circumstances of a family arrangement or a settlement are of such a
nature as to justify the relaxation of the Chancellor of the Exchequer
in his demand upon the revenues of that estate? If such a rare case
should happen as that of a person who, during his life time, legally
appropriates the half of his income to another person, it is then no
longer his, and the Exchequer has no longer any business to come upon
him for it. With regard to those who now have it, it seems to me that
they are to be considered each of them as to his own position or his own
circumstances. If a parent is in such a position that he ought to save
for his younger children, or to give them the means of saving for
themselves, it is a thing rather to be rejoiced in than not; that by
these family arrangements he is enabled to obtain an allowance from the
Exchequer for what is thus saved.

We are assuming that he retains in his own possession the full sum which
he wishes to expend, and therefore he does not embarrass his own
expenditure, but it is merely that he changes the legal tenure of the
property which is to be rated, and so far changes its incidence to the
tax? Yes.

Have you considered whether the question of savings should override in
Edition: current; Page: [558] the assessment of the rental of property,
the rule which has been equally affirmed that all property being
protected by the State should, to its full extent, be taxed equally? I
do not recognize any rights or obligations as existing in property
itself, in things; I recognize them only as existing in persons. All
moral rights reside in persons; and all moral obligations are towards
persons and I should consider nothing but persons in any question of
justice.

But then you would consider those persons not simply in their persons,
but with regard to their property, which qualifies them to pay taxes? I
should consider it, so far as it constitutes their means of paying the
taxes, and the payments ought to be adjusted equitably to those means;
but I should not think that anything depends on whether one form of
property is more easily accessible than the others, or whether you are
more certain of its amount in the case of one person than in the case of
another. I should say, in each case ascertain that as you best can, and
then tax it with reference to the circumstances of the person, and not
with reference to any supposed peculiarity in the thing. I only
recognize things as influencing the question of justice in so far as
they operate upon the situation and feelings of persons.

Are we to understand you to state that you conceive that the incomes
derived from real property should under a perfect theory of taxation be
taxed not upon their net amount but upon their amount with regard to the
supposed saving in each individual case, as measured by the tenure of
the owners? The amount of saving cannot be got at in an individual case;
but the presumable savings of classes I think depend more upon the
tenure than upon anything else. The saving which you have a right to
presume that classes will make, depends on the classification according
to the tenure; it depends upon whether the tenure of the property is
permanent or temporary, and whether it is of a fixed or of a precarious
amount. I would beg to add that whatever claims I may think exist to
exemption in the case of some life incomes derived from property (and
therefore falling within the first class in the Chairman’s memorandum),
I can hardly imagine that any of them are so strong as the claims of the
second class; because the second class has the double claim of
precariousness and of temporariness, whereas incomes from land, though
they may be for life only are usually fixed, and the cases of their
being at all variable or precarious in amount are very rare. That is one
reason. Another reason is because in the great majority of life incomes
derived from land or from realized property, the obligation or necessity
for saving, though it exists, is of a considerably less binding
character. For example, in the case, which is one of the strongest, that
of provisions for younger children, I do not think that the necessity of
saving in that case is on the average nearly so great as in the case of
industrial Edition: current; Page: [559] incomes. In the first place,
there is some difference between the case of sons and that of daughters.
In the case of daughters, a large proportion of them will probably
marry, and of those who marry a large proportion, if they marry in their
own class, will not be under the necessity of saving from their separate
incomes. Still, they may marry some one to whom their income is of
importance, or they may not marry at all, and therefore I do not think
that their claim is annihilated; it is only weakened. Then as to younger
sons who have life incomes; they have a claim to exemption, but not so
strong a one as professional and industrial incomes have; because
generally speaking, incomes given to younger sons are not meant to be
their sole provision; they are destined to enter into the professional
class in some way or other, and what is given them is generally as a
help to that rather than a substitute for it. As a matter of fact, I
believe those of them who marry do generally acquire more than the
incomes so allowed them, and those who do not marry are not obliged to
save. As a class, therefore, they have I think, a less strong claim than
industrial incomes, but still a real claim to partial exemption.

With regard to incomes in the first class, with regard to which you have
described very ably the remissions which you would be glad to see put in
force if they were practicable, and upon which I dare say you are aware
that there may be considerable doubts, but with regard to the second
class you affirm a stronger claim, because there are more of those
elements which should influence saving, which you conceive to be the
proper test for concession? Yes. In the case of industrial incomes there
are all the elements that possibly can be; there is want of permanence,
and want of fixity. There is nothing, generally speaking, to fall back
upon in the case of those for whom the saving is made, and, if they are
not provided for from that source, they are not so at all. That applies
in its strictness, however, only to professional and not to trading
incomes, and I should be glad, if it were possible, to see a distinction
made between trading and professional incomes. The claims of
professional incomes, and all incomes derived entirely from personal
exertions, seem to me to be the strongest possible. The claims of
incomes from trade are less strong; because so far as the income
consists of the interest of capital, it properly comes into the first
class, and, being of a permanent character, is not entitled to
exemption. If it were possible to tax traders on the interest of their
capital at one rate, and on the remainder of their profits at another,
as you do propose to tax the incomes of the capital that they borrow at
one rate, and their profits at another; if it were possible to extend
this to the interest of the whole of their capital, and tax it at a
higher rate, and the surplus profits at a lower rate, I should be very
glad to do it; but whether it can be done or not is a point upon which I
am entirely in the hands of those who can judge better than I can.

Edition: current; Page: [560]
Are you not now alluding to a distinction which requires you to deviate
rather from what you have hitherto taken as the main guide to the
discrimination which you require, namely, savings; do you suppose that
the proportion of the savings which are effected out of professional
earnings is larger, or as large, as those which are made out of the
earnings of trades and manufactures, and other industrial employments
which contain capital as one of their requisites? No doubt the mass of
saving comes from traders; that is, a much greater absolute mass comes
from them than from professional incomes; but whether, generally
speaking, as large a proportion may not be saved from professional
incomes I have no means of judging. Professional incomes I take to
amount, on the whole, to much less than the aggregate of trading
incomes, and therefore if they saved on the whole as large a proportion
of their incomes, their savings would still bear a much smaller
proportion to the entire savings of the country. There is one reason,
however, which inclines me to think that very likely the savings from
professional incomes may in reality be somewhat less in proportion than
from trading incomes, namely, that perhaps a larger proportion of
traders than of professional men are aiming at making fortunes. The
great mass of professional men are aiming probably at little except a
moderate provision for their children and for their old age, while
successful traders are mostly aiming at making fortunes, and passing
into a superior class altogether. That establishes a certain degree of
probability that traders save in a larger ratio than professional men,
but how far this is really the case it is not in my power to estimate.

Without venturing, therefore, to assert that traders or manufacturers
save a larger proportion, you would probably admit that they certainly
save as large a proportion as professional men do out of their earnings?
Yes.

And, therefore, if you look to that test alone, there would be no plea
for drawing a line of discrimination between them as regards the
assessment on their earnings? Just so. If it were possible to carry out
the principle of the tax, and to ascertain actual savings, I should have
no objection whatever to any degree of favour which that principle might
extend to traders. But since it is impossible to carry out that
principle, the next principle that you can follow is that of the
necessities or obligations for saving, and those are greater in the case
of professional men than in the case of traders, for two reasons. One
reason is, that the great majority of traders have capital of their own,
which, being left to their children, may be sufficient to fulfil their
obligation; since nobody is obliged to save, so as to leave his
descendants as rich as himself. The obligation to save does not extend
that far; it may be often sufficiently satisfied by leaving the capital
only. But the capital only is not always the whole of what is left. Many
businesses are Edition: current; Page: [561] in fact almost as
hereditary as properties. In almost every very successful business it
happens that if there is a son, who has been brought up to the business,
and who is capable of it, he continues to carry it on, and thus inherits
not only the interest on the capital, but that additional profit which
is the reward of ability and industry.

Supposing that it were found impracticable to draw the line of
separation between trades and incomes, from their merging into each
other in many instances, so that it is impossible always to ascertain
the amount of capital engaged in trade, which would be indispensable in
order to carry out the discriminating assessment of trades, do you think
that it would meet the justice and necessity of the case to involve both
trades and professions in one common measure of relief? I should regret
the necessity, but I would rather do that than not give relief at all.
If I could not make the distinction, I would give to both, instead of
withholding from both. And what would reconcile me mainly, if I could be
reconciled, to making no distinction, would be the fact which you have
mentioned, that the great mass of the actual saving of the country is
made by the trading classes. If one-third or any other proportion of
income may be considered to be actually saved by the trading classes, I
should see no injustice in adopting that average, and taxing them only
upon two-thirds.

Are you aware that in the paper which you have before you, the one-third
is not stated to have been arrived at by any definite calculation, but
it is rather a proportion inferentially derived from other great facts
which are patent to those who have inquired into the subject; it is in
itself rather an arbitrary figure? It is no doubt impossible to get any
perfectly accurate statement, but some rough estimate may be made, and
as far as I know, that may be a just one.

You see no reason yourself to question the propriety of that proportion?
None whatever. I observe it assumes that more than one-third is actually
saved by the trading classes, because one-third, in the plan before me,
represents the excess of their proportional saving above that which is
supposed to be made by the first class.

May the Committee infer from what you have now stated, that your wish
would be to carry out a theory which would consider the amount of saving
in individual cases, to be estimated from the nature of their tenure in
the cases of incomes in the first schedule, but that failing the power
of making that inquiry and that concession, you think it would be
desirable to make the concession which is proposed for the second class
alone, and in the proportion which is there stated? I would do so, so
far as my information extends. I cannot speak positively as to the
proportion, I must leave that to be judged of by others; but I am quite
clear about this, that even if it Edition: current; Page: [562] were
practically impossible to make the concession to any one else, the
classes in the second table in this memorandum ought to have it.

w. gladstone: You have stated that you exclude from your view the class
of difficulties, in any reconstruction of the income tax, which may be
termed administrative, and deal with the question on abstract and
scientific principles; may I ask you whether you also exclude from your
view another class of difficulties, which may be termed political
difficulties? It is hardly my province to consider political
difficulties, these being, I presume, the difficulties of carrying the
question through Parliament.

I mean the difficulties of carrying the question through Parliament, and
of making the measure acceptable to the country, which of course, as we
know very well, would not depend upon the degree of its scientific
accuracy, but in a much greater degree upon the feelings of men with
regard to the relative mode of treatment? That last consideration I do
feel bound to enter into.

You despair, do not you, of any mode of adaptation or of reconstruction
of the income tax to the principles of justice, and you look to what you
have fairly termed a rough estimate? Yes.

Those rough estimates, coming as they would, with all the disadvantages
of novelty, in the matter of taxation, and aiming at supplanting a
system which is old, and has been long established, is there not some
danger that those rough estimates might give rise to very great
differences of opinion as between those classes who were to receive
remissions and those classes who were to undergo augmentations, in order
to enable the others to receive remissions, and that the political
difficulties to which that might give rise would be so considerable,
that in all probability they would be insurmountable? If the system
which is proposed to be interfered with were one that gave general
satisfaction, and could be considered a popular system, I cannot deny
that the new inequalities which might be introduced, or those which
might be left unredressed, might be very severely criticised. But there
is such dissatisfaction with the plan as it now is, that I think there
could hardly be so much with any new one; at least if the cases in which
redress was given by the new plan, were on the whole those which
presented the strongest claims to it, as I think would be the case under
the Honourable Chairman’s plan. It seems to me, that any plan giving a
relief of one-third to the whole mass of industrial incomes, would not
only cover the greatest number of cases that have any claim, but also
the strongest cases; and I should therefore anticipate that the
complaint and dissatisfaction which might be excited by the
impossibility of carrying the relief quite so far as the principle would
go, would not be very great. I think that almost all the cases which
would be left unrelieved, would be cases in which the claim to Edition:
current; Page: [563] relief, if properly explained, would be seen to be
not nearly so strong as in the cases of industrial incomes.

I wish to call your attention particularly to the circumstance that, as
we must assume for the purpose of argument, one class of cases being
relieved, another class of cases would not merely be left unrelieved,
but they would necessarily be subjected to an additional tax, in order
to make up the vacuum in the Exchequer which is caused by the relief
granted to the other cases; and it is with reference to the
dissatisfaction that might attend the positive increase of the taxation
in the unrelieved cases that I wished to present to your mind the view
of the political difficulties. That is a case which must arise in every
attempt to redress the inequalities of taxation. If you relieve some of
the payers, the Exchequer must either do without the money or must raise
it in some other way. Those who have to make up the deficiency may
complain, but that is not an objection to redressing a grievance, when
the cases you are able to relieve are those in which the claim is
strongest. Very much will depend upon the clearness and authority with
which the real grounds for making the exemption were presented to the
public mind, and with which, I think, they would perfectly well admit of
being presented; the present Chancellor of the Exchequer, if he had to
do it, would be perfectly competent to it. I think that they would admit
of being so presented to the public, as to be made intelligible to
reasonable people. To unreasonable people they would never be
intelligible.

A great deal would depend, would it not, upon the practicability of
drawing broad and clear lines of demarcation at the point where you pass
over from one rate of tax to the other? Yes, and it is a very strong
argument in favour of the Chairman’s plan that it does so; that it draws
the line very markedly and definitely. My desire would be, if possible,
to run the risk of making the line of demarcation a little less
definite, in order to include a still greater number of the cases to
which the principle applies; but I speak entirely under correction, in
regard to the administrative difficulties that would arise in making
those distinctions, especially in reference to a very important
consideration, the possible introduction of fresh frauds.

It would be necessary, would it not, for any body of persons charged
with the responsibility of conducting public affairs, to look carefully
through, and to test all the various forms of difficulty that might be
raised, and it would not be sufficient for them to say that they had
prepared a plan of which the general outlines were so sound, that they
felt assured that it would be carried, but they must be prepared to give
an answer to every difficulty that might be stated? Yes.

Have you ever felt yourself to be in the same predicament, and to be
bound to go through the various forms of difficulty, and to deal with
them Edition: current; Page: [564] definitively on that principle, and
to consider whether the result is, to leave those clear demarcations
which might be made intelligible and satisfactory to the public? I
cannot pretend that I have considered it so fully, and with so much
knowledge of the subject as those have done whose business it is, but I
have paid some attention to it.

With regard to what I understand to be your principle of a perfectly
just income tax, namely, that there should be an exemption of all
savings, if it were attainable; am I right in supposing that you state
the ground of that principle to be this, that if any other course is
adopted, the income is twice taxed? Yes; a portion of the income is
twice taxed.

Would you kindly point out particularly in what mode it is twice taxed?
Suppose that out of an income of 1,000l. a year, I save 300l., and spend
700l.; on that 700l. I pay the tax once; we will suppose it for the sake
of simplicity to be 10 per cent. I pay, therefore, on the 300l. 30l.,
and I have only 270l. remaining; those 270l. I make no other use of
except to lay them out and receive what they produce, and that produce I
expend, and pay the income tax again on its amount. The produce has thus
been doubly reduced; in the first place by a reduction of the capital,
and in the second place by a tax upon the returns. If there had been no
income tax I should not merely have escaped the income tax on the new
revenue, but that new revenue would have been one-tenth greater than it
is, and therefore I say that I have been taxed twice. A parallel case
would, perhaps, serve for illustration. Supposing there were a tax on
stockings, intended to be 10 per cent.: if a tax were also laid upon the
machinery by which they were made (supposing for simplicity the
machinery to include all the expense of making them) will not the
stockings be in reality taxed 20 per cent.? It may be replied that the
stockings bear one part, and the machinery the other part of the tax;
that you have got the machinery and you have got the stockings too. That
is true, but the machinery is of no use except to produce the stockings.
The stockings are to be the whole of your remuneration; you have paid 20
per cent. before you sell them, and you will not get back the tax unless
you raise their price 20 per cent. In the same manner, I say, that on
that part of any person’s income which he saves and invests, and pays
income tax on the returns, he is paying the tax twice. He cannot both
spend the income and save it; but he is taxed as if he did both; he is
taxed on it in the first instance just as if he spent it, and he is
rated again on what he does spend, namely, its produce. He is taxed as
if he used it for both purposes; but he can only use it for one, though
he may use it for either. Therefore, I think you cannot claim the tax
more than once.

Practically, the state of facts which you consider glaringly unjust in
this respect, as I understand this, that a man with 1,000l. a year
saving 300l., is liable to pay an income tax of 10 per cent. (that is
30l. upon the 300l. that Edition: current; Page: [565] he saves) while
that 300l. is in its transition state from income to capital? Just so.

And that subsequently, he is also liable to pay income tax upon the
fruits of the remaining 270l.? Yes, for he pays it at both ends; he has
the amount reduced by the amount of income tax, in the first place; and
then he pays a second income tax upon it when he gets it.

Do you consider the injustice of such a state of things, as I described
in my question (if that was a true description of it) to be patent and
self-evident? I consider that on the principles of equality it is so. If
a person is taxed on one part of his income once, and on another part
twice, that is contrary to what is universally received as the just
principle of taxation; and contrary to public policy too, because the
portion which is taxed twice is just the portion employed in a way in
which it would rather be public policy to encourage its employment. In
fact, it is liable to the same objection, in some degree, which applies
to a graduated property tax. The great injustice of a graduated property
tax is that, by sparing the prodigal and taxing the saving, it is a
punishment for economy and a reward for the reverse. So is the present
income tax; since, whoever saves part of his income, pays on that part
double the tax that he would have paid if he had spent it.

If I understand your objection, it goes to the root of the principle of
a tax upon income, and what you contend that justice requires is, that
there should be no tax upon income as such, but a tax upon expenditure?
Precisely: but seeing that levying it upon income is the only way in
which it can be practically done, I would levy it in such a manner as to
make it approximate as closely as possible to a tax upon expenditure.

The great bulk of our taxation already lies upon expenditure, does it
not? Yes.

Do you think that all taxation ought to be placed upon expenditure, and
that every tax which is not placed upon expenditure, sins against first
principles? I think that every tax, in so far as it is levied upon
anything but expenditure, does sin against first principles. The most
advantageous manner of levying it may often be on income; but still I
think in its practical incidence it ought to fall on expenditure.

Therefore, with respect to the principle of the tax, making all due
allowance for the difficulty of its application, you are not prepared to
go the length of saying that those taxes which are directly laid upon
capital are indefensible upon principle? No; not the succession tax, for
instance. Those who advocate a graduated property tax, I think, have
thus much ground for their opinion: they feel instinctively that the
State, in its taxation, ought to give some advantage to those whose
income is the result of labour, above those to whom it comes without any
exertion of their own; but the only way Edition: current; Page: [566] in
which, as it seems to me, this distinction can be made financially, is
on the occurrence of a vacancy by death, or the passage of property from
one person to another; because as long as the income is in the hands of
the person in whose hands it originated, the presumption is, that he
earned it, and if you tax him at a greater proportion because the amount
is greater, it is taxing him either because he has earned more, or
because he has saved more; either of which seems to me to be unjust and
impolitic.

Still, if I understand the matter rightly, the objection which you have
taken to the present income tax, namely, that it begins by limiting
capital, and then taxes the produce of the remaining capital, and
therefore may be said to tax incomes twice over, that objection applies
just as much in the case of a succession tax, inasmuch as a man who
comes into an inheritance of the value of 10,000l., and has a succession
tax of 1,000l. laid upon it, is liable, in the first instance, to have
the capital diminished by the tax on the succession, and then on the
current rent, which is taxed by the income tax, or in whatever form the
tax may be, on the fruits of the capital itself? Perfectly true. But I
do not think that the principle of equality of taxation has any
application to the case of taxes on succession. It seems to me that
taxes on succession stand on a different foundation from all other
taxes, and that the State is entitled, in reference to them, to consider
public policy and general morality, abstractedly from the special rule
of equality of taxation. If a person is allowed by the State to succeed
to that which he has not earned, but has obtained without any exertion,
that is a privilege which he owes to the existence of law and society,
to which the State is entitled to annex conditions, and if those
conditions are just, when tried by a higher principle of morality, no
general principle of equality of taxation has any application to them.

You assume that there is a peculiarity in the case of the tax upon
succession, by its amount; would you condemn other taxes upon capital in
its transfer? I would; I think them always indefensible.

Do you think that the principle which you have laid down as adverse to
the taxation of capital, with the single exception of taxes on
succession, is of so high an order that it can be really treated, not
merely as one of policy, but as one which is imperative upon grounds of
justice? When one speaks of any principle as imperative upon grounds of
justice, one must speak with reference to its operation on the position
and feelings of individuals; and I should say, therefore, that in so far
as the feelings of individuals can receive what is due to them without
adopting this principle, it is not absolutely imperative. But the
exemption of savings would fully satisfy and cover all just claims of
individuals; and if it were practicable, there would be no need to
consider anything else; you would have a perfectly just tax, since, by
exempting all savings, all claims on the ground of the necessity of
Edition: current; Page: [567] saving would be satisfied. But since this
principle cannot be practically carried out, the next thing is to
consider what are the diversities of obligation upon different classes
in respect to saving, and whether in the main, and as classes, they do
fulfil those obligations; and if they do, I then think that the
obligation of giving them a consideration for it, by leaving untaxed, as
far as possible, the savings which they are bound to make, and which, as
a class, they practically do make, is an imperative obligation of
justice.

Supposing it were practicable to adjust the tax exactly upon the
principle of exempting savings from charge, would not that state of the
law be exceedingly favourable to the richer as compared with the poorer
members of society; is it not a very much easier thing for the wealthier
classes to save than for the poorer ones? Undoubtedly it is.

Then does not it seem that the question is raised in point of equity and
justice as to the advantages in principle of a system of law which
should adopt that basis, and should say to all classes of society, under
the notion of equality and fairness, we will exempt all savings from
taxation; it being at the same time admitted that it is a comparatively
easy thing for those who live in abundance to save, and a very difficult
thing for those who live in penury, and whose absolute wants press
hardly upon their means? That is perfectly true; but I think it is an
objection which applies to all the received maxims of taxation. For
instance, it is a received maxim to tax persons in proportion to their
means; but supposing that there is an income tax of 10 per cent., it is
a much easier thing, apart from conventions, from social necessities or
social follies, for a rich person to bear a deduction of 10 per cent.
from his income than for a poor person. I do not see how you can allow
for this consideration. I would allow for it in the case of a person who
succeeds to property which he had not earned, and I have no objection
even to graduation in the case of a succession tax; but I do not see how
you can, either with justice or policy, tax a person more heavily
because he earns more, or because, after having earned more, he saves
more. I do not think that you can lay a tax upon energy, or industry, or
prudence. It seems to me that even upon the question of justice, apart
from policy, there is no stronger or more valid principle than that of
not giving any advantage to self-indulgence over industry and economy,
even though the effect may be to give some advantage, or rather, not to
interfere with the natural advantage of the rich over the poor.

You have just stated that if you levy an equal income tax on all classes
of the community amounting to 10 per cent., from the nature of things
that tax of 10 per cent. would bear harder upon the poorer classes than
upon the richer; but is it not also the case that if, instead of having
that equal income tax of 10 per cent. upon all classes, you modify the
principle of that tax, by saying, I will exempt from the charge of 10
per cent. a certain amount Edition: current; Page: [568] which I
estimate to be the proper savings of each person; the practical effect
of that change in the frame of the income tax would be to leave what
remains bearing still harder upon the poorer members of the community
than it did when the rate was equal? Not, I apprehend, if you took a
fixed proportion from each of them on the principle of averages;
one-third, for instance, as is proposed.

What I want to present to your mind is this; I understood you to set out
with the proposition that savings ought not to be taxed; and I
understood you at once frankly to admit that saving is much more
difficult for the poorer members of society than for the richer; that is
to say, in other words, that savings cannot be effected to the same
amount, or that they cannot save the same proportion of their respective
incomes? Yes.

That being so, if it be true that we propose to deviate from an equal
income tax, by introducing the principle that savings are not to be
taxed; and if it be true that a greater proportion of savings will and
can be made by the rich than will or can be made by the poor, is it not
true that the adoption of your principle that savings shall not be
taxed, does tend upon the whole certainly to aggravate the burden of the
tax upon the poorer as compared with the richer classes? I should say
not, because the relief that you give in the case of the poor, is the
relief of a much greater necessity. Though they save less, still what
they do save costs them a much greater effort, and therefore to have
that effort alleviated, is a greater advantage to them. And in regard to
the rich, though it is true that they can save more without any
substantial mischief to themselves, it does not follow that they will.
Those whose income is permanent, seldom do so. And if they do, I am not
sure that the fact that by doing so, they confer a special benefit on
the poor by adding to the capital of the country, is not a sufficient
reason in one way to overrule the reason in the other.

But the savings of the poor man are just as good as those of the rich,
are they not, so far as they go, in adding to the capital of the
country? So far as they go, no doubt.

Let us suppose that society is divided into two classes, the rich and
the poor; that all the poor men have 50l. a year each, and that all the
rich men have 1,000l. a year each; that the poor men can by effort and
industry and forethought save 5l. a year out of their 50l., and that the
rich men can, by a similar exercise of industry and forethought, save
200l. a year out of their 1,000l.; in that state of things, would not an
equal income tax, levied upon the gross income, be far more favourable
to the interests of the poor class as compared with the rich class, than
an income tax which taxes the poor man on 45l., and the rich man on
800l. a year? That, so far as it goes, may be a reason for taxing people
according to their necessities of saving, rather than according to the
saving which they actually make. It is, no doubt, an Edition: current;
Page: [569] important question of principle, how far the importance of
not taxing twice ought to prevail over other considerations. But this is
not the question to be decided practically, since we cannot exempt
people on what they actually do save. A tax which was proportioned, not
to people’s actual savings, but to their necessities and obligations of
saving, would not be liable to the objection which you have stated,
whatever the force of that objection may be.

If a large allowance be made upon the assumption that it is an
approximation to what persons may and should save, does not the same
principle that this saving is a consideration altogether more applicable
to persons in easy circumstances, than to persons in poorer
circumstances, apply as much as if we could precisely measure the actual
amount of saving in each case? But then the average that would be taken
on the principle of having untaxed what people were bound to save, would
of itself exclude the greater portion of the opulent classes from the
benefit; it would exclude all but those who were obliged to save in
order to fulfil a real necessity.

I quite understand the force of your argument as between one portion of
the upper classes, and the other portion, that is to say, the
distinction that you have so clearly and admirably stated between the
owners of permanent and terminable incomes, and the owners of precarious
and certain incomes; but then I wish to draw your attention to quite
another division, the next division of society, not according to the
source of income, nor according to the tenure of income, but according
to the quantity of income relatively to the wants of human nature for
subsistence and for comfort, and to ask whether it did not appear, that
upon the whole, the adoption of this principle, that savings are not to
be taxed (setting aside the degree in which you may be able to give it a
precise application), and the attempt to frame a law upon that
principle, would not be a change in our law favourable to the condition
of the poorer classes of society as compared with the wealthier? I think
it would be favourable to the saving classes, whether poor or rich,
compared with the spending classes; and that consideration I think is
even paramount to the other. If the rich are to be subject to a greater
proportionate amount of taxation than the poor, I think it ought to be
done in some other way. A succession duty is the most unobjectionable
mode of doing it, because in that way it is confined to hereditary
wealth. I think you must allow people to retain the full advantage for
their lives of what they have acquired; but the State may deal with it
on the occasion of succession. I certainly do think it fair and
reasonable that the general policy of the State should favour the
diffusion rather than the concentration of wealth, but not, I think, by
taxing people twice on the same portion of their income, or by taxing
people for the fact of their saving. Taxing people on what they save,
and not taxing them on what they spend, or taxing Edition: current;
Page: [570] people on a larger proportion of their income, because they
are better off, does not hold the balance fairly between saving and
spending; it is contrary to the canon of equity, and contrary to it in
the worst way, because it makes that mode of employing income which it
is public policy to encourage, a subject of discouragement.

You have just stated, that this would be in favour of the saving
classes, as compared with the spending classes, but is it not true, that
upon the whole the poorer classes are, and must be spending classes, and
not saving classes, in comparison with the richer classes, relatively to
the rich; and is it not also true that the change would be, so far as it
goes, a change in favour of the richer classes of society as against the
poorer? In one sense it would.

I think I have understood you to say, that you adopt generally the
schedules of the Honourable Chairman, not as being perfect, but as being
a great improvement upon the present structure of the income tax?
Exactly.

There is one more point on which I should wish very much to have your
opinion with as much exactitude as you can give it, and that is the
point with regard to life incomes; but, first of all, are you prepared,
according to the schedules of the Chairman, to adopt the principle, that
all life income, as such, shall be charged with the full tax? I am not
prepared to adopt that part of the Honourable Chairman’s plan. I would
exempt as many of the life incomes as could be got at without very
inconvenient consequences.

I quite understand that your desire would be to give exemption to life
incomes in a certain form; the form which I think you suggested was that
an exemption should be laid down generally, and then a long list of
exceptions should be made, which perhaps might contain a great
proportion of them; but what I wish now to put specifically to you is
this, whether you would be ready, rather than to retain the present
income tax, to adopt the Chairman’s plan as it stands in that important
and vital point, namely, that it puts all life incomes whatever under
the full tax? Yes; life incomes in the first class, life incomes from
property: for I think that the Chairman’s second class, taking it as a
class, has a much stronger claim than almost any in the first class
have; and that is a great object to exempt the second class, even if it
were not possible to do justice to any in the first class. The only case
that I would positively take out of the first class is pensions. I do
not see any reasonable ground for refusing them exemption. There is
another class, a class essentially professional, which, because the
income is derived from land, the Chairman includes in his first class;
it is the case of clergymen, holders of tithe rent-charge, or glebe with
cure of souls. These I think in principle ought to be in the second
class. It is quite true, however, that the Chairman’s allowance of 100l.
a year untaxed to each of them, does on the average satisfy the claim of
the entire class, but it operates very unequally in individual cases.

Edition: current; Page: [571]
Are you aware that the plan of the Honourable Chairman makes an
allowance to a life interest in the case where it is founded upon a life
annuity purchased with money? I am aware of that allowance.

And you would adopt that as part of your plan, would you? I have no
doubt whatever, that in the case of what are called terminable
annuities, the Chairman’s plan is right, because a terminable annuity is
not wholly income, but partly a replacement of capital; and it may be
said of life annuities too, that they are a replacement of capital, so
far as regards those by whom they have been bought. There is this
difference, however, between the two cases, taken as classes, that in
the case of terminable annuities, the capital is actually replaced,
because it hardly ever answers the purpose of anybody to hold them,
except persons in business, who hold them as investments; whereas, a
very large proportion of life annuities are meant to be entirely
consumed; the capital is sunk; and just as I think that when income is
converted into capital, it should be exempted from the income tax, so I
think that when capital is reconverted into income, and employed in
expenditure, on the same principle it ought to become again subject to
the tax. I therefore do not see, in the case of the great mass of life
annuities, that there is any real ground for their being exempted; but I
am aware that cases may be shown in which there is ground. So many
practical difficulties would attend the attempt to make the distinction,
that I will not venture to say it ought to be made. Still I think that
in principle the case of terminable annuities, and that of the great
bulk of life annuities, are not similar. An annuity which a person holds
on his own life is usually intended to be consumed during his life, and
the capital is not intended to be, and is not, saved and replaced;
therefore, there is not the same injustice in subjecting life annuities
to the entire income tax, as there is in the case of terminable
annuities. I do not mean that the deduction (say of one-third) ought not
to be made from them as from other life incomes; I mean that no special
deduction ought to be made for the replacement of capital, such as is
proposed in the case of terminable annuities. The proposition in the
case of terminable annuities is not to deduct one-third, and charge the
tax only upon two thirds; it is to separate what is replacement of
capital, and to tax only the interest. That reason, I think, does not
exist in the majority of life annuities that are held by persons for
their own lives; still I am aware that if it were attempted to make a
distinction, there might be means of evading it, and therefore I
hesitate to give any opinion practically on the point.

In asking you those questions upon the Chairman’s schedules, the form of
question which I wish to put is this; are there any improvements which
you think it vital as a matter of principle, to make in those schedules,
in order to reconcile your mind to this plan, as a plan in substitution
for the Edition: current; Page: [572] present income tax. I do not want
merely to ask you what you think might be an improvement, but with
respect to the point of pensions, I should like to know whether you
think it vital to carry them over into the second class, or whether you
are ready to admit that you cannot get anything better than a
reconstruction of the income tax, which shall still continue to tax
pensions upon their full annual amount? Yes; but at the same time I own
that it is of very great importance to carry the principle on to all
cases to which it may be found practicable to apply it, in order to
diminish as much as possible, the number of those on whom, as has been
justly remarked by yourself, an additional burden would be thrown by an
exemption given to others.

You think, therefore, with regard to the question whether pensions shall
be charged in full, though your plan would not charge them in full, yet
you do not think it inadmissible to charge them in full as a part of a
plan of reconstruction? If it were found impossible to make any other
reform of the tax than just that which the Chairman has proposed, I
would adopt his plan.

If pensions are to be charged in full, we should stand, should we not,
in this predicament, that while aiming at equalising substantially the
incidence of the tax, we should continue to levy the tax at the same
rate upon a pension, which, in a multitude of cases, would not represent
more than four or five years’ purchase, and upon incomes from land,
which, under the most favourable circumstances, would represent 30 or 35
years’ purchase? The number of years purchase, though the ground taken
by one class of reformers of the income tax is not, in my opinion, a
tenable ground, I should consider only the necessity under which the
holder might be of saving, and the means which his income afforded him
of doing so: and certainly if the income were nearly expired, it would
not afford him much means, but also those means would not be much
crippled by the tax, as it would be for a short time only.

Therefore, you would not be staggered or alarmed by the fact, as it
would be, that pensions being often worth four or five years’ purchase,
and rarely worth more than six or eight years’ purchase, would be taxed
at the same rate upon the net income as incomes arising from land, being
worth in capitalised value four, or five, or six times as much? I should
not consider the difference in capitalised value as any test of the
injustice, but I should think that there was injustice. Still, as there
must be some injustice in any income tax, and as the thing to be aimed
at is to make that injustice the least possible, if it were shown to me,
or if there were a general conviction, that other distinctions could not
be made without involving consequences that it would not do to incur, I
would then do as much justice as I could, and take the second class as
the Chairman leaves it.

Edition: current; Page: [573]
In respect to this particular case, what I understand is, that supposing
A.B. were to object to the reconstituted income tax, that a pension
worth five years’ purchase was taxed as much as an income from land
worth 35 years’ purchase, your answer would be, if I understand you
rightly, that you put that aside as not relevant to the matter in hand,
because that is not the principle upon which you found that
reconstruction? That is not the principle, but still I should admit that
the pensioner was not justly treated.

The exemptions which you would desire to secure for pensions, you would
desire to secure upon other grounds? Yes.

You do not think it absolutely vital in the plan for reconstruction that
pensions should have any relief? I think it highly desirable in every
plan of approximating taxation to justice, that a just principle should
be carried out so far as it can go, that is, to the point at which it is
stopped by insurmountable obstacles; but if other means fail, and it is
thought that there are insurmountable obstacles to doing absolute
justice in a particular case, I am forced to give way to them, but not
for that reason to relax my support of what I consider justice in cases
in which it is practicable.

Then, with respect to annuities for life, I understand you to consider
that they ought to have an exemption? I think that the greater number of
annuities for life have no real claim to peculiar exemption as
annuities, but they have a claim to the general exemption on life
incomes of one-third. I conceive that they have not, generally speaking,
a claim to the exemption due to terminable annuities, of deducting the
replacement of capital, because, as a general rule, the capital invested
in them is not intended to be replaced, and is not replaced.

You have noticed, have you not, the mode in which the plan of the
Chairman deals with the case of life annuities? Yes; he deals with life
annuities in the same way as with terminable annuities, except that the
calculations of course are somewhat different, because they depend upon
the age and not solely upon the value.

You do not approve of this particular mode of dealing with them. You
think that they are entitled to exemption, but not in that form? I find
it difficult to make up my mind upon that subject, because it depends
very much upon practical considerations. I have no doubt whatever as to
their being entitled to the exemption of one-third, or whatever it is
that is given to life incomes generally, because there is no class of
persons on whom the obligations to save are more imperative than on a
large proportion of life annuitants. But, on the other hand, the
Chairman proposes that they should be allowed a deduction, not of this
one-third, but the much larger deduction which is implied in exempting
from taxation what is required to replace the capital. This I quite
agree is a proper principle in the case Edition: current; Page: [574] of
terminable annuities, that is, in the case of all annuities in which the
capital is really intended to be replaced; and there is a class of life
annuities, as the Honourable Chairman has had the goodness privately to
point out to me, to which it applies. For instance, if a person receives
money from an insurance office, paying for it by an annuity on his own
life, that is a similar case to an annuity for a term of years; and
there are just the same reasons for leaving untaxed the portion which is
repayment of capital.

On the whole, I think that you have considered that life annuities ought
to be treated on the general principle of life incomes, and ought to
receive the same amount of exemption as life incomes? Just so.

But are you aware that is not the principle upon which the Chairman’s
plan deals with them? He deals with them as terminable annuities.

I presume that you do not consider it vital, or of first-rate importance
to deal with them in that form? I do not attach first-rate importance to
that distinction; I do not pretend to decide positively whether life
annuities should or should not be treated like terminable annuities.

Do you consider it of first-rate importance that terminable annuities
should receive the same exemptions as life incomes? I think that it is
of importance, but not of such importance, that unless it could be done
it would be a fatal objection to the Chairman’s plan; I do not in that
sense think it of first-rate importance.

Do you think that a plan could be said to conform in your view
sufficiently to the interest of justice which levied upon all life
annuities the full tax? As it would not do what I consider full justice,
my opinion would depend upon whether the practical difficulties were
such as satisfied me, or satisfied better judges than I can pretend to
be, that it was not practicable to get nearer to complete justice. If
you have got as near to justice as you can get, every reasonable person
must be satisfied.

You are not satisfied in your own mind that this plan, which leaves all
life interests subject to the full tax, with the exception of life
interests in annuities purchased by money, is the nearest practicable
approximation to justice? I am not satisfied, because life annuities and
pensions, and even charges upon landed estates, and other settled
property, in favour of collaterals who would not come into the property
ultimately, or whose descendants would not benefit by it, might, so far
as I can see, receive an exemption; it would be just to give it to them,
and it is still to be proved to my satisfaction that it would be
practically impossible.

Should I be justly representing your idea of the plan in this way, that
you would accept it in carrying you so far on the road towards justice,
but not as reaching it, and that consequently you would accept it, in
the hope of effecting whatever further amendments experience might
suggest? I should hope that if the alteration were to be made at all, it
would be carried Edition: current; Page: [575] as far as practical
difficulties permit. But if those who have the thing to do, find that
the practical objections are insuperable to carrying it further, that
would be a sufficient presumption that in the opinion of the best
judges, this is the point at which it is necessary to stop, and if so, I
would stop at this point.

At the same time, your respect for the opinions of those who have the
thing to do is not sufficient to lead you to acquiesce in that
conclusion if they say that they cannot do it at all? Not unless they
tell me the grounds upon which they go, and then I might possibly be
convinced. If they tell me what the difficulties are, I might possibly
think that they were sufficient; or I might possibly think that they
were better judges than I am of their sufficiency.

sir s. northcote: I think I understood you to state that in apportioning
taxation you should look to the circumstances of the person taxed, and
not to the nature of the property from which the income is derived? Yes,
except in so far as it affects the circumstances of the person.

And persons should, you say, be taxed in proportion to their means? That
is a proposition which requires some explanation before I can assent to
it. I should say they should be taxed proportionally to their means of
personal expenditure, their means of expenditure as contrasted with
saving.

And you consider that their means are to be ascertained by taking the
average of classes? That is one of the elements which must be
ascertained in that way, because it can be ascertained in no other way.
The incomes may be ascertained as they now are from individuals, but
neither their actual savings nor their necessities for saving can be
ascertained by inquiring into individual cases, but must be taken on the
average of the class.

What do you mean by a class? I mean any number of persons who are in a
situation capable of being clearly specified and defined, which
situation places them in a different position as to their necessities
for saving, from that of any other set of people.

Then, in classifying for the purpose of taxation, you must classify upon
some principle which will distinguish one class from another class? Yes.

And which will be common to all individuals contained in that class?
Certainly.

You might take many different principles of classification, might you
not? I do not think you could take many that would be relevant to this
point.

You might take, for instance, the case as to the tenure which persons
have; you might distinguish persons according to their having life
interests, or more than life interests? Yes.

Then, again, you might classify them according to the amount of their
wealth, or according to their being above or below a certain rate of
income? Yes.

Edition: current; Page: [576]
Then you might classify them again, might you not, according to the
circumstances of their families, as has been done in old times, when
persons with large families were taxed at a lower rate; that would be
another principle of taxation? Yes; it would be a possible principle,
but an objectionable one.

You might classify them according to the nature of their property, or
other source from which their incomes arise? That, also, is one of the
elements.

Would it be possible to take more than one of those principles, and
combine them for the purpose of classifying, or must you classify them
upon one principle, rejecting all the others? I do not think it would be
just to disregard any consideration which is relevant to the real
principle, that is, the necessity for saving. You must, I think, make
the classification, so as to allow for the greatest number possible of
the circumstances that make it necessary for one person to save more
than another, with the single exception of those circumstances which
depend upon his own will. For instance, I would not admit large families
as a ground, because it is not a necessity for anybody to have a large
family; it is his choice, and I do not think any allowance should be
made for that.

Is it not necessary in adopting any classification for any purpose
whatsoever, as a scientific principle, that you should lay down some
principle of classification, and adhere to that one principle? It does
not seem to me always necessary to adhere to one principle; the best
classification is sometimes grounded on a combination of principles.

Supposing you were going to classify books, for instance; you might
classify them according to their size, or according to their language,
or according to the subject-matter with which they dealt, but you must
adopt one or other of those principles, must you not, and not mix up one
or two of them together? That depends upon what your object is. If your
object is to arrange them in a library, you often proceed upon more than
one of those principles; for instance, you may proceed partially upon
size, and partially upon subject; on the same shelf, it is necessary, in
some degree, to place books of the same size, and yet you may place upon
the same shelf, as far as possible, those which are upon the same
subject. I mention this, to show that it is not necessary to adhere to
one principle exclusively, and that you should take into consideration
as many as are relevant to the purpose which you have in view.

Would you call putting books on shelves classifying them? That is the
end for which I am supposing them to be classified; but if you are
classifying them for any other end, of course the principle would be
different.

Looking at it as a mere question of scientific principle, you do not
think it necessary in forming a class, that you should take any one
principle which Edition: current; Page: [577] distinguishes that class
from all other classes, and which is common to all the individuals in
it, and distinguishes them from individuals in other classes? I think
you very seldom do anything practically on one principle only. It is
almost always necessary to consider more than one principle.

Then, in fact, the classification ceases to be scientific, and becomes
arbitrary in that case, does it not? Not necessarily; because all the
elements of it may be scientific, and because each of them may only be
allowed the weight which it derives from its scientific relation to the
end which you have in view.

I understand you to say, that persons are to be classed for the purpose
of taxation, according to their means, and that their means are to be
ascertained by taking the average means of the class to which they
belong, however that class is to be ascertained? Their means are to be
ascertained in the same manner as at present, from their returns, or
otherwise.

But with regard to the higher or lower rate of taxation to be placed
upon one class or another class, do you not place people in the one
class or the other class before you get their returns of the amount of
their incomes? The necessity of classifying incomes before you receive
the returns, arises from the fact that all incomes are not ascertained
in the same way. You are obliged to have different schedules, because
the income tax is levied from different classes in different ways, and
upon different evidences. If the classification needed to be adopted to
some other purpose, such as that of making allowances of the kind which
this Committee are considering, it would probably be necessary to make
some change in the principle of classification.

You stated a little while ago, did you not, that the savings of classes
depend more on tenure than on anything else;[*] what did you mean by
tenure? If I said that, I said what I cannot stand to. I am not aware
that I said it; I think I may say that the word “tenure” is not my own
word at all.

I do not mean to say that you stated that savings depended on tenure,
but that the necessity of savings depended on it? I would not say that
the necessity for savings depends entirely upon it, because in
individual cases it does not; but it is very much affected by the fact
of the tenure being permanent or temporary, and also by the fact of the
income being fixed or precarious.

Then the income being fixed or precarious, has relation to the source of
the income, has it not? It is very much affected by it; incomes from
some sources are necessarily unfixed, while those from other sources may
be, and generally are, fixed.

Upon what else does it depend, if it is not upon the nature and source
of the income? In individual cases, it depends upon many things; for
Edition: current; Page: [578] instance, the most certain income from
land may be affected by a bad year; the rents may not be collected, and
in that way all incomes are precarious in some degree; but certain
incomes are much more precarious than others, owing to their source.
Incomes which are earned by continued labour, are liable to the
contingencies of health, while all incomes that are earned at all, are
subject to termination by death.

Is the income which a man receives from a ship, of which he is the
owner, a precarious income? It is precarious in the sense in which all
trading incomes are; that is, it may be a great deal one year, and very
little another, or he may become a bankrupt, and have none at all.

Is the income which a man derives from the possession of a house
precarious or not? No doubt it is precarious in some degree, but the
precariousness of it depends upon circumstances which can be in a
certain degree averaged.

Supposing a man to own a certain number of houses, and to make an income
by letting them, is it not uncertain from year to year what he may make
by the rent of those houses? Yes, it is uncertain; there is a character
of precariousness in it, which applies to many more cases in some
degree. For instance, in another case, which is in the Honourable
Chairman’s first class, namely, shares in public companies, the income
from them is no doubt liable to vary from year to year, and therefore in
that case the element of precariousness exists to a certain degree, but
it exists much less than it does in many other cases.

At the present time the man who owns a ship and the man who owns a house
pay at the same rate upon the incomes which they respectively derive
from them; it is now proposed to diminish by one-third the amount which
the owner of the ship has to pay, and to increase by some sensible
proportion, the amount which the owner of the house has to pay; do you
think that that is a fair arrangement to make? I think it is hardly fair
to say that the tax on the income from the house will be increased,
because it is proposed to make an allowance of 15 per cent. in the way
of reduction. That, however, is on a different ground, undoubtedly, but
I think there is one very considerable difference between the two cases
(although they are border cases, as it were). The income of the
shipowner is one in which he may make very large receipts at one time,
and none at all at another. In the case of the owner of houses, the
maximum we know; the maximum is the rental of the houses; more he cannot
receive, and his liability to receive less is a moderate liability only.
It is not likely that any person who only owns house property will have
the bulk of his property generally unlet for many years, or will have
much of it unlet at one time.

The owner of house property is, however, subject to some dangers which
are peculiar to him; for instance, fashion may change, and his houses
Edition: current; Page: [579] may become less valuable on that account,
may they not? They may so, certainly.

And certain burthens may be thrown upon house property in respect of
rates and taxes, from which other property, shipping property, for
instance, is exempt? Yes, but you may set against that that the burthens
may be diminished as well as increased.

But, as a matter of fact, is it not the case that taxes are laid upon
house property which are not laid upon shipping property? Yes.

Are you aware that house property is subject to many disadvantages and
burthens, and restrictions in its transfer from hand to hand, which do
not apply to shipping property? That is perfectly true; none of which, I
think, should exist.

But, nevertheless, while there are those differences between the two
which make for the ship and against the house, you consider that there
is a principle which would induce you to put the ship in the lower class
and the house in the higher class? There arises, then, a question which
not unfrequently does arise, namely, whether certain personal situations
are to be considered as trades or not. There are undoubtedly persons
holders of houses, and living by the rent of houses, who may be
considered as approaching to the character of traders; and if they were
all so, if all were in the situation in which some holders of a good
deal of small house property really are, they might come with propriety
into the Chairman’s second class. They do not now, because, I suppose,
the great majority of house property has not connected with it that
amount of difficulty and liability to loss, and consequent
precariousness.

You adopt a classification, do you not, which places the house in the
higher taxed class, and the ship in the lower taxed class? Yes; I adopt
that classification subject to any correction which justice may be found
to require; but so far as I can see, it is not a clear case for making a
distinction.

As you adopt this classification, I want to know what is the principle
of classification which is applicable to the one case and not the other?
The classification in the Chairman’s schedules I do not consider to be a
matter of principle, but of convenience: but the principle which in my
mind would decide the question would be, whether the income from the
ship was really more precarious and really more dependent upon personal
exertion than the income from the house. If it is not, if the income
from houses generally, or from any class of houses which can be
distinctly defined, required as much personal exertion, and therefore,
on that ground had as much of the element of non-permanency, and also
was subject to as great risk, as the situation of the shipowner, I
should say that there would be sufficient reason for putting it in the
same class as the shipowner.

Supposing that this scheme were to become law, and that after it had
Edition: current; Page: [580] become law any considerable number of
persons were to come to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and were to
represent that they were owners of house property which they were in the
habit of letting, and were to point out in what a disadvantageous
position they were placed, and were to make out a case of hardship upon
them, do you think it would be fair that the tax should be amended for
the purpose of giving relief to such persons if they could clearly
define their position? The consideration in that case would be whether
their position represented that of any class which could be distinctly
separated from all other classes; if it did, then you might separate
them, but if it did not, they must go with their class, although the
individual case may make it a hardship.

Have you ever been able yet to get at what the principle of the class
is; because when you say that the one is rather more precarious than the
other, would you not say that there are incomes included within this
second class in the Chairman’s schedule of which some are rather more
precarious than others? Yes, certainly.

For instance, the income of a physician is rather more precarious than
the income of a brewer, is it not? Yes; and if I could, I would make a
distinction, as I have already said, between the case of traders and
that of purely professional persons.

But you find it impossible to draw that distinction, and therefore you
give the relief in common to all those classes? I do not know that it is
impossible; I am inclined rather to think that it might be drawn, but I
find there is a general opinion that it is impossible.

You think, do you not, that it ought to be drawn? I think it ought to be
drawn, if it can be.

At what point would you propose to draw it? At the point where there is
the broadest distinction, namely, the distinction between trading and
professional incomes; between incomes derived from labour and capital,
and incomes derived from labour only, except inasmuch as there may have
been capital expended in education.

If the income is derived entirely from labour with no possible capital,
you would treat it upon one footing; but if from capital, and not at all
from labour, upon another footing; how would you deal with it if capital
entered to a small extent, and labour to a large extent into the
production of the income? It would very often happen in the case of a
small trader, for instance, that the capital would be so small a
proportion as not to be worth considering, and if so, I would give him
the full benefit in the same manner as professional persons; but in the
cases in which the capital was anything considerable, anything that
would be much worth taxing, I should think it just, if it were
practicable, to tax the interest on capital at one rate, and the profits
above the interest at another and a less rate.

Edition: current; Page: [581]
Do you think that it would be possible to distinguish each man’s case,
or must you settle it according to classes? On that point I cannot
presume to have an opinion.

You are prepared, however, are you not, to adopt a scheme which would
include in one class a number of cases which are shading off the one
from the other? I am, because I think that must be the case in all
classifications; you can very seldom draw a line so accurately as to
include exactly everything that you would like to include, and exclude
everything that you would like to exclude; you are obliged to take into
consideration the intelligibility of the line.

Supposing that persons owners of house property made such a case as I
have represented, and that the Chancellor of the Exchequer and
Parliament were to let them into the favoured class, would not such an
alteration probably be followed by applications from other classes of
persons who would consider that they also had claims? No doubt it would;
and you must stop at some point.

Do you think it possible to draw the line in such a way that all persons
who were taxed at the higher rate, or at all events the greater bulk of
them, would be satisfied to remain at the higher rate, or would there
not be a continual pressure to get below the line? Yes; but I think
there would be a smaller amount of pressure than there is now. By having
an indiscriminating rule and granting no exemption to any one, you do
not avoid drawing the line; all that you do is, you draw it in the worst
place possible; you draw it by making no distinctions at all; whereas in
any other place that you might draw it, you would at any rate be nearer
to doing average justice than by drawing it at one extremity.

Take the case of a manufacturing business carried on, in the first
place, by an individual, and, in the second place, by several
individuals, forming a private partnership together; and, in the third
place, by a joint stock company, all the three being in competition the
one with the other; do you think that those three sets of trading
persons should be taxed equally or unequally? I think the line should in
this case be drawn exactly where the Honourable Chairman draws it; to
tax the shareholders in the joint stock company at the higher rate, and
the two others at the lower.

Why? Because the reasons for exemption are stronger in the other two
cases than they are in that. The only reason that could be urged for
exemption in the case of the shareholder, is the slight shade of
precariousness that there is about his income, which is not usually
great in those cases. Where the shareholder is poor, the property is
usually in the funds, or in some comparatively secure and steady
investment, and where he is not poor, it will generally be so divided
that the risks will be an insurance against one another; therefore I
think the claim is at its lowest point in the case of Edition: current;
Page: [582] the shareholder in a company; it is at the lowest point that
can be, where there is any precariousness at all. But in the other two
cases, not merely the interest or profit on capital, but also the reward
of industry and talent forms part of the income; and this element of the
income, besides being more precarious, terminates with the life of the
person.

As a matter of fact, do you believe that persons with very small
incomes, who have small savings to invest, do invest them in very safe
investments, or do they not very commonly invest them in very precarious
securities? It is their own fault if they do, because very small savings
can, in any case, be invested in the savings bank, or Government
annuities.

There is no doubt that that may be, but you lay down as a reason, do you
not, for excluding from view, the precariousness of those businesses,
that the shareholders in them will be rich people, because poor people
would invest in safe investments? The case of very poor people is
otherwise provided for, by not taxing anybody who has not 100l. a year.

When you say that the precariousness in those cases is very slight, do
you mean to say that there are not a very considerable number of those
undertakings which become utter failures, and in which persons who have
embarked in them are losers to a very great extent, of the amount of
their investments? No doubt, these things happen, but you cannot provide
against all cases of individual imprudence. It is necessary to be
content with considering the general situation of individuals as to what
they are obliged to do, or what they may reasonably do. It may
reasonably be supposed that persons whose means are of importance to
them, will not invest the whole of them in some very precarious
undertaking; if they do, they must take the consequence.

But you do not mean to say that the precariousness of the income in
those public companies is very slight and inappreciable? Taking public
companies as a whole, taking any average of them, I should suppose that
they are among the most secure investments, though of course there are
many of them which are not secure.

I will put to you one case, which I have put to other witnesses; suppose
you take the case of a widow’s jointure; I understand you to say that
you would not exempt that widow from any portion of taxation in respect
of her income being a life income? I think not; after some
consideration, I have come to the conclusion that it is not entitled to
exemption.

That is to say, if her jointure arose out of land? Or out of settled
property; and on this ground, that it may fairly be presumed that if she
has children, they are provided for by the same instrument which gives
her the jointure.

Supposing the case of a man who has a substantial business, and leaves
his business to his children, and settles a jointure for his widow upon
that Edition: current; Page: [583] business, do you consider that she
ought to have any remission or not? I think not in that case, because
she is under no peculiar obligation to save.

sir f. heygate: You stated, did you not, that some annuities were meant
to be consumed? Yes.

Were what were called the Long Annuities[*] intended to be consumed in
your opinion; the annuities which expired in 1860? No, I should think
they could never have been held, except as a matter of investment. They
could not have been held for the purposes of provision for the
individual who held them, because an annuity that expires at a certain
time is one of the most inconvenient forms in which such provision could
be made, either by a person for himself, or by somebody else for him; it
would be too much if he died before it expired, and too little if he did
not die till after. Nobody wanting to provide, for himself or another,
something which is to be his sole mode of support, would choose that
mode.

Do you think that the capitalists who tendered for the late issue of
Long Annuities did not make that calculation as the basis of their
tenders? I do not know.

You think that they did not take it into consideration in offering a
price to the Government? No doubt they took them as investments; they
did not take them for a provision for themselves.

You also stated, did you not, that the daughters of individuals who have
life interests in property, who married in their own class, were
generally provided for by such marriages? They may be.

Will you explain what you mean by that? I was endeavouring to show that
those who hold life annuities issuing from land or other settled
property, though they have a claim to exemption, have not so strong a
claim as industrial incomes, because the majority of them have not the
average amount of motive or necessity to save which the owners of other
life incomes have; either they have nobody to save for, or they have
considerable chances of not needing to save for them. With regard to
those latter cases, as in the case of a widow’s jointure, in all
probability she has no necessity to save for her children. That
completeness of reason does not exist in the case of younger children,
but there are reasons which make their claim less strong than that of
industrial incomes, one of which I mentioned in the case of daughters,
that there are many chances of their acquiring by marriage a position in
which their separate income will not be so far of importance to their
descendants as that they should be obliged to save a part of it.

Who would have to maintain those daughters if they were unmarried? As I
observed some time since, they may not marry, or if they do, they may
marry some one to whom their income is important: I therefore think
Edition: current; Page: [584] them entitled to the concession; but still
I do not think that the claim is as strong as the claim of industrial
incomes; and if the concession could only be obtained upon industrial
incomes, it would not be sacrificing people whose claim is greater to
people whose claim is less; that is the sole object with which I alluded
to the subject.

You consider that they have a claim, but not so strong a claim as the
other class? Yes, that is so.

r. lowe: Upon what principle do you consider that the Chairman has
divided those incomes into two classes? Upon the principle I should say
of not disturbing the existing classifications; that is the principle
most apparent in it.

Is there not the principle of division into spontaneous and industrial
incomes; does not that appear to pervade his division? It does; but it
seems to me that the reason for making a distinction between spontaneous
and industrial incomes is one of practicability rather than of
principle.

He puts it as a matter of principle does he not? Of both, I think.

It is pretty logically carried out into first class and second class
with some slight alterations; that is pretty much the way in which they
are divided, is it not? Yes.

He says, “The characteristic of all those incomes is that, consequent on
the possession of the property from which they arise, they accrue
spontaneously, and require no exercise of labour on the part of the
owners.”[*] Your principle on the other hand is the necessity of
savings, as I understand? Yes.

And that arises mainly in your view as to whether the income be
precarious or not? Whether the income be precarious, and whether it be
only temporary.

Then the two schemes coincide in this, that you both would place
professional incomes in the favoured class? Yes.

I suppose you would both agree in placing, for instance, incomes in fee
or absolute ownership in a different class? Yes.

When we have established those two poles, the identity between you seems
to end, does it not? It goes considerably further than that, because I
should agree with the Chairman in subjecting to the entire tax the great
mass of what are nominally life incomes, when they are in the first
class, because though by law they are only incomes for life, still
practically the possessor of them has the power of expending the whole.

I understood that those life incomes where the estate was charged for
younger children, for instance, were entitled to some deduction? I think
so; that is a point in which I differ from the Chairman’s plan; but it
is a difference on the question of practicability; not on that of
principle.

Edition: current; Page: [585]
I am asking you rather with regard to the principle of the thing, and
not so much with regard to considerations of expediency or
practicability, as to what you consider to be the just principle? I
think the just principle would be, to exempt charges in favour of
younger children.

Then we come to a clergyman’s income, which I understood you to state
you would treat as a professional income? Yes.

With regard to mines, how would you treat them? I do not feel that I
understand that subject. The difficult question is to know how far
deductions should be allowed for exhaustibility, on the same principle
on which the replacement of capital is deducted in the Chairman’s plan
in the case of terminable annuities; and on that question I do not feel
that I can give any opinion worth hearing.

A mine is in pari materiâ very much what a life annuity is, that is to
say, a mine has a certain life of its own, has it not? Yes; only that
there are not so good tables for calculating the duration of mines as of
lives.

The means of calculating it are not so eligible, but the principle upon
which it would be calculated would be pretty much the same; that is,
there would be a number of elements of saving in mines which there would
not be in the case of an estate in fee? Yes.

If that class in this paper is adopted of taking the estimated annual
depreciation, you would be inclined to say that there should be some
reduction made for mines? Yes, when they get near exhaustion; I am not
sure that I should make it before.

With regard to public companies, I think you agree with the Chairman,
that you would make no exemption? I would make no exemption in their
case.

Annuities for life, you would place, if I understand you, under the head
of incomes where saving was required, and you would make some deduction
for them? I would.

And pensions the same? Yes.

And with regard to trades generally, you think that there should be some
difference between trades and professions? As the income from trade is
partly dependent upon life and health, and partly on permanent property,
I would, therefore, make a distinction if it could be done.

Taking things in the abstract and not troubling ourselves with details
as to how it is to be worked out, your opinion, as a matter of justice
in the theory of taxation would be, as I have said, that you would agree
with the two poles of the Chairman’s plan; but the intervening
circumstances would almost all of them require, in your view, some sort
of deduction? A great many of them, certainly would. I think, however,
that if the line had to be drawn with great simplicity, it ought to be
drawn where the Chairman draws it. If we are to be content with such an
approximation as can be Edition: current; Page: [586] made by taking a
great mass of cases, which present upon the whole stronger claims to
exemption than any others, I think that the Chairman, as nearly as
possible, hits the mark.

I am not speaking so much now of what you might be willing to accept, as
the Chancellor of the Exchequer put it to you,[*] but rather as a matter
of abstract reasoning? As a matter of abstract reasoning, I should
certainly carry the principle further, and make more distinctions than
the Chairman has done.

I suppose you would look to further considerations if those classes
could show any subdivision that could be effective? Certainly.

As to your principle of exemption, as I understand you, it is to exempt
all savings, if that can possibly be done? Yes.

I do not quite understand what we mean by savings in that sentence; is
it what a man does save, is it what a man can save, or is it what he
ought to save? In principle, I should say that the remission should be
on what he does save, neither more nor less; but as this cannot be
carried out, I think you must consider, taking people in classes, what
difference exists between them as to the necessity or obligation that
they are under of saving, with some consideration also of how far you
have reason to believe that, practically, as a matter of fact, they do,
as a class, save up to the mark of obligation.

That is to say, we are to take a thing compounded of what a man does
save and what he ought to save? You cannot practically enter into the
consideration of what he does save, you must consider what the class
ought to save, and then if you think that, on the whole, they do save an
equivalent amount, you should exempt them. If you thought that, on the
whole, they did not fulfil that obligation, but saved a great deal less
than what they ought to save, it would be right to consider what they do
save, rather than what they are bound to save; but as a matter of fact,
I think that the classes who pay income tax do save, on the whole, up to
their obligations.

We may take it as your view, that it is what men do save? What men ought
to save, provided they do save it.

If a man saves more than he ought to save, what then? If a man saves
more than he is bound to save, I think him entitled in principle to an
allowance on it, because otherwise, he would be taxed twice. What a man
does save is the best principle of exemption, but I am obliged to give
up that as impracticable; and I take the other, and am willing to exempt
people by considering what they are peculiarly bound to save.

Then, it comes to this, that the abstract principle is what a man ought
to save? The principle upon which you are obliged to act, is what he
ought to save; the perfect principle is what he does save, and that
covers all other Edition: current; Page: [587] principles. If that is
satisfied, all other principles are satisfied with it; but as you cannot
get at that, then, if you adopt the principle of what he ought to save,
and go upon that, I think you are right, provided you have fair reason
to think that the exempted class, as a class, in the main fulfil that
obligation; of course, if you thought that they did not, they would
forfeit the privilege.

Then you do not agree with this opinion which I will read to you, out of
your own book, in which you say this: “The principle therefore of
equality of taxation interpreted in its only just sense, equality of
sacrifice, requires that a person who has no means of providing for old
age, or for those in whom he is interested, except by saving from
income, should have the tax remitted, on all that part of his income
which is really and bonâ fide applied to that purpose”?[*] If you could
do that I should certainly think it right; the only question is as to
the mode of doing it. As you cannot get at individual cases, you must go
upon the general presumption drawn from the obligations of his position.

I understand you that this principle is introduced by you in order to
ascertain the fact whether a man does save, and that you inquire what he
ought to save as a means of getting at what he does save; is that so?
Not as a means of getting at what he does save, because I know it does
not correspond with what he does save; but in order to bear fairly upon
one person as compared with another: I think you are bound to take into
consideration, on the principle of justice between them, the difference
in the necessity. That principle I should not need if I had the other,
because the other covers it, and provides for everything which is
included in it; but as I cannot have the other, I am obliged to be
satisfied with this. I think they are both important principles.

But one or the other I suppose is the ultimate principle, and I
understand the ultimate principle to be what a man does save? What a man
does save, if you can get at it.

You think it is easier to get at what he ought to save than at what he
does save? Yes; because you can take the average of classes.

And you take what he ought to save in order to get at what he does save?
Yes; what he is to be considered as saving, when you cannot ascertain it
otherwise.

I suppose you would not adhere to what you stated just now, that the
rule is what a man ought to save, provided he does save it? In principle
I do, but in practice you cannot tell what he does save. What he ought
to save is not the only thing that you would have to consider if you
knew what he did save; if you knew that he did not save what he ought to
save, you could not defend making the allowance. But in the absence of
this knowledge, you are not entitled to presume that he does not do his
duty.

Edition: current; Page: [588]
What use will this be to me unless I found some presumption by which I
may arrive at the fact of what he does save; why should I interpose the
consideration at all, if I am to presume nothing either way from it? You
only presume that which there is always sufficient proof of, namely,
that his needs are different from those of another person. He may choose
to sacrifice those needs to something else, but you cannot help that.

I can understand that if I am at liberty to presume from the fact that
he ought to save, that he does save, but you say that I must not presume
that? The only purpose for which we need to consider what he does save,
is to justify us in taking into consideration what he ought to save.

Therefore, the ultimate principle is what he ought to save, and not what
he does save? The ultimate principle is hardly an expression which I
should apply to it. There are two principles, one is the principle of
not taxing incomes twice over, and the other, which is a totally
different principle, and is strictly one of justice, is that of showing
equal consideration to the necessities of different people. Both of
these are principles, and if you could satisfy them both you ought to do
so. If you could satisfy the principle of not taxing income twice, the
satisfaction due to the other principle would be included in that,
because if you taxed everybody according to what he did save, you would
by that very circumstance show the indulgence due to the necessities of
the person who is obliged to save. If he himself has shown that he cares
about these necessities, and if he has fulfilled the duty, he gets the
advantage which you intend for him, and not otherwise. But as you cannot
get at what he actually does save, you are obliged to found your system
upon the other principle solely, only considering that former principle
so far as to ascertain for your more complete justification, whether the
ground on which you grant the exemption really exists; whether on the
whole (since you cannot enter into individual cases) the class of
persons whom you exempt have fulfilled the proper condition.

What is the principle upon which it solely rests? That which I propose
as practicable rests upon the consideration of what a person is bound to
save.

Then the thing rests upon that, and the inquiry for us is, what a man is
bound as a moral duty to save, is that so? Yes.

If you mean by saving on your principle that regard should be had to
money laid by, or incomes invested in something else; supposing a man is
heavily in debt, and is paying off the debt by instalments, is that
saving? Yes; that is saving, certainly.

However the debt may be contracted, whether it is a gambling debt or any
other debt, you call that saving? Yes, I call that saving.

A man goes to a gambling house and spends a large sum of money, and pays
off the debt by instalments; you would say that that was a saving within
the meaning of the principle? Yes.

Edition: current; Page: [589]
When does the income become taxed; because it is very important if it is
to be exempted from taxation to fix upon the exact period of the
transition taking place; when are we to call income savings? That is a
practical rather than a theoretical question.

The income tax on the income of a landowner is levied on the tenant, and
it is paid by the tenant before he pays his landlord, is it not? Yes.

And upon that the income tax is paid? Yes.

I want to know whether that part of the income in the tenant’s hands is
to be considered as saved for the purpose of this principle? It cannot,
while in the tenant’s hands, be dealt with as saving.

But the tax is levied upon it in the tenant’s hands, is it not? Yes; but
when we are entering into considerations such as that of the hands
through which it passes, we are coming to a question of practical
arrangement, and not to a question of principle.

I do not want to put it as a matter of practical arrangement, but merely
to test the principle and to know when you would fix upon it the mark of
saving which is to exempt it from taxation. The only difficulty that
will arise is a difficulty of practice and not one of theory. In theory
the principle is that whatever he does take from his personal
consumption, and add to his capital, shall be exempted.

I find that it is laid down in the quotation which I read from your own
book, that on the contrary a man “should have the tax remitted on all
that part of his income which is really bonâ fide applied to that
purpose;” that I can quite understand, but now we have not to decide the
question of what he does save, but what he ought to save; when is that
to be decided for the purpose of collecting the tax? It seems to me,
that you are now upon the question of practicability, and not upon the
question of principle; when you ask how it is to be ascertained, I am
not obliged to show any mode of ascertaining it; I say that it cannot be
ascertained, and that all you can do is, to consider the situation of
the classes, and all the peculiarities of their situation which affect
their obligation to saving, and then to make them an allowance.

Then it is by their being of that class, that you determine the
question; you have no means of fixing upon the precise point when it
becomes saving? No; the actual saving cannot be considered as a
practical principle at all, but only as a sort of ultimate test by which
you may, in some degree, measure the approximation to justice in any
other system.

May I assume this as a principle, that it is a safe ground of solution
to presume that men will do what they ought to do, and to remit the
taxes to them accordingly? I think that you are never entitled to
suppose that men will not do what they ought to do, for the purpose of
doing something to them which would be an injustice if they did do what
they ought to do.

Edition: current; Page: [590]
Is it a safe ground of exception from a tax, that a man should be
presumed to do what he ought to have done? I think it is a safe ground
for taxation, that a person is not to be taxed in such a way, as would
render it impossible or more difficult for him to do what he ought to
do.

Of course, upon that principle, if a man could be shown to be deeply in
debt, he ought not to be taxed at all, because it would render it more
difficult for him to pay his debts? It might make it more difficult for
him to pay his debts no doubt, and if you taxed a person so that it
should make it more difficult for him to fulfil his duties, while other
people were taxed in a way that had not that effect on them, he would
suffer injustice, but not otherwise.

I will put the case of a person, we will say who is a fundholder, with
an absolute interest; it is computed by a professional witness before
this Committee, that this scheme would require 2,000,000l. to be made up
somehow or other;[*] that I presume must be levied by a fresh assessment
on a new principle? Yes.

What do you say with regard to the fundholder or tenant in fee? Do you
think that he will be impressed by the doctrine of equal sacrifice, if
he were saddled with a heavier tax, merely because it was presumed that
some other persons had saved some portions of their incomes? What a
person might do where he was himself interested, I cannot say, but I
think that a person should not put it to himself in that way, but in
this way; that persons whose circumstances require them to save, ought
to have a concession made to them, such as shall make it possible for
them to fulfil their duty without making a sacrifice to which others are
not subject.

If they do not fulfil the duty, they are to have the concession all the
same, are they not? That is one of the inconveniences which arise from
the impossibility of going into individual cases. I would most gladly go
into them if I could.

Say that a man does more than his duty, he will not have a remission for
the excess? No, and so much the worse.

So that the man who does his duty, will not get remission upon all that
he does; and the man who does not, will get a remission for what he does
not do? But the result is a greater approximation to accurate justice
than if you either gave a remission to all, or refused it to all.

We have it in evidence that very considerable frauds are practised under
Schedule D.; one gentleman who is in the habit of acting as a consulting
doctor for people in difficulties, has stated to the Committee that he
never saw a schedule of a certain class of traders that he described,
that was otherwise than incorrect in regard to income tax; and another
gentleman thought that at 1d. in the 1l., it had been 50,000l. for the
last 12 years in the City of London, which could only be correct upon
the supposition that Edition: current; Page: [591] the trade income of
London has not increased during that period; do those considerations
make any difference to you in recommending the reduction? They make a
difference in the question of imposing an income tax at all, and except
in a case of absolute necessity, and as an extraordinary resource, I
should be decidedly against it; but if there is to be an income tax, the
frauds make, in my estimation, no difference in the reasons for
reduction: because in the first place if you were to refuse the
reduction on this ground, it would be punishing the honest man for what
the rogues do; because if you announce that you must tax people in a
higher ratio, because they defraud the revenue; if in fixing their
taxation you assume that they are going to evade a part of it, you in
fact license them for doing it.

You think, then, that this income tax tends to demoralise them? Yes,
thoroughly.

Could you imagine anything more demoralising than for a man to have been
successful for 20 years in cheating the Government of a large proportion
of the tax, and then by a claim on the ground of morality, getting a
remission of the tax? Certainly; one would be sorry that the remission
should be granted to rogues; but I do not think it would do to assume
that people are rogues, for the purpose of refusing to them what they
would be entitled to if they were honest.

w. pollard-urquhart: In short, you would do them this justice, that you
would take away from them all reasonable excuse for roguery? Yes, I
would do that; but I do not attach so much importance as some do to
this, as a practical consequence of the reduction.

That would be one reason, would it not? Yes, certainly.

Because some people are rogues, it is no reason why others should not do
the thing which is just? Just so; and the more so because to refuse
people on the ground that they are going to be rogues, a concession
which would be due to them if they were honest, is licensing them to be
rogues, because you are recognising their roguery as a fact, and as a
compensation necessary to make things just.

In short, to refuse a readjustment of the income tax because a great
many people make false returns under Schedule D. is licensing those
people to make false returns for the future? Certainly.

You were speaking of the income tax being highly immoral except as it is
considered as a mere temporary tax for temporary purposes; do you not
think that the obligation to make some adjustment of the income tax is
much greater when it is likely to become a permanent law than when it
was a mere temporary tax for temporary purposes? I think so.

Was not it regarded as a mere temporary tax when it was levied by Mr.
Pitt[*] for 10 years, to the end of the war? Probably; and it is also to
be considered that in the use of a national emergency, there is not so
Edition: current; Page: [592] much danger of fraud. People only grow
fraudulent by degrees; they commit a great fraud at first; or at least
not to the same extent.

The very circumstance mentioned by Mr. Lowe just now, that the income
tax on traders had remained stationary in the City of London, shows,
does it not, that people only get rogues by degrees? Yes. Besides, at a
time when there is great national excitement, there is a strong feeling
that there is a great public object which requires the tax, and people
have both more feeling of their own against defrauding the Government,
and are more restrained from it by each other’s opinion.

When the income tax was first imposed by Sir Robert Peel,[*] for the
sake of trying a great experiment in taxation, it was to continue only
five years, and it might be regarded as levied for a temporary purpose?
It might.

In that case it was quite fair to ask people to give money wherever they
could get it, on the same principle that the Carthaginian ladies cut off
their hair in the third Punic war? It was.

Whereas, now that it can no longer be considered as a temporary tax, you
think that the obligation of readjustment is much stronger than in 1842,
when it was first imposed since the war? Certainly; the nearer the
approach to the prospect of permanency, the more reason exists for its
being readjusted.

Do you not think that the prospect of its being permanent is much
greater than it appeared to be in 1842? Yes.

You stated that you thought the people ought not to be taxed upon
savings; do you not think that that principle applies with much greater
force to the case where those savings are absolutely necessary, in order
to keep the capital at the same point at which it was the year before?
Yes; anything that goes to the replacement of capital ought not to be
taxed.

Under the present tax it is considered as income, is it not? Yes; for
instance, in the case of terminable annuities, which is the strongest of
all.

Is not the case almost equally as strong where a person has spent his
whole capital for his education, and for the purpose of maintaining
himself in the many years that are necessary in almost every profession
before realising any considerable income, that a part of his earnings,
after he begins to derive a considerable income from his profession,
ought generally to go to replace the capital so spent? No doubt that is
one of the circumstances which plead in favour of his exemption.

Do you not think it a very strong circumstance? It is a circumstance
among others.

In short, that part of his professional earnings which goes to the
replacement of the capital spent in his education ought not in
strictness to be considered income? But, on the other hand, if that
capital belonged to him, Edition: current; Page: [593] and if it was
spent by himself, you may say, on that principle, that the interest on
it becomes subject to the full taxation, and justly so.

You were asked, whether raising the number of pence in the pound, levied
in order to make this readjustment, would excite discontent;[*] would it
excite more discontent than when 4d. in the pound was added to the
income tax to pay for the extra expenses two years ago, when, for State
reasons, the income tax was raised from 5d. to 9d. in the pound, without
any readjustment; would it excite much more indignation to have it
raised from 5d. to 7d. in the pound, in order to allow of a
readjustment? It is very difficult to say; but I think, generally
speaking, that anything which is just, or which is as near as it is
practicable to get to justice, and the grounds of which are laid clearly
before the public, does, in time, command their approbation.

On the whole, you think that the fear of any dissatisfaction which might
be caused by raising the income tax slightly, in order to admit of any
equitable readjustment of it, would not be such as to constitute any
valid objection against any scheme that might appear just? I think that
the dissatisfaction would be chiefly at first, and that as soon as
people were convinced that it really was not possible to carry the
adjustment of the tax further, they would either turn themselves to
getting rid of the tax itself, or they would gradually reconcile
themselves to what remained of inequality.

Supposing the circumstances of the country would admit of a slight
lowering of the tax, would it not be better to retain the income tax at
the same poundage, at the same time giving a readjustment of the income
tax, than lowering it 1d. or 2d. in the pound, as might be required?
Decidedly.

Do you think that it would excite any very great dissatisfaction
throughout the country if it was retained at its present rate, but at
the same time readjusted according to the plan proposed by the
Honourable Chairman, or according to any plan which seemed to be
equitable? Of course, the occasion when the State could do without part
of the produce of the tax, would be a particularly convenient
opportunity for making this adjustment, and it would excite less
dissatisfaction than if it implied an increase of the poundage.

You think that it would create much less dissatisfaction if it was done
at the time when the State had an opportunity of taking off some amount
of taxation, than if you were obliged to raise the whole general rate in
order to readjust it? No doubt.

Do you think that such an opportunity occurring might certainly obviate
any objection that might be raised against the readjustment on the
ground of causing dissatisfaction? I think it would mitigate the
dissatisfaction very much.

Edition: current; Page: [594]
On the whole, do you not think that the system proposed by the Chairman
is much less unjust than the present system? Much less unjust in many
respects.

Would it not be much better for the country to submit to the system
proposed by the Chairman, even supposing it raised 1d. or 2d. more in
the pound higher than at present, rather than to have it in its present
shape? I think so; but I should be very anxious to carry the principle
as much further as it could be carried without being stopped by
obstacles, the nature of which could be made tolerably clear and
intelligible to the public.

w. buchanan: Does your recommendation of a remission of one-third on
professional and industrial incomes proceed upon the principle that
there ought to be a saving of one-third, or does it arise from the
consideration of the precariousness of those incomes? It is their
precariousness, combined with their temporary nature, which constitutes
the obligation to make savings from them. It is because the incomes may
end sooner, from loss of health and other causes, that professional
persons are under a much stronger necessity of saving, than people who
derive their incomes from property.

Then it is a consideration of the combined influence of those two
principles? It is a consideration of the greater obligation to save on
precarious and terminable incomes.

And not upon the principle that a merchant who has made a profit which
enables him to lay by one-third more than he expends, and reinvests it,
pays double tax? That is the principle that I would apply if I could;
but inasmuch as I cannot apply it, I take another standard, to satisfy
that which I consider to be the criterion of justice between one
tax-payer and another, namely, the difference in their necessities.

And also the difference of the certainty of income? Yes, the difference
of the certainty of income constitutes the difference in their
necessities; because we are supposing the incomes to be equal; but one
of those incomes is precarious, and the possessor cannot depend upon its
continuance; and as he knows that it will cease with his life, he is
obliged to save, whereas the other could dispense with saving.

Do not you consider that a professional income, when established, is a
more certain income than a commercial or a trading income? I do not
think it is so always; no doubt it is in some cases; but professional
persons, for instance, lawyers who are making a large income by their
practice occasionally, lose it by some of their juniors getting on, and
making a more brilliant success in their profession.

But a man gaining his living by being a shipowner is exposed to every
wind that blows, and he has certainly a much more precarious income than
a professional man, has he not? But then, on the other hand, there is a
portion of it dependent upon capital.

Edition: current; Page: [595]
But the capital is involved in the success of the ship, is it not? He is
under the necessity, no doubt, of insurance, but that enters into the
expenses of his business.

He cannot insure against the adventure miscarrying? He cannot insure
against a miscalculation of the markets, no doubt.

You propose, do you not, to introduce a preference in the tax in favour
of professional incomes? I should prefer to do so, certainly; and it
occurs to me that it ought to be so.

j. hubbard: You are aware that the scheme which is before you is not a
stereotyped one, and that it is of course open to any amendments which
the course of evidence may suggest; the Committee, therefore, are
naturally interested in hearing your comments upon it, therefore I would
ask you two or three questions more. It was put to you, in answer to
your objection to the way in which the present tax taxes capital, first
in its creation as earnings, and then in its fruits, that there are
other taxes which do tax capital; but is there not a great difference
between a tax which, like the legacy duty, or the probate duty, or the
succession duty, professedly taxing capital, and one which, professedly
taxing income, does partially and capriciously tax capital? It was
exceedingly well put by one of the witnesses before the Committee, Mr.
Ansell, that the injustice depends upon the combined circumstances, that
it professes to be an income tax and does tax capital, and, that taxing
capital, it does not tax it equally. It only taxes some capitals, and
not others; and is therefore unjust as a tax upon capital.[*]

You have expressed an opinion that life incomes, if possible, should be
considered with reference to the amount of tax levied upon them, as
contrasted with the amount which would be levied if the property was
held in fee; and I think you suggested that you would make the exemption
extend to life interests, with certain qualifications; will you allow me
to put a case to you, and perhaps you will tell me whether it would come
into the category of such cases as you would relieve. A nobleman has a
son who is unmarried, and whom he does not trust, but he leaves by his
will landed property to the extent of 120,000l. a year, to trustees in
trust to pay 100,000l. a year as an annuity to his son for his life, and
20,000l. a year to a married nephew, to whom he leaves also, and as heir
in reversion, the estate; there are two life annuities charged upon that
estate; are those life annuities of a like nature with those which you
would tax at a diminished ratio, or would you tax them at the full
amount of the assessable tax upon the rental? If I understand the
statement correctly, the bulk of the income is supposed to be given for
life to a person whose descendants are not to have it, while the smaller
share of the income for life is given to the person whose descendants
are to Edition: current; Page: [596] have the whole. It is plain that if
you could enter into individual cases, the one who should pay in full
should be the one whose descendants are to have the property, and not
the one whose descendants are excluded from it; but still I do not think
you could take into consideration cases of so great a rarity as these.
Generally speaking, if the estate is entailed or settled in trust in
favour of a son or any other person for life, the remainder is to
descendants, to that son’s children, and if you limit yourself to
providing for that which is so much the commonest case, you do not do
any injustice worth speaking of.

Are you prepared to state from your knowledge of legal arrangements,
that it would be possible to draw an enactment which would make
practicable, without raising doubts and litigation, the discrimination
which you wish to propose? I do not consider myself competent to do it
in the best way, or anything like the best way, nor can I foresee all
the cases that would arise, but I think I could suggest modes of drawing
it, which would provide for the objects desired. I should lay down the
rule, that all life incomes should be exempted, except such and such;
then I would enumerate all the cases in which the motive for saving
clearly does not exist, or exists in a very inferior degree.

In all those cases you would not, as some of the schemes placed before
the Committee at a former period proposed, charge the whole of the life
estate to be taxed, but you would diminish the taxation to the extent of
the concession to individual cases? I would, because it would clearly be
unjust to charge the full tax on a life interest, and the idea does not
seem to me admissible of imposing a present tax upon the future holder.

With regard to life annuities, you stated, did you not, that whether an
annuity was a life annuity or an annuity for years, if granted, for
instance, by a landowner as the means of repaying a loan, made for the
purpose of building a house, or improving his estate, you would see in
each of those cases the clear repayment of capital to the corporation
from whom he took the loan? Yes.

Seeing that in all cases, whether of a life annuity or an annuity for
years, granted to a borrower, it is only as regards the application of
the money that you would make the discrimination of charging the whole
annuity with the tax? Yes.

Upon the assumption that it is meant to be consumed? Exactly.

At least you differ in that respect from the scheme before you, upon
that assumption? Yes.

It is an assumption, is it not, that it is meant to be considered as
expenditure? It is.

Upon the other hand, you propose to make a rebate of the tax upon the
savings of capital? Yes.

Edition: current; Page: [597]
But that is only for the purpose of balancing the charge which you make
upon capital when consumed, and if you were unable to do the one, you
would not I suppose do the other? That does not necessarily follow; I
think the income tax should as far as possible be a tax upon
expenditure; I should like to bring all personal expenditure under it if
I could; and whenever I could, I should like to get hold of it and tax
it.

Your principle is (to follow this to a conclusion) that you would exempt
all savings? Yes.

And it is the operation of the same rule which induces you to wish to
see pensions placed also in a favoured position? Yes, because, the
income terminating with life, there is, generally speaking, a greater
necessity for saving from it.

May pensions, do you think, be so far considered as the result of
deferred payment for services as to be brought in as a kind of accessory
to industrial incomes and salaries? A large proportion of them might
logically be classed with industrial incomes; but not all, because some
pensions are merely the result of good-will, and are not payments for
service at all.

Do you think that they might be discriminated in that way, that where
they bear the character of being only a deferred payment for antecedent
services, they may be fairly treated in the same way as salaries? I
would treat them in that way in all cases.

You have been asked to consider the position of houses and ships as
placed one in one schedule, and one in the other; but is not the precise
matter to be assessed the rent of the houses and not the houses
themselves? Yes.

On the other hand, did you ever hear of the rent of ships? No.

Ships are only a means of industrial occupation, are they not? Yes.

And ships, therefore, are only one of the means which tend to the
commercial earnings of the owners of the ships? Yes.

But are you aware that there is any such thing as ship-rent? I am not.

Then, you can hardly call these two matters parallel? Not exactly.

The estimate that has been communicated to you of the probable
defalcation in the Exchequer from the application of any such remedy as
the one before you has been stated at 2,000,000l.;[*] supposing, for the
argument, that the complaints against the income tax with regard to its
incidence are real, and that the remedy of those evils would have such a
costly result; must not that be the logical consequence, that the
2,000,000l. represents the amount of injustice inflicted by the present
law? That follows decidedly.

t. estcourt: I understood you, in answer to a former question, to draw a
distinction between precarious incomes and incomes of a limited
duration; and I understood you to state, that in your view the fair
course would be to Edition: current; Page: [598] grant a concession of
some deduction from the amount of tax payable for incomes that are
terminable with life, or a less term; and I understood you to state,
that you would make a still further deduction in the case of those
incomes which were precarious; did I rightly understand you? Not quite.
I did not express any opinion as to the possibility of making more than
one rate of exemption. I have not made up my mind, practically, as to
whether it is better to have several scales, or only one. But what I
brought forward those considerations for, was to point out that the
claims were much stronger, the necessity for saving being much greater,
in some cases than in others; and my object was, not so much to
recommend the application of different scales to those different cases,
of which I am not able to judge sufficiently to have a decided opinion,
but rather to show that, provided you could relieve the cases in which
the claims were strongest, you need not so much mind not being able to
relieve those in which they were much weaker; that the fact that you
would perhaps be obliged to demand a little more from those who still
have some claim to exemption, is not a conclusive objection to giving
relief to those whose claims are much stronger.

I understand you to assign as the reason why any concession should be
made with regard to Schedule D. to be two-fold, first, because the
income is limited, and secondly, because it is precarious? It is both
precarious and also limited in duration.

Have your opinions, with regard to this particular subject which has
been brought before you to-day, varied since you gave evidence before
the Committee in 1852?[*] I am not aware that they have; I have
considered the subject more minutely since, and perhaps I may have more
of an opinion upon some points of practical execution than I then had;
but on the question of principle, my opinions have not altered.

Are you still of opinion, as you were in 1852, that equality requires
that in assessing precarious incomes and those of limited duration, some
deduction ought to be allowed, which I think you put at one-third,
before the assessment is imposed? Yes.

Edition: current; Page: [599]


CURRENCY AND BANKING
 1867

Edition: current; Page: [600]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Enquête sur les principes et les faits généraux qui régissent la
circulation monétaire et fiduciaire. Vol. V. Paris: Imprimerie
impériale, 1867, 589-96. Signed; not republished. Original heading:
“Réponses de M. John Stuart Mill, Membre du Parlement D’Angleterre.”
Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “Answers, in French, to the
Questionnaire of the Imperial Commission d’Enquête in Currency and
Banking, printed with their Report” (MacMinn, 97). No copy in Somerville
College.

In the text below the questions are inserted before JSM’s answers.

Edition: current; Page: [601]


Currency and Banking


DES CRISES MONÉTAIRES

1. Quelles ont été les causes de la crise monétaire de 1863-1864? Autant
que je puis en juger, la crise monétaire de 1863-1864 a eu pour cause
générale l’immense absorption des capitaux disponibles de la France:
d’abord par de fortes dépenses improductives, comme celles de la
reconstruction des grandes villes; secondement, par la rapide
immobilisation des capitaux en entreprises productives à long terme
seulement, telles que les chemins de fer en France et à l’étranger; en
troisième lieu, par les énormes emprunts que les gouvernements de la
plupart des pays n’ont cessé de faire. A tout cela est venue s’ajouter
une grande exportation des métaux précieux en échange du coton brut que
l’Europe a dû acheter de l’Inde, de l’Égypte et d’autres pays à un prix
très-élevé.

2. Quelles analogies et quelles différences cette crise a-t-elle
présentées avec les crises antérieures? Les crises antérieures ont
souvent été provoquées par des importations exceptionnelles de blé à la
suite de mauvaises récoltes, et surtout par des excès de spéculation
mercantile. Ces causes n’ont pas existé en 1863-1864.

3. Les crises monétaires tendent-elles à devenir plus fréquentes?
Tendent-elles à devenir plus générales? A regarder l’histoire
commerciale des cinquante années antérieures à 1865, la comparaison des
dates n’a pas indiqué jusqu’ici que les crises monétaires tendent à
devenir plus fréquentes. Cependant la plus grande étendue des marchés et
la plus vaste échelle des opérations commerciales semblent devoir
accroître le domaine du hasard dans ces opérations; à quoi l’on peut
ajouter que les grandes associations mercantiles, surtout à
responsabilité limitée, étant, par leur nature, plus téméraires que les
capitalistes, tendent par là à multiplier les chances de crise. D’un
autre côté, la grande multiplication des relations commerciales entre
les divers pays et l’extrême rapidité des communications ont créé une
solidarité entre tous les marchés du monde civilisé, qui tend à
généraliser, mais en même temps à adoucir, les crises qui doivent leur
naissance à des causes locales. L’effet, étendu à un champ plus vaste,
s’amoindrit sur un point donné, parce que les mouvements internationaux
de valeurs qui servent de correctifs aux perturbations locales, et qui
autrefois se faisaient avec lenteur, sont aujourd’hui presque
instantanés.

Edition: current; Page: [602]
4. Quelles som, dans un pays, les causes régulatrices du taux de
l’intérêt? Le taux moyen de l’intérêt dans un pays dépend de deux causes
générales, savoir: 1° le taux moyen du profit industriel; 2° la
proportion qui existe dans ce pays entre la classe industrielle, qui
fait valoir elle-même ses capitaux, et ce qu’on peut nommer la classe
prêtante, comme aussi entre les capitaux dont ces deux classes
disposent. Aux États-Unis par exemple, où la classe des rentiers vivant
de l’intérêt de capitaux prêtés est extrêmement restreinte, le taux de
l’intérêt est naturellement beaucoup plus élevé, relativement au profit
moyen du commerce et de l’industrie, que dans la plupart des pays de
l’Europe. Je ne parle ici que du taux moyen et normal de l’intérêt. Ses
variations passagères dépendent de toutes les vicissitudes de la
production, de la consommation et de la spéculation.

5. Quelles sont les causes qui ont agi depuis dix ans sur le cours des
métaux précieux?

6. Quelles sont les causes qui ont pu récemment réduire la disponibilité
des capitaux?

7. Y a-t-il eu ralentissement dans la formation des épargnes ou mauvaise
direction donnée à ces épargnes?

8. Y a-t-il eu insuffisance de capitaux ou excès d’entreprises?

9. La constitution de plusieurs sociétés de crédit, sous forme de
sociétés anonymes, a-t-elle exercé de l’influence sur les embarras
monétaires?

10. L’existence et l’organisation de ces sociétés sont-elles de nature à
éloigner ou à rapprocher les causes de crise?

11. Quelle influence a exercée sur le marché intérieur la participation
des capitaux français aux entreprises étrangères?

12. Quels avantages ou quels inconvénients présente la cote, à la Bourse
de Paris, des valeurs étrangères et des emprunts étrangers?

13. Quel a été, depuis dix ans, le mouvement d’entrée et de sortie des
métaux précieux? Y a-t-il des indications qui permettent de compléter
les renseignements recueillis par l’Administration des Douanes?

[Answers to 5-13:] Tout ce que mes connaissances locales me permettent
d’offrir en réponse à ces neuf Questions est compris dans les réponses
précédentes.

14. Le déplacement du numéraire a-t-il lieu dans de fortes proportions?

15. Quelles opérations donnent lieu à ce déplacement? Exerce-t-il une
influence sensible sur les transactions et sur le loyer de l’argent?
Existe-t-il des moyens de détruire ou de limiter cette action?

[Answers to 14 and 15:] Le déplacement du numéraire par entrée ou sortie
tient à deux sortes de causes. Je ne m’occuperai que du mouvement de
sortie, le seul qu’on ait songé jusqu’ici à empêcher ou à limiter. La
sortie du numéraire peut avoir lieu par suite d’événements pour ainsi
dire fortuits, entraînant des payements extraordinaires au dehors, non
balancés par les Edition: current; Page: [603] créances provenant du
commerce ordinaire d’exportation. Tels sont les achats de grains à
l’étranger à la suite d’une mauvaise récolte; tels furent encore les
achats de coton en Asie et en Afrique pendant la guerre civile aux
États-Unis; telles sont aussi les dépenses militaires au delà des
frontières. Toutes ces diverses causes de payements à faire dans les
pays étrangers, entraînant exportation de numéraire, dépendent des
vicissitudes naturelles ou de celles de la politique. Cette exportation
a pourtant une autre cause plus générale, qui a son origine dans
l’imprudence mercantile. Lorsque des spéculations excessives ont lieu
sur un point quelconque du monde commercial, ce point devient rapidement
débiteur des autres régions. Les marchandises qui sont devenues matière
à spéculation haussent démesurément de prix; cette hausse factice arrête
les exportations et stimule les importations; la balance des créances
internationales se dérange; les dettes à l’étranger viennent à dépasser
les créances: de là, sortie du numéraire. Plus tard, les spéculateurs
s’occupant de réaliser leurs gains, les prix surhaussés s’abaissent:
alors tout le monde s’empressant de vendre avant la débâcle générale,
les prix retombent beaucoup plus vite qu’ils ne s’étaient élevés, et la
réaction les fait tomber très au-dessous de leur taux normal: c’est ce
qu’on appelle une crise commerciale. Alors un mouvement se déclare en
sens inverse, et la rentrée du numéraire ramène enfin l’état normal.

La sortie du numéraire, soit qu’elle provienne de l’une on de l’autre
des causes que je viens d’indiquer, ne laisse pas d’exercer de
l’influence sur le loyer de l’argent; car le numéraire exporté est pris
sur les capitaux disponibles, destinés à alimenter le marché des prêts.
Quant aux moyens de détruire ou de limiter cette action, il ne saurait y
en avoir qu’un seul: ce serait de laisser agir la perte de numéraire sur
l’encaisse des banques, sans essayer de l’arrêter en diminuant les
avances au commerce par voie d’escompte ou autrement.

Ce moyen me semble applicable et utile, ou inefficace et nuisible,
suivant que le déplacement du numéraire a son origine dans les causes
que j’ai qualifiées de naturelles et fortuites ou dans les excès de la
spéculation.

Dans le cas, par exemple, d’une mauvaise récolte, le déplacement du
numéraire a une limite naturelle, et s’arrête de lui-même dès que cette
limite est atteinte. L’importation extraordinaire du blé une fois
liquidée, le commerce international reprend son assiette ordinaire.
Pourvu donc que l’encaisse habituel de la Banque ou des banques soit en
excès de la plus grande sortie de numéraire qui a jamais eu lieu par
suite d’une mauvaise récolte, on n’a pas, dans ce cas, à se préoccuper
de la conservation de l’encaisse: on peut, sans danger, le laisser
s’écouler, sans prendre aucune mesure violente pour en arrêter la
sortie. Il est vrai qu’après la crise il faudra toujours ramener
l’encaisse à son montant normal; mais, pour cela, il suffira d’une
Edition: current; Page: [604] hausse modérée de l’escompte, sans aucune
secousse violente. Parfois même le numéraire est ramené par le mouvement
du marché international, sans qu’il y ait besoin de s’en occuper
spécialement.

Il en est tout autrement lorsque la sortie du numéraire est déterminée
par une hausse des prix amenée par une spéculation exagérée.
L’écoulement ainsi produit n’a pas de limite naturelle, et n’a aucune
raison de s’arrêter avant la cessation des causes qui l’ont amené. Il ne
cesse et ne peut cesser que lorsque les hauts prix qui lui ont donné
lieu ont pris fin par un mouvement de baisse, c’est-à-dire lorsque la
spéculation a cédé à une réaction. En ce cas, l’écoulement du numéraire
est le remède naturel et indispensable de la maladie, et parvint-on à le
retarder, on ne réussirait qu’à prolonger le mal et à aggraver la crise
finale. Si, en ce cas, la Banque s’abstenait d’agir pour défendre son
encaisse, si elle continuait d’escompter aussi largement qu’auparavant,
en laissant s’écouler sa réserve métallique, les spéculateurs, trouvant
à emprunter au cours ordinaire, ne seraient pas réduits à vendre: ils
pourraient prolonger pendant quelque temps encore leur lutte contre les
lois naturelles; les prix surhaussés ne baisseraient pas, et partant
l’écoulement suivrait son cours jusqu’à ce que la réserve même la mieux
fournie y eût passé tout entière. A l’approche de cette catastrophe, la
Banque, pour ne pas faire faillite, serait dans la nécessité de produire
d’un seul coup la réaction qu’elle aurait dû préparer graduellement. Une
diminution des escomptes et une élévation du taux de l’intérêt, qui
eussent suffi pour arrêter la spéculation dans les commencements de la
sortie des métaux précieux, ne suffiraient plus: il faudrait une action
non-seulement plus brusque, mais plus excessive et plus violente. De là,
écoulement général du crédit, la panique et la peine, qui est loin de
frapper seulement les spéculateurs dont l’imprudence a amené le mal.

Une banque dirigée par des hommes capables, dès que sa réserve commence
à s’en aller, trouvera dans sa connaissance des antécédents commerciaux
le moyen de reconnaître les causes particulières qui ont produit
l’écoulement; elle saura si le numéraire tend à sortir en quantité
indéfinie ou seulement en quantité définie. Si l’on a laissé à cette
banque sa pleine liberté d’action, c’est seulement dans le premier cas
qu’elle se hâtera de protéger sa réserve, qu’elle aura eu soin de tenir
normalement à un montant suffisant pour faire face, sans aucune mesure
spéciale, à tout écoulement probable à limite définie.


DE LA MONNAIE FIDUCIAIRE

16. Quelle est l’utilité de la monnaie fiduciaire? La monnaie fiduciaire
est très-supérieure à la monnaie métallique pour la commodité du
transport et pour celle des grands et moyens payements. Elle est aussi
une économie Edition: current; Page: [605] du capital collectif de la
société, un remplaçant d’un instrument d’échange très-coûteux par un
autre qui ne coûte rien.

17. Le rôle de cette monnaie tend-il à devenir plus important? Oui, le
rôle de cette monnaie tend à devenir plus important, tant qu’il reste
une partie, même peu considérable, de la population qui, par défiance,
refuse le billet de banque et exige le numéraire. Mais, une fois que le
billet de banque est parvenu à se faire accepter partout comme
l’équivalent du numéraire, il ne semble pas que son rôle tende à
s’accroître davantage. Car, si la monnaie fiduciaire arrive à dépasser
en quantité la monnaie métallique qui circulerait à sa place si elle
n’existait pas, elle se déprécie; la mesure commune des valeurs devient
variable et incertaine, et l’on retombe dans les inconvénients et dans
les injustices du papier-monnaie. Cependant cette dégénération de la
monnaie fiduciaire ne saurait avoir lieu dans le système de la
convertibilité en espèces, à volonté et sur place.

18. Est-ce par les émissions de billets au porteur et à vue, ou à l’aide
des compensations par virements, comptes courants, chèques, etc., que le
crédit tend à se développer? Dès que les billets de banque ont obtenu la
confiance générale et sont parvenus à remplacer le numéraire dans tous
les recoins de la circulation, le développement normal du crédit n’a
plus lieu par la multiplication des billets de banque, mais
principalement au moyen de comptes courants et de virements qui
économisent la monnaie courante, soit fiduciaire, soit métallique.

19. L’emploi de la monnaie fiduciaire peut-il prendre un développement
indéfini? Si non, dans quelles limites doit-il être renfermé? En
répondant à la 17e Question, j’ai exprimé mon opinion sur cette
Question.


DES CONDITIONS D’UNE BONNE MONNAIE FIDUCIAIRE

20. A quelles conditions l’emploi de la monnaie fiduciaire est-il sans
inconvénients?

21. La convertibilité constante des billets est-elle indispensable?

[Answers to 20 and 21:] Sur la nécessité absolue de la convertibilité
constante et immédiate des billets, il n’y a plus de différence
d’opinion parmi les hommes compétents. Elle me paraît la seule condition
indispensable. Avec cette convertibilité suffisamment garantie, il n’y a
pas de mauvais système de banques d’émission. La convertibilité serait
évidemment illusoire si des billets pouvaient être émis par tout le
monde. Même dans le système de la pluralité, il faudrait imposer la
condition d’un capital considérable et de la publicité la plus complète.
On pourrait en outre, et peut-être on devrait, exiger un dépôt de rentes
sur l’État, égal à la somme de tous les billets émis et destiné à leur
servir de garantie spéciale.

Edition: current; Page: [606]
22. L’unité du billet de banque en favorise-t-elle la circulation?
Assurément, l’unité du billet de banque en favorise la circulation, en
dispensant le public de se donner la peine d’apprécier la solidité
relative de diverses banques. Cet avantage, cependant, est surtout
sensible dans les commencements.

23. Quels sont les inconvénients et les avantages de la pluralité des
banques, soit générales, soit à circonscription limitée? En examinant
quels sont les inconvénients et les avantages de la pluralité des
banques, soit générales, soit à circonscription limitée, je dois d’abord
écarter l’expédient de banques locales, chacune unique dans sa
circonscription. Ce système équivoque n’offre ni les avantages de
l’unité ni ceux de la pluralité. Par la pluralité des banques, j’entends
leur concurrence. Ainsi entendue, la question de l’unité ou de la
pluralité des banques d’émission ne me paraît pas avoir, à beaucoup
près, le degré d’importance qu’on lui attribue. Les partisans et les
ennemis de la pluralité semblent s’accorder à croire que si elle
existait, il y aurait une facilité de crédit beaucoup plus grande qu’à
présent. Les uns applaudissent à cette facilité, la regardant comme un
bienfait inappréciable pour le commerce, tandis que les autres trouvent
que les dangers en dépassent les avantages, et qu’en provoquant les
excès de la spéculation, elle rendrait les crises beaucoup plus
fréquentes et plus graves. Je ne puis me persuader qu’aucune de ces
opinions soit fondée. Je crois qu’après quelques tâtonnements, et
peut-être quelques excès temporaires dans l’usage d’une liberté
nouvellement acquise, la circulation des billets se trouverait partagée
entre un certain nombre d’établissements solides et prudents, qui se
conduiraient collectivement à peu près comme la banque unique se
conduit, et qu’on n’éprouverait ni les bienfaits ni les inconvénients
auxquels on s’attend. Les banques ne manqueraient pas d’établir, selon
l’usage de celles de l’Écosse, un échange hebdomadaire, sinon
journalier, de leurs billets respectifs. Il en arriverait qu’une banque
qui chercherait à accaparer la circulation en donnant de plus grandes
facilités de crédit que les autres, ne pourrait augmenter ses émissions
que momentanément: elle verrait rentrer ses billets, présentés par les
autres banques, en quantité supérieure aux billets de ces banques
qu’elle-même aurait en caisse, et il lui faudrait liquider le surplus en
numéraire. L’extension du crédit, que les uns appellent de leurs vœux et
que les autres repoussent, n’aurait donc lieu que lorsqu’elle serait
provoquée ou favorisée par des causes générales, agissant sur toutes les
banques à la fois, et tendant à déterminer une baisse générale de
l’intérêt. Mais, toutes les fois que ces causes existent, elles
exercent, comme on le voit toujours, une influence exactement pareille
sur une banque unique. En fait, la hausse et la baisse de l’escompte
auraient toujours lieu à peu près simultanément chez toutes les banques,
et, selon toute probabilité, par un accord, au moins tacite, Edition:
current; Page: [607] entre elles. Il n’y aurait donc, à mon avis, que
très-peu de différence pratique entre les deux systèmes, une fois que
les esprits et les habitudes s’y seraient accommodés.


DES ÉTABLISSEMENTS QUI ÉMETTENT DES MONNAIES FIDUCIAIRES

24. La Banque de France satisfait-elle à toutes les conditions à exiger
d’une banque d’émission; si non, quelles modifications seraient
désirables dans son organisation?

25. Quels avantages ou quelle infériorité présente l’organisation de la
Banque de France, relativement à l’organisation et au régime des
banques, soit d’émission, soit de dépôt, des autres pays, notamment des
banques d’Angleterre, des États-Unis, de Hambourg et de Hollande?

[Answers to 24 and 25:] Dans le système d’une banque unique,
l’organisation de la Banque de France n’a pas de défaut capital à moi
connu. Pour en constater les avantages, il faudrait faire l’énumération
des défauts de la plupart des autres banques nationales. On peut lui
reprocher quelques erreurs de conduite, le plus souvent contraires à son
propre intérêt de banque, et qu’on doit regarder comme des concessions
faites aux opinions qui lui sont hostiles. Je parle surtout des grands
achats d’or au-dessus de sa valeur qu’elle a cru devoir faire pour
renouveler son encaisse.

26. Y a-t-il intérêt ou inconvénient à séparer le département de
l’émission et celui de l’escompte? Cette séparation du département de
l’émission de celui de l’escompte, si elle avait lieu, aurait pour but
d’assujettir le département de l’émission à une règle semblable à celle
de la loi anglaise de Sir Robert Peel (1844), en ne permettant
l’émission de billets au-dessus d’une limite fixe qu’en échange d’une
somme égale en numéraire. Cette règle me semble, à tout prendre, plus
nuisible qu’utile. Elle contraindrait la Banque à traiter absolument de
la même manière tout écoulement de numéraire, sans égard à la diversité
des causes qui y donnent lieu. Une hausse de l’intérêt serait dès lors
inévitable, non dans quelques cas seulement, mais dans tous, et même dès
le commencement de l’écoulement, afin de protéger l’encaisse du
département de l’escompte. Or, si ma réponse aux 14e et 15e Questions
est bien fondée, cette hausse de l’intérêt serait indispensable ou
nuisible, suivant la cause de l’écoulement. Laissée à son propre
jugement, une banque bien dirigée pourrait tenir compte de la diversité
des causes, et recourir à la hausse de l’intérêt là seulement où la
hausse est le remède nécessaire d’une crise provoquée par des
spéculations excessives, tout en s’abstenant de s’en servir dans le cas
où l’écoulement, provenant de causes naturelles, tendrait à cesser de
lui-même sans avoir englouti tout l’encaisse. Edition: current; Page:
[608] Au contraire, sous la règle absolue de la loi anglaise de 1844, le
remède est obligatoire là même où il aggrave le mal. Les billets
présentés pour être échangés contre le numéraire sont forcément
supprimés, et ne peuvent plus être employés à l’escompte. Le département
de l’escompte n’a plus à compter que sur sa propre réserve; il est tenu
de faire face à toutes les crises avec une partie seulement de la
réserve totale de la Banque, puisque le numéraire du département de
l’émission lui est fermé. De là, nécessité pour lui de défendre sa
propre réserve par des hausses d’intérêt beaucoup plus fréquentes et
plus extrêmes que celles qu’on avait éprouvées en Angleterre avant la
séparation des deux départements. Il pourrait même arriver que le
département de l’escompte fût à sec, et devint incapable de remplir ses
engagements envers ses créanciers en compte courant, tandis que l’autre
département de la même banque regorgerait de fonds. C’est pour éviter ce
résultat étrange, qui serait, du moins en Angleterre, une catastrophe
beaucoup plus grave que même la suspension momentanée de la
convertibilité des billets de banque, qu’on a déjà trois fois suspendu
la loi restrictive de 1844.

27. Le cours légal, tel qu’il existe en Angleterre, s’il était attribué
aux billets de la Banque de France, aurait-il pour effet d’en mieux
assurer la circulation?

28. Quel nombre de signatures une banque doit-elle exiger pour sa
sécurité?

[Answers to 27 and 28:] Ces deux Questions exigeraient, pour y répondre,
des connaissances locales ou professionnelles que je ne possède pas.

29. L’émission des billets doit-elle être limitée? Convient-il de
proportionner l’émission à l’encaisse ou au capital? Toute limitation de
l’émission des billets, autre que la limite naturelle imposée par la
convertibilité, me semble déplacée. Ce n’est pas l’émission qu’il faut
proportionner à l’encaisse, mais bien l’encaisse à l’émission.


DU FONCTIONNEMENT DE LA BANQUE

30. A quel niveau doit être maintenu l’encaisse de la Banque pour
assurer la convertibilité des billets? Pour assurer la convertibilité,
l’encaisse moyen doit être maintenu sensiblement au-dessus de la plus
forte somme de métaux précieux qui soit jamais sortie de la Banque
d’émission dans aucune crise. Quand la crise survient, si elle est un
effet de causes naturelles, et un effet naturellement limité, on peut
sans scrupule laisser écouler l’encaisse, sauf à le renouveler après la
crise. Dans l’autre cas, c’est-à-dire quand la crise est la débâcle à la
suite d’un mouvement de spéculation, il Edition: current; Page: [609]
faut prendre, dès le commencement de l’écoulement, des mesures décisives
pour défendre l’encaisse.

31. Quelles sont les causes qui tendent à diminuer ou à augmenter
l’encaisse et les moyens à employer pour en maintenir le niveau? On peut
dire en termes généraux que l’encaisse s’augmente par l’abondance des
capitaux, combinée avec une timidité générale à l’égard des entreprises
hasardeuses. Il atteint ordinairement son maximum dans la période qui
succède à une grande crise. Il diminue ensuite, à mesure que la
spéculation renaît. Cependant celle-ci n’agit pas sur l’encaisse dès le
commencement, mais seulement quand le temps est venu de remplir les
engagements pécuniaires qu’on a pris.

32. Quel est le rôle et quelle est la destination du capital de la
Banque? Le capital doit-il être accru? Quels seraient les effets de cet
accroissement?

33. La Banque devrait-elle aliéner, en totalité ou en partie, les rentes
qu’elle possède? Quels seraient les effets de cette aliénation?

34. Le capital des banques d’émission doit-il, en général, être un
capital de garantie ou peut-il être employé utilement dans les affaires
de la Banque?

[Answers to 32-34:] C’est seulement comme garantie qu’une banque, soit
de dépôt, soit d’émission, a besoin d’un capital propre. Ce capital peut
être employé dans les affaires de la Banque sans manquer à sa fonction
de garantie; mais en ce cas il a besoin d’être plus considérable, ayant
à couvrir à la fois les risques des affaires que fait la Banque
non-seulement avec des dépôts et avec des billets, mais aussi avec ses
propres fonds. On pourrait exiger de la Banque de France qu’elle
réalisât son capital pour pouvoir l’employer tout entier à l’escompte;
mais une telle mesure ne donnerait, dans un pays où le crédit est un peu
développé, aucun avantage réel au commerce; car les sommes que la Banque
retireait de la vente de ses rentes seraient normalement puisées dans
les capitaux disponibles du pays, dans ceux qui déjà alimentent
directement ou indirectement l’escompte. Il y aurait déplacement, il n’y
aurait pas accroissement des fonds destinés à l’escompte. La Banque se
mettrait à la place de quelque autre, comme prêteur au commerce, et cet
autre se mettrait à la place de la Banque, comme créancier de l’État. La
seule exception serait si les rentes cédées par la Banque étaient
achetées par des paysans, par exemple, avec des sommes provenant de
l’épargne et qui seraient restées enfouies improductivement chez eux.

35. Quels sont pour les banques d’émission, et spécialement pour la
Banque de France, les avantages et les inconvénients des avances sur
dépôt? Cette Question exigerait, pour y répondre, des connaissances
locales que je ne possède pas.

36. L’élévation de l’escompte est-elle le seul moyen efficace de
maintenir Edition: current; Page: [610] ou de reconstituer l’encaisse?
L’achat d’or à l’étranger ne pourrait se payer qu’en lettres de change
existant sur le marché, ou tirées à long terme sans contre-valeur: dans
le premier cas, on ferait monter le taux du change, et l’on amènerait
ainsi une nouvelle exportation de métaux précieux; dans le second, on
n’arriverait qu’à éloigner un peu la sortie de l’or, sans même
l’ajourner jusqu’à l’échéance des billets; car l’élévation générale des
prix restant la même, il n’y aurait rien de changé dans les
circonstances qui avaient amené la crise, et une nouvelle sortie de
numéraire ne tarderait pas à se déclarer. Tous les moyens proposés pour
maintenir ou pour reconstituer l’encaisse, en dehors de l’élévation du
taux de l’escompte, me paraissent illusoires. On a proposé l’achat par
la Banque de lettres de change sur l’étranger, mais elle ne ferait par
là que se mettre à la place d’autres acheteurs ayant des dettes à payer
à l’étranger, dettes qu’il leur faudrait, par conséquent, acquitter en
or. Ces divers expédients seraient donc inefficaces pour protéger
l’encaisse. D’un autre côté, le refus de la Banque d’escompter et la
limitation des bordereaux seraient infiniment plus graves pour le
commerce, en temps de crise, que la hausse la plus extrême de l’intérêt.
Dans celle-ci, il ne s’agit que de payer très-cher pendant quelques
semaines le secours dont on a besoin; mais l’impossibilité d’obtenir un
secours suffisant pourrait entraîner la faillite.

37. Est-il possible de prévenir les variations de l’escompte ou de les
renfermer dans de certaines limites? Il est impossible de prévenir les
variations du taux de l’intérêt, et par conséquent de l’escompte. Elles
dépendent de l’offre et de la demande des capitaux disponibles. Il n’y a
aucun moyen de les mitiger, mais on peut les aggraver, et c’est l’effet
des règles restrictives comme celle de la loi anglaise de 1844.

38. Est-il possible d’imposer à une banque privilégiée un taux fixe
d’escompte ou même un maximum? Imposer à une banque privilégiée soit un
taux fixe, soit un maximum du taux de l’escompte, pourrait être licite
en droit, mais ne saurait, à mon avis, être utile à l’intérêt générale.
Si l’état du marché des capitaux, en dehors de la Banque, déterminait un
taux d’intérêt au-dessus de ce maximum, alors, en défendant à la Banque
de profiter de cette hausse, on ne ferait que créer un privilège en
faveur de ceux dont on aurait fait escompter le papier à un taux
exceptionnellement favorable. En supposant même, ce qui est difficile à
concevoir, qu’on pût ménager un moyen de partager également ce bénéfice
entre tous les commerçants, on ne voit pourtant pas pourquoi l’État
s’occuperait de donner le capital aux commerçants au-dessous de sa
valeur, plutôt que de donner le pain audessous de sa valeur aux classes
laborieuses.

39. Quels sont les avantages et les inconvénients des petites coupures,
notamment au point de vue de la conservation de l’encaisse? Les coupures
ne devraient pas être assez petites pour passer communément entre les
Edition: current; Page: [611] mains de personnes qui, par défaut
d’éducation et d’expérience, seraient facilement portées aux paniques.

40. Quel est celui des moyens suivants de défendre l’encaisse qui
présente le moins d’inconvénients pour le commerce: élever le taux de
l’escompte, refuser un certain nombre de bordereaux, graduer le taux de
l’escompte d’après les échéances? Voir ma réponse à la 36e Question.

41. Le développement actuel des relations internationales entraîne-t-il
une certaine solidarité entre les encaisses de toutes les banques
d’émission?

42. Quelles sont les conséquences de cette solidarité? Est-il possible
de la faire cesser ou de la restreindre?

[Answers to 41 and 42:] La solidarité entre les encaisses des banques
d’émission, sans être complète, est réelle, et plutôt un bien qu’un mal.
Si elle fait sentir à chaque pays, jusqu’à un certain degré, les crises
des pays voisins, il est vrai aussi que le mal des crises d’origine
locale s’atténue en s’étendant sur un plus grand espace.

Edition: current; Page: [612] Edition: current; Page: [613]


ENDOWMENTS
 1869

Edition: current; Page: [614]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Fortnightly Review, n.s. V (Apr., 1869), 377-90. Headed: “Endowments.”
Signed; republished without textual changes in D&D, IV (1875), 1-24.
Identified in JSM’s bibliography as “an article headed ‘Endowments’ in
the Fortnightly Review of April 1. 1869” (MacMinn, 98). No copy in
Somerville College.

The variant at 618a-a derives from the one known MS fragment (Yale
University Library), which forms part of the collection obtained from
the Sotheby sale of 27 July, 1927. Although the wording is generally
close to that of the final text, the fragment is given in full, except
for cancellations. (One cancellation—“is an offence both against liberty
& against property”—is restored in the final text at 618.22-3. The
typographical error at 620.26 (“it it” for “it”) is corrected in D&D,
IV.

Edition: current; Page: [615]


Endowments

a few years ago, the question which required to be argued on the subject
of endowments, was the right of the State to interfere with them: not
merely the right to bring them back to their original purpose when by
the corruption or negligence of the managers it had been departed from,
but the right to change altogether the application designed by the
founder. This question now scarcely needs further argument. Discussion,
and the progress of political thought, have done their work. We have
well-nigh seen the last of the superstition which allowed the man who
owned a piece of land or a sum of money five hundred years ago, to make
a binding disposition determining what should be done with it as long as
time or the British nation should last; which, after limiting an owner’s
power to tie up his property in favour of individuals to the term of a
single generation, thinks it spoliation to disobey his orders after the
lapse of centuries, when their apparent purpose is connected with
religion or charity. These prejudices had nearly ceased to be
formidable, even before they received their death-blow from the
triumphant passage through the House of Commons of the proposal for
disendowing the Irish Protestant Church.[*] Whoever voted, or would
vote, for that great measure of justice and common sense, indicates his
opinion that the jurisdiction of the State over Endowments extends, if
need be, to an entire alteration of their purposes; and even those whose
political or ecclesiastical partisanship ranges them on the other side,
find it consistent with their principles to propose alternative plans,
as subversive as disendowment itself of the legal rights vested by the
endowment in collective or fictitious public persons. There is, as on
all other great questions, a minority behind the age; which is as
natural as that there should be minorities in advance of it. But with
the bulk of the nation the indefeasibility of endowments is a chimera of
the past; so much so, that those who fought hardest against this
superstition when it was alive, are now likely to find themselves under
the obligation, not of re-arguing a gained cause, but rather of checking
the reaction to a contrary extreme, which so generally succeeds the
defeat of an old error, when the conflict has been long.

Edition: current; Page: [616]
Such a reaction, in fact, is already commencing. Some of the most
effective and valuable champions of State authority over Endowments are
claiming assent to doctrines which go far beyond providing for the due
application to public uses of funds given for the public benefit. Some
go the length of maintaining that endowments, or certain great classes
of them at least, even when their purposes have not ceased to be useful,
are altogether an evil, as the purposes would be better attained without
them. Others stop short of this, but recommend that it should be
unlawful to make endowments for any public purpose, except through the
medium, and subject to the discretion, of the Government for the time
being, or of an authority responsible to Parliament, and to those by
whom parliaments and governments are made. In a paper in all other
respects deserving of high eulogium,* Mr. Fitch—one of the men whose
personal investigations have most largely contributed to make known the
abuses of endowments—is not content with calling on statesmen to
“estimate the enormous mischief which is done in England under the name
of benevolence,” and to “see the need of a more energetic and organised
supervision of all public charities,” but urges them “to go a step
farther, and, while permitting the free exercise of testamentary rights
as between persons and persons, make it illegal to devote any money to
public objects except through the agency of some recognised body, which
is amenable to public control. Is it too much to expect,” asks Mr.
Fitch, “that we shall soon see the wisdom of restraining the power of
private persons to tamper with any one of those great national interests
such as education and the relief of the poor, which demand organisation
and fixed principles, and which still more imperatively demand complete
readjustment from time to time, in accordance with the supreme
intelligence and will of the nation, as represented in Parliament?”

It would be both unfair and unreasonable to impute to Mr. Fitch, as a
settled conviction, the doctrine here incidentally thrown out—a doctrine
breathing the very spirit, and expressed in almost the words, of the
apologies made in the over-centralised governments of the Continent for
not permitting any one to perform the smallest act connected with public
interests without the leave of the Government. But when such a maxim
finds its way to the public under such auspices, it is time to enter a
protest in behalf of those “private persons” whose power of public
usefulness Mr. Fitch estimates so lightly, but whose liberty of making
themselves useful in their own way, without requiring the consent of any
public authority, has mainly contributed to make England the free
country she is; and whose well-directed public spirit is covering
America with the very institutions which her state of society most
needs, and was least likely in any other manner Edition: current; Page:
[617] to get—institutions for the careful cultivation of the higher
studies. Whether endowments for educational purposes are a good or an
evil is a fair question for argument, and shall be argued presently. But
the reason by which Mr. Fitch supports his doctrine—namely, that as
education and the relief of the poor require organization and fixed
principles, no tampering with them by private persons should be
allowed—would avail equally against allowing any private person to set
up and support a school, or to expend money in his lifetime on any plan
for the benefit of the poor. Such doctrines lead straight to making
education and beneficence an absolute monopoly in the hands of, at the
best, a parliamentary majority; that is, of an executive government
making itself habitually the organ of the prevalent opinion in the
country, but liable to spasmodic fits of interference by the country’s
more direct representatives. It is hardly necessary to say that Mr.
Fitch cannot intend this; but it is those who do not intend a bad
principle, but only a particular consequence of it, that usually do the
work of naturalising the principle, and making it one of the moving
forces in society and government.

While there are few things more true, under due limitations, there are
few which in the present day it does more mischief to speak unguardedly
about, than the “organisation” and “fixed principles” required in
everything which aims at producing a public benefit. It is desirable
that every particular enterprise for education or other public objects
should be organised; that is, its conductors should act together for a
known object, on a definite plan, without waste of strength or
resources. But it is far from desirable that all such enterprises should
be organized exactly alike; that they all should use the same means for
the attainment of exactly the same immediate ends. And Mr. Fitch
himself, as we saw, reinforces his argument drawn from the necessity of
“fixed principles,” by another grounded on the importance of unfixing
those fixed principles from time to time.

The truth needs reasserting, and needs it every day more and more, that
what the improvement of mankind and of all their works most imperatively
demands is variety, not uniformity. What is called tampering by private
persons with great public interests, as if it meant obstructing the
Government in what it thinks fit to do for public uses with the funds at
its disposal, means trying to do with money of their own something that
shall promote the same objects better. It is tampering as those tamper
with the religion of the country who build nonconformist chapels. It is
healthy rivalry. If the law duly protects these private establishments
against interested misappropriation of their funds, many of them will
probably do better in some respects, some perhaps better on the whole,
than institutions held to “fixed principles” laid down by an Act of
Parliament, or by the opinion of the majority. At all events, whether
they do or not, they are Edition: current; Page: [618] necessary for the
just protection of minorities, whose portion in the public interest
deserves the attention of majorities equally with their own, but is far
less likely to obtain it.

All this, though its importance is seldom adequately felt but by those
who are directly interested in it, is not likely to be called in
question, so far as it affects men’s employment of their property during
their own lifetime. But there is no reason awhy respect for the free
agency of individuals should stop there, unless the power of bequest
itself is a nuisance, and ought to be abated. If it is right that people
should be suffered to employ what is lawfully their own in acts of
beneficence to individuals taking effect after their death, why not to
the public? There is good reason against allowing them to do this in
favour of an unborn individual whom they cannot know, or a public
purpose beyond the probable limits of human foresight. But within those
limits, the more scope that is given to the varieties of human
individuality, the better. Since trial alone can decide whether any
particular experiment is successful, latitude should be given for
carrying on the experiment until the trial is complete. For the length
of time, therefore, which individual foresight can reasonably be
supposed to cover, and during which circumstances are not likely to have
so totally changed as to make the effect of the gift entirely different
from what the giver intended, there is an obvious propriety in abiding
by his dispositions. To set them aside, unless at the command of a still
higher principle, is an offence both against liberty and against
property. And all that the higher Edition: current; Page: [619]
principle requires is, that a term, not too distant, should be fixed—I
will not decide that it should be half a century or a century, or even
whether it should be the same for all descriptions of endowments—but a
term at the expiration of which their appropriation should come under
the control of the State, to be modified, or entirely changed, at its
discretion; provided that the new purpose to which they may be diverted
shall be of a permanent character, to remove the temptation of laying
hands on such funds for current expenses in times of financial
difficulty.

I am not contending that there should be no limit to the right of making
endowments, except a limit of time. There are strong reasons against
permitting them to be so made as to tie up land from alienation. It is a
matter of course that they should not be permitted for any purpose
definitely illegal. I say “definitely,” because the English common law
has a number of vague formulae under cover of which almost anything of
which the judge disapproves may be declared unlawful. But there are also
employments of money which have so mischievous an effect, that they
would most likely be prohibited, if it could be done without improper
interference with individual liberty; and such an application of funds,
though the State may be obliged to tolerate, it may be right that it
should abstain from enforcing, on the mandate of the owner, after his
death. Of this sort are most of the so-called doles; indiscriminate
distributions of sums of money among the poor of a particular place or
class, the effect of which may be to pauperise and demoralise a whole
neighbourhood. In such cases, until the expiration of the term during
which testamentary directions in general Edition: current; Page: [620]
may be allowed to be valid, the intention of the testator should be
respected so far as it is not mischievous; the departure from it being
limited to the choice of an unobjectionable mode of doing good to the
persons, or the sort of persons, whom he intended to benefit; as, for
instance, by appropriating to a school for children what was destined
for alms. And it is important that even this minor degree of
interference should be exercised with great reserve. The State is not
entitled to consider, so long as the fixed term is unexpired, what mode
of employing the money would be most useful, or whether it is more
wanted for other purposes. No doubt this would often be the case; but
the money was not given to the State, nor for general uses. Nothing
ought to be regarded as a warrant for setting the donor’s dispositions
prematurely aside, but that to permit their execution would be a clear
and positive public mischief.a

What tempts people to see with complacency a testator’s dispositions
invalidated, is the case of what are called eccentric wills—bequests
determined by motives, and destined for purposes, with which they do not
sympathise. And this propensity to count the wishes of the owner of the
property for little or nothing, when they are unlike those which we
think we should ourselves have had in his place, does not stop at public
endowments, but extends to any large bequest in favour of an individual,
which departs ever so little from the common practice of the common
world. But does not this genuine intolerance of the majority respecting
other people’s disposal of their property after death, show how great is
the necessity for protection to the rights of those who do not make
resemblance to the majority their rule of life? A case of bequest which
has been much noticed in the newspapers, and of which it is still
uncertain whether it will be allowed to take effect, strikingly
exemplifies this need. A person[*] left a sum of money by will to found
an hospital for the treatment of the diseases of the lower animals,
particularly birds and quadrupeds. He made the mistake of appointing as
trustee for the purposes of the endowment, the University of London—a
body constituted for special objects, and which could not with propriety
undertake a duty so remote from the ends of its appointment. But can it
be pretended that an hospital such as was designed by the testator,
would not be a highly useful institution? Even if no regard were due to
the animals themselves, is not the mere value of many of them to man,
and the light which a better study of their physiology and pathology
cannot fail to throw on the laws of animal life and the diseases of the
human species, sufficient to make an institution for that study not
merely useful, but important? When one thinks of this, and then
considers that no such institution has ever been established in Europe;
that a person willing to employ part of his superfluities in that way,
is not born once in Edition: current; Page: [621] several centuries; and
that, now when one has been found, the use he makes of what is lawfully
his own is a subject of contemptuous jeering, and an example held up to
show the absurdities of testators, and the folly of endowments; can one
desire a more conclusive evidence of what would happen if donations for
public purposes were only valid when the purposes are consonant to the
opinion of the majority? Who knows if even the Cornell University, with
its “eccentric” provision that every student attending the University
must work bodily for his living, would at present have been more than a
project, if its realisation had depended on the will of the Government,
or of an authority accountable to the majority?

Because an endowment is a public nuisance when there is nobody to
prevent its funds from being jobbed away for the gain of irresponsible
administrators; because it may become worse than useless if irrevocably
tied up to a destination fixed by somebody who died five hundred years
ago; we ought not on that account to forget that endowments protected
against malversation, and secured to their original purpose for no more
than two or three generations, would be a precious safeguard for
uncustomary modes of thought and practice, against the repression,
sometimes amounting to suppression, to which they are even more exposed
as society in other respects grows more civilised. The fifty or hundred
years of inviolability which I claim for them, would often suffice, if
the opinion or practice is good, to change it from an uncustomary to a
customary one, leaving the endowment fairly disposable for another use.
Even when the idea embodied in the endowment is not an improvement,
those who think it so are entitled to the opportunity of bringing it to
a practical test. The presence of such attempts to promote the general
well-being by means diverging from the common standard, keeps discussion
alive, and obliges the prevailing opinions and customs to seek support
from their own merits, and not from a blind acceptance of existing
facts.

Some further observations require to be made on educational endowments,
which are in some respects a peculiar case. Of these it cannot be said,
in the present day at least, that they provide what, but for them, would
not be provided at all. Education there would still be, and the real
question is one of quality. Neither, again, has the argument, so
important in other cases, of the protection due to uncustomary opinions,
more than a limited application here. A very small minority is able to
support a private school suitable to its requirements; and it might even
seem that minorities are never in so much danger of being left out, as
in the case of endowed institutions for education, which are usually
more or less bound to opinions widely prevalent, and which, when the
time has come for bringing them under the control of the State, fall
into the power of the majority. This danger is very serious, when State
institutions, or endowments under State Edition: current; Page: [622]
superintendence, have a monopoly of education, or when those who are
there educated have, as they have usually had, legal preferences or
advantages over other people. But if endowed institutions, originally of
a national character, or which have become so by the expiration of the
term of inviolability, are open to all alike; and open in the only true
sense, that is, with full liberty to refuse one part of the teaching
while accepting another part; minorities would enjoy all the benefits
that the endowments could give, while retaining the full power of
providing, at their own cost, any education which they may consider
preferable.

The question of educational endowments resolves itself into this: Is
education one of those marketable commodities which the interest of
rival dealers can be depended on for providing, in the quantity and of
the quality required? Is education a public want which is sufficiently
met by the ordinary promptings of the principle of trade? I should be
the last to speak with sentimental disparagements of trade or its
achievements, or to imagine that the motives which govern it can safely
be dispensed with in any great department of the service of mankind. But
the question is not quite fairly stated in the disjunctive programme,
“Endowment or Free-Trade.” Endowment and Free-Trade is the thing
contended for. That there should be free competition in education; that
law, or the State, when it prescribes anything on the subject, should
fix what knowledge should be required, but not from whom it shall be
procured, is essential to civil and political freedom. But will this
indispensable free-trade in education provide what is wanted, better
without than with the help, example, and stimulus of education aided by
endowments?

There are many things which free-trade does passably. There are none
which it does absolutely well; for competition is as rife in the career
of fraudulent pretence as in that of real excellence. Free-trade is not
upheld, by any one who knows human life, from any very lofty estimate of
its worth, but because the evils of exclusive privilege are still
greater, and what is worse, more incorrigible. But the capacity of
free-trade to produce even the humblest article of a sufficient degree
of goodness, depends on three conditions: First, the consumer must have
the means of paying for it; secondly, he must care sufficiently for it;
thirdly, he must be a sufficient judge of it. All three conditions are
signally wanting in the case of national education. The first case, that
of inability to pay, now, happily, requires only a passing notice. That
those who are too poor to pay for elementary instruction, should have it
paid for by others for them, has, after a battle of above half a
century, taken its place in opinion among admitted national necessities.
But the concession of this is the concession of all the rest, at least
in principle; for, if those whom poverty disables from obtaining
instruction by themselves ought to be helped to it by others, either
because Edition: current; Page: [623] it is the interest or the duty of
those others to take care that they have it, why not also those in whose
case the obstacle is not the poverty, but the ignorance or selfishness
of parents? With respect to the other two requisites—that the customer
should care for the commodity, and that he should be able to judge of
it—the tale is soon told. As a general rule, subject to exceptions, the
wishes of parents in regard to the instruction of their children are
determined by two considerations. First, what will bring in a direct
pecuniary profit. Of this they think themselves judges, though most of
them judge even of this very incompetently, being unable to see how any
studies, except the direct practice of a business, can conduce to
business success. Of other kinds of instruction they neither are, nor
consider themselves to be, judges; and on these their rule of action is
that by which they are guided in most other things of which they are
personally ignorant—the custom of their class of society. If we desire,
therefore, that the education of those who are above poverty, but who
are not, for their own bane and that of others, predestined to idleness,
should have any better guide than an extremely narrow conception of the
exigencies of a business life, we must apply ourselves to the other of
the two levers by which those we seek to act upon can be moved; we must
introduce a better custom. It must be made the fashion to receive a
really good education. But how can this fashion be set except by
offering models of good education in schools and colleges within easy
reach of all parts of the country? And who is able to do this but such
as can afford to postpone all considerations of pecuniary profit, and
consider only the quality of the education; either because, like the
English Universities, they are certain of sufficient customers, or
because they have the means of waiting many years till the time comes
which shall show that the pupils they have trained are more than
ordinarily fitted for all the uses of life? The funds for doing this can
only be derived from taxation or from endowments; which of the two is
preferable? Independently of the pecuniary question, schools and
universities governed by the State are liable to a multitude of
objections which those that are merely watched, and, in case of need,
controlled by it, are wholly free from; especially that most fatal one
of tending to be all alike; to form the same unvarying habits of mind
and turn of character.

The abuses of endowments are flagrant, monstrous, and wholly
inexcusable. But what funds, public or private, would not be a prey to
malversation if the law took no notice of it; or if, though the law was
what it ought to be, there was no individual whose interest and no
public officer whose duty it was to put the law in force? There is
surely nothing visionary in imagining these things remedied. It cannot
be impossible, where there is the will, to prevent public funds from
being diverted to private pockets. Nor can it be doubted that the
variety of endowed institutions, and the Edition: current; Page: [624]
influence of the State exerted within its proper limits, would ensure
adequate provision for including in the course of education (either
everywhere or only somewhere, according to the necessities of the case)
whatever has any just claim to form a part of it. What is feared is,
that the teacher’s duty will be idly and inefficiently performed if his
remuneration is certain, and not dependent on pupils and their payments.
The apprehension is well grounded. But where is the necessity that the
teacher’s pay should bear no relation to the number and proficiency of
his pupils? In the case of an ordinary schoolmaster, the fees of pupils
would always be a part, and should generally be the greatest part, of
his remuneration. In an university, or a great public school, even if
the fees go to the collective body, it is not a law of nature that every
tutor or professor should be paid neither more nor less than a fixed
sum. Could anything be easier than to make the whole, or a large part,
of his remuneration proportional to the number of those who attended his
teaching during an entire term, or during a year? And would it be
impossible that he should receive an extra sum for each of his pupils
who passes a creditable examination, on leaving the institution, in his
particular department? The real principle of efficiency in teaching,
payment by results, is easily applied to public teaching, but wholly
inapplicable to private school speculations, even were they subject to a
general system of public examinations; unless by special agreement
between schoolmasters and parents, which also is a thing we have no
chance of seeing until the fashion can be set.

And is there any one so blind to the realities of life as to imagine
that the emoluments of a private schoolmaster have in general any
substantial connection with the merit and efficiency of his teaching? In
the first place, he has a direct pecuniary interest in neglecting all
studies not cared for by the general public, or by the section of it
from whom he hopes for patronage. In those which they do care for, a
little trouble goes much farther in aiming at a mere appearance of
proficiency, than at the reality. The persons whom he has to satisfy are
not experienced examiners, who take pains to find out how much the pupil
knows, and are judges of it; but parents, most of whom know little of
what is taught at schools, or have forgotten what they knew; many of
whom do not test their child’s knowledge by a single question, it being
enough for them that he has been at what is called a respectable
school—and who desire no better than to take for granted that all is
right, and that the certificates or prizes which the children bring home
from the master are the earnings of desert, not bribes for the good word
of parents. These are not the mere abuses, but the natural fruits, of
the trading principle in education; accordingly, the disclosures of the
Schools Enquiry Commission[*] have been as damning to the character of
the private, as to Edition: current; Page: [625] that of the endowed,
schools. When the pupil himself reflects, too late, that his schooling
has done him no good, the impression left upon him, if he is one of the
common herd, is not that he was sent to a bad when he ought to have been
sent to a good school, but that school altogether is a stupid and
useless thing, and schoolmasters a set of contemptible impostors. It is
difficult to see, in the operation of the trading principle, any
tendency to make these things better. When the customer’s ignorance is
great, the trading motive acts much more powerfully in the direction of
vying with one another in the arts of quackery and self-advertisement
than in merit. Those parents who desire for their children something
better than what the private schools afford, and do not find that
something better in the endowed schools as at present conducted,
sometimes combine to form the subscription schools commonly called
proprietary. This private election, as it were, of a schoolmaster, by a
rate-paying qualification, is an improvement, as far as it goes, for
those who take part in it; but as it is only had recourse to by parents
who have some perception of the badness of the private schools, it makes
the case of these last, if anything, rather worse than before, by
withdrawing that small portion of parental influence which would really
be exercised, and probably exercised beneficially. And the worth even of
the Proprietary Schools depends on that of the high public institutions
which are the trainers of schoolmasters, and whose certificates or
honours are the chief evidence, often the only tolerable evidence
available, to guide the proprietors in their choice.

Those who make the vices of mere trading education an argument for
supplementing it by something else, are charged with ignoring the
tendency which schools have, in common with other things, to improve
with the general progress of human affairs. But human affairs are seldom
improving in all directions at once, and it is doubtful if much of the
improvement that is now going on is taking the direction of trade
morality. Even in commerce properly so called—the legitimate province of
self-interest—where it is enough if the ruling motive is limited by
simple honesty, things do not look at present as if there were an
increasing tendency towards high-minded honour, conscientious abhorrence
of dishonest arts, and contempt of quackery. Even there the vastness of
the field, the greatness of the stakes now played for, and the
increasing difficulty to the public in judging rightly of transactions
or of character, are making the principle of competition bring forth a
kind of effects, the cure of which will have to be sought somewhere else
than in the corrective influence of competition itself. There is more
hope, doubtless, on the side of the parents. An increasing number of
them are probably acquiring somewhat better notions of what education
is, and a somewhat greater value for it. But experience proves that, of
all the modes of human improvement, this particular one is about the
slowest. The Edition: current; Page: [626] progress of the bulk of
mankind is not in any great degree a spontaneous thing. In a few of the
best and ablest it is spontaneous, and the others follow in their wake.
Where society must move all together, as in legislation and government,
the slowest get dragged on, at the price of a deplorable slackening in
the pace of the quickest movers; but where each has to act individually,
as in sending his children to school, and the power of the more advanced
is only that of their opinion and their example, the general mass may
long remain sadly behind.

However this may be, those cannot be accused of ignoring the
improvability of private schools, who propose the means by which their
improvement may most effectually be accelerated. Schools on the trading
principle will not be improved unless the parents insist on their
improvement, nor even then if, all other schools that are accessible
being equally bad, the dissatisfaction can have no practical effect. To
make those parents dissatisfied who care but little for good schooling,
or are bad judges, and at the same time to make it a necessity for
schoolmasters to pay regard to their dissatisfaction, there is but one
way; and this is, to give to those who cannot judge of the thing itself,
an external criterion to judge by; such as would be afforded by the
existence of a certain number of places of education with the prestige
of public sanction, giving, on a large and comprehensive scale, the best
teaching which it is found possible to provide.

But it is objected—and this is almost the staple of Mr. Lowe’s vigorous
pamphlet[*]—that injustice is done to private schools, and their
improvement impeded, by subsidising their competitors—bribing parents by
the pecuniary advantages of endowments, and enabling the endowed schools
to undersell the unendowed. There would be a great deal in this if the
endowed schools were sufficiently multiplied to supply the whole demand
for schooling. But a political economist need scarcely be reminded that
the price of a commodity is determined by that portion of the quantity
required which is produced and brought to market under the least
favourable circumstances. So long as private schools are wanted in
addition to public ones, there is no more fear of their being undersold
by them, than there is lest the owners and occupiers of the most fertile
soils should undersell those of the less productive. It may be true
that, under the present abuses of endowments, parents are sometimes
bribed to accept a bad education gratis; but the reformers of those
institutions do not propose that their funds should be employed in
giving gratuitous instruction to the children of the well-off classes,
or in enabling those who can pay for a good education to obtain it at
less than its value. Such, certainly, are not the intentions of the
Schools Enquiry Commissioners, who propose a far other application of
the Edition: current; Page: [627] funds of endowments than that of
artificially cheapening education to those who are able, and whose duty
it is, to pay its full price.

The endowments destined by the founders for purely elementary education
were not within the scope of the Commission: and respecting these there
is no difficulty, as they evidently ought to be applied in aid of that
general plan for making elementary instruction universal, which
statesmen and the public almost unanimously agree that it has become a
duty to provide. The endowments with which the Commissioners were
concerned were those that were intended to give an instruction superior
to the elementary. These they propose should be taken, large and small
together, to form, not indeed one common fund, but funds common to each
of the districts into which the country is divided for registration
purposes; each of these funds to be managed as a whole, and made to go
as far as it can in establishing good and large schools for that
district. This most judicious proposal is in accordance with one of the
great educational principles with which Mr. Chadwick has so
perseveringly identified himself—that there cannot be good teaching at a
moderate expense in small schools. In a small school the same master is
obliged to teach too many things, and to teach the same thing
simultaneously to scholars differing too much in their degree of
advancement; to the detriment necessarily of some, and generally of all.
The schools proposed by the Commissioners are of three different grades,
adapted not to adventitious differences in the quarter from whence the
pupils come, but to the number of years which their parents are able and
willing to spare for their instruction before they enter into active
life. But the most important of all the Commission’s recommendations,
showing an appreciation of the duties of society in the matter of
education, the most enlightened that ever yet proceeded from any public
authority in the United Kingdom, is that of which I have now to speak.
The State does not owe gratuitous education to those who can pay for it.
The State owes no more than elementary education to the entire body of
those who cannot pay for it. But the superior education which it does
not owe to the whole of the poorer population, it owes to the élite of
them—to those who have earned the preference by labour, and have shown
by the results that they have capacities worth securing for the higher
departments of intellectual work, never supplied in due proportion to
the demand. It is therefore proposed by the Commissioners that the
principal use made of the endowments should be to pay for the higher
education of those who, in the course of their elementary instruction,
have proved themselves to be of the sort on whom a higher education is
worth bestowing, but whose parents are not in a condition to pay the
price. The fruits of such a proposal, under any tolerable arrangements
for carrying it into effect, would be almost beyond human power to
estimate. The gain to society, by making available for its Edition:
current; Page: [628] most difficult work, not those alone who can afford
to qualify themselves, but all those who would qualify themselves if
they could afford it, would be but a part of the benefit. I believe
there is no single thing which would go so far to heal class
differences, and diminish the just dissatisfaction which the best of the
poorer classes of the nation feel with their position in it. The real
hardship of social inequalities to the poor, as the reasonable among
them can be brought to see, is not that men are unequal, but that they
are born so; not that those who are born poor do not obtain the great
objects of human desire unearned, but that the circumstances of their
birth preclude their earning them; that the higher positions in life,
including all which confer power or dignity, can not only be obtained by
the rich without taking the trouble to be qualified for them, but that
even were this corrected (to which there is an increasing tendency),
none, as a rule, except the rich, have it in their power to make
themselves qualified. By the proposal of the Commissioners, every child
of poor parents (for, of course, girls must sooner or later be
included), would have that power opened to him, if he passed with real
distinction through the course of instruction provided for all; and the
feelings which give rise to Socialism would be in a great measure
disarmed, in as much of them as is unreasonable or exaggerated, by this
just concession to that in them which is rational and legitimate.

It is not with this express purpose that the Commissioners have made the
recommendation; it is because they believe that in itself it would be
the greatest improvement in national education to which the endowments
provided for the superior departments of instruction could possibly be
applied. The work would be further carried on by the endowments of the
Universities; which are already partly expended in scholarships, to aid
the maintenance of those who have shown themselves worthy, but would not
otherwise be able, to pursue the studies of the University. There are
other important uses, which need not here be discussed, to which
University endowments may be, and to some extent are, very suitably
applied: for instance, the maintenance of professors, and in some cases
the encouragement of students, in kinds of knowledge never likely to be
sought by more than a few, but which it is of importance to mankind that
those few should have the means of finding; such as those ancient
languages which are chiefly valuable philologically; comparative
philology itself, which has of late years yielded such a harvest of
interesting and valuable knowledge; historical erudition in many of its
departments; and, it may be added, the highest branches of almost all
sciences, even physical: for the speculative researches which lead to
the grandest results in science are not those by which money can be made
in the general market.

One more point is too important to be omitted. Common justice requires,
and the Commissioners have urged—though their proposals in this respect
Edition: current; Page: [629] are far short of what they themselves
would probably desire—that in the employment of the endowments equal
provision should be made for the education of both sexes. Many of the
original endowments were for girls as well as boys; in the progress of
abuse the boys have very often had their rights filched from them, the
girls almost always. In one of the great endowed establishments of which
the efficiency has been least impaired by neglect or malversation,
Christ’s Hospital, the foundation was for both sexes: at present those
who benefit by it are eighteen girls and 1,192 boys. Considering that,
in the eyes of the law and of the State, one girl ought to count for
exactly as much as one boy, and that, as members of society, the good
education of women is almost more important than even that of men, it is
an essential part of a just scheme for the use of the means provided for
education that the benefit of them should be given alike to girls and to
boys, without preference or partiality.

Edition: current; Page: [630] Edition: current; Page: [631]


THORNTON ON LABOUR AND ITS CLAIMS
 1869

Edition: current; Page: [632]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Part I, Fortnightly Review, n.s. V (May, 1869), 505-18; Part II, ibid.
(June, 1869), 680-700. Signed; republished in D&D, IV (1875), 25-85.
Original heading, “Thornton on Labour and its Claims,” footnoted: “On
Labour, its Wrongful Claims and Rightful Dues, its Actual Present and
Possible Future. By William Thomas Thornton, Author of “A Plea for
Peasant Proprietors,” &c. London [: Macmillan], 1869. 14s.” Identified
in JSM’s bibliography as “Two articles on Mr. Thornton’s book ‘On
Labour’ in the Fortnightly Review of May 1, and June 1, 1869” (MacMinn,
99). No copy in Somerville College.

JSM originally offered, 16 March, 1869, to write on Thornton’s book for
the Edinburgh, but withdrew the offer on 22 March when the editor, Henry
Reeve, suggested that he combine his remarks on Thornton with a review
of the Report of the Trades Union Commission. Four days before
withdrawing, however, JSM wrote to Reeve, in part: “I shall have much
pleasure in writing a notice of Mr. Thornton’s book for the ‘Edinburgh
Review’, and shall, of course, put what I have to say in a form somewhat
different from that in which I should write for another publication. My
own point of view does not exactly coincide either with that of Mr.
Thornton or with that of the ‘Edinburgh’ Reviewer to whom he refers;
and, of course, I must be free to express my own view, and that only.”
He then summarizes Thornton’s views of the virtues and vices of trades
unions, and adds: “In these various opinions I entirely agree, and I
should feel bound to express them in anything I write on the subject. It
is for you to decide whether they would be unsuitable for publication in
the ‘E. Review.’ ” (Copy in the British Library of Political and
Economic Science.)

In the Preface to the 7th ed. (1871) of his Principles, JSM remarks that
since 1865 “there has been some instructive discussion on the theory of
Demand and Supply, and on the influence of Strikes and Trades Unions on
wages, by which additional light has been thrown on these subjects. . .”
(Collected Works, II, xciv), and goes on, in a footnote, to refer the
reader to this article and to Thornton’s reply in the 2nd ed. of his
book, for a view “of the present state of the discussion.”

In the following text three corrections are made on the basis of the
text in D&D, IV; the readings in the Fortnightly, identified as “69”,
are given as variants (see 642, 660, 666). Also the change required in
dispensing with the two-part division for the D&D republication is
indicated as a variant (see 646). Two errors introduced into the text of
D&D, IV, not noted below, occur at 643.16 and 664.34: in the former,
“accepted” is substituted for “excepted”; in the latter, “worthless” is
substituted for “worth less”. The variant at 667 derives from the one
known MS fragment of the article, in the Harvard University Library,
which was bought by G. H. Palmer with other MSS (mostly fragments) at
the sale (21 to 28 May, 1905) of JSM’s literary effects by Ramanille,
bookseller in Avignon, on Helen Taylor’s returning to England. The
fragment is given in full (except for cancellations), although some
wordings overlap; a hypothetical “will” is added to give syntactical
continuity.

Edition: current; Page: [633]


Thornton on Labour and Its Claims


PART I

mr. thornton long ago gave proof of his competency to the treatment of
some of the most important questions of practical political economy, by
two works of great merit, “Over Population and its Remedy,”[*] and “A
Plea for Peasant Proprietors.”[†] Of the latter of these especially it
may be said, that nothing but the total absence, at the time of its
publication, of any general interest in its subject, can account for its
not having achieved a high repute and a wide circulation. The lack of
interest in the subject has now ceased; opinion is rapidly advancing in
the direction which the author favours; and a new edition, with its
facts brought down to the latest date, would be welcomed by advanced
politicians, and would materially contribute to the formation of an
enlightened judgment on one of the economical questions on which truth
is most important, and prejudice still most rife.

The present work, though popular and attractive in style, is strictly
scientific in its principles and reasonings; and is therefore, as might
be expected, strictly impartial in its judgments. A considerable part of
the volume is employed in refuting the principles on which it is usual
to rest those claims and aspirations of the labouring classes, which
nevertheless the author, on better grounds, supports. No blind partisan
on either side of the feud of labour against capital, will relish the
book; but few persons of intelligence and impartiality who read it
through, will lay it down without having reason to feel that they
understand better than before some of the bearings of the questions
involved in that conflict.

To this great practical merit are to be added two of a more theoretic
kind, to the value of which I am the more called upon to bear testimony,
as on the particular points touched upon in this department I shall have
to express more difference than agreement. First: it contains a
discussion of one of the fundamental questions of abstract political
economy (the Edition: current; Page: [634] influence of demand and
supply on price), which is a real contribution to science, though, in my
estimation, an addition, and not, as the author thinks, a correction, to
the received doctrine. Secondly: in the attempt to go to the very bottom
of the question, what are the just rights of labour on one side, and
capital on the other, it raises the great issues respecting the
foundation of right and wrong, of justice and injustice, in a manner
highly provocative of thought. To lay down a definite doctrine of social
justice, as well as a distinct view of the natural laws of the exchange
of commodities, as the basis for the deductions of a work devoted to
such a subject as the principles and practice of Trades-Unionism, was
inseparable from the thoroughness with which the author has sought to do
his work. Every opinion as to the relative rights of labourers and
employers, involves expressly or tacitly some theory of justice, and it
cannot be indifferent to know what theory. Neither, again, can it be
decided in what manner the combined proceedings of labourers or of
employers affect the interests of either side, without a clear view of
the causes which govern the bargain between them—without a sound theory
of the law of wages.

Indeed, a theory of wages obtrusively meets the inquirer, at the
threshold of every question respecting the relations between labourers
and employers, and is commonly regarded as rendering superfluous any
further argument. It is laid down that wages, by an irresistible law,
depend on the demand and supply of labour, and can in no circumstances
be either more or less than what will distribute the existing wages-fund
among the existing number of competitors for employment. Those who are
content to set out from generally-received doctrines as from
self-evident axioms, are satisfied with this, and inquire no further.
But those who use their own understanding, and look closely into what
they assent to, are bound to ask themselves whether or in what sense
wages do depend on the demand and supply of labour, and what is meant by
the wages-fund.

The author of this work has asked himself these questions; and while he
is, as his writings give evidence, well versed in political economy, and
is able to hold his ground with the best in following out economical
laws into their more obscure and intricate workings, he has become
convinced that the barrier which seems to close the entrance into one of
the most important provinces of economical and social inquiry, is a
shadow which will vanish if we go boldly up to it. He is of opinion that
economists have mistaken the scientific law not only of the price of
labour, but of prices in general. It is an error, he thinks, that price,
or value in exchange, depends on supply and demand.

There is one sense, in which this proposition of Mr. Thornton would be
assented to by all economists; they none of them consider supply and
Edition: current; Page: [635] demand to be the ultimate regulators of
value.* That character, they hold, belongs to cost of production; always
supposing the commodity to be a product of labour, and natural or
artificial monopoly to be out of the question. Subject to these
conditions, all commodities, in the long run and on the average, tend to
exchange for one another (and, though this point is a little more
intricate, tend also to exchange for money) in the ratio of what it
costs, in labour and abstinence, to produce the articles and to bring
them to the place of sale. But though the average price of everything,
the price to which the producer looks forward for his remuneration, must
approximately conform to the cost of production, it is not so with the
price at any given moment. That is always held to depend on the demand
and supply at the moment. And the influence even of cost of production
depends on supply; for the only thing which compels price, on the
average, to conform to cost of production, is that if the price is
either above or below that standard, it is brought back to it either by
an increase or by a diminution of the supply; though, after this has
been effected, the supply adjusts itself to the demand which exists for
the commodity at the remunerating price. These are the limits within
which political economists consider supply and demand as the arbiters of
price. But even within these limits Mr. Thornton denies the doctrine.

Like all fair controversialists, Mr. Thornton directs his attack against
the strongest form of the opinion he assails. He does not much concern
himself with the infantine form of the theory, in which demand is
defined as a desire for the commodity, or as the desire combined with
the power of purchase; or in which price is supposed to depend on the
ratio between demand and supply. It is to be hoped that few are now
dwelling in this limbus infantum. Demand, to be capable of comparison
with supply, must be taken to mean, not a wish, nor a power, but a
quantity. Neither is it at any time a fixed quantity, but varies with
the price. Nor does the price Edition: current; Page: [636] depend on
any ratio. The demand and supply theory, when rightly understood—indeed
when capable of being understood at all—signifies, that the ratio which
exists between demand and supply, when the price has adjusted itself, is
always one of equality. If at the market price the demand exceeds the
supply, the competition of buyers will drive up the price to the point
at which there will only be purchasers for as much as is offered for
sale. If, on the contrary, the supply, being in excess of the demand,
cannot be all disposed of at the existing price, either a part will be
withdrawn to wait for a better market, or a sale will be forced by
offering it at such a reduction of price as will bring forward new
buyers, or tempt the old ones to increase their purchases. The law,
therefore, of values, as affected by demand and supply, is that they
adjust themselves so as always to bring about an equation between demand
and supply, by the increase of the one or the diminution of the other;
the movement of price being only arrested when the quantity asked for at
the current price, and the quantity offered at the current price, are
equal. This point of exact equilibrium may be as momentary, but is
nevertheless as real, as the level of the sea.

It is this doctrine which Mr. Thornton contests: and his mode of
combating it is by adducing case after case in which he thinks he can
show that the proposition is false; most of the cases being, on the face
of them, altogether exceptional; but among them they cover, in his
opinion, nearly the whole field of possible cases.

The first case, which is presented as the type of a class, rather than
for its intrinsic importance, is that of what is called a Dutch auction.

When a herring or mackerel boat has discharged on the beach, at Hastings
or Dover, last night’s take of fish, the boatmen, in order to dispose of
their cargo, commonly resort to a process called Dutch auction. The fish
are divided into lots, each of which is set up at a higher price than
the salesman expects to get for it, and he then gradually lowers his
terms, until he comes to a price which some bystander is willing to pay
rather than not have the lot, and to which he accordingly agrees.
Suppose on one occasion the lot to have been a hundredweight, and the
price agreed to twenty shillings. If, on the same occasion, instead of
the Dutch form of auction, the ordinary English mode had been adopted,
the result might have been different. The operation would then have
commenced by some bystander making a bid, which others might have
successively exceeded, until a price was arrived at beyond which no one
but the actual bidder could afford or was disposed to go. That sum would
not necessarily be twenty shillings; very possibly it might be only
eighteen shillings. The person who was prepared to pay the former price
might very possibly be the only person present prepared to pay even so
much as the latter price; and if so, he might get by English auction for
eighteen shillings the fish for which at Dutch auction he would have
paid twenty shillings. In the same market, with the same quantity of
fish for sale, and with customers in number and every other respect the
same, the same lot of fish might fetch two very different prices.

(Thornton, pp. 47-8.)

Edition: current; Page: [637]
This instance, though seemingly a trivial, is really a representative
one and a hundred cases could not show, better than this does, what Mr.
Thornton has and what he has not made out. He has proved that the law of
the equalisation of supply and demand is not the whole theory of the
particular case. He has not proved that the law is not strictly
conformed to in that case. In order to show that the equilisation of
supply and demand is not the law of price, what he has really shown is
that the law is, in this particular case, consistent with two different
prices, and is equally and completely fulfilled by either of them. The
demand and supply are equal at twenty shillings, and equal also at
eighteen shillings. The conclusion ought to be, not that the law is
false, for Mr. Thornton does not deny that in the case in question it is
fulfilled; but only, that it is not the entire law of the phenomenon.
The phenomenon cannot help obeying it, but there is some amount of
indeterminateness in its operation—a certain limited extent of variation
is possible within the bounds of the law; and as there must be a
sufficient reason for every variation in an effect, there must be a
supplementary law, which determines the effect, between the limits
within which the principal law leaves it free. Whoever can teach us this
supplementary law, makes a valuable addition to the scientific theory of
the subject; and we shall see presently that in substance, if not
strictly in form, Mr. Thornton does teach it. Even if he did not, he
would have shown the received theory to be incomplete; but he would not
have, nor has he now, shown it to be in the smallest degree incorrect.

What is more; when we look into the conditions required to make the
common theory inadequate, we find that, in the case at least which we
have now examined, the incompleteness it stands convicted of amounts to
an exceedingly small matter. To establish it, Mr. Thornton had to assume
that the customer who was prepared to pay twenty shillings for a
hundredweight of fish, was the only person present who was willing to
pay even so much as eighteen shillings. In other words, he supposed the
case to be an exception to the rule, that demand increases with
cheapness: and since this rule, though general, is not absolutely
universal, he is scientifically right. If there is a part of the scale
through which the price may vary without increasing or diminishing the
demand, the whole of that portion of the scale may fulfil the condition
of equality between supply and demand. But how many such cases really
exist? Among a few chafferers on the beach of a small fishing port, such
a case, though even there improbable, is not totally out of the
question. But where buyers are counted by thousands, or hundreds, or
even scores; in any considerable market—and, far more, in the general
market of the world—it is the next thing to impossible that more of the
commodity should not be asked for at every reduction of price. The
Edition: current; Page: [638] case of price, therefore, which the law of
the equalisation does not reach, is one which may be conceived, but
which, in practice, is hardly ever realised.

The next example which Mr. Thornton produces of the failure of supply
and demand as the law of price, is the following:—

Suppose two persons at different times, or in different places, to have
each a horse to sell, valued by the owner at £50; and that in the one
case there are two, and in the other three persons, of whom every one is
ready to pay £50 for the horse, though no one of them can afford to pay
more. In both cases supply is the same, viz., one horse at £50; but
demand is different, being in one case two, and in the other three,
horses at £50. Yet the price at which the horses will be sold will be
the same in both cases, viz., £50.

(P. 49.)

The law does fail in this case, as it failed in the former, but for a
different reason; not, as in the former case, because several prices
fulfil the condition equally well, but because no price fulfils it. At
£50 there is a demand for twice or three times the supply; at £50. 0s.
0¼d. there is no demand at all. When the scale of the demand for a
commodity is broken by so extraordinary a jump, the law fails of its
application; not, I venture to say, from any fault in the law, but
because the conditions on which its applicability depends do not exist.
If the peculiarities of the case do not permit the demand to be equal to
the supply, leaving it only the alternative of being greater or less,
greater or less it will be; and all that can be affirmed is, that it
will keep as near to the point of equality as it can. Instead of
conflicting with the law, this is the extreme case which proves the law.
The law is, that the price will be that which equalises the demand with
the supply; and the example proves that this only fails to be the case
when there is no price that would fulfil the condition, and that even
then, the same causes, still operating, keep the price at the point
which will most nearly fulfil it. Is it possible to have any more
complete confirmation of the law, than that in order to find a case in
which the price does not conform to the law, it is necessary to find one
in which there is no price that can conform to it?

Again:—

When a tradesman has placed upon his goods the highest price which any
one will pay for them, the price cannot, of course, rise higher, yet the
supply may be below the demand. A glover in a country town, on the eve
of an assize ball, having only a dozen pairs of white gloves in store,
might possibly be able to get ten shillings a pair for them. He would be
able to get this if twelve persons were willing to pay that price rather
than not go to the ball, or than go ungloved. But he could not get more
than this, even though, while he was still higgling with his first batch
of customers, a second batch, equally numerous and neither more nor less
eager, should enter his shop, and offer to pay the same Edition:
current; Page: [639] but not a higher price. The demand for gloves,
which at first had been just equal to the supply, would now be exactly
doubled, yet the price would not rise above ten shillings a pair. Such
abundance of proof is surely decisive against the supposition that price
must rise when demand exceeds supply.

(Pp. 51-2.)

Here, again, the author is obliged to suppose that the whole body of
customers (twenty-four in number) place the extreme limit of what they
are willing to pay rather than go without the article, exactly at the
same point—an exact repetition of the hypothesis about the horse who is
estimated at £50, and not a farthing more, by every one who is willing
to buy him. The case is just possible in a very small market—practically
impossible in the great market of the community. But, were it ever so
frequent, it would not impugn the truth of the law, but only its
all-comprehensiveness. It would show that the law is only fulfilled when
its fulfilment is, in the nature of things, possible, and that there are
cases in which it is impossible; but that even there the law takes
effect, up to the limit of possibility.

Mr. Thornton’s next position is, that if the equalisation theory were
literally true, it would be a truth of small significance, because—

Even if it were true that the price ultimately resulting from
competition is always one at which supply and demand are equalised,
still only a small proportion of the goods offered for sale would
actually be sold at any such price, since a dealer will dispose of as
much of his stock as he can at a higher price, before he will lower the
price in order to get rid of the remainder.

(P. 53.)

This is only saying that the law in question resembles other economical
laws in producing its effects not suddenly, but gradually. Though a
dealer may keep up his price until buyers actually fall off, or until he
is met by the competition of rival dealers, still if there is a larger
supply in the market than can be sold on these terms, his price will go
down until it reaches the point which will call forth buyers for his
entire stock; and when that point is reached it will not descend
further. A law which determines that the price of the commodity shall
fall, and fixes the exact point which the fall will reach, is not justly
described as “a truth of small significance” merely because the dealers,
not being dead matter, but voluntary agents, may resist for a time the
force to which they at last succumb. Limitations such as these affect
all economical laws, but are never considered to destroy their value. As
well might it be called an insignificant truth that there is a market
price of a commodity, because a customer who is ignorant, or in a hurry,
may pay twice as much for the thing as he could get it for at another
shop a few doors farther off.

The last objection of Mr. Thornton to the received theory, and the one
that he lays most stress upon, is, that it assumes “that goods are
offered Edition: current; Page: [640] for sale unreservedly, and that
dealers are always content to let them go for what they will fetch.”
This, however, he observes,—

Is scarcely ever—nay, might almost be said to be absolutely never—the
fact. With one notable exception, that of labour, commodities are almost
never offered unreservedly for sale; scarcely ever does a dealer allow
his goods to go for what they will immediately fetch—scarcely ever does
he agree to the price which would result from the actual state of supply
and demand, or, in other words, to the price at which he could
immediately sell the whole of his stock. Imagine the situation of a
merchant who could not afford to wait for customers, but was obliged to
accept for a cargo of corn, or sugar, or sundries, the best offer he
could get from the customers who first presented themselves; or imagine
a jeweller, or weaver, or draper, or grocer, obliged to clear out his
shop within twenty-four hours. The nearest approach ever made to such a
predicament is that of a bankrupt’s creditors selling off their debtor’s
effects at a proverbially ‘tremendous sacrifice;’ and even they are,
comparatively speaking, able to take their time. But the behaviour of a
dealer under ordinary pressure is quite different from that of a
bankrupt’s assignees. He first asks himself what is the best price which
is likely to be presently given, not for the whole, but for some
considerable portion of his stock, and he then begins selling, either at
that price or at such other price as proves upon trial to be the best
obtainable at the time. His supply of goods is probably immensely
greater than the quantity demanded at that price, but does he therefore
lower his terms? Not at all, and he sells as much as he can at that
price, and then, having satisfied the existing demand, he waits awhile
for further demand to spring up. In this way he eventually disposes of
his stock for many times the amount he must have been fain to accept if
he had attempted to sell off all at once. A corn dealer who in the
course of a season sells thousands of quarters of wheat at fifty
shillings per quarter, or thereabouts, would not get twenty shillings a
quarter if, as soon as his corn ships arrived, he was obliged to turn
the cargoes into money. A glover who, by waiting for customers, will no
doubt get three or four shillings a pair for all the gloves in his shop,
might not get sixpence a pair if he forced them on his customers. But
how is it that he manages to secure the higher price? Simply by not
selling unreservedly, simply by declining the price which would have
resulted from the relations between actual supply and actual demand, and
by setting up his goods at some higher price, below which he refuses to
sell.

(Pp. 55-6.)

I confess I cannot perceive that these considerations are subversive of
the law of demand and supply, nor that there is any ground for supposing
political economists to be unaware that when supply exceeds the demand,
the two may be equalised by subtracting from the supply as well as by
adding to the demand. Reserving a price is, to all intents and purposes,
withdrawing supply. When no more than forty shillings a head can be
obtained for sheep, all sheep whose owners are determined not to sell
them for less than fifty shillings are out of the market, and form no
part at all of the supply which is now determining price. They may have
been offered for sale, but they have been withdrawn. They are held back,
waiting for some future time, which their owner hopes may be more
advantageous to him; and they will be an element in determining the
price when that time Edition: current; Page: [641] comes, or when,
ceasing to expect it, or obliged by his necessities, he consents to sell
his sheep for what he can get. In the meanwhile, the price has been
determined without any reference to his withheld stock, and determined
in such a manner that the demand at that price shall (if possible) be
equal to the supply which the dealers are willing to part with at that
price. The economists who say that market price is determined by demand
and supply do not mean that it is determined by the whole supply which
would be forthcoming at an unattainable price, any more than by the
whole demand that would be called forth if the article could be had for
an old song. They mean that, whatever the price turns out to be, it will
be such that the demand at that price, and the supply at that price,
will be equal to one another. To this proposition Mr. Thornton shows an
undeniable exception in the case of a dealer who holds out for a price
which he can obtain for a part of his supply, but cannot obtain for the
whole. In that case, undoubtedly, the price obtained is not that at
which the demand is equal to the supply; but the reason is the same as
in one of the cases formerly considered; because there is no such price.
At the actual price the supply exceeds the demand; at a farthing less
the whole supply would be withheld. Such a case might easily happen if
the dealer had no competition to fear; not easily if he had: but on no
supposition does it contradict the law. It falls within the one case in
which Mr. Thornton has shown that the law is not fulfilled—namely, when
there is no price that would fulfil it; either the demand or the supply
advancing or receding by such violent skips, that there is no halting
point at which it just equals the other element.

Do I then mean to say that Mr. Thornton is entirely wrong in his
interpretation of the cases which he suggests, and has pointed out no
imperfection in the current theory? Even if it were so, it would not
follow that he has rendered no service to science. “There is always a
benefit done to any department of knowledge by digging about the roots
of its truths.”[*] Scientific laws always come to be better understood
when able thinkers and acute controversialists stir up difficulties
respecting them, and confront them with facts which they had not yet
been invoked to explain. But Mr. Thornton has done much more than this.
The doctrine he controverts, though true, is not the whole truth. It is
not the entire law of the phenomenon; for he has shown, and has been the
first to show, that there are cases which it does not reach. And he has,
if not fully defined, at least indicated, the causes which govern the
effect in those exceptional cases. If there is a fault to be found with
him, it is one that he has in common with all those improvers of
political economy by whom new and just views “have been promulgated as
contradictions of the doctrines previously Edition: current; Page: [642]
received as fundamental, instead of being, what they almost always are,
developments of them;”[*] the almost invariable error of those political
economists, for example, who have set themselves in opposition to
Ricardo.

Let us, by Mr. Thornton’s aid, endeavour to fix our ideas respecting
that portion of the law of price which is not provided for by the common
theory. When the equation of demand and supply leaves the price in part
indeterminate, because there is more than one price which would fulfil
the law; neither sellers nor buyers are under the action of any motives,
derived from supply and demand, to give way to one another. Much will,
in that case, depend on which side has the initiative of price. This is
well exemplified in Mr. Thornton’s supposed Dutch auction. The commodity
might go no higher than eighteen shillings if the offers came from the
buyers’ side, but because they come from the seller the price reaches
twenty shillings. Now, Mr. Thornton has well pointed out that this case,
though exceptional among auctions, is normal as regards the general
acoursea of trade. As a general rule, the initiative of price does rest
with the dealers, and the competition which modifies it is the
competition of dealers.* When, therefore, several prices are consistent
with carrying off the whole supply, the dealers are tolerably certain to
hold out for the highest of those prices; for they have no motive to
compete with one another in cheapness, there being room for them all at
the higher price. On the other hand, the buyers are not compelled by
each other’s competition to pay that higher price; for (since, by
supposition the case is one in which a fall of price does not call forth
an additional demand) if the buyers hold out for a lower price and get
it, their gain may be permanent. The price, in this case, becomes simply
a question whether sellers or buyers hold out longest; and depends on
their comparative patience, or on the degree of inconvenience they are
respectively put to by delay.

By this time, I think, an acute reader, who sees towards what results a
course of inquiry is tending before the conclusion is drawn, will begin
to perceive that Mr. Thornton’s improvements in the theory of price,
minute as they appear when reduced to their real dimensions, and
unimportant as they must necessarily be in the common case in which
supply and demand are but disturbing causes, and cost of production the
real law of Edition: current; Page: [643] the phenomenon, may be of very
great practical importance in the case which suggested the whole train
of thought, the remuneration of labour. If it should turn out that the
price of labour falls within one of the excepted cases—the case which
the law of equality between demand and supply does not provide for,
because several prices all agree in satisfying that law; we are already
able to see that the question between one of those prices and another
will be determined by causes which operate strongly against the
labourer, and in favour of the employer. For, as the author observes,
there is this difference between the labour market and the market for
tangible commodities, that in commodities it is the seller, but in
labour it is the buyer, who has the initiative in fixing the price. It
is the employer, the purchaser of labour, who makes the offer of wages;
the dealer, who is in this case the labourer, accepts or refuses.
Whatever advantage can be derived from the initiative is, therefore, on
the side of the employer. And in that contest of endurance between buyer
and seller, by which alone, in the excepted case, the price so fixed can
be modified, it is almost needless to say that nothing but a close
combination among the employed can give them even a chance of
successfully contending against the employers.

It will of course be said, that these speculations are idle, for labour
is not in that barely possible excepted case. Supply and demand do
entirely govern the price obtained for labour. The demand for labour
consists of the whole circulating capital of the country, including what
is paid in wages for unproductive labour. The supply is the whole
labouring population. If the supply is in excess of what the capital can
at present employ, wages must fall. If the labourers are all employed,
and there is a surplus of capital still unused, wages will rise. This
series of deductions is generally received as incontrovertible. They are
found, I presume, in every systematic treatise on political economy, my
own certainly included. I must plead guilty to having, along with the
world in general, accepted the theory without the qualifications and
limitations necessary to make it admissible.[*]

The theory rests on what may be called the doctrine of the wages fund.
There is supposed to be, at any given instant, a sum of wealth, which is
unconditionally devoted to the payment of wages of labour. This sum is
not regarded as unalterable, for it is augmented by saving, and
increases with the progress of wealth; but it is reasoned upon as at any
given moment a predetermined amount. More than that amount it is assumed
that the wages-receiving class cannot possibly divide among them; that
amount, and no less, they cannot but obtain. So that, the sum to be
divided being fixed, the wages of each depend solely on the divisor, the
number of participants. In this doctrine it is by implication affirmed,
that the demand for Edition: current; Page: [644] labour not only
increases with the cheapness, but increases in exact proportion to it,
the same aggregate sum being paid for labour whatever its price may be.

But is this a true representation of the matter of fact? Does the
employer require more labour, or do fresh employers of labour make their
appearance, merely because it can be bought cheaper? Assuredly, no.
Consumers desire more of an article, or fresh consumers are called
forth, when the price has fallen: but the employer does not buy labour
for the pleasure of consuming it; he buys it that he may profit by its
productive powers, and he buys as much labour and no more as suffices to
produce the quantity of his goods which he thinks he can sell to
advantage. A fall of wages does not necessarily make him expect a larger
sale for his commodity, nor, therefore, does it necessarily increase his
demand for labour.

To this it may be replied, that though possibly he may employ no more
labour in his own business when wages are lower, yet if he does not, the
same amount of capital will be no longer required to carry on his
operations; and as he will not be willing to leave the balance
unemployed, he will invest it in some other manner, perhaps in a joint
stock company, or in public securities, where it will either be itself
expended in employing labour, or will liberate some other person’s
capital to be so expended, and the whole of the wages-fund will be
paying wages as before.

But is there such a thing as a wages-fund, in the sense here implied?
Exists there any fixed amount which, and neither more nor less than
which, is destined to be expended in wages?

Of course there is an impassable limit to the amount which can be so
expended; it cannot exceed the aggregate means of the employing classes.
It cannot come up to those means; for the employers have also to
maintain themselves and their families. But, short of this limit, it is
not, in any sense of the word, a fixed amount.

In the common theory, the order of ideas is this. The capitalist’s
pecuniary means consist of two parts—his capital, and his profits or
income. His capital is what he starts with at the beginning of the year,
or when he commences some round of business operations: his income he
does not receive until the end of the year, or until the round of
operations is completed. His capital, except such part as is fixed in
buildings and machinery, or laid out in materials, is what he has got to
pay wages with. He cannot pay them out of his income, for he has not yet
received it. When he does receive it, he may lay by a portion to add to
his capital, and as such it will become part of next year’s wages-fund,
but has nothing to do with this year’s.

This distinction, however, between the relation of the capitalist to his
capital, and his relation to his income, is wholly imaginary. He starts
at Edition: current; Page: [645] the commencement with the whole of his
accumulated means, all of which is potentially capital: and out of this
he advances his personal and family expenses, exactly as he advances the
wages of his labourers. He of course intends to pay back the advance out
of his profits when he receives them; and he does pay it back day by
day, as he does all the rest of his advances; for it needs scarcely be
observed that his profit is made as his transactions go on, and not at
Christmas or Midsummer, when he balances his books. His own income,
then, so far as it is used and expended, is advanced from his capital
and replaced from the returns, pari passu with the wages he pays. If we
choose to call the whole of what he possesses applicable to the payment
of wages, the wages-fund, that fund is co-extensive with the whole
proceeds of his business, after keeping up his machinery, buildings and
materials, and feeding his family; and it is expended jointly upon
himself and his labourers. The less he expends on the one, the more may
be expended on the other, and vice versâ. The price of labour, instead
of being determined by the division of the proceeds between the employer
and the labourers, determines it. If he gets his labour cheaper, he can
afford to spend more upon himself. If he has to pay more for labour, the
additional payment comes out of his own income; perhaps from the part
which he would have saved and added to capital, thus anticipating his
voluntary economy by a compulsory one; perhaps from what he would have
expended on his private wants or pleasures. There is no law of nature
making it inherently impossible for wages to rise to the point of
absorbing not only the funds which he had intended to devote to carrying
on his business, but the whole of what he allows for his private
expenses, beyond the necessaries of life. The real limit to the rise is
the practical consideration, how much would ruin him, or drive him to
abandon the business: not the inexorable limits of the wages-fund.

In short, there is abstractedly available for the payment of wages,
before an absolute limit is reached, not only the employer’s capital,
but the whole of what can possibly be retrenched from his personal
expenditure; and the law of wages, on the side of demand, amounts only
to the obvious proposition, that the employers cannot pay away in wages
what they have not got. On the side of supply, the law as laid down by
economists remains intact. The more numerous the competitors for
employment, the lower, cæteris paribus, will wages be. It would be a
complete misunderstanding of Mr. Thornton to suppose that he raises any
question about this, or that he has receded from the opinions enforced
in his former writings respecting the inseparable connection of the
remuneration of labour with the proportion between population and the
means of subsistence.

But though the population principle and its consequences are in no way
touched by anything that Mr. Thornton has advanced, in another of its
Edition: current; Page: [646] bearings the labour question, considered
as one of mere economics, assumes a materially changed aspect. The
doctrine hitherto taught by all or most economists (including myself),
which denied it to be possible that trade combinations can raise wages,
or which limited their operation in that respect to the somewhat earlier
attainment of a rise which the competition of the market would have
produced without them,—this doctrine is deprived of its scientific
foundation, and must be thrown aside. The right and wrong of the
proceedings of Trades’ Unions becomes a common question of prudence and
social duty, not one which is peremptorily decided by unbending
necessities of political economy.

I have stated this argument in my own way, which is not exactly Mr.
Thornton’s; but the reasoning is essentially his, though, in a part of
it, I have only been anticipated by him. I have already shown in what I
consider his exposition of the abstract question to be faulty. I think
that the improvement he has made in the theory of price is a case of
growth, not of revolution. But in its application to labour, it does not
merely add to our speculative knowledge; it destroys a prevailing and
somewhat mischievous error. It has made it necessary for us to
contemplate, not as an impossibility but as a possibility, that
employers, by taking advantage of the inability of labourers to hold
out, may keep wages lower than there is any natural necessity for; and è
converso, that if work-people can by combination be enabled to hold out
so long as to cause an inconvenience to the employers greater than that
of a rise of wages, a rise may be obtained which, but for the
combination, not only would not have happened so soon, but possibly
might not have happened at all. The power of Trades’ Unions may
therefore be so exercised as to obtain for the labouring classes
collectively, both a larger share and a larger positive amount of the
produce of labour; increasing, therefore, one of the two factors on
which the remuneration of the individual labourer depends. The other and
still more important factor, the number of sharers, remains unaffected
by any of the considerations now adduced.

The most serious obstacle to a right judgment concerning the efficacy
and tendencies of Trades’ Unions, and the prospects of labour as
affected by them, having thus been removed, the author has a free field
for the untrammelled discussion of those topics. bBut the due
consideration of them as presented in his work, requires an article to
itself.


PART II

In a former article it has beenb seen how Mr. Thornton, in the first
chapter of his First Book, disproved, on grounds of pure political
economy, the Edition: current; Page: [647] supposed natural law by
which, in the opinion of many, the price of labour is as strictly
determined as the motion of the earth, and determined in a manner
unalterable by the will or effort of either party to the transaction.
But whatever in the affairs of mankind is not peremptorily decided for
them by natural laws, falls under the jurisdiction of the moral law.
Since there is a certain range, wider than has been generally believed,
within which the price of labour is decided by a conflict of wills
between employers and labourers, it is necessary, as in every other case
of human voluntary action, to ascertain the moral principles by which
this conflict ought to be regulated. The terms of the bargain not being
a matter of necessity, but, within certain limits, of choice, it has to
be considered how far either side can rightfully press its claims, and
take advantage of its opportunities. Or, to express the same ideas in
other phraseology, it has to be decided whether there are any rights, of
labour on the one hand, or of capital on the other, which would be
violated if the opposite party pushed its pretensions to the extreme
limits of economic possibility.

To this Mr. Thornton answers,—None. As a matter of mere right, both the
employer and the labourer, while they abstain from force or fraud, are
entitled to all that they can get, and to nothing more than what they
can get. The terms of their contract, provided it is voluntary on both
sides, are the sole rule of justice between them. No one being under any
obligation of justice to employ labour at all, still less is any one
bound in justice to pay for it any given price.

Except under the terms of some mutual agreement, the employer is not
bound to give anything. Before joining in the agreement he was under no
obligation to furnish the labourer with occupation. Either he might not
have required his or any one else’s services, or he might have preferred
to employ some one else. But if he was not bound to furnish employment
at all, à fortiori he was not bound to furnish it on any particular
terms. If, therefore, he did consent to furnish it, he had a right to
dictate his own terms; and whatever else those terms might be, however
harsh, illiberal, exorbitant, or what you will, they could not, at any
rate or by any possibility, be unjust. For they could only be unjust in
so far as they deviated from some particular terms which justice might
have exacted. But, as we have seen, there were no such terms, and it is
manifestly absurd to condemn a thing merely because its limits do not
coincide with those of an abstraction incapable of being realised or
defined, incapable, that is to say, of having any limits at all.

(Thornton, p. 111.)

The counter-theory, on which the labourer’s side of the question is
usually argued, “that every man who has not by crime forfeited the
right, and who has no other means of living, has a right to live by
labour,” [p. 88] Mr. Thornton entirely rejects.

Although [he says] these pages have little other object than that of
determining how the labouring classes may most easily and effectually
obtain fully as much as they ever dreamt of asking, the writer is
constrained, even in the Edition: current; Page: [648] interest of those
classes, to protest against the theory set up in their behalf. No cause
can be permanently maintained that is suffered to rest on fallacies; and
one pervading fallacy, beginning at the very first link, runs through
the whole chain of reasoning of which the theory consists.

The right of the poor to live by labour, affirmed as unhesitatingly as
if it were a self-evident proposition beyond the possibility of dispute,
is explained to mean not merely the right so to live if they can
themselves find the means, but to have the means supplied by others if
they cannot themselves obtain them, and to have them supplied, nominally
by society at large, but really by the richer portion of it, the rich
alone being in a position to furnish what is required. But right on the
one side necessarily implies corresponding obligation on the other; and
how can society, or how can the rich, have incurred the obligation of
maintaining in the world those whom they were in no degree instrumental
in bringing into it? Only, if at all, in one or other of two ways.
Either mankind were placed in possession of the earth which they inhabit
on condition, expressed or implied, that the wants of all the earth’s
human inhabitants should be provided for from its produce; or part of
those inhabitants have, by some communal act or institution of the whole
body, been dispossessed of the means of providing for themselves. But in
the first of these hypotheses, in order that the supposed condition
should be equitable, it would be necessary that the earth should be
capable of producing enough for the wants of whatever number of
inhabitants might obtain footing upon it; whereas it is demonstrable
that population would infallibly everywhere speedily outrun subsistence,
if the earth’s produce were freely accessible to all who had need. Of
the other supposition, it is to be remarked that the only institution
that has ever been accused of producing the alleged effect is the
institution of property; and very slight advocacy will suffice to
absolve an institution from the charge of depriving people of that
which, but for itself, could not have existed. Let it be admitted that
the earth was bestowed by the Creator, not on any privileged class or
classes, but on all mankind, and on all successive generations of men,
so that no one generation can have more than a life interest in the
soil, or be entitled to alienate the birthright of succeeding
generations. Let this be admitted, and the admission is surely large
enough to satisfy the most uncompromising champion of the natural rights
of man. Still it is certain that those rights, if fully exercised, must
inevitably have proved themselves to be so far worse than worthless, as
to have prevented any but a very minute fraction of the existing number
of claimants from being born to claim them. The earth, if
unappropriated, must also have remained untilled, and consequently
comparatively unproductive. Anything like the world’s actual population
could not possibly have been in existence, nor, if it had been, would a
whole year’s growth of the earth’s natural produce have sufficed for the
subsistence of the earth’s inhabitants during a single day. The utmost
of which the poor have been dispossessed by the institution of property
is their fair proportion of what the earth could have produced if it had
remained unappropriated. Compensation for this is the utmost which is
due to them from society, and the debt is obviously so infinitesimally
small, that the crumbs which habitually fall from the tables of the rich
are amply sufficient to pay it.

If these things be so, a strict debtor and creditor account between rich
and poor would show no balance against the former. Society cannot
properly be said to owe anything to the poor beyond what it is
constantly and regularly Edition: current; Page: [649] paying. It is not
bound in equity, whatever it may be in charity, to find food for the
hungry because they are in need, nor to find occupation for the
unemployed because they are out of work. By withholding aid, it is not
guilty of the smallest injustice. For injustice implies violation of a
right; and not only can there be no breach of right without disregard of
a corresponding obligation, but that only can be a right the breach or
denial of which constitutes a wrong. But wrong is committed only when
some good which is due is withheld, or when some evil which is not due
is inflicted. Applying this test, we shall find that the poor, as such,
have no unliquidated claim against the rich. The latter are doing them
no wrong, are guilty of no injustice towards them in merely abstaining
from paying a debt which, whether due to the poor or not, is, at any
rate, not due to them from the rich. It was not the rich who placed the
poor on the earth, and it is not the rich who owe them the means of
living here. How far the poor may be forgiven for complaining, as of a
grievance, of having been placed here without adequate means of living,
may possibly be a question for the theologian. But the political
economist may fairly content himself with showing that the grievance is,
at any rate, not one with which they can reproach any of their
fellow-creatures, except their own parents. No other portion of society
was a party to the transaction, and no other portion can justly be
responsible for its consequences.*

(Pp. 91-94.)

It is unnecessary to quote the application of these principles to the
particular case of contracts for labour.

Edition: current; Page: [650]
Here, then, are two theories of justice arrayed against each other in
order of battle: theories differing in their first principles, markedly
opposed in their conclusions, and both of them doctrines à priori,
claiming to command assent by their own light—to be evident by simple
intuition: a pretension which, as the two are perfectly inconsistent,
must, in the case of one or other of them, be unfounded, and may be so
in the case of both. Such conflicts in the domain of ethics are highly
instructive, but their value is chiefly negative; the principal use of
each of the contrary theories is to destroy the other. Those who cherish
any one of the numerous à priori systems of moral duty, may learn from
such controversies how plausible a case may be made for other à priori
systems repugnant to their own; and the adepts of each may discover,
that while the maxims or axioms from which they severally set out are
all of them good, each in its proper place, yet what that proper place
is, can only be decided, not by mental intuition, but by the thoroughly
practical consideration of consequences; in other words, by the general
interest of society and mankind, mental and bodily, intellectual,
emotional, and physical, taken together. Mr. Thornton seems to admit the
general happiness as the criterion of social virtue, but not of positive
duty—not of justice and injustice in the strict sense: and he imagines
that it is in making a distinction between these two ideas that his
doctrine differs from that of utilitarian moralists. But this is not the
case. Utilitarian morality fully recognises the distinction between the
province of positive duty and that of virtue, but maintains that the
standard and rule of both is the general interest. From the utilitarian
point of view, the distinction between them is the following:—There are
many acts, and a still greater number of Edition: current; Page: [651]
forbearances, the perpetual practice of which by all is so necessary to
the general well-being, that people must be held to it compulsorily,
either by law, or by social pressure. These acts and forbearances
constitute duty. Outside these bounds there is the innumerable variety
of modes in which the acts of human beings are either a cause, or a
hindrance, of good to their fellow-creatures, but in regard to which it
is, on the whole, for the general interest that they should be left
free; being merely encouraged, by praise and honour, to the performance
of such beneficial actions as are not sufficiently stimulated by
benefits flowing from them to the agent himself. This larger sphere is
that of Merit or Virtue.

The anxiety of moralists for some more definite standard of judgment
than the happiness of mankind appears to them to be, or for some first
principle which shall have a greater hold on the feeling of obligation
than education has yet given to the idea of the good of our
fellow-creatures, makes them eager to erect into an axiom of morals any
one of the familiar corollaries from the principle of general utility,
which, from the impressiveness of the cases to which it is applicable,
has taken a deep root in the popular mind, and gathered round itself a
considerable amount of human feeling. When they have made choice of any
such maxim, they follow it out as if there were no others of equal
authority by which its application ought to be limited; or with only as
much regard to those limitations, as the amount of common sense
possessed by the particular thinker peremptorily enforces upon him as a
practical being. The two opposite theories of social justice set forth
by Mr. Thornton—the Rousseau or Proudhon theory, and his own—are cases
of this description. The former of these, according to which all private
appropriation of any of the instruments of production was a wrong from
the beginning, and an injury to the rest of mankind, there is neither
room, nor is it necessary, here to discuss. But I venture to think that,
on intuitional grounds, there is quite as much to be said for it as for
the rival theory. Mr. Thornton must admit that the Rousseau doctrine, in
its most absolute form, has charmed great numbers of human beings,
including not merely those to whose apparent interests it was
favourable, but many of those to whom it was hostile; that it has
satisfied their highest conceptions of justice and moral right, and has
the “note” of intuitive truth as completely as the principles from which
his own system is a deduction. Still more may this be said of the more
moderate forms of the same theory. “Justice is supposed”—erroneously in
the author’s opinion—“to require that a labourer’s remuneration should
correspond with his wants and his merits” (p. 111). If justice is an
affair of intuition—if we are guided to it by the immediate and
spontaneous perceptions of the moral sense—what doctrines of justice are
there, on which the human race would more instantaneously and with one
accord put the stamp of its recognition, than Edition: current; Page:
[652] these—that it is just that each should have what he deserves, and
that, in the dispensation of good things, those whose wants are most
urgent should have the preference? In conscience, can it be expected
that any one, who has grounded his social theories on these maxims,
should discard them in favour of what Mr. Thornton tenders instead—viz.,
that no one is accountable for any evil which he has not produced by
some violence, fraud, or breach of engagement of his own; and that,
these things apart, no one has any ground of complaint for his lot on
earth, against those who had no hand in placing him here? Mr. Thornton
himself concedes so much, as not positively to deny the justice of the
maxims which he practically repudiates; but regards their violation as a
grievance (if grievance at all) against the general order of the
universe, and not against society, or the employers of labour. But if
there be in the natural constitution of things something patently
unjust—something contrary to sentiments of justice, which sentiments,
being intuitive, are supposed to have been implanted in us by the same
Creator who made the order of things that they protest against—do not
these sentiments impose on us the duty of striving, by all human means,
to correct the injustice? And if, on the contrary, we avail ourselves of
it for our own personal advantage, do we not make ourselves
participators in injustice—allies and auxiliaries of the Evil Principle?

While the author’s intuitive theory of right and wrong has thus no
advantage in point of intuitive evidence over the doctrine which it is
brought to contradict, it illustrates an incurable defect of all these à
priori theories—that their most important applications may be rebutted
without denying their premises. To point out in what manner this
consequence arises out of the inherent nature of such theories, would
detain us too long; but the examples afforded of it by the author’s
theory are numerous and remarkable.

Take, for instance, what seems the strongest point in his principal
argument—viz., that the institution of property in land does not deprive
the poor of anything except “their fair proportion of what the earth
could have produced if it had remained unappropriated;” that is, little
or nothing—since, if unappropriated, it would have been untilled, and
its spontaneous produce would have yielded sustenance to only a very
small number of human beings. This may be an answer to Rousseau, though
even to him not a complete one;* but it is no answer to the Socialists
of the present day. These are, in general, willing enough to admit that
property in land was a Edition: current; Page: [653] necessary
institution in early ages, and until mankind were sufficiently civilised
to be capable of managing their affairs in common for the general
benefit. But when this time has arrived—and according to them it has
arrived—the legitimacy of private landed property, they contend, has
ceased, and mankind at large ought now to re-enter on their inheritance.
They deny the claim of the first possessors to impose fetters on all
generations, and to prevent the species at large from resuming rights of
which, for good but temporary reasons, it had suspended the exercise.
Society made the concession, and society can at any moment take it back.

Again, the author, in his chapter on the Rights of Capital [pp. 124ff.],
very truly and forcibly argues, that these are a portion of the rights
of labour. They are the rights of past labour, since labour is the
source of all capital; and are sacred, in the same sense, and in an
equal degree, with those of present labour. From this he deduces the
equal legitimacy of any contract for employment, which past labour may
impose on the necessities of present labour, provided there is no taint
of force or fraud. But is there no taint of force or fraud in the
original title of many owners of past labour? The author states the case
as if all property, from the beginning of time, had been honestly come
by; either produced by the labour of the owner himself, or bestowed on
him by gift or bequest from those whose labour did produce it. But how
stands the fact? Landed property at least, in all the countries of
modern Europe, derives its origin from force; the land was taken by
military violence from former possessors, by those from whom it has been
transmitted to its present owners. True, much of it has changed hands by
purchase, and has come into the possession of persons who had earned the
purchase-money by their labour; but the sellers could not impart to
others a better title than they themselves possessed. Movable property,
no doubt, has on the whole a purer origin, its first acquirers having
mostly worked for it, at something useful to their fellow-citizens. But,
looking at the question merely historically, and confining our attention
to the larger masses, the doctrine that the rights of capital are those
of past labour is liable even here to great abatements. Putting aside
what has been acquired by fraud, or by the many modes of taking
advantage of circumstances, which are deemed fair in commerce, though a
person of a delicate conscience would scruple to use them in most of the
other concerns of life—omitting all these considerations, how many of
the great commercial fortunes have been, at least partly, built up by
practices which in a better state of society would have been
impossible—jobbing contracts, profligate loans, or other abuses of
Government expenditure, improper use of public positions, monopolies,
and other bad laws, or perhaps only by the manifold advantages which
imperfect social institutions gave to those who are already rich, over
their poorer fellow-citizens, in the general struggle of life? We
Edition: current; Page: [654] may be told that there is such a thing as
prescription, and that a bad title may become a good one by lapse of
time. It may, and there are excellent reasons of general utility why it
should; but there would be some difficulty in establishing this position
from any à priori principle. It is of great importance to the good order
and comfort of the world that an amnesty should be granted to all wrongs
of so remote a date that the evidence necessary for the ascertainment of
title is no longer accessible, or that the reversal of the wrong would
cause greater insecurity and greater social disturbance than its
condonation. This is true, but I believe that no person ever succeeded
in reconciling himself to the conviction, without doing considerable
violence to what is called the instinctive sentiment of justice. It is
not at all conformable to intuitive morality that a wrong should cease
to be a wrong because of what is really an aggravation, its durable
character; that because crime has been successful for a certain limited
period, society for its own convenience should guarantee its success for
all time to come. Accordingly, those who construct their systems of
society upon the natural rights of man, usually add to the word natural
the word imprescriptible, and strenuously maintain that it is impossible
to acquire a fee-simple in an injustice.

Yet one more example, to show the ease with which conclusions that seem
to follow absolutely from an à priori theory of justice can be defeated
by other deductions from the same premises. According to the author,
however inadequate the remuneration of labour may be, the labourer has
no grievance against society, because society is not the cause of the
insufficiency, nor did society ever bargain with him, or bind itself to
him by any engagement, guaranteeing a particular amount of remuneration.
And, this granted, the author assumes (at p. 394 and elsewhere) as a
logical consequence, that proprietors must not be interfered with, out
of regard to the interests of labour, in the perfectly free use of their
property conformably to their own inclination. Now, if this point were
being argued as a practical question, on utilitarian grounds, there
probably would be little difference between Mr. Thornton’s conclusions
and my own. I should stand up for the free disposal of property as
strongly, and most likely with only the same limitations, as he would.
But we are now on à priori ground, and while that is the case, I must
insist upon having the consequences of principles carried out to the
full. What matters it that, according to the author’s theory, the
employer does no wrong in making the use he does of his capital, if the
same theory would justify the employed in compelling him by law to make
a different use—if the labourers would in no way infringe the definition
of justice by taking the matter into their own hands, and establishing
by law any modification of the rights of property which in their opinion
would increase the remuneration of their labour? And, on the Edition:
current; Page: [655] author’s principles, this right cannot be denied
them. The existing social arrangements, and law itself, exist in virtue
not only of the forbearance, but of the active support of the labouring
classes. They could effect the most fundamental changes in the whole
order of society by simply withholding their concurrence. Suppose that
they, who being the numerical majority cannot be controlled except by
their own tacit consent, should come to the conclusion (for example)
that it is not essential to the benefits of the institution of property
that wealth should be allowed to accumulate in large masses; and should
consequently resolve to deny legal protection to all properties
exceeding a certain amount. There are the strongest utilitarian reasons
against their doing this; but on the author’s principles, they have a
right to do it. By this mere abstinence from doing what they have never
promised nor in any way bound themselves to do, they could extort the
consent of the rich to any modification of proprietary rights which they
might consider to be for their advantage. They might bind the rich to
take the whole burden of taxation upon themselves. They might bind them
to give employment, at liberal wages, to a number of labourers in a
direct ratio to the amount of their incomes. They might enforce on them
a total abolition of inheritance and bequest. All this would be a very
wrong use of their power of withholding protection; but only because the
conditions imposed would be injurious, instead of beneficial, to the
public weal. Nor do I see what arguments, except utilitarian ones, are
open to the author for condemning them. Even the manifest obligation of
making the changes with the least possible detriment to the interests
and feelings of the existing generation of proprietors, it would be
extremely difficult to deduce from the author’s premises, without
calling in other maxims of justice than his theory recognises.

It is almost needless for me to repeat that these things are said, not
with a view to draw any practical conclusions respecting the rights of
labour, but to show that no practical conclusions of any kind can be
drawn from such premises; and because I think, with Mr. Thornton, that
when we are attempting to determine a question of social ethics, we
should make sure of our ethical foundation. On the questions between
employers and labourers, or on any other social questions, we can
neither hope to find, nor do we need, any better criterion than the
interest, immediate and ultimate, of the human race. But the author’s
treatment of the subject will have a useful effect if it leads any of
those friends of democracy and equality, who disdain the prosaic
consideration of consequences, and demand something more high-flown as
the ground on which to rest the rights of the human race, to perceive
how easy it is to frame a theory of justice that shall positively deny
the rights considered by them as so transcendent, and which yet shall
make as fair a claim as theirs to an intuitive character, and shall
command by its Edition: current; Page: [656] à priori evidence the full
conviction of as enlightened a thinker, and as warm a supporter of the
principal claims of the labouring classes, as the author of the work
before us.

The author’s polemic against the doctrines commonly preached by the
metaphysical theorists of the Cause of Labour, is not without other
points of usefulness. Not only are those theorists entirely at sea on
the notion of right, when they suppose that labour has, or can have, a
right to anything, by any rule but the permanent interest of the human
race; but they also have confused and erroneous notions of matters of
fact, of which Mr. Thornton points out the fallacy. For example, the
working classes, or rather their champions, often look upon the whole
wealth of the country as the produce of their labour, and imply, or even
assert, that if everybody had his due the whole of it would belong to
them. Apart from all question as to right, this doctrine rests on a
misconception of fact. The wealth of the country is not wholly the
produce of present labour. It is the joint product of present labour and
of the labour of former years and generations, the fruits of which,
having been preserved by the abstinence of those who had the power of
consuming them, are now available for the support or aid of present
labour which, but for that abstinence, could not have produced
subsistence for a hundredth part the number of the present labourers. No
merit is claimed for this abstinence; those to whose persevering
frugality the labouring classes owe this enormous benefit, for the most
part thought only of benefiting themselves and their descendants. But
neither is there any merit in labouring, when a man has no other means
of keeping alive. It is not a question of merit, but of the common
interest. Capital is as indispensable to labour as labour to capital. It
is true the labourers need only capital, not capitalists; it would be
better for them if they had capital of their own. But while they have
not, it is a great benefit to them that others have. Those who have
capital did not take it from them, and do not prevent them from
acquiring it. And, however badly off they may be under the conditions
which they are able to make with capitalists, they would be still worse
off if the earth were freely delivered over to them without capital, and
their existing numbers had to be supported upon what they could in this
way make it produce.

On the other hand, there is on the opposite side of the question a kind
of goody morality, amounting to a cant, against which the author
protests, and which it is imperative to clear our minds of. There are
people who think it right to be always repeating, that the interest of
labourers and employers (and, they add, of landlords and farmers, the
upper classes and the lower, governments and subjects, &c.) is one and
the same. It is not to be wondered at that this sort of thing should be
irritating to those to whom it is intended as a warning. How is it
possible that the buyer and the seller of a Edition: current; Page:
[657] commodity should have exactly the same interest as to its price?
It is the interest of both that there should be commodities to sell; and
it is, in a certain general way, the interest both of labourers and
employers that business should prosper, and that the returns to labour
and capital should be large. But to say that they have the same interest
as to the division, is to say that it is the same thing to a person’s
interest whether a sum of money belongs to him or to somebody else. The
employer, we are gravely told, will expend in wages what he saves in
wages; he will add it to his capital, which is a fine thing for the
labouring classes. Suppose him to do so, what does the labourer gain by
the increase of capital, if his wages must be kept from rising to admit
of its taking place?

Workmen are solemnly adjured, [says Mr. Thornton (p. 260),] not to try
to get their wages raised, because success in the attempt must be
followed by a fall of profits which will bring wages down again. They
are entreated not to better themselves, because any temporary bettering
will be followed by a reaction which will leave them as ill off as
before; not to try to raise the price of labour, because to raise the
price is to lower the demand, and to lower the demand is to lower the
price. As if a great demand for labour were of any other use to the
labourer than that of raising the price of labour, or as if an end were
to be sacrificed to means whose whole merit consists in their leading to
that same end. If all the political economy opposed to trades’ unions
were like this, trades’ unions would be quite right in opposing
political economy.

What is true is, that wages might be so high as to leave no profit to
the capitalist, or not enough to compensate him for the anxieties and
risks of trade; and in that case labourers would be killing the goose to
get at the eggs. And, again, wages might be so low as to diminish the
numbers or impair the working powers of the labourers, and in that case
the capitalist also would generally be a loser. But between this and the
doctrine, that the money which would come to the labourer by a rise of
wages will be of as much use to him in the capitalist’s pocket as in his
own, there is a considerable difference.

Between the two limits just indicated—the highest wages consistent with
keeping up the capital of the country, and increasing it pari passu with
the increase of people, and the lowest that will enable the labourers to
keep up their numbers with an increase sufficient to provide labourers
for the increase of employment—there is an intermediate region within
which wages will range higher or lower according to what Adam Smith
calls “the higgling of the market.” In this higgling, the labourer in an
isolated condition, unable to hold out even against a single employer,
much more against the tacit combination of employers, will, as a rule,
find his wages kept down at the lower limit. Labourers sufficiently
organised in Unions may, under favourable circumstances, attain to the
higher. This, however, supposes an Edition: current; Page: [658]
organisation including all classes of labourers, manufacturing and
agricultural, unskilled as well as skilled. When the union is only
partial, there is often a nearer limit—that which would destroy, or
drive elsewhere, the particular branch of industry in which the rise
takes place. Such are the limiting conditions of the strife for wages
between the labourers and the capitalists. The superior limit is a
difficult question of fact, and in its estimation serious errors may be,
and have been, committed. But, having regard to the greatly superior
numbers of the labouring class, and the inevitable scantiness of the
remuneration afforded by even the highest rate of wages which, in the
present state of the arts of production, could possibly become general;
whoever does not wish that the labourers may prevail, and that the
highest limit, whatever it be, may be attained, must have a standard of
morals, and a conception of the most desirable state of society, widely
different from those of either Mr. Thornton or the present writer.

The remainder of the book is occupied in discussing the means adopted or
which might be adopted by the operative classes, for obtaining all such
advantages in respect of wages, and the other conditions of labour, as
are within the reach of attainment: a subject comprehending all the
questions respecting the objects and practices of Trades’ Unionism,
together with the whole theory and practice of co-operative industry.
And here I am nearly at the end of my disagreements with Mr. Thornton.
His opinions are in every respect as favourable to the claims of the
labouring classes as is consistent with the regard due to the permanent
interest of the race. His conclusions leave me little to do but to make
a résumé of them, though I may still dissent from some of his premises.
For example, the same principles which lead him to acquit employers of
wrong, however they may avail themselves of their advantage to keep down
wages, make him equally exculpate Unionists from a similar charge, even
when he deems them to be making a short-sighted and dangerous use of the
power which combinations give them. But while I agree with the author
that conduct may be “grovelling and sordid” [p. 180] without being
morally culpable, I must yet maintain that if there are (as it cannot be
doubted that there are) demands which employers might make from
labourers, or labourers from employers, the enforcement of which, even
by the most innocent means, would be contrary to the interests of
civilisation and improvement—to make these demands, and to insist on
them as conditions of giving and receiving employment, is morally wrong.

Again, the author most justly stigmatises the English law of conspiracy,
that reserved weapon of arbitrary and ex-post-facto coercion, by which
anything, that a court of law thinks ought not to be done, may be made a
criminal offence if done in concert by more than one person—a law of
which a most objectionable use has been made against Trades’ Unions.
Edition: current; Page: [659] But I cannot go entirely with him when he
lays it down as an absolute and self-evident truth, that whatever is
lawful when done by one person, ought not to be an offence when done by
a combination of several. He forgets that the number of agents may
materially alter the essential character of the act. Suppose, merely for
the sake of illustration, that the state of opinion was such as to
induce legislators to tolerate, within certain limits, the prosecution
of quarrels and the redress of injuries by the party’s own hands; as is
the case practically, though not legally, in all countries where
duelling prevails. If, under cover of this license, instead of a combat
between one and one, a band of assailants were to set upon a single
person, and take his life, or inflict on him bodily harm, would it be
allowable to apply to this case the maxim, that what is permitted to one
person ought to be permitted to any number? The cases are not parallel;
but if there be so much as one case of this character, it is
discussable, and requires to be discussed, whether any given case is
such a one; and we have a fresh proof how little even the most plausible
of these absolute maxims of right and wrong are to be depended on, and
how unsafe it is to lose sight, even for a moment, of the paramount
principle—the good of the human race. The maxims may, as the rough
results of experience, be regarded as primâ facie presumptions that what
they inculcate will be found conducive to the ultimate end; but not as
conclusive on that point without examination, still less as carrying an
authority independent of, and superior to, the end.

My difference with Mr. Thornton is in this case only theoretical; for I
do not know of anything that ought to be legally interdicted to workmen
in combination, except what would be criminal if done by any of them
individually, viz., physical violence or molestation, defamation of
character, injury to property, or threats of any of these evils. We hear
much invective against Trades’ Unions on the score of being
infringements of the liberty of those working men on whom a kind of
social compulsion is exercised to induce them to join a Union, or to
take part in a strike. I agree with Mr. Thornton in attaching no
importance whatever to this charge. An infringement of people’s liberty
it undoubtedly is, when they are induced, by dread of other people’s
reproaches, to do anything which they are not legally bound to do; but I
do not suppose it will be maintained that disapprobation never ought to
be expressed except of things which are offences by law. As soon as it
is acknowledged that there are lawful, and even useful, purposes to be
fulfilled by Trades’ Unions, it must be admitted that the members of
Unions may reasonably feel a genuine moral disapprobation of those who
profit by the higher wages or other advantages that the Unions procure
for non-Unionists as well as for their own members, but refuse to take
their share of the payments, and submit to the restrictions, by which
those advantages are obtained. It is vain to say that if a strike is
really for the good of Edition: current; Page: [660] the workmen, the
whole body will join in it from a mere sense of the common interest.
There is always a considerable number who will hope to share the benefit
without submitting to the sacrifices; and to say that these are not to
have cbrought before them, in an impressive manner, what their
fellow-workmen think of their conduct, is equivalent to saying that
social pressure ought not to be put upon any one to consider the
interests of others as well as his own. All that legislation is
concerned with is, that the pressure shall stop at the expression of
feeling, and the withholding of such good offices as may properly depend
upon feeling, and shall not extend to an infringement, or a threat of
infringement, of any of the rights which the law guarantees to
all—security of person and property against violation, and of reputation
against calumny. There are few cases in which the application of this
distinction can give rise to any doubt. What is called picketing is just
on the border which separates the two regions; but the sole difficulty
in that case is one of fact and evidence—to ascertain whether the
language or gestures used implied a threat of any such treatment as,
between individual and individual, would be contrary to law. Hooting,
and offensive language, are points on which a question may be raised;
but these should be dealt with according to the general law of the
country. No good reason can be given for subjecting them to special
restriction on account of the occasion which gives rise to them, or to
any legal restraint at all beyond that which public decency, or the
safety of the public peace, may prescribe as a matter of police
regulation.

Mr. Thornton enters into a minute examination of the limits to the
efficacy of Trades’ Unions—the circumstances in which increased wages
may be claimed with a prospect of success, and, if successful, of
permanence. These discussions I must content myself with recommending to
the attention of the reader, who will find in them much matter of great
value. In the present article there is only room for the most general
considerations, either of political economy or of morals. Under the
former aspect, there is a view of the question, not overlooked by the
author, but hardly, perhaps, made sufficiently prominent by him. From
the necessity of the case, the only fund out of which an increase of
wages can possibly be obtained by the labouring classes considered as a
whole, is profits. This is contrary to the common opinion, both of the
general public and of the workmen themselves, who think that there is a
second source from which it is possible for the augmentation to come,
namely, prices. The employer, they think, can, if foreign or other
competition will let him, indemnify himself for the additional wages
demanded of him, by charging an increased price to the consumer. And
this may certainly happen in single trades, and even in large branches
of trade, under conditions which are carefully investigated Edition:
current; Page: [661] by Mr. Thornton. The building trade, in its
numerous subdivisions, is one of the most salient instances. But though
a rise of wages in a given trade may be compensated to the masters by a
rise of the price of their commodity, a rise of general wages cannot be
compensated to employers generally by a general rise of prices. This
distinction is never understood by those who have not considered the
subject, but there are few truths more obvious to all who have. There
cannot be a general rise of prices unless there is more money expended.
But the rise of wages does not cause more money to be expended. It takes
from the incomes of the masters and adds to those of the workmen; the
former have less to spend, the latter have more; but the general sum of
the money incomes of the community remains what it was, and it is upon
that sum that money prices depend. There cannot be more money expended
on everything, when there is not more money to be expended altogether.
In the second place, even if there did happen a rise of all prices, the
only effect would be that money, having become of less value in the
particular country, while it remained of its former value everywhere
else, would be exported until prices were brought down to nearly or
quite their former level. But thirdly: even on the impossible
supposition that the rise of prices could be kept up, yet, being
general, it would not compensate the employer; for though his money
returns would be greater, his outgoings (except the fixed payments to
those to whom he is in debt) would be increased in the same proportion.
Finally, if when wages rose all prices rose in the same ratio, the
labourers would be no better off with high wages than with low; their
wages would not command more of any article of consumption; a real rise
of wages, therefore, would be an impossibility.

It being obvious, from these accumulated considerations, that a real
rise of general wages cannot be thrown on the consumer by a rise of
prices; it follows also that a real rise even of partial wages—of wages
in one or a few employments—when thrown on the consumer by an increased
price of the articles produced, is generally a gain made, wholly or in
part, at the expense of the remainder of the labouring classes. For, the
aggregate incomes of the purchasing public not being increased, if more
is spent on some articles of consumption, less will be spent on others.
There are two possible suppositions. The public may either reduce its
consumption of the articles which have risen, or it may retrench by
preference in other articles. In the former case, if the consumption
falls off in full proportion to the rise of price, there is no more
money than before expended in the article, and no more, therefore, to be
divided between the labourers and their employers; but the labourers may
possibly retain their improved wages, at the expense of profits, until
the employers, weary of having less profit than other people, withdraw
part of their capital. But if the consumption does Edition: current;
Page: [662] not fall off, or falls off in a less degree, so that more is
really spent on the articles after than before the rise, the prices of
some other things will fall from diminished demand; the producers of
those other things will have less to divide, and either wages or profits
must suffer. It will usually be wages; for as there will not be
employment in those departments for so many labourers as before, some
labourers will be thrown out of work. As Mr. Thornton remarks, the
general increase of the incomes of the community through the progress of
wealth may make up to the other branches of the productive classes for
what they thus lose, and convert it from an absolute loss, to the loss
of a gain—the gain which as a body they would have derived from the
general increase of wealth, but of which the whole, or more than the
fair share, has been drawn off by a single branch. Still, the rise of
wages in any department is necessarily at the expense either of wages in
other departments or of profits, and in general both will contribute to
it. So long, at least, as there are any classes of labourers who are not
unionised, the successes of the Unions will generally be a cause of loss
to the labourers in the non-unionist occupations.

From the recognition of this fact arises a serious question of right and
wrong, as between Unionists and the remainder of the labouring classes.
As between themselves and their employers, they are under no obligations
but those of prudence. The employers are quite capable of taking care of
themselves. Unionists are under no moral duty to their employers which
the conditions they may seek to impose on them can possibly violate. But
they owe moral duties to the remainder of the labouring classes, and
moral duties to the community at large; and it behooves them to take
care that the conditions they make for their own separate interest do
not conflict with either of these obligations.

However satisfactorily the question may admit of being answered, it
still requires to be asked, whether Unionists are justified in seeking a
rise of wages for themselves, which will in all probability produce a
fall of wages, or loss of employment, to other labourers, their
fellow-countrymen. Still more is this question raised by those
restrictive rules, forbidding the employment of non-unionists, limiting
the number of apprentices, &c., which many Unions maintain, and which
are sometimes indispensable to the complete efficacy of Unionism. For
(as Mr. Thornton recognises) there is no keeping up wages without
limiting the number of competitors for employment. And all such
limitation inflicts distinct evil upon those whom it excludes—upon that
great mass of labouring population which is outside the Unions; an evil
not trifling, for if the system were rigorously enforced it would
prevent unskilled labourers or their children from ever rising to the
condition of skilled. In what manner is a system which thus operates, to
be reconciled either with the obligations of general morality, or with
the special regard professed by labouring men for the interest of the
Edition: current; Page: [663] labouring class? To the justification of
Unionism it is necessary not only that a mode of reconciliation should
exist, but that Unionists should know it and consider it; for if there
is ever so good a defence of their conduct, and they do not know or care
about it, their case is morally the same as if there were none.
Unionists who do not concern themselves with these scruples are, in
intention, sacrificing the interests of their fellow-labourers, the
majority of the labouring classes, to their own separate advantage; they
are making themselves into an oligarchy of manual labourers, indirectly
supported by a tax levied on the democracy.

There are, however, two considerations, either of which, in the mind of
an upright and public spirited working man, may fairly legitimate his
adhesion to Unionism. The first is, by considering the Unions of
particular trades as a mere step towards an universal Union, including
all labour, and as a means of educating the élite of the working classes
for such a future. This is well put by Mr. Thornton:—

Though, in the interests of universal labour, the formation of national
and cosmopolitan unionism be clearly an end to be aimed at, the best, if
not the only means to that end is the previous formation and bringing to
maturity of separate trade unions. The thing is scarcely to be done, if
done at all, in any other way. National unionism is only to be built up
piecemeal. To begin by laying foundations coextensive with the area to
be finally covered, would be a sure way of never getting beyond the
foundations. The only plan at all feasible, is for separate sections of
labourers to organise themselves independently, and for each separate
organisation to confine its attention to its own affairs, wherein it
would long find abundant occupation without troubling itself about those
of its neighbours, until it and they, having grown strong enough to
stand alone, should perceive it to be for their mutual advantage to
coalesce and stand together. This is the plan which, unconsciously
perhaps for the most part, trades’ unions are at present following, each
in obedience to its own selfish instinct, seeking only to do the best
for itself, yet each doing thereby the best for the others also. That
this or any other plan will ever really eventuate in the formation of a
confederacy embracing the entire working population, may to most people
appear an utterly chimerical notion, and no doubt the chances are great
against its realisation. But the thing, however improbable, is not more
improbable than some of the actual phenomena of unionism would not long
since have appeared. Half a century back, while the marvellous
organising aptitudes of working men lay dormant and unsuspected, it
would have been quite as difficult for any one to look forward to the
existing ‘amalgamation’ of little less than 50,000 engineers or 70,000
miners, as it is now to imagine that in another century or so—no very
long period in a nation’s life—a combination of these and of other
associations may weld together the whole community of British workmen as
one brotherhood. At the present rate of progress less than a hundred
years would suffice for the operation.

(Pp. 289-90.)

This prospect may appear too remote, and even visionary, to be an
actuating motive with any considerable number of Unionists; but it is
certainly not beyond the aspirations of the intelligent leaders of
Unionism, Edition: current; Page: [664] and what is more, some great
steps have already been made in the direction of its realisation. A
generation ago all Unions were local, and in those days strikes were
much more frequent, much oftener unreasonable, and much oftener attended
with criminal excesses, than is the case at present. Since then, a
number of the most important trades have been formed into Amalgamated
Societies extending to the whole country, and a central council decides
with a view to the interests of the entire trade, what conditions shall
be imposed on employers, and in what cases strikes shall take place. And
it is admitted that the rules of these Amalgamated Societies are much
less objectionable than those of the local unions previously were, and
that the central body prevents many more strikes than it sanctions. The
immediate motive to the amalgamations was, of course, the experience
that attempts in one town to obtain a rise of wages, only caused the
transfer of the business to another. Concert having been at length
substituted for competition between different towns, the Unions now aim
at effecting the same substitution between different countries: and
within the last few years there is a commencement of International
Congresses of working people, to prevent the efforts made in one country
from being frustrated for want of a common understanding with other
countries. And there can be little doubt that these attempts to lay the
foundation of an alliance among the artisans of competing countries,
have already produced some effect, and will acquire increasing
importance.

There is, however, another, and a less elevated, but not fallacious
point of view, from which the apparent injustice of Unionism to the
non-united classes of labourers may be morally vindicated to the
conscience of an intelligent Unionist. This is the Malthusian point of
view, so blindly decried as hostile and odious, above all, to the
labouring classes. The ignorant and untrained part of the poorer classes
(such Unionists may say) will people up to the point which will keep
their wages at that miserable rate which the low scale of their ideas
and habits makes endurable to them. As long as their minds remain in
their present state, our preventing them from competing with us for
employment does them no real injury; it only saves ourselves from being
brought down to their level. Those whom we exclude are a morally
inferior class of labourers to us; their labour is worth less, and their
want of prudence and self-restraint makes them much more active in
adding to the population. We do them no wrong by intrenching ourselves
behind a barrier, to exclude those whose competition would bring down
our wages, without more than momentarily raising theirs, but only adding
to the total numbers in existence. This is the practical justification,
as things now are, of some of the exclusive regulations of Trades’
Unions. If the majority of their members look upon this state of things,
so far as the excluded labourers are concerned, with indifference, and
think it enough for the Edition: current; Page: [665] Unions to take
care of their own members, this is not more culpable in them than is the
same indifference in classes far more powerful and more privileged by
society. But it is a strong indication of a better spirit among them,
that the operatives and artisans throughout the country form the main
strength of the demand, rapidly becoming irresistible, for universal and
compulsory education. The brutish ignorance of the lowest order of
unskilled labourers has no more determined enemies, none more earnest in
insisting that it be cured, than the comparatively educated workmen who
direct the Unions.

The moral duties which Unionists owe to society at large—to the
permanent interest of the nation and of the race—are still less regarded
than the duties imposed by good feeling towards their own class. There
is as little practical sense of such duties in the minds of workmen as
in those of employers—and there can scarcely be less. Yet it is evident
(for instance) that it cannot be right that a contest between two
portions of society as to the terms on which they will co-operate,
should be settled by impairing the efficacy of their joint action. There
must be some better mode of sharing the fruits of human productive power
than by diminishing their amount. Yet this is not only the effect, but
the intention, of many of the conditions imposed by some Unions on
workmen and on employers. All restrictions on the employment of
machinery, or on arrangements for economising labour, deserve this
censure. Some of the Unionist regulations go even further than to
prohibit improvements; they are contrived for the express purpose of
making work inefficient; they positively prohibit the workman from
working hard and well, in order that it may be necessary to employ a
greater number. Regulations that no one shall move bricks in a
wheelbarrow, but only carry them in a hod, and then no more than eight
at a time; that stones shall not be worked at the quarry while they are
soft, but must be worked by the masons of the place where they are to be
used; that plasterers shall not do the work of plasterers’ labourers,
nor labourers that of plasterers, but a plasterer and a labourer must
both be employed when one would suffice; that bricks made on one side of
a particular canal must lie there unused, while fresh bricks are made
for work going on upon the other; that men shall not do so good a day’s
work as to “best their mates;” that they shall not walk at more than a
given pace to their work when the walk is counted “in the master’s
time”—these and scores of similar examples which will be found in Mr.
Thornton’s book,[*] equally vexatious, and some of them more ridiculous,
are all grave violations of the moral rule, that disputes between
classes should not be so conducted as to make the world a worse place
for both together, and ultimately for the whole of the community. I do
not say that there are never Edition: current; Page: [666] cases which
justify a resort to measures even thus bad in principle. A portion of
society which cannot otherwise obtain just consideration from the rest,
may be warranted in doing a mischief to society in order to extort what
it considers its dues. But when thus acting, that portion of society is
in a state of war with the rest; and such means are never justifiable
but as weapons of war, like the devastation of a country and the
slaughter of its innocent inhabitants—things abominable in themselves,
but which may unhappily be the only means of forcing a powerful
adversary to consent to just terms of accommodation. It is palpably for
the good of society that its means of production, that the efficacy of
its industry, should be as great as possible, and it cannot be necessary
to an equitable division of the produce to make that efficacy less. The
true morality of the workmen would be to second zealously all means by
which labour can be economised or made more efficient, but to demand
their share of the benefit. In what shape they shall obtain it, is a
matter of negociation between the parties, the difficulties of which may
be greatly lightened by an impartial arbitration; and it is in such
cases, above all others, that advantage might be expected from the
Councils of Conciliation, which Mr. Mundella and Mr. Rupert Kettle have
so forcibly advocated, and have carried so successfully into practice in
their respective localities. The identification of the interest of the
workmen with the efficiency, instead of the inefficiency of the work, is
a happy result as yet only attained by co-operative industry in some dof
its forms. And if it should prove, in the end, not to be attainable
otherwise; if the claims of the workmen to share the benefit of whatever
was beneficial to the general interest of the business, became an
embarrassment to the masters from which no system of arbitration could
sufficiently relieve them, and growing inconvenience to them from the
opposition of interest between themselves and the workmen should
stimulate the conversion of existing businesses into Industrial
Partnerships, in which the whole body of workpeople have a direct
interest in the profits of the enterprise; such a transformation would
be the true euthanasia of Trades’ Unionism, while it would train and
prepare at least the superior portion of the working classes for a form
of co-operation still more equal and complete.

It is to this feature in the futurity of labour that the whole of Mr.
Thornton’s argument leads up: and to this he looks forward as the true
solution of the great economic problem of modern life. Nowhere will be
found so compact and comprehensive an account of the various forms of
co-operative industry which have been tried in this and other countries
with such remarkable success, either by combinations of operatives
uniting their small savings, or by capitalist employers admitting their
workmen to a participation in profits. I will not weaken these most
interesting statements Edition: current; Page: [667] by abridgment, nor
is it necessary to prolong this article by disserting on a subject which
eis every year commanding more of the attention of the best practical
minds. The reader may be referred to Mr. Thornton for a conclusive
answer to the hesitations concerning the probabilities of success of
this great movement, as well as for an inspiring picture of the
blessings to human society which may rationally be expected from its
progressive realisation.e I will rather turn back to Unionism, and
conclude with a passage embodying the author’s ultimate moral judgment
upon it. (Pp. 333-36.)

Sufficient note has not perhaps been taken of the educational office
which unionism is silently and unconsciously performing, and of the
softening and composing influence which it is insensibly exercising over
its constituents. Mere union, quite irrespectively of any special
object, is of itself beneficial discipline. The mere act of association
is of itself a wholesome subordination of the individual to the general.
Merely to combine for some common object, causes people to take pride
and pleasure in that object, whatever it be, and renders them ready to
make sacrifices for its furtherance. And if the object be mutual defence
and mutual support, then, for the associates to take an interest in it
and in each other, is one and the same thing. Among trades’ unionists
accustomed to look to each other for assistance in sickness, in
distress, and in old age, the sense of mutual dependence begets mutual
attachment. In their official intercourse they speak of each other as
‘brothers;’ and the word is not an empty sound, but indicates the sort
of relationship which they at least desire should subsist between them,
and which, because they do desire it, is sure to grow up. So far their
sympathies have already widened, and it is characteristic of all moral
expansion never to cease expanding. Those who, from caring for none but
themselves, have got so far as to care for their fellow-workmen, will
not stop till they have learned to care for all their fellow-men. Love
of their class will prove to have been only an intermediate stage
between self-love and love of their kind. Nor is it only indirectly that
unionism is qualified to contribute towards this moral development.
Certain of its arrangements are calculated to lead straight towards the
same result. Hitherto, protection against material evil and acquisition
of material good have been its chief care, but higher objects are
beginning to claim attention, and intellectual and moral improvement are
coming in for a share of solicitude. In the lodges of the London
bricklayers, drunkenness and swearing are expressly interdicted. Under
the auspices of the Amalgamated Carpenters, industrial schools are being
established. These are straws on the surface, showing how the current of
unionist opinion is flowing. The day may not be very distant when
increasing esprit de corps will make Amalgamated Engineers and
Carpenters as proud individually of their respective societies, as
jealous of their honour, and as unwilling to disgrace them, as the
officers of the old Bengal Engineers used to Edition: current; Page:
[668] be of their connection with that pre-eminently distinguished
corps; and in proportion as those feelings become general among
unionists, in the same proportion may unionism be expected to divest
itself of its offensive attributes, exchanging eventually past violence
and extravagance for as much moderation as its nature will admit of.

Still, even when so modified and chastened, the necessity for its
continuing to exist at all will continue to be an evil. The one
constitutional vice, inherent in and inseparable from unionism, is its
being a visible and a tangible embodiment of that antagonism between
labour and capital, which has always been the curse of the one and a
thorn in the flesh of the other. . . . The utmost successes of which it
is capable can never be such as well-wishers of their fellow-men, with
any catholicity of sympathy, will be much disposed to rejoice over. Its
highest achievements must always fall very short indeed of the
consummation to which speculative philanthropy loves to look forward,
when labour and capital, no longer needing to keep each other’s
aggressiveness in check, shall cordially combine for mutual
co-operation. . . . But until the alliance is effected, and as long as
the antagonism subsists, trades’ unionism will continue to be an
indispensable auxiliary of labour, and the sooner it is so recognised,
both by the legislature and by capitalists, the better for the public
peace.

Edition: current; Page: [669]


LESLIE ON THE LAND QUESTION
 1870

Edition: current; Page: [670]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Fortnightly Review, n.s. VII (June, 1870), 641-54. Signed; republished
in D&D, IV (1875), 86-110. Original heading: “Professor Leslie on the
Land Question,” footnoted: “Land Systems and Industrial Economy of
Ireland, England, and Continental Countries. By T. E. Cliffe Leslie,
LL.B. of Lincoln’s Inn, Barrister-at-Law, Examiner in Political Economy
in the University of London, and Professor of Jurisprudence and
Political Economy in the Queen’s University in Ireland, and Queen’s
College, Belfast. London: [Longmans, Green,] 1870.” Identified in JSM’s
bibliography as “A review of Professor Cliffe Leslie’s work on the Land
Systems of different countries, in the Fortnightly Review of June 1,
1870” (MacMinn, 99). No copy in Somerville College.

In answer to a letter from Leslie, JSM wrote from Avignon, 8 March,
1870, in part: “I have just seen the advertisement of your book in
Longmans’ list. It is not worth while sending any proofs here as we
leave for England at the beginning of next week.” (Draft in British
Library of Political and Economic Science.)

In the D&D version, many mistakes in the quotations from Leslie are
corrected. The corrections in punctuation are accepted silently; the
substantive corrections are also accepted, and the readings in the
Fortnightly are given as variant notes. In these notes, “70” refers to
the version in the Fortnightly; “75” to that in D&D, IV.

Edition: current; Page: [671]


Leslie on the Land Question

the founders of Political Economy have left two sorts of disciples:
those who have inherited their methods, and those who have stopped short
at their phrases; those who have carried on the work of the masters, and
those who think that the masters have left them no work to do. The
former follow the example of their teachers in endeavouring to discern
what principles are applicable to a particular case, by analysing its
circumstances; the latter believe themselves to be provided with a set
of catch-words, which they mistake for principles—free-trade, freedom of
contract, competition, demand and supply, the wages fund, individual
interest, desire of wealth, &c.—which supersede analysis, and are
applicable to every variety of cases without the trouble of thought. In
the language of Mr. Leslie, himself one of the best living writers on
applied political economy—

A school of economists of no small pretensions, strongly represented in
Parliament, supposes itself to be furnished with a complete apparatus of
formulas, within which all economic knowledge is comprised;—which
clearly and satisfactorily expounds all the phenomena of wealth, and
renders all further investigation of the causes and effects of the
existing economy of society needless, and even mischievous as tending to
introduce doubt and heresy into a scientific world of certainty and
truth, and discontent and disturbance into a social world of order and
prosperity.*

(P. 89.)

Since the downfall of Protectionism made Political Economy a term of
honour, and no longer, with the classes dominant in politics and
society, one of opprobrium, this routine school of political economists
have mostly had things their own way; the more easily, as they comprise
in their ranks some men of more than ordinary talents and acquirements,
but who share the common infirmity of liking to get their thinking done
once for all, and be saved all further trouble except that of referring
to a formula. The Edition: current; Page: [672] ascendancy, however, of
this school has always been disputed by those who hold that general
maxims should be helps to thought, not substitutes for it. And the
progress of events is now thrusting into the front, not merely of
theoretical discussion, but of practical statesmanship, problems which
definitely separate these two kinds of political economists, and put in
evidence the broad distinction between them. Such is, in a peculiar
degree, the question of Land Tenure, in Ireland and in England.

The Irish land difficulty having shown, by painful experience, that
there is at least one nation closely connected with our own, which
cannot and will not bear to have its agricultural economy ruled by the
universal maxims which some of our political economists challenge all
mankind to disobey at their peril; it has begun to dawn upon an
increasing number of understandings, that some of these universal maxims
are perhaps not universal at all, but merely English customs; and a few
have begun to doubt whether, even as such, they have any claim to the
transcendent excellence ascribed to them. The question has been raised
whether the administration of the land of a country is a subject to
which our current maxims of free trade, free contract, the exclusive
power of every one over his own property, and so forth, are really
applicable, or applicable without very serious limitations; whether
private individuals ought to have the same absolute control, the same
jus utendi et abutendi, over landed property, which it is just and
expedient that they should be permitted to exercise over movable wealth.

Once fairly raised, this question admits of but one answer. The
distinction between the two kinds of property is fundamental.

In the first place, land is a monopoly, not by the act of man, but of
nature; it exists in limited quantity, not susceptible of increase. Now
it is an acknowledged principle that when the State permits a monopoly,
either natural or artificial, to fall into private hands, it retains the
right, and cannot divest itself of the duty, to place the exercise of
the monopoly under any degree of control which is requisite for the
public good.

This control, moreover, is likely to be peculiarly needful, when the
State has allowed private persons to appropriate the source from which
mankind derive, and must continue to derive, their subsistence. The
community has too much at stake in the employment of the land as an
instrument for the supply of human wants, to be entitled to recognise
any right in individuals to make themselves an impediment to the most
beneficial use of it for that end. Wherever might is not accepted as a
sufficient basis of right, the justification of private property in land
has rested on the theory that most is made of the land for the good of
the community by giving that full play to the stimulus of self-interest
which is given by private ownership. But this theory, though it has a
foundation in truth, is by no means absolutely true; and the limits of
its truth ought to be the limits of its practical application. Edition:
current; Page: [673] The self-interest of the owners of land, under
perfect freedom, coincides with the general interest of the community up
to a certain point, but not wholly; there are cases in which it draws in
a totally opposite direction. Not even in the point of view of
Production is there a complete coincidence between the private interest
of landowners and the public interest. In that of Distribution, whether
the institution of private property in land should include the
concession, to enrich a class, of all that annual increase of wealth
which the mere progress of capital and population, in a prosperous
community, showers down upon landlords without any exertion or sacrifice
of their own, is a question not raised by Mr. Leslie, and which, for the
present, we are content to leave undiscussed. But the self-interest of
landlords is far from a sufficient security for their turning the land
to the best account, even as to its productive powers.

It has been urged, [says Mr. Leslie,] even by economists of eminence, .
. . . that the best security the public can obtain for the good
management of land is the personal interest of its private holders. The
desire of wealth, it is urged, must impel the possessors of land, like
the owners of capital in trade, to make the best commercial and
productive use they can of their possessions. Political economy, I must
affirm, countenances no such assumption. The desire of wealth is far
from being a productive impulse under all circumstances; it is, on the
contrary, sometimes a predatory aone. Anda the fundamental assumption of
political economy with respect to it is, that men desire to get wealth
with the least possible trouble, exertion, and sacrifice; that besides
wealth, they desire ease, pleasure, social position, and political
power; and that they will combine all the gratification they can of
their other desires with the acquisition of wealth. The situation of the
inheritor of a large landed estate is entirely different from that of
the trader, of whom (trained to habits of business, exposed to
competition, and influenced not only by the desire of gain, but by the
fear of being driven from the market altogether by better producers) it
is true that the best security the public can have for the good
management of his capital is his own private interest. It is as contrary
to political economy as to common sense to assume that a rich sinecure
btends to makeb its possessor industrious and improving; and the
landholders of this country are the holders, not only of rich sinecures,
but of sinecures the value of which tends steadily, and often rapidly,
to increase without any exertion on their part. . . . . The interest of
the proprietors of land is, according to the assumption their own
conduct compels us to make, to get as much, not only of money, but of
amusement, social consideration, and political influence as they can,
making as little sacrifice as they can in return for any of those
advantages, in the shape of leases to their tenants, the improvement of
their estates, or even residence upon them when other places are more
agreeable. That they are frequently guided solely by their interest in
this sense is borne out by notorious facts; by absenteeism, by the
frequent absence of all improvement on the part of the landlord and the
refusal of any security to the tenant, by the mischievous extent of the
preservation of game and the extension of cdeer-forestsc over what once
was cultivated land. Edition: current; Page: [674] The single
circumstance that tenancy from year to year, a tenure incompatible with
good agriculture, is the commonest tenure both in England and Ireland,
affords positive proof that the interest of the landlord is no security
to the public for the good management of the land in the absence of all
interference of law. (Pp. 123-6.)

Wealth, [the author says elsewhere (p. 88)] is not the predominant
interest of the most powerful classes.

But though the self-interest of landlords frequently operates to
frustrate, instead of promoting, the interest which the community has in
the most effective use of the productive powers of the soil, there is
another party concerned whose self-interest does work in that useful
direction; and that is, the actual cultivator of the soil, if he be
either a small proprietor, or a tenant on conditions which secure to him
the full fruits of his labour and outlay:—

He is a farmer by profession, with the habits of one, and exposed to
much competition; he has his livelihood to make, and he would of course
dbe gladd to make his fortune too, by ehise farming. The public can,
therefore, count upon the tenant doing his best by the land, if he is
sure of deriving the benefit. But if he has no prospect of doing so, it
becomes, on the contrary, his interest to labour only for the present,
and to employ his savings and leisure anywhere rather than upon the
permanent improvement of his farm. And that he cannot obtain the
requisite security from contract alone, is evident, both from what has
been said of the interest and conduct of landlords in the matter, and
from the fact . . . . . that the Courts and the Legislature have found
it necessary to interpose law after law to secure the property in their
own improvements to the tenants.

(P. 126.)

It is a great step in advance, and a signal triumph of political
necessity over inveterate prejudice, that Parliament is now passing a
bill[*] which recognises that in Ireland at least, security of tenure is
indispensable to enlist the self-interest of the occupier of land on the
side of good cultivation, and that this security cannot, in Ireland, be
trusted to the operation of contract, but must be provided by law. There
is something amusingly naïf in the form in which this interference of
legislation represents itself to the minds of many who, with
considerable reluctance, find themselves forced to support it. According
to them, it is a deeply to be regretted, but unavoidable, setting aside
of what they call the principles of political economy, in consequence of
insuperable difficulties. May I venture to suggest that there are no
such principles of political economy as those which they imagine
themselves to be violating? The principles of political economy, as of
every other department of knowledge, are a different thing from its
practical precepts. The same principles require different precepts,
wherever different Edition: current; Page: [675] means are required for
the same ends. If the interest of landlords does not afford sufficient
security to tenants, it is not contrary, but in the strictest
conformity, to the teachings of political economy, to provide other
security instead. The absolute power of landlords over the soil is what
political economy really condemns; and condemns in England as well as in
Ireland, though its economic mischiefs are not, in England, so flagrant
and unqualified.

Mr. Leslie’s volume is partly a republication of essays which have
appeared during the last three years in periodicals. But they are as
fresh, and as germane to the present state of the question, as if they
had been written yesterday; and they are supplemented by others which
bring up the information and discussion to the latest date. They all
relate to some of the aspects of the question of Land Tenure, and may be
classed under three heads: the land question as it is in Ireland, the
land question as it is in England, and the agricultural economy of those
continental countries which the author has had the means of personally
observing. We cannot attempt to give an adequate view of the contents of
the volume; but in the hope of directing readers to the work itself, we
will touch cursorily on a few of the points on which most stress is
laid.

The view which Mr. Leslie takes of the condition of Ireland—and Mr.
Leslie is an Irishman, of Ulster, who has studied the operation of
economic laws in that country at first hand, and on the spot—is at once
unfavourable and encouraging. Encouraging as regards the capabilities of
the country, agricultural and even manufacturing, and the capacity of
the people for thriving under a more tolerable land system; but
unfavourable, as he considers much of the improvement alleged to have
taken place, and to be still in progress, under the present system, in
consequence of the famine and the emigration, to be merely imaginary. He
denies the virtue either of emigration, or of the other favourite
English prescription—the consolidation of farms—as a cure, or even much
of a palliation, for Irish poverty. As a matter of fact, he asserts that
the increase of wages which has taken place, considerable as it appears
in comparison with the former standard, is not much more than equivalent
to the rise in the price of articles of consumption caused by the gold
discoveries, and by the railways, which have everywhere so greatly
increased the price of agricultural produce in what were once, from the
inaccessibility of markets, the cheap regions of the world. As a matter
of science, he justly criticises the sweeping generalisation which
assumes that whatever reduces the supply of labourers must
proportionally raise wages, without regard to the effect which, in
certain economic conditions, even a small rise in the price of labour
may produce on the demand. On this subject he has shown that there is
room and need for a supplementary chapter or section in our treatises on
political economy; and it is no Edition: current; Page: [676] blame to
him if, in a volume of this character, he rather points out the want
than supplies it.* As far as Ireland is concerned, his opinion is, that
the extensive substitution of pasture for tillage which has been taking
place during the whole period of the emigration, and has been greatly
facilitated by it, has curtailed the demand for labour in a proportion
fully equal to the diminution of the supply. And the facts adduced, not
only by Mr. Leslie, but by Professor Lyon Playfair, in his essay in
Recess Studies, “On the Declining Production of Human Food in
Ireland,”[*] show that this transformation and, in fact, supersession of
rural industry, which at first only diminished the produce of tillage,
but greatly increased the products of grazing farms, has now for some
years decreased even the number of cattle, “through the want of winter
keep, and what is worse, through a positive deterioration of the
depastured soil,” its fertilizing elements, Edition: current; Page:
[677] instead of being restored to it, having been carried out of the
country in the bodies of the exported cattle ([Leslie,] p. 65). The
single exception to the decline in the number of animals is sheep, the
only farm product which increases in a soil abandoned to nature, and
which, accordingly, has greatly increased in Ireland. The “decay of
husbandmen”[*] and diminution of the produce of agriculture has had its
natural effect in the decay of the country town and the village; and Mr.
Leslie draws a sad picture of the desolation of the poverty-stricken
country towns, the eastern coast excepted, which has been saved by the
trade with England. Even the rise of prices, seemingly so beneficial to
the farmer, is, under the wretched land system of Ireland, often the
very reverse. “Rising prices, in themselves, and unaccompanied by
security, only imperil the position of the tenant farmer, by tempting
the proprietor to sudden changes in the terms of the tenure, or in the
tenancy itself.” (P. 63.) And tenancy at will is more universally the
rule at this moment than it has been for several generations. “The
natural consequence has been that system of husbandry which so
experienced a judge as Mr. Caird lately described as everywhere meeting
his eye, save in Ulster and the eastern seaboard of the country. ‘What
the ground will yield from year to year at the least cost of time,
labour, and money is taken from it.’ ”[†]

The consolidation of farms, from which so much was expected, and which
so many Englishmen still honestly believe to be the panacea for Irish
poverty, perversely resisted by a population which it would essentially
benefit, has proved, no less than the emigration, a complete failure as
regards the prosperity of the country.

Mr. Brodrick, in one of the essays which the Irish land question has
elicited from distinguished Englishmen,[‡] mentions with something of
surprise, as a fact of which his inquiries in the island have convinced
him, that fifteen and ten-acre farmers in Ireland pay a higher rent than
larger farmers, with at least equal punctuality. The truth is that they
generally produce more; and that the consolidation of farms means the
diminution of crops, the extension of grazing, and, sooner or later, the
exhaustion of the soil. The table in the note, taken from the last
volume of Irish agricultural statistics, affords conclusive evidence
that cultivation decreases, and g‘grass, bog, and waste’g increase, in
exact proportion to the size of farms. It may be true that not a few of
the small holdings which have disappeared in recent years were, soil and
situation considered, too diminutive; but they were so because the best
land has been generally given to large grazing farms; and because the
same error which has made landowners look Edition: current; Page: [678]
with disfavour on small farms, has led them to drive them to the worst
ground and the worst situations, and to limit unduly both the duration
of their tenure and the amount of land left to them. The consolidation
of farms, in place of being an advance, has involved a palpable
retrogression in Irish husbandry and in its productiveness.

(Pp. 67-9.)

Since the immense produce raised from the barrenest soil in the small
farms of Belgium, and the higher rent they actually pay, compared with
large farms, have been made generally known in England, attempts have
been made by Lord Rosse, Lord Dufferin, and others, to make out that the
experience of Flanders, from difference of climate and other causes, is
not applicable to Ireland. Mr. Leslie maintains, on the contrary, that
the success of the petite culture in Flanders has been attained in spite
of great disadvantages, not only of soil but of climate; that the
British islands have much greater natural advantages than Flanders, for
the success of five-acre farms; that “there is hardly any part of
Europe, save England, better fitted for farms of the smallest
description than the greater part of Ireland, including its waste lands;
and even its waste lands could be made highly productive by Flemish
agriculture.” (P. 18.) Nor are the Irish peasantry, under anything like
fair play, incapable of the qualities necessary for doing the fullest
justice to small holdings.

In a southern county on this side, not many years ago a backward one
from its isolation, there is a locality comprising several large estates
well known to the writer, which, within his remembrance, and chiefly
within very recent years, has undergone a complete transformation. It
was farmed as most other parts of Ireland were farmed in his childhood;
it is now farmed as well as any part of England, and a single dealer in
a small town within it sells artificial manure to the value of £25,000 a
year, who could probably not have sold a pound’s worth to a former
generation. From this locality, a large proprietor, of English descent,
himself the cause of much of the improvement he describes, and who used
to define the Irish tenant as a creature to whom multiplication and
subdivision come by nature, but to whom the art of man cannot
communicate an idea of farming or forbearance from marriage, now
reports:—‘The twenty-acre men are holding on well, farming far better
than formerly, and not involving themselves, as formerly, with wives and
families as a matter of course. The farming of this class—Roman
Catholics and indigenous Irish—is exceedingly improved; their prudence
in the matter of marriage still more remarkable; their sisters and
younger brothers, too, remaining frequently unmarried, as they will not
marry out of their class, unless to better themselves.’ . . . . Other
instances of a landlord’s good example being followed by his tenants,
where English markets have come within reach, and English improvements
in farming have become known, fell under the writer’s observation in a
recent visit to other eastern counties; and from one that was not
visited, a farmer, loud for tenant-right, writes:—‘Farming in general is
greatly improving in this district and the neighbouring ones. Here
farmers are to some extent able to compete with the landed proprietors
at agricultural shows and the like.’

(Pp. 39-40.)

Edition: current; Page: [679]
It is not, therefore, as so often idly pretended, from any original
incapacity or inveterate habits in the Irish race, that production and
prosperity are declining throughout the whole space contained between “a
line from Dublin to the nearest point of Lough Swilly in the north, and
another to Bantry Bay in the south” (p. 70), a space including nearly
three-fourths of the island. But to say more at present on the Irish
part of the land question is inconsistent with our limits.

The land question in England, as Mr. Leslie justly observes, is unlike
the land question in Ireland; but the evils of the system are different
in kind rather than inferior in degree. The land question in Ireland is
a tenant’s question; and what the case principally requires is reform of
the conditions of tenure. The land question in England is mainly a
labourer’s question, though the tenants also suffer deeply from the same
causes which have reduced the labourers to their present state. Mr.
Leslie tells once again the sad history of the divorce of the peasantry
from the land. In England, unlike many other countries, the descendants
of serfs had risen into a yeomanry, regarded by cotemporary chroniclers
as the main strength of the country, both in war and in peace. In the
last quarter of the seventeenth century the number of these small landed
proprietors still “exceeded that of the tenant-farmers, amounting at the
most moderate estimate to not less than 160,000 proprietors, who with
their families must have made more than a seventh of the whole
population.” (P. 164, and the passage of Macaulay therein quoted.[*])
But now—

The landed yeomanry, insignificant in number and a nullity in political
power, are steadily disappearing altogether; the tenant-farmers have
lost the security of tenure, the political hindependenceh, and the
prospect of one day farming their own estate, which they formerly
enjoyed; and lastly, the inferior peasantry not only have lost ground in
the literal sense, and have rarely any other connection with the soil
than a pauper’s claim, but have sunk deplorably in other ieconomical
aspectsi below their condition in former centuries. Thus a soil
eminently adapted by natural gifts to sustain a numerous and flourishing
rural population of every grade, has almost the thinnest and absolutely
the most joyless peasantry in the civilised world, and its chief end as
regards human beings seems only to be a nursery of over-population and
misery in cities. (P. 163.)

Every grade of the rural population has sunk; the landed yeomanry are
almost gone; the tenant-farmers have lost their ancient independence and
interest in the soil; the labourers have lost their separate cottages
and plots of ground, and their share in a common fund of land; and
whereas all these grades were once Edition: current; Page: [680] rising,
the prospect of the landed yeomanry is now one of total extinction; that
of the tenant-farmers, increasing insecurity; that of the agricultural
labourer, to find the distance between his own grade and that of the one
above him wider and more impassable than ever, while the condition of
his own grade is scarcely above jthat ofj the brutes. Once, from the
meanest peasant to the greatest noble, all had land, and he who had
least might hope for more; now there is being taken away from who khask
little even that which he has—his cottage, nay, his separate room. Once
there was an ascending movement from the lowest grade towards the
highest; now there is a descending movement in every grade below the
highest. Once the agricultural class had a political representation, and
a voice in legislation, which they dared to raise against the landed
gentry and nobility; now the latter have the supreme command at once of
the soil and of the suffrages of its cultivators. (P. 174.)

In fact, there is no longer a true rural population remaining, for the
ends, political, social, and economic, which such a population ought to
fulfil.

[P. 162.]

The means by which these lamentable changes have been brought about may
be found in Mr. Leslie’s volume, or in Mr. W. T. Thornton’s
“Over-population and its Remedy.” They are summed up by Mr. Leslie, so
far as relates to the labourers, in the following catalogue (pp.
207-8):—

Briefly enumerated, the chief causes by which the peasantry—the really
most important class—have been dispossessed of their ancient proprietary
rights and beneficial interests in the soil are the following:—

(1) Confiscation of their ancient rights of common, which were not only
in themselves of great value, but most important for the help they gave
towards the maintenance of their separate lands.

(2) Confiscation to a large extent of their separate lands themselves,
by a long course of violence, fraud, and chicane, in addition to
forfeitures resulting from deprivation of their rights of common.

(3) The destruction of country towns and villages, and the loss, in
consequence, of local markets for the produce of peasant farms and
gardens.

(4) The construction of a legal system based on the principle of
inalienability from the feudal line, in the interest of great landed
families, and incompatible with either the continuance of the ancient or
the rise of a new class of peasant landholders.

(5) The loss, with their lands and territorial rights, of all political
power and independence on the part of the peasantry; and, by
consequence, the establishment and maintenance by the great proprietors
of laws most adverse to their interests.

(6) Lastly, the administration by the great landowners of their own
estates in such a manner as to impoverish the peasantry still further,
and to sever their last remaining connection with the soil.

These various headings are explained and expounded in the pages which
follow; and the author concludes—

The Irish land question is of more importance politically than the
English for the hour, but it is not so economically even for the hour;
and it is so, Edition: current; Page: [681] politically, for the hour
only. Economically, the emergency is much greater at this moment in this
than in the other island; the main land question here relates to a
poorer class than even the Irish tenantry, and there is a much greater
amount of material misery and actual destitution in England, traceable
mainly to its own land system, though aggravated by that of Ireland and
the consequent immigration of poverty.

The day is not distant when the supreme question of English as of Irish
politics, will be whether the national territory is to be the source of
power and luxury to a few individuals, or of prosperity and happiness to
the nation at large? and whether those few individuals, or the nation at
large, are to determine the answer?

(P. 229.)

Thus complete has been the failure of the English agricultural economy,
if we look, not to the prosperity of landlords, nor even to the amount
of produce raised from the soil, but to the truest test—the condition of
the mass of the population. But when we pass, in our author’s pages,
from the picture of the evils to the suggestion of remedies, we are
struck by a sense of their inadequacy. We imagine Mr. Leslie himself
would be the first to admit that he does little more than break ground
on the subject.

The causes of evil, in Mr. Leslie’s apprehension, are, that landed
property is in too few hands; that the movement even towards large farms
has been carried too far; and that tenants have not sufficient security
of tenure. Remedial measures, he believes, will be efficacious, just in
so far as they tend to increase the number of proprietors of land, and
to give to tenants the security of a long lease. To attain the former
object—

There are three different methods recorded in history to make choice
from. One is the French law of partition of family property among all
children alike—an expedient which deserves no higher commendation than
that it is better than the feudal system of disinheriting all the
children but one. A second method which suggests itself with higher
reason on its side, is a limitation of the amount of land that any
single individual shall take by inheritance. Such a measure, however
shocking to present proprietary sentiments, lcouldl not diminish the
real happiness, it may safely be asserted, of one human being in the
next generation; nor can it be confidently pronounced that the mischief
resulting from the long retention of a restriction of a different kind
upon the possession of land may not yet be found such that some such
measure will be of necessity adopted, to make room for the natural
increase of mpopulation. But it would be a remedy which only a violent
revolution could at present accomplish. . . . . . And if neither the
French system of partition nor the agrarian system of the Gracchi is to
be our model, . . . . . we may yet find a model in the general tendency
of English law reform since the system was established which first
limited property in land to a particular line of descent in a particular
number of families; for that end depriving each successive proprietor of
the chief uses of property itself. The feudal landowner forfeited the
right to sell his own land, to leave it by will, to let it securely, to
provide for his family out of it, to subject it to the payment of his
debts; he forfeited, therefore, the chief rights of property, taking
only in exchange a right to confiscate the property of his tenants.

(Pp. 191-2.)

Edition: current; Page: [682]
Mr. Leslie’s proposal is to restore to him these legitimate rights,
abolishing all restrictions which deprive the owner of land for the time
being of the power of alienation.

To extinguish the force of settlements as binding and irrevocable
instruments, save so far as a provision for a wife is concerned; to put
family settlements, save as to a wife, on the same footing as wills,
ipso facto void upon marriage, and revocable by any subsequent
conveyance or will; to enact that each successive proprietor shall take
the land he succeeds to, free from any restriction on his rights of
proprietorship; and further, to make provision that all lands left
burdened with any charges shall be sold immediately on the death of the
owner to pay off the incumbrance; with the addition, of course, of
assimilating the devolution of land, in case of intestacy, to that of
personal property.

(Pp. 198-200.)

In order to judge of these proposals, it is not necessary to have come
to a positive conclusion on the rather difficult legislative question,
whether and in what cases settlements should be permitted; in other
words, whether and to what extent an owner of property should have power
to bequeath to one person a life-interest, and to another or others the
succession after the death of the first. It is evident that settlement
of property may be permitted without permitting settlement of land. It
would be sufficient to enact that testamentary dispositions which do not
confer unrestricted ownership on the person in whose favour they are
made, shall not be valid for the land itself, but only for the proceeds
of its sale. There are not the same objections to tying up consols and
similar representative wealth from alienation, which there are in the
case of the actual sources of production; and if, without forbidding the
landowner to regulate, within certain limits, the descent of his
pecuniary means beyond his immediate successor, it were put out of his
power to detain for this purpose any portion of the land of the country
from general circulation, he would be obliged either to bequeath the
land in full ownership, implying liberty of sale, or if he thought it
indispensable to tie the hands of his successor, the land would be sold
by operation of law at his decease, and the restriction would only apply
to the proceeds. Mr. Leslie, as we saw, proposes a sale of land at every
succession to the extent necessary for clearing the remainder from all
existing incumbrances. Without pledging ourselves to this proposal,
which requires mature discussion, we may remark that if it were adopted,
the proprietor, being no longer able to charge the land beyond his own
life with a provision for younger children, must choose between leaving
them a portion of the land itself, and selling a portion to raise money
for their benefit. These provisions combined would greatly restrict the
power of keeping together large masses of land in a particular line of
descent; and it might fairly be anticipated that a great increase would
take place in the quantity of land which would annually be brought into
the market.

But Mr. Leslie, we should think, must be as well aware as anybody, how
Edition: current; Page: [683] little this would do towards making any
great part of the land of this country the property of the actual
cultivators. In France, and other countries of the Continent, the sale
of land generally means its purchase by the poor; for the poor give the
highest price, the rich being neither numerous, nor, in general,
addicted to rural duties or pleasures. But in England the sale of land
means generally its sale to the rich. The annual accumulation of
fortunes in manufactures and commerce raises up a perpetual succession
of rich families, eager to step into the place of landowners who are
obliged to sell. Unless changes much more radical than an increase of
the facilities of alienation are destined to take place in this country,
nearly all the land, however it may change hands, is likely to remain
the property of the rich; nor are the new proprietors more likely than
the old to lease their lands on terms more encouraging to the industry
and enterprise of their tenants. No doubt, the increased quantity of
land in the market would cause a cheapening of its price, which would
bring it within the reach of a somewhat greater number of purchasers;
and it would occasionally fall into the hands of persons intending to
cultivate instead of letting it, but seldom of those who cultivate with
their own hands. If the greater marketableness of land is to be made a
benefit to the labouring class, it must be in another manner entirely;
as, for example, by buying from time to time on account of the public,
as much of the land that comes into the market as may be sufficient to
give a full trial to such modes of leasing it, either to small farmers
with due security of tenure, or to co-operative associations of
labourers, as without impairing, but probably even increasing, the
produce of the soil, would make the direct benefits of its possession
descend to those who hold the plough and wield the spade. Mr. Leslie has
not included any measure of this sort among his proposals, but it is
quite germane to his principles, and necessary, we think, to enable them
to produce their best effects.

Meanwhile, the measures which he proposes would render possible a
multitude of agricultural and industrial enterprises, beneficial to the
national wealth, and giving great employment to labour, which at present
the restrictions of family settlements make impracticable. We quote at
the foot of the page some striking examples of the obstructive operation
of these arrangements.*

We have not space remaining for an analysis of the third part of Mr.
Edition: current; Page: [684] Leslie’s Essays, relating to the land
systems and agricultural economy of Continental states. They are,
however, a valuable contribution to our knowledge of the subject,
relating to regions which the author has himself visited, and has been
assisted in his inquiries by high economical and agricultural
authorities on the spot: in Westphalia and the Ruhr Basin by several
persons; in Central France by the eminent M. Léonce de Lavergne; and in
Belgium by M. Emile de Laveleye, whose important paper in the Edition:
current; Page: [685] Cobden Club volume[*] has recently brought home to
many English readers the lessons contained in his remarkable works on
Belgium, Holland, and Lombardy. The essays on the Ruhr Basin and on La
Creuse are most interesting reading, and the facts they contain, when
first published by Mr. Leslie, were almost wholly new to English
readers. But the most valuable, for the general purposes of the book,
are those on Belgium. Mr. Leslie’s paper in the Cobden Club volume[†]
had shown, in opposition to a still strong, though diminishing,
prejudice, the great success of peasant properties in France. The paper
in the present volume on Belgium renders the same justice to the small
farms as well as the small properties of that country. If we compare
with the minute and well-considered statements of Mr. Leslie and M. de
Laveleye, such as are given on the contrary side even by such an
authority as Mr. James Howard, in his “Continental Farms and
Peasantry”[‡] (though Mr. Howard is by no means absolutely hostile to
small farms, but expresses a strong sense of the desirableness of a
certain admixture of them), we see nothing in the latter which seriously
diminishes the consideration due to the former. Everything in Mr.
Howard’s remarks which is matter of fact—everything which is the result
of actual observation—may be admitted, without affecting the worth of
Belgian example as evidence in favour of what the petite culture is
capable of. There is not a single drawback pointed out by Mr. Howard,
which is inseparable from petite culture; while even in Belgium the
drawbacks are shown by Mr. Leslie and M. de Laveleye to be steadily
diminishing.

Edition: current; Page: [686] Edition: current; Page: [687]


LAND TENURE REFORM
 1871

Edition: current; Page: [688]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Programme of the Land Tenure Reform Association, with an Explanatory
Statement by John Stuart Mill. London: Longmans, Green, Reader, and
Dyer, 1871, 6-16. Republished, D&D, IV (1875), 239-50, as “Explanatory
Statement of the Programme of the Land Tenure Reform Association,” with
a footnote giving the ten points of the Programme. The footnote is dated
July, 1870, the date of the adoption of the Programme, not of the
writing of the “Explanatory Statement.” Identified in JSM’s bibliography
as “The Explanatory Statement published with the Programme of the Land
Tenure Reform Association in March 1871” (MacMinn, 100). No corrections
or variants in Somerville College copy.

During the preliminary organization of the Association, in autumn, 1869,
JSM served as Chairman of the Provisional Committee but, as he informed
Andrew Reid (eventually Secretary of the Association), he would not take
on the leadership of the Association once it was established. He was,
however, actively involved in drawing up the Programme (completed during
April, 1870), and became Chairman. On 15 March, 1871, he wrote to
Longmans asking them to publish the pamphlet containing the Programme
and his Explanatory Statement; Longmans agreed, and the pamphlet, to
cost sixpence, was ready for the press on 27 March. Within the next year
the Association had taken 2100 copies, largely for distribution to the
working classes, and 331 had been bought by the public. For a document
issued by the Association, under JSM’s name as Chairman, see Appendix D,
766-7 below.

In the following text the one substantive variant (see 689) derives from
D&D, IV, which is identified as “75”. The ten points of the Programme,
which appear before JSM’s explanation in the pamphlet, are introduced as
footnotes where appropriate.

Edition: current; Page: [689]


Land Tenure Reform

of all our leading institutions, none are more unsuited than the Land
Laws to the state of society of which the Reform Act of 1867[*] is the
harbinger. Originating in an age when the landholders were masters of
the country, it is no wonder that they should require alteration now,
when the country belongs, at least in principle, to the whole of its
inhabitants. Our laws relating to land are the remains of a system
which, as history tells us, was designed to prop up a ruling class. They
were made for the purpose of keeping together the largest possible
possessions in the families which owned the land, and by means of it
governed the country. So long as those families were not obliged to
share power with any other class, or with the people, the Land Laws were
in many respects considerably worse than they are now; but what is left
of them has still the same object: to contrive that the land of the
family shall descend unbroken to the eldest son, and that the owner for
the time being shall not be at liberty to defeat this purpose by selling
the land. By these means the land has been prevented, to a large extent,
from passing out of the hands of the idle into those of the industrious,
and its ownership has been retained aasa the privilege of a small and
decreasing number of families.

The removal of these remains of feudality is the object aimed at in the
first three articles of the Society’s Programme.[†] They hope to be
aided in its attainment by all real Liberals, not excepting those who
demand changes much more drastic. An active and influential portion of
the working classes have adopted the opinion, that private property in
land is a mistake, and that the land ought to be resumed, and managed on
account of the State, compensation being made to the proprietors. Some
of these reformers look with jealousy on any relaxation of the land
monopoly, thinking that an increase of the number of landed proprietors
would strengthen the obstacles Edition: current; Page: [690] to a
general resumption of the land. But even from their point of view, there
is another side to the question; since, (in a country like this, where
there is not, as in Ireland and France, an intense competition among the
labouring classes for land, raising it far above its reasonable value)
whatever brings more land into the market tends to lower its price, and
diminishes the amount of compensation which, if the views of these
reformers were to prevail, the nation would have to pay to the
landowners. Meanwhile, so long as land is private property, whatever
facilitates its passing into new hands tends to increase its
productiveness, and thereby its usefulness to the nation at large: since
those among the owners who are least provided with skill, enterprise,
and capital, are those who are under the strongest inducement to sell
their land. The Society, therefore, venture to hope that even the most
extreme section of land reformers will not reject this first part of
their programme; while they are assured of the support, to this extent,
of many whose ideas of Land Tenure Reform go no farther.

The Society, however, are not content to stop at this point. They are of
opinion that much more is amiss in the present system of landed property
than merely the restraints on its alienation. Whether the hitherto
fundamental institution of property in land is destined to be permanent,
or to disappear, they do not take upon themselves to decide. On this, as
on other questions of the distant future, persons of both modes of
thinking may consistently give the Society their support. The Society is
formed to promote, not the abolition of landed property, but its reform,
and the vindication of those rights of the entire community which need
not be, and never ought to have been, waived in favour of the landlords.
One of these is the right of laying peculiar taxation on land. Landed
property enjoys a special advantage over other property, and for that
special advantage it ought to pay. This is the purpose of the Fourth
Article of the Programme.[*]

There are some things which, if allowed to be articles of commerce at
all, cannot be prevented from being monopolized articles. On all such
the State has an acknowledged right to limit the profits. Railways, for
instance, are inevitably a monopoly, and the State, accordingly, sets a
legal limit to the amount of railway fares. Now, land is one of these
natural monopolies. The demand for it, in every prosperous country, is
constantly rising, while the land itself is susceptible of but little
increase. All such articles, when indispensable to human existence, tend
irresistibly to rise in price, with the progress of wealth and
population. The rise of the value of land, and of the Edition: current;
Page: [691] incomes of landowners, during the present century, has been
enormous. Part of it, undoubtedly, has been due to agricultural
improvements and the expenditure of capital on the soil. Much of it,
however, is merely the result of the increased demand for agricultural
products, and for building land, and would have taken place even though
no money had been laid out in increasing the productive powers of the
soil. Such outlay, moreover, as there has been, was made, in a great
proportion of cases, not by the landlord, but by the tenant, who may or
may not have been indemnified by a temporary enjoyment of the profits;
but, sooner or later, the increased return produced by the tenant’s
capital has become an unearned addition to the income of the landlord.

The Society are of opinion that in allowing the land to become private
property, the State ought to have reserved to itself this accession of
income, and that lapse of time does not extinguish this right, whatever
claim to compensation it may establish in favour of the landowners. The
land is the original inheritance of all mankind. The usual, and by far
the best argument for its appropriation by individuals is, that private
ownership gives the strongest motive for making the soil yield the
greatest possible produce. But this argument is only valid for leaving
to the owner the full enjoyment of whatever value he adds to the land by
his own exertions and expenditure. There is no similar reason for
allowing him to appropriate an increase of value to which he has
contributed nothing, but which accrues to him from the general growth of
society, that is to say, not from his own labour or expenditure, but
from that of other people—of the community at large.

The Society do not propose to disturb the landowners in their past
acquisitions. But they assert the right of the State to all such
accessions of income in the future. Whatever value the land may have
acquired at the time when the principle they contend for shall obtain
the assent of Parliament, they do not propose to interfere with. If,
rather than submit to be specially taxed on the future increase of his
rent, a landowner prefers to relinquish his land to the State, the
Society are willing that the State should pay for it at its selling
value. By this provision, all his just claims will be fully satisfied,
while the bargain will still be highly advantageous to the nation, since
an individual never gives, in present money, for a remote profit,
anything like what that profit is worth to the State, which is immortal.
In this manner, that increase of wealth which now flows into the coffers
of private persons from the mere progress of society, and not from their
own merits or sacrifices, will be gradually, and in an increasing
proportion, diverted from them to the nation as a whole, from whose
collective exertions and sacrifices it really proceeds. The State will
receive the entire rent of the lands voluntarily sold to it by their
possessors, together with a tax on the future increase of rent on those
properties whose owners have sufficient confidence in the justice and
moderation of the State to prefer retaining Edition: current; Page:
[692] them. These owners should be allowed at any future period to alter
their minds, and give up their lands for the price first offered; or
more, if they can show that they have made, during the intervening
period, substantial improvements at their own cost. The option thus
allowed would be a permanent security to the landowners against any
unjust or excessive exercise of the right of taxation by the State.

Objections have been made to the taxation of a prospective increase of
rent, on the ground of difficulties of execution; but those
difficulties, fairly encountered, would not, it is conceived, be very
serious. It is not necessary to enforce the right of the State to the
utmost farthing. A large margin should be allowed for possible
miscalculation. A valuation of all the land in the country would be made
in the first instance, and a registration established of subsequent
improvements made by the landlord. Taxation would not commence until
there had been time for an increase of value to accrue, and should then
be kept carefully within the amount of increase due to general causes.
If a landowner could prove that, owing to special circumstances, his
estate had not shared in the general rise of value, he would be exempt
from the tax: and at all events, if the just limit was exceeded, the
power of surrendering the land at its original valuation, augmented by a
just compensation for subsequent improvements, would be a sufficient
protection to the pecuniary interests of the landlords.

This reassertion of the right of the State to lay special taxation,
within the limits now specified, on the rent of land, is the extent of
the claim made by the Society, in behalf of the nation, upon the lands
which have been permitted to become the patrimony of private families.
But there is another large portion of the lands of the country which are
not yet private property, and to these the Society demands that the
right of the nation be henceforth maintained. As much of the original
right of the whole people to the land as the nation has already parted
with to individuals, the programme of the Association leaves to those
who have it. But they decidedly object to parting with any more. They
demand that the practice of converting public property into private
should henceforth terminate.

There are, in the first place, what are called the common lands. These
are said to belong to the lord of the manor. But they are not his like
his private estate—to deal with as he pleases. They are not his for the
principal purpose to which land is applicable—that of cultivation. Even
their spontaneous produce does not belong to him exclusively. The game
is his, and the game is nearly the only thing found on them that is his.
The natural pasture, and the wood which grows wild on the land, he
shares with those of his neighbours who have rights of common; and if he
wants to bring the land into cultivation, he must apply to the Inclosure
Commissioners,[*] who Edition: current; Page: [693] obtain for him an
Act of Parliament. This Act of Parliament divides the land between him
and the adjacent landowners, who alone, in rural districts, except by
special grant from the lord of the manor, are considered to have rights
of common; and neither tenants nor cottagers, save in quite exceptional
cases, obtain any compensation, unless that name is given to the
miserable reservation of a few acres for recreation ground or cottage
allotments. The Society regard this disposal of the common lands as an
iniquity, and demand that it should entirely cease. The demand is no
infringement of private property. Neither the lord of the manor nor the
neighbouring landowners are entitled to a farthing more than the value
of what the land yields to them in its wild state. The Society are
willing to respect existing possession, but they protest against making
a fresh gift from the nation to its wealthiest members. If free gifts
are to be made at all, they should at least be reserved for those who
need them.

When the State thinks fit to exercise its right to these waste lands,
the lord of the manor should be compensated for his manorial rights, and
the commoners for their rights of common, at the existing value, and the
land either kept open for the enjoyment of the people or cultivated for
their use. The Society attach great importance to keeping open extensive
tracts in a state of wild natural beauty and freedom; and a large
portion of the waste lands of the country are of too poor a quality to
be worth much for any other purpose. When the land is worth cultivation,
and the wants of society require that it should be cultivated, the mode
of bringing it into cultivation should be principally determined by the
interest of the labouring classes. Were it desirable to give any further
extension to private property in land, those classes would have a
paramount claim to be admitted to a share in it, by the grant of the
land in small parcels to respectable agricultural labourers at a fixed
rent. But if, as is, perhaps, more to be expected, the opinion prevails
that any further permanent alienation of the land is undesirable, these
lands will remain with the State, or with local authorities, as a means
of trying, with the greatest advantage and under every variety of
circumstances, the modes in which land can be most successfully managed
on the public account—whether by capitalist farmers, with stipulations
for the benefit of the labourers, or by long leases on proper conditions
to small cultivators, or finally, by co-operative farming.[*]

Edition: current; Page: [694]
A still more valuable resource than the common lands consists of the
land owned by public bodies and endowed institutions. These possessions
are not, in any sense whatever, private property. No one of those who
profit by them has more than a life interest, most have not so much, and
their interests can be bought up, or suffered to expire. All enlightened
reformers acknowledge the moral distinction between private property and
public endowments; and it is now an admitted doctrine among Liberals,
that endowments, after a certain length of duration, are at the disposal
of the State, which from that time should fix their destination. Many
endowments are positively mischievous, and ought to be extinguished.
Others, especially educational endowments, are highly useful, and under
better management will, it may be hoped, become more so; and many, now
worthless from abuse, only require to be properly looked after. A
portion of the lands of the country, much larger and more valuable than
the public in general are aware of, is thus at the disposal of the
State. It can keep those lands together, and administer them either for
the objects to which they are appropriated, or for such other objects as
may be considered preferable, and permit them to be leased or occupied
on such terms as it thinks fit by individuals or associations. It may,
without injustice or detriment to any one, make use of them for any
well-considered social or philanthropic experiments. Among the lands
thus disposable is the soil of large portions of our great towns, and
particularly of London. It is obvious what facilities their possession
would give for promoting every improvement that tends to raise the
condition of the mass of the people: sanitary works, improved dwellings,
public gardens, co-operative buildings, co-operative agriculture, useful
public institutions of every kind.*

These important reforms are the object of the 7th, 8th, and 9th articles
of the Programme.[*] But inasmuch as the waste lands, and the lands
Edition: current; Page: [695] belonging to public bodies, are
irregularly and unequally distributed through the country; and the means
which they afford, as well for executing recognised improvements, as for
bringing to an experimental test such as are yet untried, ought not to
be confined to some neighbourhoods, but should exist in all parts of the
country; it is therefore provided, by the 5th and 6th articles,[*] that
the State should purchase from private owners estates which are in the
market, when such purchase is necessary for giving a fair trial in any
neighbourhood to co-operative agriculture, or to a properly regulated
system of small farming.

The 10th article of the Programme requires no explanation.[†] It is
contrary to all principle that private proprietors, who may be, and
often are, liberal and enlightened, but who may, on the contrary, be the
most ignorant and capricious of mankind, should have the power of
destroying, or of closing from public view, natural curiosities, or
monuments and historical relics, of the greatest value to science, to
history, and to the instruction and enjoyment of every person in the
country who has sufficient knowledge and intelligence to appreciate
their value.

Edition: current; Page: [696] Edition: current; Page: [697]


PROPERTY AND TAXATION
 1873

Edition: current; Page: [698]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Fortnightly Review, n.s. XIII (Mar., 1873), 396-8. Signed; republished
in D&D, IV (1875), 231-6. Original heading, as first of the Fortnightly
“Critical Notices,” “L’Avere et l’Imposta. Per Constantino Baer. Roma,
Torino, Firenze [: Loescher], 1872.” Not mentioned in JSM’s
bibliography. No copy in Somerville College. The D&D text, which is
headed “L’Avere e l’Imposta,” does not differ substantively from that in
the Fortnightly, except in correcting “et” to “e” in the title. The
title here used is taken from the text of JSM’s review.

Writing to Cairnes from Avignon, 9 Dec., 1872, JSM says in part: “Have
you ever turned your attention to the merits and demerits of a tax on
property, i.e. land and capital, realized and unrealized, as a
substitute for an income tax? The pros and cons are tolerably obvious,
the pros consisting rather in the demerits of other direct taxes than in
the recommendations of this. My attention has been drawn to the subject
by an Italian correspondent of mine, Constantino Baer by name, a clever
and sensible man, well versed in the best English political economy, and
who has published a little book recommending, as the best system of
taxation, a tax on land and capital, of a percentage on their pecuniary
value, combined with taxes on such modes of expenditure as may be a fair
test of a person’s general scale of unproductive expenses. I have
written, for the small print of the Fortnightly, a short notice of this
book, but I should much like to have your opinion on its main position.”
(Letter in the British Library of Political and Economic Science.)

Edition: current; Page: [699]


Property and Taxation

those who are apt to feel discouragement at the slow progress of
mankind, both in the discovery of truth and in the application of it,
may derive comfort from the fact that those nations which, from
historical accidents or their own energy, precede others in either of
these kinds of improvement, are found to have laboured not for
themselves only, but for all the rest, and greatly abridge the task for
those who have fallen behind. The European nations which have lately
been freed from the hindrances that had retarded their development—Italy
and Hungary—with the vigorous impulse which the awakening of liberty
gives to the human faculties, have thrown themselves into serious study;
and being able to resort at once to the latest and best products of
thought in the more advanced countries, are attaining by strides the
results which their teachers were only able to reach by slow and
measured steps. Knowing that they have all to learn, they learn all at
once, having no habit, authority, or prejudice to detain them halfway.

If an example is desired, one will be found in the work before us, the
production of a distinguished Italian political economist. Political
economy, it is true, is no new subject to Italian intellect; the study
of it may almost be said to have originated in Italy: its early
cultivators who have left a reputation behind them were generally
Italians, and chiefly (we leave the explanation to historians) Southern
Italians; indeed, the speculative movement of Italy had for centuries
its chief seat in the southern portion of the peninsula, as the
political, commercial, and artistic had theirs in the northern. Owing,
however, to the general slackening of the intellectual movement in
Italy, caused by her unfortunate political situation in the last three
centuries, she was outstripped in this as in other departments by more
fortunate nations, and it was left to them to originate all the great
improvements in this branch of knowledge. But, since restored to
freedom, active minds in Italy have not only revived the study of
scientific economics, but have placed themselves at once at the most
advanced point which that study has yet reached. The work of Mr.
Constantine Baer on “Property and Taxation” shows not only a familiar
knowledge of the best English, French, Edition: current; Page: [700] and
German authorities, but a mastery of their most improved doctrines not
often met with even in England; and along with it, no ordinary degree of
the ability required for what is a very different thing from a knowledge
of economic truths—the power of applying them. We say this, although we
have to add that as regards the specific proposal which the book is
written to recommend—a matter not of principle, but of application—we do
not consider it to be successful. But we have seldom seen a greater
amount of sound practical argument brought to the support of a
conclusion that we think practically unsound. Like everything written on
such subjects by a person thoroughly competent in knowledge and ability,
whether right or wrong on the particular point in question, the
discussion is highly instructive.

Mr. Baer’s case is this. The primary requisite of just taxation is that
every one should be taxed in proportion to his means (avere). There are
other requisites, as that taxation should not interfere injuriously with
the free employment of labour and capital, that it should give the least
possible opening to fraud or arbitrary exaction, and so forth: but the
first requisite of all is that it should be equal. Mr. Baer ably
confutes the standards different from this which have been or are
occasionally professed or acted on; particularly the doctrine, which has
a considerable hold on many minds, that persons should be taxed more or
less according as they are supposed to benefit more or less by the
services of the Government, or according as the services they receive
cost more or less to the State.

But the main question is, in what sense is equality of means to be
understood? and what constitutes a person’s means? They are, according
to Mr. Baer, of two descriptions: productive (if he have any such) and
unproductive. The former are capital, and land employed as a source of
income; the latter is his income, such parts excepted as he saves and
converts into capital. In order, therefore, to reach the whole of his
means, we ought to tax his income, and also his land and capital. An
income-tax Mr. Baer rejects, and some of the objections to it are stated
by him with much force. Income, in his opinion, is best reached by taxes
on consumption, imposed on such articles or modes of outlay as can be
taxed without interfering with the channels of industry, and as may be
considered fair tests of a person’s general expenditure: houses,
servants, horses, and carriages Mr. Baer considers to be among the best.
Capital and land he would tax by a percentage on their money value,
which (as he remarks) represents, in the case of capital, only such part
of the income from it as is measured by the ordinary rate of interest,
and spares all such part as is either compensation for extra risk, or a
return for the skill and industry of the possessor. The tax is to extend
to property not yielding income, if of a kind admitting of accumulation,
such as houses, furniture, pictures, and sculptures, Edition: current;
Page: [701] The practical means of levying such a tax are discussed in
some detail by Mr. Baer, and he succeeds to a great extent in showing
that there are accessible criteria which would in most cases enable it
to be assessed with little danger of fraud by the taxpayer, or undue
exaction by the receiver, and without harassing inquisition into private
affairs; while, at the worst, the evils of this sort would be many times
less for a tax on capital, than they necessarily are for taxes on
income.

The objection which we have to bring against Mr. Baer’s scheme of
taxation will easily be anticipated. The avere, or possessions, of any
one, on which taxation is to be grounded, are estimated by a wrong
standard. Taxation is to be proportioned to means; but a person’s means
of paying taxes, or of bearing any other burden of a pecuniary nature,
do not consist of his capital and his income, but of his capital or his
income. He possesses them both in the sense of legal control, but only
one or other of them for the purposes of his own consumption. His
capital, so long as it remains capital, is not consumed by himself, but
by the workpeople whom he employs, and the producers of his machinery
and material: if he diverts it from their use to his own, it ceases to
yield him an income. He can consume either his capital or his income,
but not both; and if he is taxed on both, he is taxed twice over on the
same means of payment. The maxim that equal means should pay equal taxes
has nothing to rest upon unless the means intended are those which are
available to pay taxes from. What forms no part of a person’s means of
expenditure forms no part of his means of paying taxes: while, if he
withdraws it from production and employs it as means of expenditure, it
pays, while it lasts, additional taxes on expenditure, and so, even in
that case, satisfies the claims of financial justice. It is true that
though he has no other advantage from his capital while it remains
capital, he has a sense of power and importance connected with it; and
in consideration of this it may be thought equitable to make him pay
something additional to the State. But this is departing from the
principle of taxation in proportion to means, and introducing another
principle, that of distributive justice; it is laying a tax on an
advantageous social position—a measure which, if defensible, must be so
on moral or political grounds, not on economical.

Notwithstanding, however, the well-grounded objections on the score of
justice, in a merely pecuniary point of view, to which a tax on capital
is liable, the subject cannot be altogether disregarded by economists
and politicians. No tax is in itself absolutely just; the justice or
injustice of taxes can only be comparative: if just in the conception,
they are never completely so in the application: and it is quite
possible that nations may some day be obliged to resort to a moderate
tax on all property, as the least unjust mode of raising a part of their
revenue. The many injustices of a Edition: current; Page: [702] direct
income-tax are generally acknowledged; while perhaps the greatest of all
is that which is the least complained of, that it is a tax on
conscience, and a premium on deception and improbity. The increase of
commercial dishonesty, so much complained of for many years past, was
predicted by good judges as the certain effect of Sir Robert Peel’s
income-tax; and it will never be known for how much of that evil product
the tax may be accountable, or in how many cases a false return of
income was the first dereliction of pecuniary integrity. Nevertheless,
an income-tax is felt to be indispensable on our present financial
system, because without it there are actually no means, recognised by
existing opinion, of making the richer classes pay their just share of
taxation—a thing which cannot be done by any system of taxes on
consumption yet devised. Succession duties are, no doubt, the least
objectionable mode of making property, as distinguished from income,
contribute directly to the State, and they should be employed as far as
practicable; but unless the duty is very light, there is great
difficulty in protecting it against evasion. The tax proposed by Mr.
Baer may, therefore, some time or other, have to be taken into serious
consideration: and should that time come, his remarks on the practical
side of the question will be found well worth attending and referring to
by those who have to deal with the subject.

Edition: current; Page: [703]


CHAPTERS ON SOCIALISM
 1879

Edition: current; Page: [704]


EDITOR’S NOTE

Fortnightly Review, n.s. XXV (Feb., 1879), 217-37; ibid. (Mar., 1879),
373-82; ibid. (Apr., 1879), 513-30. Original heading (of all three
instalments): “Chapters on Socialism. By John Stuart Mill.” As
unpublished and incomplete, not mentioned in JSM’s Autobiography or
bibliography (but identified by Ney MacMinn in his introduction, xiin).
The best evidence concerning its composition is in the “Preliminary
Notice” by Helen Taylor (JSM’s step-daughter), which appeared with the
first instalment, and is retained here. For an account of the missing
manuscript, see the Textual Introduction, xlvii above.

The first instalment contained the first two chapters (including
Introductory); the second contained the third chapter; and the third the
final two chapters.

Edition: current; Page: [705]


Chapters on Socialism


PRELIMINARY NOTICE

it was in the year 1869 that, impressed with the degree in which, even
during the last twenty years, when the world seemed so wholly occupied
with other matters, the socialist ideas of speculative thinkers had
spread among the workers in every civilised country, Mr. Mill formed the
design of writing a book on Socialism. Convinced that the inevitable
tendencies of modern society must be to bring the questions involved in
it always more and more to the front, he thought it of great practical
consequence that they should be thoroughly and impartially considered,
and the lines pointed out by which the best speculatively-tested
theories might, without prolongation of suffering on the one hand, or
unnecessary disturbance on the other, be applied to the existing order
of things. He therefore planned a work which should go exhaustively
through the whole subject, point by point; and the four chapters now
printed are the first rough drafts thrown down towards the foundation of
that work. These chapters might not, when the work came to be completely
written out and then re-written, according to the author’s habit, have
appeared in the present order; they might have been incorporated into
different parts of the work. It has not been without hesitation that I
have yielded to the urgent wish of the editor of this Review to give
these chapters to the world; but I have complied with his request
because, while they appear to me to possess great intrinsic value as
well as special application to the problems now forcing themselves on
public attention, they will not, I believe, detract even from the mere
literary reputation of their author, but will rather form an example of
the patient labour with which good work is done.

Helen Taylor

January, 1879


INTRODUCTORY

in the great country beyond the Atlantic, which is now well-nigh the
most powerful country in the world, and will soon be indisputably so,
manhood suffrage prevails. Such is also the political qualification of
France Edition: current; Page: [706] since 1848, and has become that of
the German Confederation, though not of all the several states composing
it. In Great Britain the suffrage is not yet so widely extended, but the
last Reform Act[*] admitted within what is called the pale of the
Constitution so large a body of those who live on weekly wages, that as
soon and as often as these shall choose to act together as a class, and
exert for any common object the whole of the electoral power which our
present institutions give them, they will exercise, though not a
complete ascendancy, a very great influence on legislation. Now these
are the very class which, in the vocabulary of the higher ranks, are
said to have no stake in the country. Of course they have in reality the
greatest stake, since their daily bread depends on its prosperity. But
they are not engaged (we may call it bribed) by any peculiar interest of
their own, to the support of property as it is, least of all to the
support of inequalities of property. So far as their power reaches, or
may hereafter reach, the laws of property have to depend for support
upon considerations of a public nature, upon the estimate made of their
conduciveness to the general welfare, and not upon motives of a mere
personal character operating on the minds of those who have control over
the Government.

It seems to me that the greatness of this change is as yet by no means
completely realised, either by those who opposed, or by those who
effected our last constitutional reform. To say the truth, the
perceptions of Englishmen are of late somewhat blunted as to the
tendencies of political changes. They have seen so many changes made,
from which, while only in prospect, vast expectations were entertained,
both of evil and of good, while the results of either kind that actually
followed seemed far short of what had been predicted, that they have
come to feel as if it were the nature of political changes not to fulfil
expectation, and have fallen into a habit of half-unconscious belief
that such changes, when they take place without a violent revolution, do
not much or permanently disturb in practice the course of things
habitual to the country. This, however, is but a superficial view either
of the past or of the future. The various reforms of the last two
generations have been at least as fruitful in important consequences as
was foretold. The predictions were often erroneous as to the suddenness
of the effects, and sometimes even as to the kind of effect. We laugh at
the vain expectations of those who thought that Catholic emancipation
would tranquillise Ireland, or reconcile it to British rule. At the end
of the first ten years of the Reform Act of 1832, few continued to think
either that it would remove every important practical grievance, or that
it had opened the door to universal suffrage. But five-and-twenty years
more of its operation have given scope for a large development of its
indirect working, which Edition: current; Page: [707] is much more
momentous than the direct. Sudden effects in history are generally
superficial. Causes which go deep down into the roots of future events
produce the most serious parts of their effect only slowly, and have,
therefore, time to become a part of the familiar order of things before
general attention is called to the changes they are producing; since,
when the changes do become evident, they are often not seen, by cursory
observers, to be in any peculiar manner connected with the cause. The
remoter consequences of a new political fact are seldom understood when
they occur, except when they have been appreciated beforehand.

This timely appreciation is particularly easy in respect to the
tendencies of the change made in our institutions by the Reform Act of
1867. The great increase of electoral power which the Act places within
the reach of the working classes is permanent. The circumstances which
have caused them, thus far, to make a very limited use of that power,
are essentially temporary. It is known even to the most inobservant,
that the working classes have, and are likely to have, political objects
which concern them as working classes, and on which they believe,
rightly or wrongly, that the interests and opinions of the other
powerful classes are opposed to theirs. However much their pursuit of
these objects may be for the present retarded by want of electoral
organization, by dissensions among themselves, or by their not having
reduced as yet their wishes into a sufficiently definite practical
shape, it is as certain as anything in politics can be, that they will
before long find the means of making their collective electoral power
effectively instrumental to the promotion of their collective objects.
And when they do so, it will not be in the disorderly and ineffective
way which belongs to a people not habituated to the use of legal and
constitutional machinery, nor will it be by the impulse of a mere
instinct of levelling. The instruments will be the press, public
meetings and associations, and the return to Parliament of the greatest
possible number of persons pledged to the political aims of the working
classes. The political aims will themselves be determined by definite
political doctrines; for politics are now scientifically studied from
the point of view of the working classes, and opinions conceived in the
special interest of those classes are organized into systems and creeds
which lay claim to a place on the platform of political philosophy, by
the same right as the systems elaborated by previous thinkers. It is of
the utmost importance that all reflecting persons should take into early
consideration what these popular political creeds are likely to be, and
that every single article of them should be brought under the fullest
light of investigation and discussion, so that, if possible, when the
time shall be ripe, whatever is right in them may be adopted, and what
is wrong rejected by general consent, and that instead of a hostile
conflict, physical or only Edition: current; Page: [708] moral, between
the old and the new, the best parts of both may be combined in a
renovated social fabric. At the ordinary pace of those great social
changes which are not effected by physical violence, we have before us
an interval of about a generation, on the due employment of which it
depends whether the accommodation of social institutions to the altered
state of human society, shall be the work of wise foresight, or of a
conflict of opposite prejudices. The future of mankind will be gravely
imperilled, if great questions are left to be fought over between
ignorant change and ignorant opposition to change.

And the discussion that is now required is one that must go down to the
very first principles of existing society. The fundamental doctrines
which were assumed as incontestable by former generations, are now put
again on their trial. Until the present age, the institution of property
in the shape in which it has been handed down from the past, had not,
except by a few speculative writers, been brought seriously into
question, because the conflicts of the past have always been conflicts
between classes, both of which had a stake in the existing constitution
of property. It will not be possible to go on longer in this manner.
When the discussion includes classes who have next to no property of
their own, and are only interested in the institution so far as it is a
public benefit, they will not allow anything to be taken for
granted—certainly not the principle of private property, the legitimacy
and utility of which are denied by many of the reasoners who look out
from the standpoint of the working classes. Those classes will certainly
demand that the subject, in all its parts, shall be reconsidered from
the foundation; that all proposals for doing without the institution,
and all modes of modifying it which have the appearance of being
favourable to the interest of the working classes, shall receive the
fullest consideration and discussion before it is decided that the
subject must remain as it is. As far as this country is concerned, the
dispositions of the working classes have as yet manifested themselves
hostile only to certain outlying portions of the proprietary system.
Many of them desire to withdraw questions of wages from the freedom of
contract, which is one of the ordinary attributions of private property.
The more aspiring of them deny that land is a proper subject for private
appropriation, and have commenced an agitation for its resumption by the
State. With this is combined, in the speeches of some of the agitators,
a denunciation of what they term usury, but without any definition of
what they mean by the name; and the cry does not seem to be of home
origin, but to have been caught up from the intercourse which has
recently commenced through the Labour Congresses and the International
Society, with the continental Socialists who object to all interest on
money, and deny the legitimacy of deriving an Edition: current; Page:
[709] income in any form from property apart from labour. This doctrine
does not as yet show signs of being widely prevalent in Great Britain,
but the soil is well prepared to receive the seeds of this description
which are widely scattered from those foreign countries where large,
general theories, and schemes of vast promise, instead of inspiring
distrust, are essential to the popularity of a cause. It is in France,
Germany, and Switzerland that anti-property doctrines in the widest
sense have drawn large bodies of working men to rally round them. In
these countries nearly all those who aim at reforming society in the
interest of the working classes profess themselves Socialists, a
designation under which schemes of very diverse character are
comprehended and confounded, but which implies at least a remodelling
generally approaching to abolition of the institution of private
property. And it would probably be found that even in England the more
prominent and active leaders of the working classes are usually in their
private creed Socialists of one order or another, though being, like
most English politicians, better aware than their Continental brethren
that great and permanent changes in the fundamental ideas of mankind are
not to be accomplished by a coup de main, they direct their practical
efforts towards ends which seem within easier reach, and are content to
hold back all extreme theories until there has been experience of the
operation of the same principles on a partial scale. While such
continues to be the character of the English working classes, as it is
of Englishmen in general, they are not likely to rush headlong into the
reckless extremities of some of the foreign Socialists, who, even in
sober Switzerland, proclaim themselves content to begin by simple
subversion, leaving the subsequent reconstruction to take care of
itself; and by subversion they mean not only the annihilation of all
government, but getting all property of all kinds out of the hands of
the possessors to be used for the general benefit; but in what mode it
will, they say, be time enough afterwards to decide.

The avowal of this doctrine by a public newspaper, the organ of an
association (La Solidarité, published at Neuchâtel), is one of the most
curious signs of the times. The leaders of the English working men—whose
delegates at the congresses of Geneva and Bâle contributed much the
greatest part of such practical common sense as was shown there—are not
likely to begin deliberately by anarchy, without having formed any
opinion as to what form of society should be established in the room of
the old. But it is evident that whatever they do propose can only be
properly judged, and the grounds of the judgment made convincing to the
general mind, on the basis of a previous survey of the two rival
theories, that of private property and that of Socialism, one or other
of which must necessarily furnish most of the premises in the
discussion. Before, therefore, we can Edition: current; Page: [710]
usefully discuss this class of questions in detail, it will be advisable
to examine from their foundations the general questions raised by
Socialism. And this examination should be made without any hostile
prejudice. However irrefutable the arguments in favour of the laws of
property may appear to those to whom they have the double prestige of
immemorial custom and of personal interest, nothing is more natural than
that a working man who has begun to speculate on politics, should regard
them in a very different light. Having, after long struggles, attained
in some countries, and nearly attained in others, the point at which for
them, at least, there is no further progress to make in the department
of purely political rights, is it possible that the less fortunate
classes among the “adult males” should not ask themselves whether
progress ought to stop there? Notwithstanding all that has been done,
and all that seems likely to be done, in the extension of franchises, a
few are born to great riches, and the many to a penury, made only more
grating by contrast. No longer enslaved or made dependent by force of
law, the great majority are so by force of poverty; they are still
chained to a place, to an occupation, and to conformity with the will of
an employer, and debarred by the accident of birth both from the
enjoyments, and from the mental and moral advantages, which others
inherit without exertion and independently of desert. That this is an
evil equal to almost any of those against which mankind have hitherto
struggled, the poor are not wrong in believing. Is it a necessary evil?
They are told so by those who do not feel it—by those who have gained
the prizes in the lottery of life. But it was also said that slavery,
that despotism, that all the privileges of oligarchy were necessary. All
the successive steps that have been made by the poorer classes, partly
won from the better feelings of the powerful, partly extorted from their
fears, and partly bought with money, or attained in exchange for support
given to one section of the powerful in its quarrels with another, had
the strongest prejudices opposed to them beforehand; but their
acquisition was a sign of power gained by the subordinate classes, a
means to those classes of acquiring more; it consequently drew to those
classes a certain share of the respect accorded to power, and produced a
corresponding modification in the creed of society respecting them;
whatever advantages they succeeded in acquiring came to be considered
their due, while, of those which they had not yet attained, they
continued to be deemed unworthy. The classes, therefore, which the
system of society makes subordinate, have little reason to put faith in
any of the maxims which the same system of society may have established
as principles. Considering that the opinions of mankind have been found
so wonderfully flexible, have always tended to consecrate existing
facts, and to declare what did not yet exist, either pernicious or
impracticable, what assurance have those classes that the distinction of
rich and poor is grounded on a more imperative Edition: current; Page:
[711] necessity than those other ancient and long-established facts,
which, having been abolished, are now condemned even by those who
formerly profited by them? This cannot be taken on the word of an
interested party. The working classes are entitled to claim that the
whole field of social institutions should be re-examined, and every
question considered as if it now arose for the first time; with the idea
constantly in view that the persons who are to be convinced are not
those who owe their ease and importance to the present system, but
persons who have no other interest in the matter than abstract justice
and the general good of the community. It should be the object to
ascertain what institutions of property would be established by an
unprejudiced legislator, absolutely impartial between the possessors of
property and the non-possessors; and to defend and justify them by the
reasons which would really influence such a legislator, and not by such
as have the appearance of being got up to make out a case for what
already exists. Such rights or privileges of property as will not stand
this test will, sooner or later, have to be given up. An impartial
hearing ought, moreover, to be given to all objections against property
itself. All evils and inconveniences attaching to the institution in its
best form ought to be frankly admitted, and the best remedies or
palliatives applied which human intelligence is able to devise. And all
plans proposed by social reformers, under whatever name designated, for
the purpose of attaining the benefits aimed at by the institution of
property without its inconveniences, should be examined with the same
candour, not prejudged as absurd or impracticable.


SOCIALIST OBJECTIONS TO THE PRESENT ORDER OF SOCIETY

As in all proposals for change there are two elements to be
considered—that which is to be changed, and that which it is to be
changed to—so in Socialism considered generally, and in each of its
varieties taken separately, there are two parts to be distinguished, the
one negative and critical, the other constructive. There is, first, the
judgment of Socialism on existing institutions and practices and on
their results; and secondly, the various plans which it has propounded
for doing better. In the former all the different schools of Socialism
are at one. They agree almost to identity in the faults which they find
with the economical order of existing society. Up to a certain point
also they entertain the same general conception of the remedy to be
provided for those faults; but in the details, notwithstanding this
general agreement, there is a wide disparity. It will be both natural
and convenient, in attempting an estimate of their doctrines, to begin
with the negative portion which is common to them all, and to postpone
all mention Edition: current; Page: [712] of their differences until we
arrive at that second part of their undertaking, in which alone they
seriously differ.

The first part of our task is by no means difficult; since it consists
only in an enumeration of existing evils. Of these there is no scarcity,
and most of them are by no means obscure or mysterious. Many of them are
the veriest commonplaces of moralists, though the roots even of these
lie deeper than moralists usually attempt to penetrate. So various are
they that the only difficulty is to make any approach to an exhaustive
catalogue. We shall content ourselves for the present with mentioning a
few of the principal. And let one thing be remembered by the reader.
When item after item of the enumeration passes before him, and he finds
one fact after another which he has been accustomed to include among the
necessities of nature urged as an accusation against social
institutions, he is not entitled to cry unfairness, and to protest that
the evils complained of are inherent in Man and Society, and are such as
no arrangements can remedy. To assert this would be to beg the very
question at issue. No one is more ready than Socialists to admit—they
affirm it indeed much more decidedly than truth warrants—that the evils
they complain of are irremediable in the present constitution of
society. They propose to consider whether some other form of society may
be devised which would not be liable to those evils, or would be liable
to them in a much less degree. Those who object to the present order of
society, considered as a whole, and who accept as an alternative the
possibility of a total change, have a right to set down all the evils
which at present exist in society as part of their case, whether these
are apparently attributable to social arrangements or not, provided they
do not flow from physical laws which human power is not adequate, or
human knowledge has not yet learned, to counteract. Moral evils, and
such physical evils as would be remedied if all persons did as they
ought, are fairly chargeable against the state of society which admits
of them; and are valid as arguments until it is shown that any other
state of society would involve an equal or greater amount of such evils.
In the opinion of Socialists, the present arrangements of society in
respect to Property and the Production and Distribution of Wealth, are,
as means to the general good, a total failure. They say that there is an
enormous mass of evil which these arrangements do not succeed in
preventing; that the good, either moral or physical, which they realise
is wretchedly small compared with the amount of exertion employed, and
that even this small amount of good is brought about by means which are
full of pernicious consequences, moral and physical.

First among existing social evils may be mentioned the evil of Poverty.
The institution of Property is upheld and commended principally as being
the means by which labour and frugality are insured their reward, and
Edition: current; Page: [713] mankind enabled to emerge from indigence.
It may be so; most Socialists allow that it has been so in earlier
periods of history. But if the institution can do nothing more or better
in this respect than it has hitherto done, its capabilities, they
affirm, are very insignificant. What proportion of the population, in
the most civilised countries of Europe, enjoy in their own persons
anything worth naming of the benefits of property? It may be said, that
but for property in the hands of their employers they would be without
daily bread; but, though this be conceded, at least their daily bread is
all that they have; and that often in insufficient quantity; almost
always of inferior quality; and with no assurance of continuing to have
it at all; an immense proportion of the industrious classes being at
some period or other of their lives (and all being liable to become)
dependent, at least temporarily, on legal or voluntary charity. Any
attempt to depict the miseries of indigence, or to estimate the
proportion of mankind who in the most advanced countries are habitually
given up during their whole existence to its physical and moral
sufferings, would be superfluous here. This may be left to
philanthropists, who have painted these miseries in colours sufficiently
strong. Suffice it to say that the condition of numbers in civilised
Europe, and even in England and France, is more wretched than that of
most tribes of savages who are known to us.

It may be said that of this hard lot no one has any reason to complain,
because it befalls those only who are outstripped by others, from
inferiority of energy or of prudence. This, even were it true, would be
a very small alleviation of the evil. If some Nero or Domitian were to
require a hundred persons to run a race for their lives, on condition
that the fifty or twenty who came in hindmost should be put to death, it
would not be any diminution of the injustice that the strongest or
nimblest would, except through some untoward accident, be certain to
escape. The misery and the crime would be that any were put to death at
all. So in the economy of society; if there be any who suffer physical
privation or moral degradation, whose bodily necessities are either not
satisfied or satisfied in a manner which only brutish creatures can be
content with, this, though not necessarily the crime of society, is pro
tanto a failure of the social arrangements. And to assert as a
mitigation of the evil that those who thus suffer are the weaker members
of the community, morally or physically, is to add insult to misfortune.
Is weakness a justification of suffering? Is it not, on the contrary, an
irresistible claim upon every human being for protection against
suffering? If the minds and feelings of the prosperous were in a right
state, would they accept their prosperity if for the sake of it even one
person near them was, for any other cause than voluntary fault, excluded
from obtaining a desirable existence?

One thing there is, which if it could be affirmed truly, would relieve
social Edition: current; Page: [714] institutions from any share in the
responsibility of these evils. Since the human race has no means of
enjoyable existence, or of existence at all, but what it derives from
its own labour and abstinence, there would be no ground for complaint
against society if every one who was willing to undergo a fair share of
this labour and abstinence could attain a fair share of the fruits. But
is this the fact? Is it not the reverse of the fact? The reward, instead
of being proportioned to the labour and abstinence of the individual, is
almost in an inverse ratio to it: those who receive the least, labour
and abstain the most. Even the idle, reckless, and ill-conducted poor,
those who are said with most justice to have themselves to blame for
their condition, often undergo much more and severer labour, not only
than those who are born to pecuniary independence, but than almost any
of the more highly remunerated of those who earn their subsistence; and
even the inadequate self-control exercised by the industrious poor costs
them more sacrifice and more effort than is almost ever required from
the more favoured members of society. The very idea of distributive
justice, or of any proportionality between success and merit, or between
success and exertion, is in the present state of society so manifestly
chimerical as to be relegated to the regions of romance. It is true that
the lot of individuals is not wholly independent of their virtue and
intelligence; these do really tell in their favour, but far less than
many other things in which there is no merit at all. The most powerful
of all the determining circumstances is birth. The great majority are
what they were born to be. Some are born rich without work, others are
born to a position in which they can become rich by work, the great
majority are born to hard work and poverty throughout life, numbers to
indigence. Next to birth the chief cause of success in life is accident
and opportunity. When a person not born to riches succeeds in acquiring
them, his own industry and dexterity have generally contributed to the
result; but industry and dexterity would not have sufficed unless there
had been also a concurrence of occasions and chances which falls to the
lot of only a small number. If persons are helped in their worldly
career by their virtues, so are they, and perhaps quite as often, by
their vices: by servility and sycophancy, by hard-hearted and
close-fisted selfishness, by the permitted lies and tricks of trade, by
gambling speculations, not seldom by downright knavery. Energies and
talents are of much more avail for success in life than virtues; but if
one man succeeds by employing energy and talent in something generally
useful, another thrives by exercising the same qualities in
out-generalling and ruining a rival. It is as much as any moralist
ventures to assert, that, other circumstances being given, honesty is
the best policy, and that with parity of advantages an honest person has
better chances than a rogue. Even this in many stations and
circumstances of life is questionable; anything more than Edition:
current; Page: [715] this is out of the question. It cannot be pretended
that honesty, as a means of success, tells for as much as a difference
of one single step on the social ladder. The connection between fortune
and conduct is mainly this, that there is a degree of bad conduct, or
rather of some kinds of bad conduct, which suffices to ruin any amount
of good fortune; but the converse is not true: in the situation of most
people no degree whatever of good conduct can be counted upon for
raising them in the world, without the aid of fortunate accidents.

These evils, then—great poverty, and that poverty very little connected
with desert—are the first grand failure of the existing arrangements of
society. The second is human misconduct; crime, vice, and folly, with
all the sufferings which follow in their train. For, nearly all the
forms of misconduct, whether committed towards ourselves or towards
others, may be traced to one of three causes: Poverty and its
temptations in the many; Idleness and désœuvrement in the few whose
circumstances do not compel them to work; bad education, or want of
education, in both. The first two must be allowed to be at least
failures in the social arrangements, the last is now almost universally
admitted to be the fault of those arrangements—it may almost be said the
crime. I am speaking loosely and in the rough, for a minuter analysis of
the sources of faults of character and errors of conduct would establish
far more conclusively the filiation which connects them with a defective
organization of society, though it would also show the reciprocal
dependence of that faulty state of society on a backward state of the
human mind.

At this point, in the enumeration of the evils of society, the mere
levellers of former times usually stopped: but their more far-sighted
successors, the present Socialists, go farther. In their eyes the very
foundation of human life as at present constituted, the very principle
on which the production and repartition of all material products is now
carried on, is essentially vicious and anti-social. It is the principle
of individualism, competition, each one for himself and against all the
rest. It is grounded on opposition of interests, not harmony of
interests, and under it every one is required to find his place by a
struggle, by pushing others back or being pushed back by them.
Socialists consider this system of private war (as it may be termed)[*]
between every one and every one, especially fatal in an economical point
of view and in a moral. Morally considered, its evils are obvious. It is
the parent of envy, hatred, and all uncharitableness; it makes every one
the natural enemy of all others who cross his path, and every one’s path
is constantly liable to be crossed. Under the present system hardly any
one can gain except by the loss or disappointment of one or of many
others. In Edition: current; Page: [716] a well-constituted community
every one would be a gainer by every other person’s successful
exertions; while now we gain by each other’s loss and lose by each
other’s gain, and our greatest gains come from the worst source of all,
from death, the death of those who are nearest and should be dearest to
us. In its purely economical operation the principle of individual
competition receives as unqualified condemnation from the social
reformers as in its moral. In the competition of labourers they see the
cause of low wages; in the competition of producers the cause of ruin
and bankruptcy; and both evils, they affirm, tend constantly to increase
as population and wealth make progress; no person (they conceive) being
benefited except the great proprietors of land, the holders of fixed
money incomes, and a few great capitalists, whose wealth is gradually
enabling them to undersell all other producers, to absorb the whole of
the operations of industry into their own sphere, to drive from the
market all employers of labour except themselves, and to convert the
labourers into a kind of slaves or serfs, dependent on them for the
means of support, and compelled to accept these on such terms as they
choose to offer. Society, in short, is travelling onward, according to
these speculators, towards a new feudality, that of the great
capitalists.

As I shall have ample opportunity in future chapters to state my own
opinion on these topics, and on many others connected with and
subordinate to them, I shall now, without further preamble, exhibit the
opinions of distinguished Socialists on the present arrangements of
society, in a selection of passages from their published writings. For
the present I desire to be considered as a mere reporter of the opinions
of others. Hereafter it will appear how much of what I cite agrees or
differs with my own sentiments.

The clearest, the most compact, and the most precise and specific
statement of the case of the Socialists generally against the existing
order of society in the economical department of human affairs, is to be
found in the little work of M. Louis Blanc, Organisation du Travail. My
first extracts, therefore, on this part of the subject, shall be taken
from that treatise.

Competition is for the people a system of extermination. Is the poor man
a member of society, or an enemy to it? We ask for an answer.

All around him he finds the soil preoccupied. Can he cultivate the earth
for himself? No; for the right of the first occupant has become a right
of property. Can he gather the fruits which the hand of God ripens on
the path of man? No; for, like the soil, the fruits have been
appropriated. Can he hunt or fish? No; for that is a right which is
dependent upon the government. Can he draw water from a spring enclosed
in a field? No; for the proprietor of the field is, in virtue of his
right to the field, proprietor of the fountain. Can he, dying of hunger
and thirst, stretch out his hands for the charity of his fellow
creatures? No; for there are laws against begging. Can he, exhausted by
Edition: current; Page: [717] fatigue and without a refuge, lie down to
sleep upon the pavement of the streets? No; for there are laws against
vagabondage. Can he, flying from the cruel native land where everything
is denied him, seek the means of living far from the place where life
was given him? No; for it is not permitted to change your country except
on certain conditions which the poor man cannot fulfil.

What, then, can the unhappy man do? He will say, ‘I have hands to work
with, I have intelligence, I have youth, I have strength; take all this,
and in return give me a morsel of bread.’ This is what the working men
do say. But even here the poor man may be answered, ‘I have no work to
give you.’ What is he to do then?

What is competition from the point of view of the workman? It is work
put up to auction. A contractor wants a workman: three present
themselves.—How much for your work?—Half-a-crown: I have a wife and
children.—Well; and how much for yours?—Two shillings: I have no
children, but I have a wife.—Very well; and now how much for you?—One
and eightpence are enough for me; I am single. Then you shall have the
work. It is done; the bargain is struck. And what are the other two
workmen to do? It is to be hoped they will die quietly of hunger. But
what if they take to thieving? Never fear; we have the police. To
murder? We have got the hangman. As for the lucky one, his triumph is
only temporary. Let a fourth workman make his appearance, strong enough
to fast every other day, and his price will run down still lower; then
there will be a new outcast, a new recruit for the prison perhaps!

Will it be said that these melancholy results are exaggerated; that at
all events they are only possible when there is not work enough for the
hands that seek employment? But I ask, in answer, Does the principle of
competition contain, by chance, within itself any method by which this
murderous disproportion is to be avoided? If one branch of industry is
in want of hands, who can answer for it that, in the confusion created
by universal competition, another is not overstocked? And if, out of
thirty-four millions of men, twenty are really reduced to theft for a
living, this would suffice to condemn the principle.

But who is so blind as not to see that under the system of unlimited
competition, the continual fall of wages is no exceptional circumstance,
but a necessary and general fact? Has the population a limit which it
cannot exceed? Is it possible for us to say to industry—industry given
up to the accidents of individual egotism and fertile in ruin—can we
say, ‘Thus far shalt thou go, and no farther?’ The population increases
constantly: tell the poor mother to become sterile, and blaspheme the
God who made her fruitful, for if you do not the lists will soon become
too narrow for the combatants. A machine is invented: command it to be
broken, and anathematize science, for if you do not, the thousand
workmen whom the new machine deprives of work will knock at the door of
the neighbouring workshop, and lower the wages of their companions. Thus
systematic lowering of wages, ending in the driving out of a certain
number of workmen, is the inevitable effect of unlimited competition. It
is an industrial system by means of which the working classes are forced
to exterminate one another.

If there is an undoubted fact, it is that the increase of population is
much more rapid among the poor than among the rich. According to the
Statistics Edition: current; Page: [718] of European Population, the
births at Paris are only one-thirty-second of the population in the rich
quarters, while in the others they rise to one-twenty-sixth. This
disproportion is a general fact, and M. de Sismondi, in his work on
Political Economy,[*] has explained it by the impossibility for the
workmen of hopeful prudence. Those only who feel themselves assured of
the morrow can regulate the number of their children according to their
income; he who lives from day to day is under the yoke of a mysterious
fatality, to which he sacrifices his children as he was sacrificed to it
himself. It is true the workhouses exist, menacing society with an
inundation of beggars—what way is there of escaping from the cause? . .
. . It is clear that any society where the means of subsistence increase
less rapidly than the numbers of the population, is a society on the
brink of an abyss. . . . . Competition produces destitution; this is a
fact shown by statistics. Destitution is fearfully prolific; this is
shown by statistics. The fruitfulness of the poor throws upon society
unhappy creatures who have need of work and cannot find it; this is
shown by statistics. At this point society is reduced to a choice
between killing the poor or maintaining them gratuitously—between
atrocity or folly.*

So much for the poor. We now pass to the middle classes.

According to the political economists of the school of Adam Smith and
Léon Say, cheapness is the word in which may be summed up the advantages
of unlimited competition. But why persist in considering the effect of
cheapness with a view only to the momentary advantage of the consumer?
Cheapness is advantageous to the consumer at the cost of introducing the
seeds of ruinous anarchy among the producers. Cheapness is, so to speak,
the hammer with which the rich among the producers crush their poorer
rivals. Cheapness is the trap into which the daring speculators entice
the hard-workers. Cheapness is the sentence of death to the producer on
a small scale who has no money to invest in the purchase of machinery
that his rich rivals can easily procure. Cheapness is the great
instrument in the hands of monopoly; it absorbs the small manufacturer,
the small shopkeeper, the small proprietor; it is, in one word, the
destruction of the middle classes for the advantage of a few industrial
oligarchs.

Ought we, then, to consider cheapness as a curse? No one would attempt
to maintain such an absurdity. But it is the speciality of wrong
principles to turn good into evil and to corrupt all things. Under the
system of competition cheapness is only a provisional and fallacious
advantage. It is maintained only so long as there is a struggle; no
sooner have the rich competitors driven out their poorer rivals than
prices rise. Competition leads to monopoly, for the same reason
cheapness leads to high prices. Thus, what has been made use of as a
weapon in the contest between the producers, sooner or later becomes a
cause of impoverishment among the consumers. And if to this cause we add
the others we have already enumerated, first among which must be ranked
the inordinate increase of the population, we shall be compelled to
recognise the impoverishment of the mass of the consumers as a direct
consequence of competition.

Edition: current; Page: [719]
But, on the other hand, this very competition which tends to dry up the
sources of demand, urges production to over-supply. The confusion
produced by the universal struggle prevents each producer from knowing
the state of the market. He must work in the dark and trust to chance
for a sale. Why should he check the supply, especially as he can throw
any loss on the workman whose wages are so pre-eminently liable to rise
and fall? Even when production is carried on at a loss the manufacturers
still often carry it on, because they will not let their machinery, &c.,
stand idle, or risk the loss of raw material, or lose their customers;
and because productive industry as carried on under the competitive
system being nothing else than a game of chance, the gambler will not
lose his chance of a lucky stroke.

Thus, and we cannot too often insist upon it, competition necessarily
tends to increase supply and to diminish consumption; its tendency
therefore is precisely the opposite of what is sought by economic
science; hence it is not merely oppressive but foolish as well.

And in all this, in order to avoid dwelling on truths which have become
commonplaces and sound declamatory from their very truth, we have said
nothing of the frightful moral corruption which industry, organized, or
more properly speaking disorganized as it is at the present day, has
introduced among the middle classes. Everything has become venal, and
competition invades even the domain of thought.

The factory crushing the workshop; the showy establishment absorbing the
humble shop; the artisan who is his own master replaced by the
day-labourer; cultivation by the plough superseding that by the spade,
and bringing the poor man’s field under disgraceful homage to the
money-lender; bankruptcies multiplied; manufacturing industry
transformed by the ill-regulated extension of credit into a system of
gambling where no one, not even the rogue, can be sure of winning; in
short a vast confusion calculated to arouse jealousy, mistrust, and
hatred, and to stifle, little by little, all generous aspirations, all
faith, self-sacrifice, and poetry—such is the hideous but only too
faithful picture of the results obtained by the application of the
principle of competition.*

The Fourierists, through their principal organ, M. Considérant,
enumerate the evils of the existing civilisation in the following
order:—

1. It employs an enormous quantity of labour and of human power
unproductively, or in the work of destruction.

In the first place there is the army, which in France, as in all other
countries, absorbs the healthiest and strongest men, a large number of
the most talented and intelligent, and a considerable part of the public
revenue. . . . . The existing state of society develops in its impure
atmosphere innumerable outcasts, whose labour is not merely
unproductive, but actually destructive: adventurers, prostitutes, people
with no acknowledged means of living, beggars, convicts, swindlers,
thieves, and others whose number tends rather to increase than to
diminish. . . . .

To the list of unproductive labour fostered by our state of Society must
be Edition: current; Page: [720] added that of the judicature and of the
bar, of the courts of law and magistrates, the police, gaolers,
executioners, &c.—functions indispensable to the state of society as it
is.

Also people of what is called ‘good society’; those who pass their lives
in doing nothing; idlers of all ranks.

Also the numberless custom-house officials, tax-gatherers, bailiffs,
excisemen; in short, all that army of men which overlooks, brings to
account, takes, but produces nothing.

Also the labours of sophists, philosophers, metaphysicians, political
men, working in mistaken directions, who do nothing to advance science,
and produce nothing but disturbance and sterile discussions; the
verbiage of advocates, pleaders, witnesses, &c.

And finally all the operations of commerce, from those of the bankers
and brokers, down to those of the grocer behind his counter.*

Secondly, they assert that even the industry and powers which in the
present system are devoted to production, do not produce more than a
small portion of what they might produce if better employed and
directed:—

Who with any good-will and reflection will not see how much the want of
coherence—the disorder, the want of combination, the parcelling out of
labour and leaving it wholly to individual action without any
organization, without any large or general views—are causes which limit
the possibilities of production and destroy, or at least waste, our
means of action? Does not disorder give birth to poverty, as order and
good management give birth to riches? Is not want of combination a
source of weakness, as combination is a source of strength? And who can
say that industry, whether agricultural, domestic, manufacturing,
scientific, artistic, or commercial, is organized at the present day
either in the state or in municipalities? Who can say that all the work
which is carried on in any of these departments is executed in
subordination to any general views, or with foresight, economy, and
order? Or, again, who can say that it is possible in our present state
of society to develop, by a good education, all the faculties bestowed
by nature on each of its members; to employ each one in functions which
he would like, which he would be the most capable of, and which,
therefore, he could carry on with the greatest advantage to himself and
to others? Has it even been so much as attempted to solve the problems
presented by varieties of character so as to regulate and harmonize the
varieties of employments in accordance with natural aptitudes? Alas! The
Utopia of the most ardent philanthropists is to teach reading and
writing to twenty-five millions of the French people! And in the present
state of things we may defy them to succeed even in that!

And is it not a strange spectacle, too, and one which cries out in
condemnation of us, to see this state of society where the soil is badly
cultivated, and sometimes not cultivated at all; where man is ill
lodged, ill clothed, and yet where whole masses are continually in need
of work, and pining in misery because they cannot find it? Of a truth we
are forced to acknowledge that if the nations are poor and starving it
is not because nature has denied the means Edition: current; Page: [721]
of producing wealth, but because of the anarchy and disorder in our
employment of those means; in other words, it is because society is
wretchedly constituted and labour unorganized.

But this is not all, and you will have but a faint conception of the
evil if you do not consider that to all these vices of society, which
dry up the sources of wealth and prosperity, must be added the struggle,
the discord, the war, in short, under many names and many forms which
society cherishes and cultivates between the individuals that compose
it. These struggles and discords correspond to radical
oppositions—deep-seated antinomies between the various interests.
Exactly in so far as you are able to establish classes and categories
within the nation; in so far, also, you will have opposition of
interests and internal warfare either avowed or secret, even if you take
into consideration the industrial system only.*

One of the leading ideas of this school is the wastefulness and at the
same time the immorality of the existing arrangements for distributing
the produce of the country among the various consumers, the enormous
superfluity in point of number of the agents of distribution, the
merchants, dealers, shopkeepers and their innumerable employés, and the
depraving character of such a distribution of occupations.

It is evident that the interest of the trader is opposed to that of the
consumer and of the producer. Has he not bought cheap and undervalued as
much as possible in all his dealings with the producer, the very same
article which, vaunting its excellence, he sells to you as dear as he
can? Thus the interest of the commercial body, collectively and
individually, is contrary to that of the producer and of the
consumer—that is to say, to the interest of the whole body of society.

The trader is a go-between, who profits by the general anarchy and the
non-organization of industry. The trader buys up products, he buys up
everything; he owns and detains everything, in such sort that:—

1stly. He holds both Production and Consumption under his yoke, because
both must come to him either finally for the products to be consumed, or
at first for the raw materials to be worked up. Commerce with all its
methods of buying, and of raising and lowering prices, its innumerable
devices, and its holding everything in the hands of middle-men, levies
toll right and left: it despotically gives the law to Production and
Consumption, of which it ought to be only the subordinate.

2ndly. It robs society by its enormous profits—profits levied upon the
consumer and the producer, and altogether out of proportion to the
services rendered, for which a twentieth of the persons actually
employed would be sufficient.

3rdly. It robs society by the substraction of its productive forces;
taking off from productive labour nineteen-twentieths of the agents of
trade who are mere parasites. Thus, not only does commerce rob society
by appropriating an exorbitant share of the common wealth, but also by
considerably diminishing the productive energy of the human beehive. The
great majority of traders would Edition: current; Page: [722] return to
productive work if a rational system of commercial organization were
substituted for the inextricable chaos of the present state of things.

4thly. It robs society by the adulteration of products, pushed at the
present day beyond all bounds. And in fact, if a hundred grocers
establish themselves in a town where before there were only twenty, it
is plain that people will not begin to consume five times as many
groceries. Hereupon the hundred virtuous grocers have to dispute between
them the profits which before were honestly made by the twenty;
competition obliges them to make it up at the expense of the consumer,
either by raising the prices as sometimes happens, or by adulterating
the goods as always happens. In such a state of things there is an end
to good faith. Inferior or adulterated goods are sold for articles of
good quality whenever the credulous customer is not too experienced to
be deceived. And when the customer has been thoroughly imposed upon, the
trading conscience consoles itself by saying, ‘I state my price; people
can take or leave; no one is obliged to buy.’ The losses imposed on the
consumers by the bad quality or the adulteration of goods are
incalculable.

5thly. It robs society by accumulations, artificial or not, in
consequence of which vast quantities of goods, collected in one place,
are damaged and destroyed for want of a sale. Fourier (Th. des Quat.
Mouv., p. 334, 1st ed.) says: ‘The fundamental principle of the
commercial systems, that of leaving full liberty to the merchants, gives
them absolute right of property over the goods in which they deal; they
have the right to withdraw them altogether, to withhold or even to burn
them, as happened more than once with the Oriental Company of Amsterdam,
which publicly burnt stores of cinnamon in order to raise the price.
What it did with cinnamon it would have done with corn; but for the fear
of being stoned by the populace, it would have burnt some corn in order
to sell the rest at four times its value. Indeed, it actually is of
daily occurrence in ports, for provisions of grains to be thrown into
the sea because the merchants have allowed them to rot while waiting for
a rise. I myself, when I was a clerk, have had to superintend these
infamous proceedings, and in one day caused to be thrown into the sea
some forty thousand bushels of rice, which might have been sold at a
fair profit had the withholder been less greedy of gain. It is society
that bears the cost of this waste, which takes place daily under shelter
of the philosophical maxim of full liberty for the merchants.’

6thly. Commerce robs society, moreover, by all the loss, damage, and
waste that follows from the extreme scattering of products in millions
of shops, and by the multiplication and complication of carriage.

7thly. It robs society by shameless and unlimited usury—usury absolutely
appalling. The trader carries on operations with fictitious capital,
much higher in amount that his real capital. A trader with a capital of
twelve hundred pounds will carry on operations, by means of bills and
credit, on a scale of four, eight, or twelve thousand pounds. Thus he
draws from capital which he does not possess, usurious interest, out of
all proportion with the capital he actually owns.

8thly. It robs society by innumerable bankruptcies, for the daily
accidents of our commercial system, political events, and any kind of
disturbance, must usher in a day when the trader, having incurred
obligations beyond his means, is no longer able to meet them; his
failure, whether fraudulent or not, must be a severe blow to his
creditors. The bankruptcy of some entails that of others, so that
bankruptcies follow one upon another, causing widespread ruin. And it is
Edition: current; Page: [723] always the producer and the consumer who
suffer; for commerce, considered as a whole, does not produce wealth,
and invests very little in proportion to the wealth which passes through
its hands. How many are the manufactures crushed by these blows! how
many fertile sources of wealth dried up by these devices, with all their
disastrous consequences!

The producer furnishes the goods, the consumer the money. Trade
furnishes credit, founded on little or no actual capital, and the
different members of the commercial body are in no way responsible for
one another. This, in a few words, is the whole theory of the thing.

9thly. Commerce robs society by the independence and irresponsibility
which permits it to buy at the epochs when the producers are forced to
sell and compete with one another, in order to procure money for their
rent and necessary expenses of production. When the markets are
overstocked and goods cheap, trade purchases. Then it creates a rise,
and by this simple manœuvre despoils both producer and consumer.

10thly. It robs society by a considerable drawing off of capital, which
will return to productive industry when commerce plays its proper
subordinate part, and is only an agency carrying on transactions between
the producers (more or less distant) and the great centres of
consumption—the communistic societies. Thus the capital engaged in the
speculations of commerce (which, small as it is, compared to the immense
wealth which passes through its hands, consists nevertheless of sums
enormous in themselves), would return to stimulate production if
commerce was deprived of the intermediate property in goods, and their
distribution became a matter of administrative organization.
Stock-jobbing is the most odious form of this vice of commerce.

11thly. It robs society by the monopolising or buying up of raw
materials. ‘For’ (says Fourier, Th. des Quat. Mouv., p. 359, 1st ed.),
‘the rise in price on articles that are bought up, is borne ultimately
by the consumer, although in the first place by the manufacturers, who,
being obliged to keep up their establishments, must make pecuniary
sacrifices, and manufacture at small profits in the hope of better days;
and it is often long before they can repay themselves the rise in prices
which the monopoliser has compelled them to support in the first
instance. . . . .’

In short, all these vices, besides many others which I omit, are
multiplied by the extreme complication of mercantile affairs; for
products do not pass once only through the greedy clutches of commerce;
there are some which pass and repass twenty or thirty times before
reaching the consumer. In the first place, the raw material passes
through the grasp of commerce before reaching the manufacturer who first
works it up; then it returns to commerce to be sent out again to be
worked up in a second form; and so on until it receives its final shape.
Then it passes into the hands of merchants, who sell to the wholesale
dealers, and these to the great retail dealers of towns, and these again
to the little dealers and to the country shops; and each time that it
changes hands, it leaves something behind it.

. . . . One of my friends who was lately exploring the Jura, where much
working in metal is done, had occasion to enter the house of a peasant
who was a manufacturer of shovels. He asked the price. ‘Let us come to
an understanding,’ answered the poor labourer, not an economist at all,
but a man of common sense; ‘I sell them for 8d. to the trade, which
retails them at 1s. 8d. in the towns. Edition: current; Page: [724] If
you could find a means of opening a direct communication between the
workman and the consumer, you might have them for 1s. 2d., and we should
each gain 6d. by the transaction.’*

To a similar effect Owen, in the Book of the New Moral World, part 2,
chap. iii.[*]

The principle now in practice is to induce a large portion of society to
devote their lives to distribute wealth upon a large, a medium, and a
small scale, and to have it conveyed from place to place in larger or
smaller quantities, to meet the means and wants of various divisions of
society and individuals, as they are now situated in cities, towns,
villages, and country places. This principle of distribution makes a
class in society whose business it is to buy from some parties and to
sell to others. By this proceeding they are placed under circumstances
which induce them to endeavour to buy at what appears at the time a low
price in the market, and to sell again at the greatest permanent profit
which they can obtain. Their real object being to get as much profit as
gain between the seller to, and the buyer from them, as can be effected
in their transactions.

There are innumerable errors in principle and evils in practice which
necessarily proceed from this mode of distributing the wealth of
society.

1st. A general class of distributers is formed, whose interest is
separated from, and apparently opposed to, that of the individual from
whom they buy and to whom they sell.

2nd. Three classes of distributers are made, the small, the medium, and
the large buyers and sellers; or the retailers, the wholesale dealers,
and the extensive merchants.

3rd. Three classes of buyers thus created constitute the small, the
medium, and the large purchasers.

By this arrangement into various classes of buyers and sellers, the
parties are easily trained to learn that they have separate and opposing
interests, and different ranks and stations in society. An inequality of
feeling and condition is thus created and maintained, with all the
servility and pride which these unequal arrangements are sure to
produce. The parties are regularly trained in a general system of
deception, in order that they may be the more successful in buying cheap
and selling dear.

The smaller sellers acquire habits of injurious idleness, waiting often
for hours for customers. And this evil is experienced to a considerable
extent even amongst the class of wholesale dealers.

There are, also, by this arrangement, many more establishments for
selling than are necessary in the villages, towns, and cities; and a
very large capital is thus wasted without benefit to society. And from
their number opposed to each other all over the country to obtain
customers, they endeavour to undersell each other, and are therefore
continually endeavouring to injure the producer by the establishment of
what are called cheap shops and warehouses; and to support their
character the master or his servants must be continually on the watch to
buy bargains, that is, to procure wealth for less than the cost of its
production.

Edition: current; Page: [725]
The distributers, small, medium, and large, have all to be supported by
the producers, and the greater the number of the former compared with
the latter, the greater will be the burden which the producer has to
sustain; for as the number of distributers increases, the accumulation
of wealth must decrease, and more must be required from the producer.

The distributers of wealth, under the present system, are a dead weight
upon the producers, and are most active demoralisers of society. Their
dependent condition, at the commencement of their task, teaches or
induces them to be servile to their customers, and to continue to be so
as long as they are accumulating wealth by their cheap buying and dear
selling. But when they have secured sufficient to be what they imagine
to be an independence—to live without business—they are too often filled
with a most ignorant pride, and become insolent to their dependents.

The arrangement is altogether a most improvident one for society, whose
interest it is to produce the greatest amount of wealth of the best
qualities; while the existing system of distribution is not only to
withdraw great numbers from producing to become distributors, but to add
to the cost of the consumer all the expense of a most wasteful and
extravagant distribution; the distribution costing to the consumer many
times the price of the original cost of the wealth purchased.

Then, by the position in which the seller is placed by his created
desire for gain on the one hand, and the competition he meets with from
opponents selling similar productions on the other, he is strongly
tempted to deteriorate the articles which he has for sale; and when
these are provisions, either of home producing to become distributers,
but to add to the cost of the consumer all the quent comfort and
happiness of the consumers, are often most injurious, and productive of
much premature death, especially among the working classes, who, in this
respect, are perhaps made to be the greatest sufferers, by purchasing
the inferior or low-priced articles. . . . .

The expense of thus distributing wealth in Great Britain and Ireland,
including transit from place to place, and all the agents directly and
indirectly engaged in this department, is, perhaps, little short of one
hundred millions annually, without taking into consideration the
deterioration of the quality of many of the articles constituting this
wealth, by carriage, and by being divided into small quantities, and
kept in improper stores and places, in which the atmosphere is
unfavourable to the keeping of such articles in a tolerably good, and
much less in the best, condition for use.

In further illustration of the contrariety of interests between person
and person, class and class, which pervades the present constitution of
society, M. Considérant adds:—

If the wine-growers wish for free trade, this freedom ruins the producer
of corn, the manufacturers of iron, of cloth, of cotton, and—we are
compelled to add—the smuggler and the customs’ officer. If it is the
interest of the consumer that machines should be invented which lower
prices by rendering production less costly, these same machines throw
out of work thousands of workmen who do not know how to, and cannot at
once, find other work. Here, then, again is one of the innumerable
vicious circles of civilisation . . . . for there are a thousand facts
which prove cumulatively that in our existing social system the
introduction of any good brings always along with it some evil.

Edition: current; Page: [726]
In short, if we go lower down and come to vulgar details, we find that
it is the interest of the tailor, the shoemaker, and the hatter that
coats, shoes, and hats should be soon worn out; that the glazier profits
by the hail-storms which break windows; that the mason and the architect
profit by fires; the lawyer is enriched by law-suits; the doctor by
disease; the wine-seller by drunkenness; the prostitute by debauchery.
And what a disaster would it be for the judges, the police, and the
gaolers, as well as for the barristers and the solicitors, and all the
lawyers’ clerks, if crimes, offences, and law-suits were all at once to
come to an end!*

The following is one of the cardinal points of this school:—

Add to all this, that civilisation, which sows dissension and war on
every side; which employs a great part of its powers in unproductive
labour, or even in destruction; which furthermore diminishes the public
wealth by the unnecessary friction and discord it introduces into
industry; add to all this, I say, that this same social system has for
its special characteristic to produce a repugnance for work—a disgust
for labour.

Everywhere you hear the labourer, the artisan, the clerk complain of his
position and his occupation, while they long for the time when they can
retire from work imposed upon them by necessity. To be repugnant, to
have for its motive and pivot nothing but the fear of starvation, is the
great, the fatal, characteristic of civilised labour. The civilised
workman is condemned to penal servitude. So long as productive labour is
so organized that instead of being associated with pleasure it is
associated with pain, weariness and dislike, it will alway happen that
all will avoid it who are able. With few exceptions, those only will
consent to work who are compelled to it by want. Hence the most numerous
classes, the artificers of social wealth, the active and direct creators
of all comfort and luxury, will always be condemned to touch closely on
poverty and hunger; they will always be the slaves to ignorance and
degradation; they will continue to be always that huge herd of mere
beasts of burden whom we see ill-grown, decimated by disease, bowed down
in the great workshop of society over the plough or over the counter,
that they may prepare the delicate food, and the sumptuous enjoyments of
the upper and idle classes.

So long as no method of attractive labour has been devised, it will
continue to be true that ‘there must be many poor in order that there
may be a few rich;’ a mean and hateful saying, which we hear every day
quoted as an eternal truth from the mouths of people who call themselves
Christians or philosophers! It is very easy to understand that
oppression, trickery, and especially poverty, are the permanent and
fatal appanage of every state of society characterized by the dislike of
work, for, in this case, there is nothing but poverty that will force
men to labour. And the proof of this is, that if every one of all the
workers were to become suddenly rich, nineteen-twentieths of all the
work now done would be abandoned.†

In the opinion of the Fourierists, the tendency of the present order of
society is to a concentration of wealth in the hands of a comparatively
few immensely rich individuals or companies, and the reduction of all
the rest Edition: current; Page: [727] of the community into a complete
dependence on them. This was termed by Fourier la féodalité
industrielle.

This feudalism, [says M. Considérant,] would be constituted as soon as
the largest part of the industrial and territorial property of the
nation belongs to a minority which absorbs all its revenues, while the
great majority, chained to the work-bench or labouring on the soil, must
be content to gnaw the pittance which is cast to them.*

This disastrous result is to be brought about partly by the mere
progress of competition, as sketched in our previous extract by M. Louis
Blanc; assisted by the progress of national debts, which M. Considérant
regards as mortgages of the whole land and capital of the country, of
which “les capitalistes prêteurs” become, in a greater and greater
measure, co-proprietors, receiving without labour or risk an increasing
portion of the revenues.


THE SOCIALIST OBJECTIONS TO THE PRESENT ORDER OF SOCIETY EXAMINED

It is impossible to deny that the considerations brought to notice in
the preceding chapter make out a frightful case either against the
existing order of society, or against the position of man himself in
this world. How much of the evils should be referred to the one, and how
much to the other, is the principal theoretic question which has to be
resolved. But the strongest case is susceptible of exaggeration; and it
will have been evident to many readers, even from the passages I have
quoted, that such exaggeration is not wanting in the representations of
the ablest and most candid Socialists. Though much of their allegations
is unanswerable, not a little is the result of errors in political
economy; by which, let me say once for all, I do not mean the rejection
of any practical rules of policy which have been laid down by political
economists, I mean ignorance of economic facts, and of the causes by
which the economic phenomena of society as it is, are actually
determined.

In the first place, it is unhappily true that the wages of ordinary
labour, in all the countries of Europe, are wretchedly insufficient to
supply the physical and moral necessities of the population in any
tolerable measure. But, when it is further alleged that even this
insufficient remuneration has a tendency to diminish; that there is, in
the words of M. Louis Blanc, une baisse continue des salaires; the
assertion is in opposition to all accurate information, and to many
notorious facts. It has yet to be proved that there Edition: current;
Page: [728] is any country in the civilised world where the ordinary
wages of labour, estimated either in money or in articles of
consumption, are declining; while in many they are, on the whole, on the
increase; and an increase which is becoming, not slower, but more rapid.
There are, occasionally, branches of industry which are being gradually
superseded by something else, and, in those, until production
accommodates itself to demand, wages are depressed; which is an evil,
but a temporary one, and would admit of great alleviation even in the
present system of social economy. A diminution thus produced of the
reward of labour in some particular employment is the effect and the
evidence of increased remuneration, or of a new source of remuneration,
in some other; the total and the average remuneration being
undiminished, or even increased. To make out an appearance of diminution
in the rate of wages in any leading branch of industry, it is always
found necessary to compare some month or year of special and temporary
depression at the present time, with the average rate, or even some
exceptionally high rate, at an earlier time. The vicissitudes are no
doubt a great evil, but they were as frequent and as severe in former
periods of economical history as now. The greater scale of the
transactions, and the greater number of persons involved in each
fluctuation, may make the fluctuation appear greater, but though a
larger population affords more sufferers, the evil does not weigh
heavier on each of them individually. There is much evidence of
improvement, and none, that is at all trustworthy, of deterioration, in
the mode of living of the labouring population of the countries of
Europe; when there is any appearance to the contrary it is local or
partial, and can always be traced either to the pressure of some
temporary calamity, or to some bad law or unwise act of government which
admits of being corrected, while the permanent causes all operate in the
direction of improvement.

M. Louis Blanc, therefore, while showing himself much more enlightened
than the older school of levellers and democrats, inasmuch as he
recognises the connection between low wages and the over-rapid increase
of population, appears to have fallen into the same error which was at
first committed by Malthus and his followers, that of supposing that
because population has a greater power of increase than subsistence, its
pressure upon subsistence must be always growing more severe. The
difference is that the early Malthusians thought this an irrepressible
tendency, while M. Louis Blanc thinks that it can be repressed, but only
under a system of Communism. It is a great point gained for truth when
it comes to be seen that the tendency to over-population is a fact which
Communism, as well as the existing order of society, would have to deal
with. And it is much to be rejoiced at that this necessity is admitted
by the most considerable chiefs of all existing schools of Socialism.
Owen and Fourier, no less than M. Louis Blanc, admitted it, and claimed
for their respective systems a pre-eminent Edition: current; Page: [729]
power of dealing with this difficulty. However this may be, experience
shows that in the existing state of society the pressure of population
on subsistence, which is the principal cause of low wages, though a
great, is not an increasing evil; on the contrary, the progress of all
that is called civilisation has a tendency to diminish it, partly by the
more rapid increase of the means of employing and maintaining labour,
partly by the increased facilities opened to labour for transporting
itself to new countries and unoccupied fields of employment, and partly
by a general improvement in the intelligence and prudence of the
population. This progress, no doubt, is slow; but it is much that such
progress should take place at all, while we are still only in the first
stage of that public movement for the education of the whole people,
which when more advanced must add greatly to the force of all the two
causes of improvement specified above. It is, of course, open to
discussion what form of society has the greatest power of dealing
successfully with the pressure of population on subsistence, and on this
question there is much to be said for Socialism; what was long thought
to be its weakest point will, perhaps, prove to be one of its strongest.
But it has no just claim to be considered as the sole means of
preventing the general and growing degradation of the mass of mankind
through the peculiar tendency of poverty to produce over-population.
Society as at present constituted is not descending into that abyss, but
gradually, though slowly, rising out of it, and this improvement is
likely to be progressive if bad laws do not interfere with it.

Next, it must be observed that Socialists generally, and even the most
enlightened of them, have a very imperfect and one-sided notion of the
operation of competition. They see half its effects, and overlook the
other half; they regard it as an agency for grinding down every one’s
remuneration—for obliging every one to accept less wages for his labour,
or a less price for his commodities, which would be true only if every
one had to dispose of his labour or his commodities to some great
monopolist, and the competition were all on one side. They forget that
competition is a cause of high prices and values as well as of low; that
the buyers of labour and of commodities compete with one another as well
as the sellers; and that if it is competition which keeps the prices of
labour and commodities as low as they are, it is competition which
prevents them from falling still lower. In truth, when competition is
perfectly free on both sides, its tendency is not specially either to
raise or to lower the price of articles, but to equalise it; to level
inequalities of remuneration, and to reduce all to a general average, a
result which, in so far as realised (no doubt very imperfectly), is, on
Socialistic principles, desirable. But if, disregarding for the time
that part of the effects of competition which consists in keeping up
prices, we fix our attention on its effect in keeping them down, and
contemplate this effect in reference solely to the interest of the
labouring classes, Edition: current; Page: [730] it would seem that if
competition keeps down wages, and so gives a motive to the labouring
classes to withdraw the labour market from the full influence of
competition, if they can, it must on the other hand have credit for
keeping down the prices of the articles on which wages are expended, to
the great advantage of those who depend on wages. To meet this
consideration Socialists, as we said in our quotation from M. Louis
Blanc,[*] are reduced to affirm that the low prices of commodities
produced by competition are delusive, and lead in the end to higher
prices than before, because when the richest competitor has got rid of
all his rivals, he commands the market and can demand any price he
pleases. Now, the commonest experience shows that this state of things,
under really free competition, is wholly imaginary. The richest
competitor neither does nor can get rid of all his rivals, and establish
himself in exclusive possession of the market; and it is not the fact
that any important branch of industry or commerce formerly divided among
many has become, or shows any tendency to become, the monopoly of a few.

The kind of policy described is sometimes possible where, as in the case
of railways, the only competition possible is between two or three great
companies, the operations being on too vast a scale to be within the
reach of individual capitalists; and this is one of the reasons why
businesses which require to be carried on by great joint-stock
enterprises cannot be trusted to competition, but, when not reserved by
the State to itself, ought to be carried on under conditions prescribed,
and, from time to time, varied by the State, for the purpose of insuring
to the public a cheaper supply of its wants than would be afforded by
private interest in the absence of sufficient competition. But in the
ordinary branches of industry no one rich competitor has it in his power
to drive out all the smaller ones. Some businesses show a tendency to
pass out of the hands of many small producers or dealers into a smaller
number of larger ones; but the cases in which this happens are those in
which the possession of a larger capital permits the adoption of more
powerful machinery, more efficient by more expensive processes, or a
better organized and more economical mode of carrying on business, and
thus enables the large dealer legitimately and permanently to supply the
commodity cheaper than can be done on the small scale; to the great
advantage of the consumers, and therefore of the labouring classes, and
diminishing, pro tanto, that waste of the resources of the community so
much complained of by Socialists, the unnecessary multiplication of mere
distributors, and of the various other classes whom Fourier calls the
parasites of industry. When this change is effected, the larger
capitalists, either individual or joint-stock, among which the business
is divided, are seldom, if ever, in any considerable branch of commerce,
so few as that Edition: current; Page: [731] competition shall not
continue to act between them; so that the saving in cost, which enabled
them to undersell the small dealers, continues afterwards, as at first,
to be passed on, in lower prices, to their customers. The operation,
therefore, of competition in keeping down the prices of commodities,
including those on which wages are expended, is not illusive but real,
and, we may add, is a growing, not a declining, fact.

But there are other respects, equally important, in which the charges
brought by Socialists against competition do not admit of so complete an
answer. Competition is the best security for cheapness, but by no means
a security for quality. In former times, when producers and consumers
were less numerous, it was a security for both. The market was not large
enough nor the means of publicity sufficient to enable a dealer to make
a fortune by continually attracting new customers: his success depended
on his retaining those that he had; and when a dealer furnished good
articles, or when he did not, the fact was soon known to those whom it
concerned, and he acquired a character for honest or dishonest dealing
of more importance to him than the gain that would be made by cheating
casual purchasers. But on the great scale of modern transactions, with
the great multiplication of competition and the immense increase in the
quantity of business competed for, dealers are so little dependent on
permanent customers that character is much less essential to them, while
there is also far less certainty of their obtaining the character they
deserve. The low prices which a tradesman advertises are known, to a
thousand for one who has discovered for himself or learned from others,
that the bad quality of the goods is more than an equivalent for their
cheapness; while at the same time the much greater fortunes now made by
some dealers excite the cupidity of all, and the greed of rapid gain
substitutes itself for the modest desire to make a living by their
business. In this manner, as wealth increases and greater prizes seem to
be within reach, more and more of a gambling spirit is introduced into
commerce; and where this prevails not only are the simplest maxims of
prudence disregarded, but all, even the most perilous, forms of
pecuniary improbity receive a terrible stimulus. This is the meaning of
what is called the intensity of modern competition. It is further to be
mentioned that when this intensity has reached a certain height, and
when a portion of the producers of an article or the dealers in it have
resorted to any of the modes of fraud, such as adulteration, giving
short measure, &c., of the increase of which there is now so much
complaint, the temptation is immense on these to adopt the fraudulent
practices, who would not have originated them; for the public are aware
of the low prices fallaciously produced by the frauds, but do not find
out at first, if ever, that the article is not worth the lower price,
and they will not go on paying a higher price for a better article, and
the honest dealer is placed Edition: current; Page: [732] at a terrible
disadvantage. Thus the frauds, begun by a few, become customs of the
trade, and the morality of the trading classes is more and more
deteriorated.

On this point, therefore, Socialists have really made out the existence
not only of a great evil, but of one which grows and tends to grow with
the growth of population and wealth. It must be said, however, that
society has never yet used the means which are already in its power of
grappling with this evil. The laws against commercial frauds are very
defective, and their execution still more so. Laws of this description
have no chance of being really enforced unless it is the special duty of
some one to enforce them. They are specially in need of a public
prosecutor. It is still to be discovered how far it is possible to
repress by means of the criminal law a class of misdeeds which are now
seldom brought before the tribunals, and to which, when brought, the
judicial administration of this country is most unduly lenient. The most
important class, however, of these frauds, to the mass of the people,
those which affect the price or quality of articles of daily
consumption, can be in a great measure overcome by the institution of
co-operative stores. By this plan any body of consumers who form
themselves into an association for the purpose, are enabled to pass over
the retail dealers and obtain their articles direct from the wholesale
merchants, or, what is better (now that wholesale co-operative agencies
have been established), from the producers, thus freeing themselves from
the heavy tax now paid to the distributing classes and at the same time
eliminate the usual perpetrators of adulterations and other frauds.
Distribution thus becomes a work performed by agents selected and paid
by those who have no interest in anything but the cheapness and goodness
of the article; and the distributors are capable of being thus reduced
to the numbers which the quantity of work to be done really requires.
The difficulties of the plan consist in the skill and trustworthiness
required in the managers, and the imperfect nature of the control which
can be exercised over them by the body at large. The great success and
rapid growth of the system prove, however, that these difficulties are,
in some tolerable degree, overcome. At all events, if the beneficial
tendency of the competition of retailers in promoting cheapness is
foregone, and has to be replaced by other securities, the mischievous
tendency of the same competition in deteriorating quality is at any rate
got rid of; and the prosperity of the co-operative stores shows that
this benefit is obtained not only without detriment to cheapness, but
with great advantage to it, since the profits of the concerns enable
them to return to the consumers a large percentage on the price of every
article supplied to them. So far, therefore, as this class of evils is
concerned, an effectual remedy is already in operation, which, though
Edition: current; Page: [733] suggested by and partly grounded on
socialistic principles, is consistent with the existing constitution of
property.

With regard to those greater and more conspicuous economical frauds, or
malpractices equivalent to frauds, of which so many deplorable cases
have become notorious—committed by merchants and bankers between
themselves or between them and those who have trusted them with money,
such a remedy as above described is not available, and the only
resources which the present constitution of society affords against them
are a sterner reprobation by opinion, and a more efficient repression by
the law. Neither of these remedies has had any approach to an effectual
trial. It is on the occurrence of insolvencies that these dishonest
practices usually come to light; the perpetrators take their place, not
in the class of malefactors, but in that of insolvent debtors; and the
laws of this and other countries were formerly so savage against simple
insolvency, that by one of those reactions to which the opinions of
mankind are liable, insolvents came to be regarded mainly as objects of
compassion, and it seemed to be thought that the hand both of law and of
public opinion could hardly press too lightly upon them. By an error in
a contrary direction to the ordinary one of our law, which in the
punishment of offences in general wholly neglects the question of
reparation to the sufferer, our bankruptcy laws have for some time
treated the recovery for creditors of what is left of their property as
almost the sole object, scarcely any importance being attached to the
punishment of the bankrupt for any misconduct which does not directly
interfere with that primary purpose. For three or four years past there
has been a slight counter-reaction, and more than one bankruptcy act has
been passed, somewhat less indulgent to the bankrupt; but the primary
object regarded has still been the pecuniary interest of the creditors,
and criminality in the bankrupt himself, with the exception of a small
number of well-marked offences, gets off almost with impunity. It may be
confidently affirmed, therefore, that, at least in this country, society
has not exerted the power it possesses of making mercantile dishonesty
dangerous to the perpetrator. On the contrary, it is a gambling trick in
which all the advantage is on the side of the trickster: if the trick
succeeds it makes his fortune, or preserves it; if it fails, he is at
most reduced to poverty, which was perhaps already impending when he
determined to run the chance, and he is classed by those who have not
looked closely into the matter, and even by many who have, not among the
infamous but among the unfortunate. Until a more moral and rational mode
of dealing with culpable insolvency has been tried and failed,
commercial dishonesty cannot be ranked among evils the prevalence of
which is inseparable from commercial competition.

Edition: current; Page: [734]
Another point on which there is much misapprehension on the part of
Socialists, as well as of Trades Unionists and other partisans of Labour
against Capital, relates to the proportions in which the produce of the
country is really shared and the amount of what is actually diverted
from those who produce it, to enrich other persons. I forbear for the
present to speak of the land, which is a subject apart. But with respect
to capital employed in business, there is in the popular notions a great
deal of illusion. When, for instance, a capitalist invests £20,000 in
his business, and draws from it an income of (suppose) £2,000 a year,
the common impression is as if he was the beneficial owner both of the
£20,000 and of the £2,000, while the labourers own nothing but their
wages. The truth, however, is that he only obtains the £2,000 on
condition of applying no part of the £20,000 to his own use. He has the
legal control over it, and might squander it if he chose, but if he did
he would not have the £2,000 a year also. As long as he derives an
income from his capital he has not the option of withholding it from the
use of others. As much of his invested capital as consists of buildings,
machinery and other instruments of production, are applied to production
and are not applicable to the support or enjoyment of any one. What is
so applicable (including what is laid out in keeping up or renewing the
buildings and instruments) is paid away to labourers, forming their
remuneration and their share in the division of the produce. For all
personal purposes they have the capital and he has but the profits,
which it only yields to him on condition that the capital itself is
employed in satisfying not his own wants, but those of labourers. The
proportion which the profits of capital usually bear to the capital
itself (or rather to the circulating portion of it) is the ratio which
the capitalist’s share of the produce bears to the aggregate share of
the labourers. Even of his own share a small part only belongs to him as
the owner of capital. The portion of the produce which falls to capital
merely as capital is measured by the interest of money, since that is
all that the owner of capital obtains when he contributes nothing to
production except the capital itself. Now the interest of capital in the
public funds, which are considered to be the best security, is at the
present prices (which have not varied much for many years) about three
and one-third per cent. Even in this investment there is some little
risk—risk of repudiation, risk of being obliged to sell out at a low
price in some commercial crisis.

Estimating these risks at ⅓ per cent., the remaining 3 per cent. may be
considered as the remuneration of capital, apart from insurance against
loss. On the security of a mortgage 4 per cent. is generally obtained,
but in this transaction there are considerably greater risks—the
uncertainty of titles to land under our bad system of law; the chance of
having to realise the security at a great cost in law charges; and
liability to delay in the Edition: current; Page: [735] receipt of the
interest, even when the principal is safe. When mere money independently
of exertion yields a larger income, as it sometimes does, for example,
by shares in railway or other companies, the surplus is hardly ever an
equivalent for the risk of losing the whole, or part, of the capital by
mismanagement, as in the case of the Brighton Railway, the dividend of
which, after having been 6 per cent. per annum, sunk to from nothing to
1½ per cent., and shares which had been bought at 120 could not be sold
for more than about 43. When money is lent at the high rates of interest
one occasionally hears of, rates only given by spendthrifts and needy
persons, it is because the risk of loss is so great that few who possess
money can be induced to lend to them at all. So little reason is there
for the outcry against “usury” as one of the grievous burthens of the
working classes. Of the profits, therefore, which a manufacturer or
other person in business obtains from his capital no more than about 3
per cent. can be set down to the capital itself. If he were able and
willing to give up the whole of this to his labourers, who already share
among them the whole of his capital as it is annually reproduced from
year to year, the addition to their weekly wages would be
inconsiderable. Of what he obtains beyond 3 per cent. a great part is
insurance against the manifold losses he is exposed to, and cannot
safely be applied to his own use, but requires to be kept in reserve to
cover those losses when they occur. The remainder is properly the
remuneration of his skill and industry—the wages of his labour of
superintendence. No doubt if he is very successful in business these
wages of his are extremely liberal, and quite out of proportion to what
the same skill and industry would command if offered for hire. But, on
the other hand, he runs a worse risk than that of being out of
employment; that of doing the work without earning anything by it, of
having the labour and anxiety without the wages. I do not say that the
drawbacks balance the privileges, or that he derives no advantage from
the position which makes him a capitalist and employer of labour,
instead of a skilled superintendent letting out his services to others;
but the amount of his advantage must not be estimated by the great
prizes alone. If we subtract from the gains of some the losses of
others, and deduct from the balance a fair compensation for the anxiety,
skill, and labour of both, grounded on the market price of skilled
superintendence, what remains will be, no doubt, considerable, but yet,
when compared to the entire capital of the country, annually reproduced
and dispensed in wages, it is very much smaller than it appears to the
popular imagination; and were the whole of it added to the share of the
labourers it would make a less addition to that share than would be made
by any important invention in machinery, or by the suppression of
unnecessary distributors and other “parasites of industry.” To complete
the estimate, however, of the portion of the produce of industry
Edition: current; Page: [736] which goes to remunerate capital we must
not stop at the interest earned out of the produce by the capital
actually employed in producing it, but must include that which is paid
to the former owners of capital which has been unproductively spent and
no longer exists, and is paid, of course, out of the produce of other
capital. Of this nature is the interest of national debts, which is the
cost a nation is burthened with for past difficulties and dangers, or
for past folly or profligacy of its rulers, more or less shared by the
nation itself. To this must be added the interest on the debts of
landowners and other unproductive consumers; except so far as the money
borrowed may have been spent in remunerative improvement of the
productive powers of the land. As for landed property itself—the
appropriation of the rent of land by private individuals—I reserve, as I
have said, this question for discussion hereafter; for the tenure of
land might be varied in any manner considered desirable, all the land
might be declared the property of the State, without interfering with
the right of property in anything which is the product of human labour
and abstinence.

It seemed desirable to begin the discussion of the Socialist question by
these remarks in abatement of Socialist exaggerations, in order that the
true issues between Socialism and the existing state of society might be
correctly conceived. The present system is not, as many Socialists
believe, hurrying us into a state of general indigence and slavery from
which only Socialism can save us. The evils and injustices suffered
under the present system are great, but they are not increasing; on the
contrary, the general tendency is towards their slow diminution.
Moreover the inequalities in the distribution of the produce between
capital and labour, however they may shock the feeling of natural
justice, would not by their mere equalisation afford by any means so
large a fund for raising the lower levels of remuneration as Socialists,
and many besides Socialists, are apt to suppose. There is not any one
abuse or injustice now prevailing in society by merely abolishing which
the human race would pass out of suffering into happiness. What is
incumbent on us is a clam comparison between two different systems of
society, with a view of determining which of them affords the greatest
resources for overcoming the inevitable difficulties of life. And if we
find the answer to this question more difficult, and more dependent upon
intellectual and moral conditions, than is usually thought, it is
satisfactory to reflect that there is time before us for the question to
work itself out on an experimental scale, by actual trial. I believe we
shall find that no other test is possible of the practicability or
beneficial operation of Socialist arrangements; but that the
intellectual and moral grounds of Socialism deserve the most attentive
study, as affording in many cases the guiding principles of the
improvements necessary to give the present economic system of society
its best chance.

Edition: current; Page: [737]


THE DIFFICULTIES OF SOCIALISM

Among those who call themselves Socialists, two kinds of persons may be
distinguished. There are, in the first place, those whose plans for a
new order of society, in which private property and individual
competition are to be superseded and other motives to action
substituted, are on the scale of a village community or township, and
would be applied to an entire country by the multiplication of such
self-acting units; of this character are the systems of Owen, of
Fourier, and the more thoughtful and philosophic Socialists generally.
The other class, who are more a product of the Continent than of Great
Britain and may be called the revolutionary Socialists, propose to
themselves a much bolder stroke. Their scheme is the management of the
whole productive resources of the country by one central authority, the
general government. And with this view some of them avow as their
purpose that the working classes, or somebody in their behalf, should
take possession of all the property of the country, and administer it
for the general benefit.

Whatever be the difficulties of the first of these two forms of
Socialism, the second must evidently involve the same difficulties and
many more. The former, too, has the great advantage that it can be
brought into operation progressively, and can prove its capabilities by
trial. It can be tried first on a select population and extended to
others as their education and cultivation permit. It need not, and in
the natural order of things would not, become an engine of subversion
until it had shown itself capable of being also a means of
reconstruction. It is not so with the other: the aim of that is to
substitute the new rule for the old at a single stroke, and to exchange
the amount of good realised under the present system, and its large
possibilities of improvement, for a plunge without any preparation into
the most extreme form of the problem of carrying on the whole round of
the operations of social life without the motive power which has always
hitherto worked the social machinery. It must be acknowledged that those
who would play this game on the strength of their own private opinion,
unconfirmed as yet by any experimental verification—who would forcibly
deprive all who have now a comfortable physical existence of their only
present means of preserving it, and would brave the frightful bloodshed
and misery that would ensue if the attempt was resisted—must have a
serene confidence in their own wisdom on the one hand and a recklessness
of other people’s sufferings on the other, which Robespierre and St.
Just, hitherto the typical instances of those united attributes,
scarcely came up to. Nevertheless this scheme has great elements of
popularity which the more cautious and reasonable form of Socialism has
not; because what it Edition: current; Page: [738] professes to do it
promises to do quickly, and holds out hope to the enthusiastic of seeing
the whole of their aspirations realised in their own time and at a blow.

The peculiarities, however, of the revolutionary form of Socialism will
be most conveniently examined after the considerations common to both
the forms have been duly weighed.

The produce of the world could not attain anything approaching to its
present amount, nor support anything approaching to the present number
of its inhabitants, except upon two conditions: abundant and costly
machinery, buildings, and other instruments of production; and the power
of undertaking long operations and waiting a considerable time for their
fruits. In other words, there must be a large accumulation of capital,
both fixed in the implements and buildings, and circulating, that is,
employed in maintaining the labourers and their families during the time
which elapses before the productive operations are completed and the
products come in. This necessity depends on physical laws, and is
inherent in the condition of human life; but these requisites of
production, the capital, fixed and circulating, of the country (to which
has to be added the land, and all that is contained in it), may either
be the collective property of those who use it, or may belong to
individuals; and the question is, which of these arrangements is most
conducive to human happiness. What is characteristic of Socialism is the
joint ownership by all the members of the community of the instruments
and means of production; which carries with it the consequence that the
division of the produce among the body of owners must be a public act,
performed according to rules laid down by the community. Socialism by no
means excludes private ownership of articles of consumption; the
exclusive right of each to his or her share of the produce when
received, either to enjoy, to give, or to exchange it. The land, for
example, might be wholly the property of the community for agricultural
and other productive purposes, and might be cultivated on their joint
account, and yet the dwelling assigned to each individual or family as
part of their remuneration might be as exclusively theirs, while they
continued to fulfil their share of the common labours, as any one’s
house now is; and not the dwelling only, but any ornamental ground which
the circumstances of the association allowed to be attached to the house
for purposes of enjoyment. The distinctive feature of Socialism is not
that all things are in common, but that production is only carried on
upon the common account, and that the instruments of production are held
as common property. The practicability then of Socialism, on the scale
of Mr. Owen’s or M. Fourier’s villages, admits of no dispute. The
attempt to manage the whole production of a nation by one central
organization is a totally different matter; but a mixed agricultural and
manufacturing association Edition: current; Page: [739] of from two
thousand to four thousand inhabitants under any tolerable circumstances
of soil and climate would be easier to manage than many a joint stock
company. The question to be considered is, whether this joint management
is likely to be as efficient and successful as the managements of
private industry by private capital. And this question has to be
considered in a double aspect; the efficiency of the directing mind, or
minds, and that of the simple workpeople. And in order to state this
question in its simplest form, we will suppose the form of Socialism to
be simple Communism, i.e. equal division of the produce among all the
sharers, or, according to M. Louis Blanc’s still higher standard of
justice, apportionment of it according to difference of need, but
without making any difference of reward according to the nature of the
duty nor according to the supposed merits or services of the individual.
There are other forms of Socialism, particularly Fourierism, which do,
on considerations of justice or expediency, allow differences of
remuneration for different kinds or degrees of service to the community;
but the consideration of these may be for the present postponed.

The difference between the motive powers in the economy of society under
private property and under Communism would be greatest in the case of
the directing minds. Under the present system, the direction being
entirely in the hands of the person or persons who own (or are
personally responsible for) the capital, the whole benefit of the
difference between the best administration and the worst under which the
business can continue to be carried on accrues to the person or persons
who control the administration: they reap the whole profit of good
management except so far as their self-interest or liberality induce
them to share it with their subordinates; and they suffer the whole
detriment of mismanagement except so far as this may cripple their
subsequent power of employing labour. This strong personal motive to do
their very best and utmost for the efficiency and economy of the
operations, would not exist under Communism; as the managers would only
receive out of the produce the same equal dividend as the other members
of the association. What would remain would be the interest common to
all in so managing affairs as to make the dividend as large as possible;
the incentives of public spirit, of conscience, and of the honour and
credit of the managers. The force of these motives, especially when
combined, is great. But it varies greatly in different persons, and is
much greater for some purposes than for others. The verdict of
experience, in the imperfect degree of moral cultivation which mankind
have yet reached, is that the motive of conscience and that of credit
and reputation, even when they are of some strength, are, in the
majority of cases, much stronger as restraining than as impelling
forces—are more to be depended on for preventing wrong, than for calling
forth the fullest Edition: current; Page: [740] energies in the pursuit
of ordinary occupations. In the case of most men the only inducement
which has been found sufficiently constant and unflagging to overcome
the ever-present influence of indolence and love of ease, and induce men
to apply themselves unrelaxingly to work for the most part in itself
dull and unexciting, is the prospect of bettering their own economic
condition and that of their family; and the closer the connection of
every increase of exertion with a corresponding increase of its fruits,
the more powerful is this motive. To suppose the contrary would be to
imply that with men as they now are, duty and honour are more powerful
principles of action than personal interest, not solely as to special
acts and forbearances respecting which those sentiments have been
exceptionally cultivated, but in the regulation of their whole lives;
which no one, I suppose, will affirm. It may be said that this inferior
efficacy of public and social feelings is not inevitable—is the result
of imperfect education. This I am quite ready to admit, and also that
there are even now many individual exceptions to the general infirmity.
But before these exceptions can grow into a majority, or even into a
very large minority, much time will be required. The education of human
beings is one of the most difficult of all arts, and this is one of the
points in which it has hitherto been least successful; moreover
improvements in general education are necessarily very gradual, because
the future generation is educated by the present, and the imperfections
of the teachers set an invincible limit to the degree in which they can
train their pupils to be better than themselves. We must therefore
expect, unless we are operating upon a select portion of the population,
that personal interest will for a long time be a more effective stimulus
to the most vigorous and careful conduct of the industrial business of
society than motives of a higher character. It will be said that at
present the greed of personal gain by its very excess counteracts its
own end by the stimulus it gives to reckless and often dishonest risks.
This it does, and under Communism that source of evil would generally be
absent. It is probable, indeed, that enterprise either of a bad or of a
good kind would be a deficient element, and that business in general
would fall very much under the dominion of routine; the rather, as the
performance of duty in such communities has to be enforced by external
sanctions, the more nearly each person’s duty can be reduced to fixed
rules, the easier it is to hold him to its performance. A circumstance
which increases the probability of this result is the limited power
which the managers would have of independent action. They would of
course hold their authority from the choice of the community, by whom
their function might at any time be withdrawn from them; and this would
make it necessary for them, even if not so required by the constitution
of the community, to obtain the general consent of the body before
making any Edition: current; Page: [741] change in the established mode
of carrying on the concern. The difficulty of persuading a numerous body
to make a change in their accustomed mode of working, of which change
the trouble is often great, and the risk more obvious to their minds
than the advantage, would have a great tendency to keep things in their
accustomed track. Against this it has to be set, that choice by the
persons who are directly interested in the success of the work, and who
have practical knowledge and opportunities of judgment, might be
expected on the average to produce managers of greater skill than the
chances of birth, which now so often determine who shall be the owner of
the capital. This may be true; and though it may be replied that the
capitalist by inheritance can also, like the community, appoint a
manager more capable than himself, this would only place him on the same
level of advantage as the community, not on a higher level. But it must
be said on the other side that under the Communist system the persons
most qualified for the management would be likely very often to hang
back from undertaking it. At present the manager, even if he be a hired
servant, has a very much larger remuneration than the other persons
concerned in the business; and there are open to his ambition higher
social positions to which his function of manager is a stepping-stone.
On the Communist system none of these advantages would be possessed by
him; he could obtain only the same dividend out of the produce of the
community’s labour as any other member of it; he would no longer have
the chance of raising himself from a receiver of wages into the class of
capitalists; and while he could be in no way better off than any other
labourer, his responsibilities and anxieties would be so much greater
that a large proportion of mankind would be likely to prefer the less
onerous position. This difficulty was foreseen by Plato as an objection
to the system proposed in his Republic of community of goods among a
governing class; and the motive on which he relied for inducing the fit
persons to take on themselves, in the absence of all the ordinary
inducements, the cares and labours of government, was the fear of being
governed by worse men.[*] This, in truth, is the motive which would have
to be in the main depended upon; the persons most competent to the
management would be prompted to undertake the office to prevent it from
falling into less competent hands. And the motive would probably be
effectual at times when there was an impression that by incompetent
management the affairs of the community were going to ruin, or even only
decidedly deteriorating. But this motive could not, as a rule, expect to
be called into action by the less stringent inducement of merely
promoting improvement; unless in the case of inventors or schemers eager
to try some device from which they hoped for great and immediate fruits;
and persons of this kind are very often unfitted by over-sanguine temper
Edition: current; Page: [742] and imperfect judgment for the general
conduct of affairs, while even when fitted for it they are precisely the
kind of persons against whom the average man is apt to entertain a
prejudice, and they would often be unable to overcome the preliminary
difficulty of persuading the community both to adopt their project and
to accept them as managers. Communistic management would thus be, in all
probability, less favourable than private management to that striking
out of new paths and making immediate sacrifices for distant and
uncertain advantages, which, though seldom unattended with risk, is
generally indispensable to great improvements in the economic condition
of mankind, and even to keeping up the existing state in the face of a
continual increase of the number of mouths to be fed.

We have thus far taken account only of the operation of motives upon the
managing minds of the association. Let us now consider how the case
stands in regard to the ordinary workers.

These, under Communism, would have no interest, except their share of
the general interest, in doing their work honestly and energetically.
But in this respect matters would be no worse than they now are in
regard to the great majority of the producing classes. These, being paid
by fixed wages, are so far from having any direct interest of their own
in the efficiency of their work, that they have not even that share in
the general interest which every worker would have in the Communistic
organization. Accordingly, the inefficiency of hired labour, the
imperfect manner in which it calls forth the real capabilities of the
labourers, is matter of common remark. It is true that a character for
being a good workman is far from being without its value, as it tends to
give him a preference in employment, and sometimes obtains for him
higher wages. There are also possibilities of rising to the position of
foreman, or other subordinate administrative posts, which are not only
more highly paid than ordinary labour, but sometimes open the way to
ulterior advantages. But on the other side is to be set that under
Communism the general sentiment of the community, composed of the
comrades under whose eyes each person works, would be sure to be in
favour of good and hard working, and unfavourable to laziness,
carelessness, and waste. In the present system not only is this not the
case, but the public opinion of the workman class often acts in the very
opposite direction: the rules of some trade societies actually forbid
their members to exceed a certain standard of efficiency, lest they
should diminish the number of labourers required for the work; and for
the same reason they often violently resist contrivances for economising
labour. The change from this to a state in which every person would have
an interest in rendering every other person as industrious, skilful, and
careful as possible (which would be the case under Communism), would be
a change very much for the better.

It is, however, to be considered that the principal defects of the
present Edition: current; Page: [743] system in respect to the
efficiency of labour may be corrected, and the chief advantages of
Communism in that respect may be obtained, by arrangements compatible
with private property and individual competition. Considerable
improvement is already obtained by piece-work, in the kinds of labour
which admit of it. By this the workman’s personal interest is closely
connected with the quantity of work he turns out—not so much with its
quality, the security for which still has to depend on the employer’s
vigilance; neither does piece-work carry with it the public opinion of
the workman class, which is often, on the contrary, strongly opposed to
it, as a means of (as they think) diminishing the market for labourers.
And there is really good ground for their dislike of piece-work, if, as
is alleged, it is a frequent practice of employers, after using
piece-work to ascertain the utmost which a good workman can do, to fix
the price of piece-work so low that by doing that utmost he is not able
to earn more than they would be obliged to give him as day wages for
ordinary work.

But there is a far more complete remedy than piece-work for the
disadvantages of hired labour, viz. what is now called industrial
partnership—the admission of the whole body of labourers to a
participation in the profits, by distributing among all who share in the
work, in the form of a percentage on their earnings, the whole or a
fixed portion of the gains after a certain remuneration has been allowed
to the capitalist. This plan has been found of admirable efficacy, both
in this country and abroad. It has enlisted the sentiments of the
workmen employed on the side of the most careful regard by all of them
to the general interest of the concern; and by its joint effect in
promoting zealous exertion and checking waste, it has very materially
increased the remuneration of every description of labour in the
concerns in which it has been adopted. It is evident that this system of
indefinite extension and of an indefinite increase in the share of
profits assigned to the labourers, short of that which would leave to
the managers less than the needful degree of personal interest in the
success of the concern. It is even likely that when such arrangements
become common, many of these concerns would at some period or another,
on the death or retirement of the chiefs, pass, by arrangement, into the
state of purely cooperative associations.

It thus appears that as far as concerns the motives to exertion in the
general body, Communism has no advantage which may not be reached under
private property, while as respects the managing heads it is at a
considerable disadvantage. It has also some disadvantages which seem to
be inherent in it, through the necessity under which it lies of deciding
in a more or less arbitrary manner questions which, on the present
system, decide themselves, often badly enough, but spontaneously.

It is a simple rule, and under certain aspects a just one, to give equal
Edition: current; Page: [744] payment to all who share in the work. But
this is a very imperfect justice unless the work also is apportioned
equally. Now the many different kinds of work required in every society
are very unequal in hardness and unpleasantness. To measure these
against one another, so as to make quality equivalent to quantity, is so
difficult that Communists generally propose that all should work by
turns at every kind of labour. But this involves an almost complete
sacrifice of the economic advantages of the division of employments,
advantages which are indeed frequently over-estimated (or rather the
counter-considerations are under-estimated) by political economists, but
which are nevertheless, in the point of view of the productiveness of
labour, very considerable, for the double reason that the co-operation
of employment enables the work to distribute itself with some regard to
the special capacities and qualifications of the worker, and also that
every worker acquires greater skill and rapidity in one kind of work by
confining himself to it. The arrangement, therefore, which is deemed
indispensable to a just distribution would probably be a very
considerable disadvantage in respect of production. But further, it is
still a very imperfect standard of justice to demand the same amount of
work from every one. People have unequal capacities of work, both mental
and bodily, and what is a light task for one is an insupportable burthen
to another. It is necessary, therefore, that there should be a
dispensing power, an authority competent to grant exemptions from the
ordinary amount of work, and to proportion tasks in some measure to
capabilities. As long as there are any lazy or selfish persons who like
better to be worked for by others than to work, there will be frequent
attempts to obtain exemptions by favour or fraud, and the frustration of
these attempts will be an affair of considerable difficulty, and will by
no means be always successful. These inconveniences would be little
felt, for some time at least, in communities composed of select persons,
earnestly desirous of the success of the experiment; but plans for the
regeneration of society must consider average human beings, and not only
them but the large residuum of persons greatly below the average in the
personal and social virtues. The squabbles and ill-blood which could not
fail to be engendered by the distribution of work whenever such persons
have to be dealt with, would be a great abatement from the harmony and
unanimity which Communists hope would be found among the members of
their association. That concord would, even in the most fortunate
circumstances, be much more liable to disturbance than Communists
suppose. The institution provides that there shall be no quarrelling
about material interests; individualism is excluded from that department
of affairs. But there are other departments from which no institutions
can exclude it: there will still be rivalry for reputation and for
personal power. When selfish ambition is excluded from the field in
which, with most men, it chiefly exercises itself, that of riches and
pecuniary interest, it would betake itself with greater Edition:
current; Page: [745] intensity to the domain still open to it, and we
may expect that the struggles for pre-eminence and for influence in the
management would be of great bitterness when the personal passions,
diverted from their ordinary channel, are driven to seek their principal
gratification in that other direction. For these various reasons it is
probable that a Communist association would frequently fail to exhibit
the attractive picture of mutual love and unity of will and feeling
which we are often told by Communists to expect, but would often be torn
by dissension and not unfrequently broken up by it.

Other and numerous sources of discord are inherent in the necessity
which the Communist principle involves, of deciding by the general voice
questions of the utmost importance to every one, which on the present
system can be and are left to individuals to decide, each for his own
case. As an example, take the subject of education. All Socialists are
strongly impressed with the all-importance of the training given to the
young, not only for the reasons which apply universally, but because
their demands being much greater than those of any other system upon the
intelligence and morality of the individual citizen, they have even more
at stake than any other societies on the excellence of their educational
arrangements. Now under Communism these arrangements would have to be
made for every citizen by the collective body, since individual parents,
supposing them to prefer some other mode of educating their children,
would have no private means of paying for it, and would be limited to
what they could do by their own personal teaching and influence. But
every adult member of the body would have an equal voice in determining
the collective system designed for the benefit of all. Here, then, is a
most fruitful source of discord in every association. All who had any
opinion or preference as to the education they would desire for their
own children, would have to rely for their chance of obtaining it upon
the influence they could exercise in the joint decision of the
community.

It is needless to specify a number of other important questions
affecting the mode of employing the productive resources of the
association, the conditions of social life, the relations of the body
with other associations, &c., on which difference of opinion, often
irreconcilable, would be likely to arise. But even the dissensions which
might be expected would be a far less evil to the prospects of humanity
than a delusive unanimity produced by the prostration of all individual
opinions and wishes before the decree of the majority. The obstacles to
human progression are always great, and require a concurrence of
favourable circumstances to overcome them; but an indispensable
condition of their being overcome is, that human nature should have
freedom to expand spontaneously in various directions, both in thought
and practice; that people should both think for themselves and try
experiments for themselves, and should not resign into the hands of
rulers, whether acting in the name of a few or of the majority, the
business of Edition: current; Page: [746] thinking for them, and of
prescribing how they shall act. But in Communist associations private
life would be brought in a most unexampled degree within the dominion of
public authority, and there would be less scope for the development of
individual character and individual preferences than has hitherto
existed among the full citizens of any state belonging to the
progressive branches of the human family. Already in all societies the
compression of individuality by the majority is a great and growing
evil; it would probably be much greater under Communism, except so far
as it might be in the power of individuals to set bounds to it by
selecting to belong to a community of persons like-minded with
themselves.

From these various considerations I do not seek to draw any inference
against the possibility that Communistic production is capable of being
at some future time the form of society best adapted to the wants and
circumstances of mankind. I think that this is, and will long be, an
open question, upon which fresh light will continually be obtained, both
by trial of the Communistic principle under favourable circumstances,
and by the improvements which will be gradually effected in the working
of the existing system, that of private ownership. The one certainty is,
that Communism, to be successful, requires a high standard of both moral
and intellectual education in all the members of the community—moral, to
qualify them for doing their part honestly and energetically in the
labour of life under no inducement but their share in the general
interest of the association, and their feelings of duty and sympathy
towards it; intellectual, to make them capable of estimating distant
interests and entering into complex considerations, sufficiently at
least to be able to discriminate, in these matters, good counsel from
bad. Now I reject altogether the notion that it is impossible for
education and cultivation such as is implied in these things to be made
the inheritance of every person in the nation; but I am convinced that
it is very difficult, and that the passage to it from our present
condition can only be slow. I admit the plea that in the points of moral
education on which the success of Communism depends, the present state
of society is demoralising, and that only a Communistic association can
effectually train mankind for Communism. It is for Communism, then, to
prove, by practical experiment, its power of giving this training.
Experiments alone can show whether there is as yet in any portion of the
population a sufficiently high level of moral cultivation to make
Communism succeed, and to give to the next generation among themselves
the education necessary to keep up that high level permanently. If
Communist associations show that they can be durable and prosperous,
they will multiply, and will probably be adopted by successive portions
of the population of the more advanced countries as they become morally
fitted for that mode of life. But to force unprepared populations into
Communist societies, even if a political revolution gave the power to
make such an attempt, would end in disappointment.

Edition: current; Page: [747]
If practical trial is necessary to test the capabilities of Communism,
it is no less required for those other forms of Socialism which
recognise the difficulties of Communism and contrive means to surmount
them. The principal of these is Fourierism, a system which, if only as a
specimen of intellectual ingenuity, is highly worthy of the attention of
any student, either of society or of the human mind. There is scarcely
an objection or a difficulty which Fourier did not foresee, and against
which he did not make provision beforehand by self-acting contrivances,
grounded, however, upon a less high principle of distributive justice
than that of Communism, since he admits inequalities of distribution and
individual ownership of capital, but not the arbitrary disposal of it.
The great problem which he grapples with is how to make labour
attractive, since, if this could be done, the principal difficulty of
Socialism would be overcome. He maintains that no kind of useful labour
is necessarily or universally repugnant, unless either excessive in
amount or devoid of the stimulus of companionship and emulation, or
regarded by mankind with contempt. The workers in a Fourierist village
are to class themselves spontaneously in groups, each group undertaking
a different kind of work, and the same person may be a member not only
of one group but of any number; a certain minimum having first been set
apart for the subsistence of every member of the community, whether
capable or not of labour, the society divides the remainder of the
produce among the different groups, in such shares as it finds attract
to each the amount of labour required, and no more; if there is too
great a run upon particular groups it is a sign that those groups are
over-remunerated relatively to others; if any are neglected their
remuneration must be made higher. The share of produce assigned to each
group is divided in fixed proportions among three elements—labour,
capital, and talent; the part assigned to talent being awarded by the
suffrages of the group itself, and it is hoped that among the variety of
human capacities all, or nearly all, will be qualified to excel in some
group or other. The remuneration for capital is to be such as is found
sufficient to induce savings from individual consumption, in order to
increase the common stock to such point as is desired. The number and
ingenuity of the contrivances for meeting minor difficulties, and
getting rid of minor inconveniences, is very remarkable. By means of
these various provisions it is the expectation of Fourierists that the
personal inducements to exertion for the public interest, instead of
being taken away, would be made much greater than at present, since
every increase of the service rendered would be much more certain of
leading to increase of reward than it is now, when accidents of position
have so much influence. The efficiency of labour, they therefore expect,
would be unexampled, while the saving of labour would be prodigious, by
diverting to useful occupations that which is now wasted on things
useless or hurtful, and by dispensing with the vast number of
superfluous distributors, the Edition: current; Page: [748] buying and
selling for the whole community being managed by a single agency. The
free choice of individuals as to their manner of life would be no
further interfered with than would be necessary for gaining the full
advantages of co-operation in the industrial operations. Altogether, the
picture of a Fourierist community is both attractive in itself and
requires less from common humanity than any other known system of
Socialism; and it is much to be desired that the scheme should have that
fair trial which alone can test the workableness of any new scheme of
social life.*

The result of our review of the various difficulties of Socialism has
led us to the conclusion that the various schemes for managing the
productive resources of the country by public instead of private agency
have a case for a trial, and some of them may eventually establish their
claims to preference over the existing order of things, but that they
are at present workable only by the élite of mankind, and have yet to
prove their power of training mankind at large to the state of
improvement which they presuppose. Far more, of course, may this be said
of the more ambitious plan which aims at taking possession of the whole
land and capital of the country, and beginning at once to administer it
on the public account. Apart from all consideration of injustice to the
present possessors, the very idea of conducting the whole industry of a
country by direction from a single centre is so obviously chimerical,
that nobody ventures to propose any mode in which it should be done; and
it can hardly be doubted that if the revolutionary Socialists attained
their immediate object, and actually had the whole property of the
country at their disposal, they would find no other practicable mode of
exercising their power over it than that of dividing it into portions,
each to be made over to the administration of a small Socialist
community. The problem of management, which we have seen to be so
difficult even to a select population well prepared beforehand, would be
thrown down to be solved as best it could by aggregations united only by
locality, or taken indiscriminately from the population, including all
the malefactors, all the idlest and most vicious, the most incapable of
steady industry, forethought, or self-control, and a majority who,
though not equally degraded, are yet, in the opinion of Socialists
themselves, as far as Edition: current; Page: [749] regards the
qualities essential for the success of Socialism, profoundly demoralised
by the existing state of society. It is saying but little to say that
the introduction of Socialism under such conditions could have no effect
but disastrous failure, and its apostles could have only the consolation
that the order of society as it now exists would have perished first,
and all who benefit by it would be involved in the common ruin—a
consolation which to some of them would probably be real, for if
appearances can be trusted the animating principle of too many of the
revolutionary Socialists is hate; a very excusable hatred of existing
evils, which would vent itself by putting an end to the present system
at all costs even to those who suffer by it, in the hope that out of
chaos would arise a better Kosmos, and in the impatience of desperation
respecting any more gradual improvement. They are unaware that chaos is
the very most unfavourable position for setting out in the construction
of a Kosmos, and that many ages of conflict, violence, and tyrannical
oppression of the weak by the strong must intervene; they know not that
they would plunge mankind into the state of nature so forcibly described
by Hobbes (Leviathan, Part I. ch. xiii.),[*] where every man is enemy to
every man:—

In such condition there is no place for industry, because the fruit
thereof is uncertain, and consequently no culture of the earth, no
navigation, no use of the commodities that may be imported by sea, no
commodious building, no instruments of moving and removing such things
as require much force, no knowledge of the face of the earth, no account
of time, no arts, no letters, no society; and, which is worst of all,
continual fear and danger of violent death; and the life of man
solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short.

If the poorest and most wretched members of a so-called civilised
society are in as bad a condition as every one would be in that worst
form of barbarism produced by the dissolution of civilised life, it does
not follow that the way to raise them would be to reduce all others to
the same miserable state. On the contrary, it is by the aid of the first
who have risen that so many others have escaped from the general lot,
and it is only by better organization of the same process that it may be
hoped in time to succeed in raising the remainder.


THE IDEA OF PRIVATE PROPERTY NOT FIXED BUT VARIABLE

The preceding considerations appear sufficient to show that an entire
renovation of the social fabric, such as is contemplated by Socialism,
establishing the economic constitution of society upon an entirely new
basis, other than that of private property and competition, however
valuable as an Edition: current; Page: [750] ideal, and even as a
prophecy of ultimate possibilities, is not available as a present
resource, since it requires from those who are to carry on the new order
of things qualities both moral and intellectual, which require to be
tested in all, and to be created in most; and this cannot be done by an
Act of Parliament, but must be, on the most favourable supposition, a
work of considerable time. For a long period to come the principle of
individual property will be in possession of the field; and even if in
any country a popular movement were to place Socialists at the head of a
revolutionary government, in however many ways they might violate
private property, the institution itself would survive, and would either
be accepted by them or brought back by their expulsion, for the plain
reason that people will not lose their hold of what is at present their
sole reliance for subsistence and security until a substitute for it has
been got into working order. Even those, if any, who had shared among
themselves what was the property of others would desire to keep what
they had acquired, and to give back to property in the new hands the
sacredness which they had not recognised in the old.

But though, for these reasons, individual property has presumably a long
term before it, if only of provisional existence, we are not, therefore,
to conclude that it must exist during that whole term unmodified, or
that all the rights now regarded as appertaining to property belong to
it inherently, and must endure while it endures. On the contrary, it is
both the duty and the interest of those who derive the most direct
benefit from the laws of property to give impartial consideration to all
proposals for rendering those laws in any way less onerous to the
majority. This, which would in any case be an obligation of justice, is
an injunction of prudence also, in order to place themselves in the
right against the attempts which are sure to be frequent to bring the
Socialist forms of society prematurely into operation.

One of the mistakes oftenest committed, and which are the sources of the
greatest practical errors in human affairs, is that of supposing that
the same name always stands for the same aggregation of ideas. No word
has been the subject of more of this kind of misunderstanding than the
word property. It denotes in every state of society the largest powers
of exclusive use or exclusive control over things (and sometimes,
unfortunately, over persons) which the law accords, or which custom, in
that state of society, recognises; but these powers of exclusive use and
control are very various, and differ greatly in different countries and
in different states of society.

For instance, in early states of society, the right of property did not
include the right of bequest. The power of disposing of property by will
was in most countries of Europe a rather late institution; and long
after it was introduced it continued to be limited in favour of what
were called natural heirs. Where bequest is not permitted, individual
property is only Edition: current; Page: [751] a life interest. And in
fact, as has been so well and fully set forth by Sir Henry Maine in his
most instructive work on Ancient Law,[*] the primitive idea of property
was that it belonged to the family, not the individual. The head of the
family had the management and was the person who really exercised the
proprietary rights. As in other respects, so in this, he governed the
family with nearly despotic power. But he was not free so to exercise
his power as to defeat the co-proprietors of the other portions; he
could not so dispose of the property as to deprive them of the joint
enjoyment or of the succession. By the laws and customs of some nations
the property could not be alienated without the consent of the male
children; in other cases the child could by law demand a division of the
property and the assignment to him of his share, as in the story of the
Prodigal Son. If the association kept together after the death of the
head, some other member of it, not always his son, but often the eldest
of the family, the strongest, or the one selected by the rest, succeeded
to the management and to the managing rights, all the others retaining
theirs as before. If, on the other hand, the body broke up into separate
families, each of these took away with it a part of the property. I say
the property, not the inheritance, because the process was a mere
continuance of existing rights, not a creation of new; the manager’s
share alone lapsed to the association.

Then, again, in regard to proprietary rights over immovables (the
principal kind of property in a rude age) these rights were of very
varying extent and duration. By the Jewish law property in immovables
was only a temporary concession; on the Sabbatical year it returned to
the common stock to be redistributed; though we may surmise that in the
historical times of the Jewish state this rule may have been
successfully evaded. In many countries of Asia, before European ideas
intervened, nothing existed to which the expression property in land, as
we understand the phrase, is strictly applicable. The ownership was
broken up among several distinct parties, whose rights were determined
rather by custom than by law. The government was part owner, having the
right to a heavy rent. Ancient ideas and even ancient laws limited the
government share to some particular fraction of the gross produce, but
practically there was no fixed limit. The government might make over its
share to an individual, who then became possessed of the right of
collection and all the other rights of the state, but not those of any
private person connected with the soil. These private rights were of
various kinds. The actual cultivators, or such of them as had been long
settled on the land, had a right to retain possession; it was held
unlawful to evict them while they paid the rent—a rent not in general
fixed by agreement, but by the custom of the neighbourhood. Between the
actual cultivators and the state, or the substitute to whom the state
had transferred Edition: current; Page: [752] its rights, there were
intermediate persons with rights of various extent. There were officers
of government who collected the state’s share of the produce, sometimes
for large districts, who, though bound to pay over to government all
they collected, after deducting a percentage, were often hereditary
officers. There were also, in many cases, village communities,
consisting of the reputed descendants of the first settlers of a
village, who shared among themselves either the land or its produce
according to rules established by custom, either cultivating it
themselves or employing others to cultivate it for them, and whose
rights in the land approached nearer to those of a landed proprietor, as
understood in England, than those of any other party concerned. But the
proprietary right of the village was not individual, but collective;
inalienable (the rights of individual sharers could only be sold or
mortgaged with the consent of the community) and governed by fixed
rules. In mediæval Europe almost all land was held from the sovereign on
tenure of service, either military or agricultural; and in Great Britain
even now, when the services as well as all the reserved rights of the
sovereign have long since fallen into disuse or been commuted for
taxation, the theory of the law does not acknowledge an absolute right
of property in land in any individual; the fullest landed proprietor
known to the law, the freeholder, is but a “tenant” of the Crown. In
Russia, even when the cultivators of the soil were serfs of the landed
proprietor, his proprietary right in the land was limited by rights of
theirs belonging to them as a collective body managing its own affairs,
and with which he could not interfere. And in most of the countries of
continental Europe when serfage was abolished or went out of use, those
who had cultivated the land as serfs remained in possession of rights as
well as subject to obligations. The great land reforms of Stein and his
successors in Prussia consisted in abolishing both the rights and the
obligations, and dividing the land bodily between the proprietor and the
peasant, instead of leaving each of them with a limited right over the
whole. In other cases, as in Tuscany, the metayer farmer is virtually
co-proprietor with the landlord, since custom, though not law,
guarantees to him a permanent possession and half the gross produce, so
long as he fulfils the customary conditions of his tenure.

Again, if rights of property over the same things are of different
extent in different countries, so also are they exercised over different
things. In all countries at a former time, and in some countries still,
the right of property extended and extends to the ownership of human
beings. There has often been property in public trusts, as in judicial
offices, and a vast multitude of others in France before the Revolution;
there are still a few patent offices in Great Britain, though I believe
they will cease by operation of law on the death of the present holders;
and we are only now abolishing property in army rank. Public bodies,
constituted and endowed for public purposes, Edition: current; Page:
[753] still claim the same inviolable right of property in their estates
which individuals have in theirs, and though a sound political morality
does not acknowledge this claim, the law supports it. We thus see that
the right of property is differently interpreted, and held to be of
different extent, in different times and places; that the conception
entertained of it is a varying conception, has been frequently revised,
and may admit of still further revision. It is also to be noticed that
the revisions which it has hitherto undergone in the progress of society
have generally been improvements. When, therefore, it is maintained,
rightly or wrongly, that some change or modification in the powers
exercised over things by the persons legally recognised as their
proprietors would be beneficial to the public and conducive to the
general improvement, it is no good answer to this merely to say that the
proposed change conflicts with the idea of property. The idea of
property is not some one thing, identical throughout history and
incapable of alteration, but is variable like all other creations of the
human mind; at any given time it is a brief expression denoting the
rights over things conferred by the law or custom of some given society
at that time; but neither on this point nor on any other has the law and
custom of a given time and place a claim to be stereotyped for ever. A
proposed reform in laws or customs is not necessarily objectionable
because its adoption would imply, not the adaptation of all human
affairs to the existing idea of property, but the adaptation of existing
ideas of property to the growth and improvement of human affairs. This
is said without prejudice to the equitable claim of proprietors to be
compensated by the state for such legal rights of a proprietary nature
as they may be dispossessed of for the public advantage. That equitable
claim, the grounds and the just limits of it, are a subject by itself,
and as such will be discussed hereafter. Under this condition, however,
society is fully entitled to abrogate or alter any particular right of
property which on sufficient consideration it judges to stand in the way
of the public good. And assuredly the terrible case which, as we saw in
a former chapter,[*] Socialists are able to make out against the present
economic order of society, demands a full consideration of all means by
which the institution may have a chance of being made to work in a
manner more beneficial to that large portion of society which at present
enjoys the least share of its direct benefits.

Edition: current; Page: [754] Edition: current; Page: [755]


APPENDICES

Edition: current; Page: [756] Edition: current; Page: [757]


Appendix A


McCulloch’s Discourse on Political Economy (1825)

Westminster Review, IV (July, 1825), 88-92. Unsigned; not republished.
Original heading: “Art. VI. A Discourse on the Rise, Progress, Peculiar
Objects, and Importance of Political Economy. By J. R. M’Culloch, Esq.
Second Edition. pp. 117. Edinburgh [: Constable]. 1825.” Running head:
“M’Culloch’s Discourse on Political Economy.” Not mentioned in JSM’s
bibliography or Autobiography. Vol. IV of the Westminster is missing
from the Mills’ set in Somerville College. Identified as partly by JSM
in Alexander Bain, James Mill (London: Longmans, Green, 1882), 292,
where a letter from James Mill to McCulloch (18/8/25) is cited, reading
in part: “I suppose you have seen by this time the review of your
Discourse in the Westminster? John expresses great dissatisfaction with
the behaviour of the editors. The whole was the joint production of him
and [William] Ellis: but they say that several important things were
left out, and the article, by that and other editorial operations,
disfigured.” (Cf. Edmund K. Blyth, Life of William Ellis [London: Kegan
Paul, Trench, 1889], 35-6, 352.) There is no external evidence to
indicate what part of this slight review is by JSM; if a guess is
permissible, it seems likely that the sketch of the history of Political
Economy is his.

if there is one sign of the times upon which more than any other we
should be justified in resting our hopes of the future progression of
the human race in the career of improvement, that sign undoubtedly is,
the demand which is now manifesting itself on the part of the public for
instruction in the science of Political Economy. It is unnecessary for
us to bring forward any evidence to prove the existence of this
demand—the fact is sufficiently notorious. It is equally notorious, that
considerable respect is now paid by the more enlightened portion of our
administration to the great principles of the science; that many members
of the House of Commons are beginning to be familiar with the
demonstrations by which those principles are established; and that those
who have inherited the ignorance of their ancestors with their estates,
have of late been obliged, however ungraciously, on many occasions, by
the force of public opinion, to bow down to others who have less
reverence for the errors of the past. And yet, surprising as it may
appear, it is no less notorious, that up to the year 1818, Edition:
current; Page: [758] the science of political economy was scarcely known
or talked of beyond a small circle of philosophers, and that
legislation, so far from being in conformity with its principles, was
daily receding from them more and more.

At that time all the most important principles contained in the science
had been clearly demonstrated, and the materiel for the formation of a
regular system was collected. A long interval elapsed after the
publication of the Wealth of Nations, in 1776, without any thing worth
mentioning being contributed to the science. In 1798 appeared Malthus’s
Essay upon the Principle of Population; in 1802, Mr. Say’s work;[*] in
1815, two Essays upon the Nature of Rent;[†] and in 1817, Mr. Ricardo’s
profound work upon the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation; and
finally, in 1821, Mr. Mill’s Elements of Political Economy.

The attention of those who wish to see an amelioration in the condition
of the great mass of mankind ought henceforward to be mainly directed to
the means of communicating to all that which is now known only to a few.
The principal difficulty is overcome—the road to happiness is
discovered—no groping, no perplexing research, no hopeless, thankless
toil is required—all that remains to be done is, to remove the obstacles
which conceal that road from the view of those who are less fortunate
than ourselves. The perfectibility of the human species has long been
looked upon as a fit subject of speculation for castle-builders and
Utopians; and certainly the schemes by which it has frequently been
thought that this perfectibility might be brought about, were well
calculated to excite a smile even on the countenance of the most
benevolent. On the other hand, political economists, as a class, have
often been held up to hatred because their doctrines were considered as
adverse to the scheme of perfectibility. This hatred has, however, been
extremely ill-placed. For, waiving any opinion as to the scheme of
perfectibility, and as to the possibility of attaching any very precise
idea to the term, it must be allowed that political economists have
shown in what manner the condition of mankind may be considerably
improved. It must be allowed, moreover, that, previous to their
inquiries, unknown causes existed, by which all plans for improvement
were checked and counteracted. Not only have they pointed out these
causes of evil, but, fearlessly braving the prejudices of the ignorant
and vulgar, they have brought to light a remedy by which that evil may
be averted. If, therefore, they are of opinion that the perfectibility
of the species is a mere vision, although bright and fascinating to
dwell upon, they have, at all events, Edition: current; Page: [759]
produced a plan by which a large addition may almost immediately be made
to human happiness, and which will ultimately raise the species to a
state at least approaching to the perfectibility which has been aimed
at.

The readiness with which all the late discoveries in economical science
have been received and assented to, and the success which has attended
all the attempts that have been made to diffuse a knowledge of them,
hold out the strongest encouragement to those who have already devoted
either time or talent for the purpose of imparting useful information,
to persevere in their course, and to others to follow their example. Of
all who have hitherto been engaged in this meritorious employment, there
is no one who has distinguished himself more than the author of the
Discourse which we have before us. Were it possible to trace any portion
of the improvement in the public mind within these few years to the
labours of particular individuals, we think that much might be traced to
those of Mr. McCulloch. In him are united a profound knowledge of the
principles of the science, a most uncommon degree of skill in
illustrating and expounding them, a complete mastery of all the errors
and sophisms which have heretofore prevailed, and of the arguments by
which they are to be met, with an apostolic zeal in communicating his
knowledge to others. What other qualities can be required to entitle a
man to the character of a perfect teacher?

In the early part of last year a Lectureship upon Political Economy was
founded for a limited number of years in honour of the late Mr. Ricardo;
a manner of commemorating the virtues and talents of that great
philosopher, as consonant to what it might be supposed would be his
wishes, as it was creditable to the judgment of his friends and
admirers. The well-known qualifications of Mr. McCulloch pointed him out
to these gentlemen as the fittest person to fill the lecturer’s chair.
Mr. McCulloch had already given some courses of lectures at his own
private risk at Edinburgh; but doubts were entertained by many whether
the public mind was yet ripe for such an institution. The success,
however, which attended his first course far exceeded the most sanguine
expectations of the most ardent friends of the science, and induced a
number of public-spirited individuals to invite him to deliver a course
of lectures in the city, in addition to the one which he was engaged to
deliver as Ricardo lecturer.

The student who wishes to form an idea of what political economy really
means, and to judge for himself whether the knowledge of the science
would repay him for the time and application which he must necessarily
sacrifice in order to obtain it, cannot do better than purchase this
pamphlet. It does not contain more than 117 pages, and is written in a
popular and pleasing style. In it he will find a general view of the
principles on which the science is founded; the distinguishing features
of the most celebrated theories that have been advanced to explain its
various results; the distinction between it Edition: current; Page:
[760] and politics; and some remarks illustrative of the utility of its
study to all ranks and orders of the community.

Mr. McCulloch puts forth no pretensions to originality in this
discourse. It was written evidently with a view to attract those who as
yet are strangers to the science. In this he has more than succeeded.
Whoever carefully peruses its contents cannot fail to be inspired with a
wish to perfect himself in the science, since he will see the necessity
of either ceasing to take a part in the discussion of public affairs, or
of qualifying himself to discuss them philosophically. Our space will
not permit us to indulge in many examples of the style and spirit of the
work. We subjoin the following:

There is a peculiarity in the political and economical sciences which
deserves to be noticed, inasmuch as it serves to show the superior
necessity and importance of general instruction in their principles. The
peculiarity in question originates in the circumstance of the politician
or economist being extremely apt to be influenced by other
considerations than a regard to the interests of truth and the public
welfare. The cultivators of the mathematical and physical sciences, can
very rarely have any motive to bias their judgments, or to induce them
to conceal or pervert the truth. But such is not the case with those who
discuss political or economical questions. Every abuse, and every
vicious and unjust institution and regulation, operates as a bounty on
the production of false theories; for, though injurious to the public,
they are almost always productive of advantage to a greater or smaller
number of individuals, who, to preserve this advantage, enlist a portion
of the press into their service, and labour, by means of perverted and
fallacious statements, to make the public believe that the abuse is
really beneficial to them, and that they are interested in its support.
These attempts to make the worse appear the better cause, or to make the
most flagrant abuses be viewed as national benefits, have very often
been attended with complete success. And there are plainly no means of
obviating this evil, of correcting what is really disadvantageous in the
influence of the press, and of preventing the public from being misled
by the specious sophistry of those whose interest and object it is to
delude them, except by making them generally acquainted with the
elementary and fundamental truths of this science. . . . . . Ignorance
is the impure and muddy fountain whence nine tenths of the vice, misery,
and crime, to be found in the world are really derived. Make the body of
the people once fully aware of the circumstances which really determine
their condition, and you may be assured that an immense majority will
endeavour to turn that knowledge to good account. If you once succeed in
convincing a man that it is for his interest to abandon one line of
conduct and follow another, the chances are ten to one that he will do
so.

(Pp. 85-87.)

Edition: current; Page: [761]


Appendix B


Petition on Free Trade (1841)

Morning Chronicle, 17 June, 1841, 6. Unsigned; not republished. Original
heading: “Kensington. The following is the petition agreed to at the
meeting held at Kensington on Tuesday evening.” Identified in JSM’s
bibliography as “The Kensington Petition for free trade, agreed to at a
public meeting held on the 15th June 1841, and printed in the Morning
Chronicle of June 17th” (MacMinn, 53). No copy in Somerville College.

JSM wrote to Albany Fonblanque (17 June, 1841), saying in part: “The
Kensington petition, printed in the Chronicle today, is of my writing, &
I had a great share in getting up the public meeting, which, though in a
very unpromising neighbourhood, was a very striking demonstration”
(Earlier Letters, Collected Works, XIII, 478).


TO THE HONOURABLE THE HOUSE OF COMMONS

The humble petition of the inhabitants of Kensington and its vicinity,
in public meeting assembled, sheweth,

That protecting duties, or, in other words, duties imposed on foreign
commodities, not to raise a revenue, but to keep up the price of similar
articles produced at home, are a tax on the whole community for the
pecuniary profit of some class or classes, and are therefore an abuse of
the power of legislation.

That the argument frequently urged in defence of such duties, namely,
that they encourage production and favour the national industry, is in
the opinion of your petitioners, not only unfounded, but the very
reverse of the truth, inasmuch as employments which would not be carried
on without an artificial high price, are by this very circumstance
proved to be employments yielding of themselves a less return than that
which the same amount of labour and capital would realise if left to
take its natural course. A smaller production is by this means obtained
through the sacrifice of a greater, and thus, in addition to what these
restrictions take from one portion of the community to bestow upon
another, they cause a further and commonly a still greater loss of
national wealth, without benefit to any one.

Edition: current; Page: [762]
That nevertheless former Parliaments, partly influenced by the class
interests of their several members, and partly by mistaken views of
public policy now exploded, have imposed protecting duties on almost
every article of foreign produce or manufacture which could possibly
come into competition with anything produced in our own country or its
dependencies, thus throwing upon the public, in the increased price of
the articles of their expenditure, burdens which, according to the
calculations of the best practical authorities, exceed the amount of all
the taxes which the people of this country pay to the state, while of
this vast sum a very small portion alone reaches the coffers of the
various classes of producers whom the legislature intended to benefit.

That of these burdens, the most revolting in its principle, the largest
in its amount, and the severest in its pressure, is the tax on food,
imposed by the present corn and provision laws.[*]

That a tax on food is the only tax from which no degree of abject
poverty is an exemption, but which in its very nature falls heaviest
upon the poorest class, nearly the whole of whose consumption consists
of food.

That whatever makes the poor poorer, tends in the same proportion to
render them ignorant and vicious, by depriving them of the opportunities
and means of good education, while it strengthens and multiplies the
temptations to which their condition exposes them. That the corn-laws,
as producing these effects, are, in the view of your petitioners,
opposed both to the first principles of morality and to the spirit of
the Christian religion, as well as to the direct precepts of Scripture,
which expressly declares,

“He that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him; but blessing
shall be upon the head of him that selleth it.”[†]

That, so far as your petitioners are able to observe, these evils
originate for some time existed, in a considerable portion of the
labouring classes, a deeply seated hostility to existing political
institutions, and in the country generally a growing alienation among
the different ranks of society, the causes of which, your petitioners
humbly submit, demand the most serious consideration from your
honourable house.

That, so far as your petitioners are able to observe, these evils
originate in the persuasion openly entertained by large bodies of
persons that the ruling principle in the government of this country is
not the public good, but the particular interest of certain classes, who
command a majority, both in the other house of Parliament and in your
honourable house. Your petitioners respectfully express their conviction
that nothing has so much contributed to give rise to this unfortunate
impression, or has given so much colour of truth to it, as the existing
commercial restrictions, and in particular Edition: current; Page: [763]
the corn-laws. That by whatever arguments the supporters of those laws
may justify themselves to their own minds, their reasons are not of a
nature to be convincing or intelligible to persons whose small loaf is
made smaller for no purpose apparent to them but that of still further
enriching the rich. A bread tax for the supposed benefit of the
landlords, and a people well affected to the state, are two things
which, in the opinion of your petitioners, cannot easily co-exist.

That, entertaining these opinions, your petitioners have hailed with joy
the announcement by her Majesty’s government of a general revision of
the existing import duties, and the introduction into your honourable
house of measures, by which some of the most oppressive of those duties,
and particularly, the most oppressive of all, the corn-laws, are
considerably relaxed.[*] That although in the article of food nothing
but entire freedom from taxation would be satisfactory to your
petitioners as a permanent arrangement; yet, as a means of transition,
to prevent too sudden a shock to existing interests, your petitioners
fully subscribe to the propriety of retaining, for the present, a
moderate duty on imported corn. And your petitioners are strongly of
opinion that the protection thus temporarily conceded should be in the
shape of a fixed duty rather than of a sliding scale. Your petitioners
can scarcely imagine any mode of regulating a great branch of commerce
and industry more injurious to all parties than the present variable
scale of duties, under which the home grower can never know what degree
of protection he has to reckon upon, nor the importer what rate of duty
he will be required to pay.

That although the measures recently promulgated by her Majesty’s
government would have commanded, under any circumstances, the warmest
support of your petitioners, they derive an additional recommendation
from the particular time at which they are proposed, namely, when the
approaching revision of the duties levied on our productions by several
of our largest customers threatens us with retaliatory measures most
ruinous to our foreign trade, while the state of our own revenue leaves
us no option but either to lower the tariff, or impose new and onerous
taxes upon the property or the already overburthened industry of the
country.

Your petitioners, therefore, earnestly entreat your honourable house to
give your most serious consideration to these various circumstances, and
to adopt the measures recently submitted to you by her Majesty’s
government with respect to the duties on imports, and especially on
foreign corn.

And your petitioners will every pray.

Edition: current; Page: [764]


Appendix C


Examination Paper in Political Economy Set by JSM (1872)

JSM’s interest in higher education for women led to his being asked to
set examination papers in Political Economy for The College, Hitchin,
later Girton College, Cambridge. The following paper is reproduced from
JSM’s Letters, edited Hugh S. R. Elliot (London, 1910), II, 336-7, where
it is dated 6 May, 1872.

1. What is the distinction between Productive and Unproductive Labour,
and between Productive and Unproductive Consumption?

2. Does all Productive labour tend to increase the permanent wealth of
the country?

3. State any causes, in general operation, which tend to increase the
productive power of labour, and any which tend to diminish it.

4. Explain in what sense the value of a commodity depends on supply and
demand, and in what sense on cost of production.

5. What cost of production is it which determines the exchange value of
the products of agriculture?

6. A state of free trade being supposed, can a country permanently
import a commodity from a place where its cost of production is greater
than that at which it could be produced at home?

7. What are the effects, first on the national wealth, and secondly, on
the wages of labour, of a large government expenditure? and does it make
any difference what the expenditure is upon?

8. In what respect are the interest of the labouring classes and that of
the employers of labour identical? and in what respects, if in any,
opposed?

9. What is the meaning of depreciation of the currency? and what are the
principal causes of such depreciation?

10. By what means can a currency be protected against depreciation?

11. What is meant by the terms, a favourable and an unfavourable
exchange? and is there any well-grounded objection to that phraseology?

12. How far, and in what respects, is the discovery of new and rich
deposits of the precious metals a benefit to the national wealth?

Edition: current; Page: [765]
13. Mention the principal circumstances that tend to produce either a
rise or a fall in the rent of land.

14. State what are the known modes in which the produce of land, or the
proceeds of the sale of that produce, are shared among the different
classes of persons connected with the land, and state briefly the
advantages and disadvantages of each.

Edition: current; Page: [766]


Appendix D


Land Tenure Reform Association: Public Lands and Commons Bill (1872)

JSM was in Avignon during the early part of 1872, when this sheet must
have been distributed, and there is no evidence that he took part in its
composition, though he would surely have approved it. No marks on
Somerville College copy.


LAND TENURE REFORM ASSOCIATION

Chairman, Mr. J. Stuart Mill

Treasurer, Mr. P. A. Taylor, m.p. Hon. Secretary, Colonel T. A. Cowper

Offices:—9, Buckingham Street, Strand


PUBLIC LANDS AND COMMONS BILL

The Second Reading of the Public Lands and Commons Bill will be moved by
Sir C. Dilke, on Wednesday, July 3rd. The Bill is brought in by Sir C.
Dilke, Mr. Morrison and Mr. P. A. Taylor, and applies only to Public
Lands, or Lands held by Corporations, Charities, &c. for public uses, to
Commons and Rights of Way. It not only provides for the more economical
administration of public lands, but contains provisions calculated
largely to promote the social and material well being of the industrial
classes.

The Bill provides for the appointment of overseers of all public lands,
commons, and rights of way; the salaries of such overseers to be
defrayed out of the proceeds of the lands under their charge. Their
duties in regard Edition: current; Page: [767] to public lands will be
to manage them in the most economical and efficient manner, to let such
lands by public tender, and when tenders are equal, to give the
preference to that in which the largest number of persons are
interested, thus affording facilities for co-operative agriculture and
co-operative building.

The duties of the overseers in regard to public commons and rights of
way will be to make enquiries into the nature and extent of public
rights, report the result to the Home Secretary, and mark the extent of
such commons and rights of way upon maps of their several districts,
thus permanently securing the rights of the public.

All earnest Land Reformers are therefore urged to support the Bill for
the following reasons:—

-   

    1—Because it is desirable that as large a number of persons as
    possible should have an interest in the soil.
-   

    2—Because there is a growing disposition on the part of the present
    administrators of public lands and others to dispose of them to
    private individuals, and invest the proceeds in other kinds of
    property.
-   

    3—Because it is to the public advantage that no lands over which the
    public have any rights should pass into the hands of individual
    proprietors.
-   

    4—Because it is notorious that the present administration of public
    lands (the value of which is estimated at £500,000,000) is often
    attended by gross abuses, which the Bill would render almost
    impossible.
-   

    5—Because, from the absence of constant supervision, lands formerly
    devised for public purposes, have been converted to private uses.
-   

    6—Because, although co-operative agriculture has been successfully
    tried, as at Rahaline, in Ireland, and Acrington, in Suffolk,
    opportunities for extending its operations are not afforded by
    private landowners.
-   

    7—Because the Bill would prevent the annexation by private persons
    of strips of common land, and the stoppage of rights of way, actions
    which are now often indulged in with impunity.
-   

    8—Because the effect of the Bill would be to make known the whole
    extent of the lands over which public rights exist, and to secure
    such public rights in the future.

The Executive Committee of the Land Tenure Reform Association trust that
their friends in the various constituencies will use every effort in
behalf of the Bill, especially by communicating with their parliamentary
representatives, and by obtaining resolutions from associated bodies in
its favor, which also should be forwarded to the local members.

Edition: current; Page: [768]
s

