November 1850 to July 1865


1.: Secular Education
 AFTER 4 NOVEMBER, 1850?

sir, the commencement at Manchester of a movement for a national
education not under the control or management of either established or
non-established clergy has already, it would seem, made no
inconsiderable impression on the public, or else The Times has made a
false move and miscalculated the signs of the coming public opinion; for
already at the very beginning of the agitation that journal has
discovered, what it did not find out in the case of the Corn Law League
until the fourth or fifth year of its existence, that the thing is not
merely a good thing, but what is so much better in the estimation of The
Times, a thing destined to succeed.1 The promoters doubtless thought no
less, but they probably did not expect so early a recognition of their
prospects. How much then it is to be lamented that an enterprise of so
much promise should have been inaugurated by an act of truckling and
compromise; that for the sake of conciliating people who are not to be
conciliated and whom it ought not to have been an object to conciliate,
the Association should have let itself be persuaded by Mr. Cobden, aided
by some dissenting ministers, to sacrifice its distinctive flag, and
instead of calling itself an Association for secular education should
have sheltered its timidity under the ambiguous designation of
unsectarian.2

Edition: current; Page: [4]
If this is only a change in words and means nothing it deserves no
better name than that of deception; if it does mean anything, if by
unsectarian is to be understood something different from secular
education, the broad principle of religious freedom which was to be the
foundation of this great educational movement is abandoned.

In the debates of the Conference there was a good deal of
misunderstanding, some of it I fear rather wilful on the part of Mr.
Cobden and his supporters respecting the import of the word secular.
There is no uncertainty about it. There is not a better defined word in
the English language. Secular is whatever has reference to this life.
Secular instruction is instruction respecting the concerns of this life.
Secular subjects therefore are all subjects except religion. All the
arts and sciences are secular knowledge. To say that secular means
irreligious implies that all the arts and sciences are irreligious, and
is very like saying that all professions except that of the law are
illegal. There is a difference between irreligious and not religious,
however it may suit the purposes of many persons to confound it. Now on
the principles of religious freedom which we were led to believe that it
was the purpose of this Association to accept, instruction on subjects
not religious is as much the right of those who will not accept
religious instruction as of those who will. To know the laws of the
physical world, the properties of their own bodies and minds, the past
history of their species, is as much a benefit to the Jew, the
Mussulman, the Deist, the Atheist, as to the orthodox churchman; and it
is as iniquitous to withhold it from them. Education provided by the
public must be education for all, and to be education for all it must be
purely secular education.

When, then, the Association refuses to say that their education is
secular but are willing to say that it shall be unsectarian, what do
they mean? Doubtless that it is still to be exclusive, though in a minor
degree. That religion is to be taught, but not sectarian religion. That
they are not to have Church of England teaching, or Catholic teaching,
or Baptist, or Methodist, or Unitarian teaching, but I suppose Christian
teaching; that is, whatever common elements of Christianity are supposed
to be found in all these sects alike. How far this is likely to
conciliate the various classes of sectarians the Association will
probably hear loudly enough from the sectarians themselves. I am much
mistaken if they will be at all thankful for any religious teaching
which expresses no opinion on a subject on which Christians differ in
opinion, or if the substratum of universal Christianity which it is
proposed to teach will appear to them at all different from Deism. But
this is their concern. I take higher ground. I maintain that if you
could carry all the sects with you by your compromise you would have
effected nothing but a compact among the more powerful bodies to cease
fighting among themselves and join in trampling on the weaker. You would
have contrived a national education not for all, but for believers in
the New Testament. The Jew and the unbeliever would be excluded from it
though they would not the less be required to pay for it. I do not hear
that their money is to be refused, that they are to be exempted from the
school Edition: current; Page: [5] rate. Religious exclusion and
inequality are as odious when practised towards minorities as
majorities. I thought the principle of the Association had been that of
justice, but I find it is that of being unjust to those alone who are
not numerous enough to resist.

I cannot help remarking how much less confidence professed Christians
appear to have in the truth and power of their principles than infidels
generally have in theirs. Disbelievers in Christianity almost always
hail the advance of public intelligence as favourable to them; the more
informed and exercised a mind is, the more likely they account it to
adopt their opinions: but I cannot find a trace of similar confidence in
most of the professedly religious. If they hold their belief with the
same full assurance as the others their disbelief, surely infidels and
the children of infidels are those to whom, even more than to any
others, they would be eager to give all instruction which could render
their minds more capable of pursuing and recognising truth. A person is
without religious belief, or in other words is in their estimation in a
state of the most pitiable, the most calamitous ignorance by which
anyone can possibly be afflicted, and for this reason they refuse him
instruction, they refuse him knowledge and the cultivation and
discipline of the intellect, as if they thought that mental cultivation
could not possibly be favourable to Christianity, unless the mind is
first strongly prepossessed on its behalf. Such sentiments as these are
not complimentary to Christianity nor to the sincerity of their belief
in it. Its greatest enemy could say nothing worse of it than that either
ignorance or early prejudice is the soil it must have to flourish in,
and that to instruct unbelievers, to make them rational and thinking
beings, is but to confirm them in unbelief. I hoped that the founders of
the Lancaster Association3 had been persons who thought that mental
cultivation opens the mind to all truth, whether expressly taught or
not. Let us hope that this conviction is still theirs and will guide and
animate their labours; but they have missed through pusillanimity a
splendid opportunity for inscribing it on their banner and proclaiming
it in the face of the world.


2.: Cooperation
 28 MARCH, 1864

The Reasoner (then subtitled The Secular World and Social Economist),
XXVIII (1 May, 1864), 116–17. Dated in text “Easter Monday.” Headed:
“Great Co-operative Soiree in London. / Speech of Mr. J.S. .” Also
in The Co-operator, No. 52 (June 1864), pp. Edition: current; Page: [6]
4–6. Both journals were the property of George Jacob Holyoake, who says,
in his J.S.  as Some of the Working Classes Knew Him (London:
Trübner, 1873), p. 5: “The first time [] appeared at a public
meeting and made a speech was at the Whittington Club, before a large
tea gathering of co-operators with their wives and families. I was asked
to urge him to speak. . . . [H]ad it not been for the evidence of so
many women taking part in co-operative economy, . . . he, I suspect had
not spoken then.” The organizing group was the London Society for
Promoting Co-operation. The Chair was taken by Edward Vansittart Neale.
His speech was followed by those of Lloyd Jones, Dr. Bowker, and Henry
Pitman (editor of The Reasoner). Then  spoke.

i have very little to say, but that little will be to express my sense
of the great value of such societies as this is, as a central organ in
London, and possibly for much more than London. It appears to me that
the value of such a society consists not solely or principally in the
great advantage it affords, to bring into a single focus the interests
and efforts of its members, so as to carry on, as this purposes to do,
that joint operation for their common benefit; it is not this merely
which seems to me to constitute the principal value of a central organ
like this—but it is also to be a moral organ, to keep before the eyes of
co-operators true principles. What does this mean? Does it mean merely a
contrivance by which a small number of persons, or a small number of
societies can eat or drink that which is wholesome, and eat and drink it
at the lowest price? This is certainly not an unimportant thing; but
this is a small thing, and co-operation is a great thing. No doubt it is
very desirable, and, indeed, important, that some hundreds of persons or
societies should improve their condition—if they should do so, I would
be very glad, and should greatly rejoice at it,—and that they should
purchase what they want more cheaply and of better quality than they
have been accustomed to do. But this is not co-operation. It is not
co-operation between a few persons to join for the purpose of making a
profit from cheap purchases, by which one, two, or more might benefit.
Co-operation is where the whole of the produce is divided. aWe want, not
to benefit a few, but to elevate the whole working class.a This
principle has been so well stated before, that I should not venture to
insist upon it after the admirable manner in which it has been put by
previous speakers; but it is absolutely necessary to insist upon it, and
it is impossible to insist upon it too strongly. It is not bgenuineb
co-operation, where any of the cco-operators are excluded from the
division of the whole producec. Anything else than such participation in
the produce, is nothing more than raising working people into the
position of employers. Now, what is wanted is, that the whole of the
working classes should partake of the profits of labour. (Cheers.) We
want that the whole produce of labour shall, as far as the nature of
things will permit, be divided among the Edition: current; Page: [7]
workers. The nature, however, of things dfixes certain limitations. But
the whole of the produce of labour can be divided amongst the workers
only to the extent that it is obtained fromd their own industry. So long
as profits are thus obtained, and the workers are in possession of
capital, they will naturally receive,—as they are entitled to
receive,—the whole of the produce; but as long as they are not in
possession of means sufficient, or cannot employ their labour, they will
need to be aided by greater means—by the capital of those ewho, ore
whose progenitors have accumulated it by their labour for acquired it by
their intelligence. Thosef who furnish a portion of the capital, will,
no doubt, be entitled to a portion of the profit. The earnings of
capital are not large—its remuneration is not great. Three per cent. is
but little for its use; that is the rate with the Government, where the
security is the best given. Capitalists are satisfied with four per
cent. from some of the railway companies, where the security is not so
good. This is all that can be obtained for the risk implied in its
investment. Now, we are not to suppose that co-operation may not be made
as safe as railway companies. Indeed, you may ultimately hope that the
workers will be able to divide among themselves the whole produce, with
the exception of the small amount I have mentioned. Three, or four, or
five per cent., five pounds out of £100, is but a small deduction. Who
can say that this is too much, or that it is unreasonable for the use of
capital to be applied to the purposes of labour? Few societies would
think of offering a less consideration gthan that to their own members
to induce them to save, and put their savings into the joint concerng.
Many people think, although the co-operatives have very judiciously and
very rightly shown no hostility to any other class—no desire on their
own account to bring any other class down, yet that their aims are
unattainable. A difficulty is felt; and it is said, what is to become of
capital, if you succeed to the extent you hope for? In the first place,
it is necessary to state that this is a gradual process; for as long as
there are hany working people who are dishonest—as long as there are any
who are idle, who are intemperate, who are spendthrifts—so long there
will be working people who are only fit to beh receivers of wages. We
are enabled to judge of those who are honest and trustworthy in the same
way as we are to judge who is untrustworthy, so that, while we ought not
to give our confidence rashly, there is also a danger in withdrawing it
rashly when it has been once reasonably, and after due consideration,
given. Here are two dangers; and it follows, that, so long as there are
persons unworthy to take a part in great Edition: current; Page: [8]
operations, there must be persons receivers of wages. iIt is only when
the entire working class shall be as much improved as the best portion
of them now are that our hopes will be realised, and the whole mass of
the people will practically adopt co-operation.i There is no fear that
there will be any disturbance of existing interests, that there will be
any disposition to avoid taking part in the working out the problem.
Nothing will last any longer than the circumstances which necessitate
it. There is no fear that co-operation will spread faster than the
co-operators jimprovej. It is not an easy thing. It is certain there
will be, for many generations a great scope for labour in common way of
wages. It is only in proportion as the lower grades rise to the level of
the higher classes—it is only in proportion as that great change takes
place, that the advantages of co-operation will be individually felt;
and persons will become ashamed of not taking their due share in the
work; and no difficulty whatever will be felt of obtaining capital to
co-operate with labour. This will be a new ennium, which it requires
but little knowledge to comprehend as entirely practical. We want, then,
the co-operation of all workers—such ought to be our object. We ought to
proceed towards this cautiously and tentatively, and never attempt to do
an act which we feel will not be recommended by right principle. We
ought to be content with steady persevering co-operation. I do not mean
that the industrial or commercial operations of co-operatives can or
ought to be carried on on some gigantic scale; for all such operations
as you contemplate are in their essence limited. That which can be
carried on from your side, must be necessarily small. The duty of all
such co-operative societies is first, that they should help one another,
that they should encourage those who have gone first, and shown the
others the way to go,—how to succeed, and the sort of success worth
having. (Cheers.) How to succeed will be learned by degrees.
Co-operators will learn by practice. It is not an easy thing: if it had
been, people would not have waited until this period for it. It cannot
advance further than the minds and morals of the people engaged in it
knor faster than honest and competent men and women can find howk to
manage its concerns. It cannot progress faster than the lability to
distinguish those who are trustworthy, and the willingness to trust them
when foundl. These are the points on which co-operators are most in
danger of failing—in the first place in not having competent and
trustworthy managers; and, in the next place, to have them and not to
know them. (Hear.) Then, what is the success to be kept in view! mBut
when this great improvement in the mind of the people has taken
place,—when all have become capable of co-operation, and most have
adopted it,—I believe that the Edition: current; Page: [9] owners of
property will be ashamed to be the only persons who do not take their
share in the useful work of the world, and will be willing to invest
their capital in co-operative societies, receiving a fair interest for
its use. This is the ennium towards which we should strive. I do not
mean that the industrial or commercial operations of particular
co-operative societies can or ought to be carried out upon some gigantic
scale. All that such societies as this can do, is in its nature limited.
But this co-operative societies can do—they can help one another. Those
who have succeeded can encourage and show the way to others; and they
can keep constantly in view both the way to succeed, and the sort of
success worth having. How to succeed will be learned by
degrees—co-operators will learn by practice.m I confess, if there were
no other object in view than that persons who are original members
should make themselves a little better off, I should not be addressing
you to-night. I should be glad of it. I should be rejoiced at any person
being improved in his position. This, however, is a small thing compared
with co-operation. What we ought to aim at is, not to enable a small
number of persons to rise, but all workers to share in the profits of
labour. It all depends upon keeping right principles in view. All
depends upon the disposition to put into practice the excellent
principles that Mr. Lloyd Jones has expounded.1 I believe there are many
co-operators who are fully imbued with these principles, and I believe
that the number is increasing. It is because I believe this n—and
therefore feel assured thatn co-operation will ultimately regenerate the
masses of the country, and through them society itself, that I have
ventured to address you this evening. (Loud cheering.)

[Following , the Rev. Henry Solly (a long-time friend of ’s
family) and George Jacob Holyoake spoke.]


3.: Corruption at Elections
 4 APRIL, 1864

In Frederick D. Maurice, Corruption at Elections (London: Faithful,
1864), pp. 14–16. Briefly noted in the Daily Telegraph, 5 April, 1864
(copied in the Beehive, 9 April, p. 2), and the Law Times, 16 April, p.
277. The Department of Jurisprudence and Amendment of the Law, a section
of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science, met at
its offices, 3 Waterloo Place, Edwin Chadwick (1800–91) in the Chair, to
consider the standing committee’s report on the paper by William Dougal
Christie (1816–74), which is included, with Chadwick’s speech, in the
pamphlet and was issued as Suggestions for an Organization for the
Restraint of Corruption at Elections (London: N.A.P.S.S., 1864).
Edition: current; Page: [10] After mention by G.W. Hastings of
registration in Ireland, letters were read in support of the report, and
then  spoke.

it is unnecessary here, though it might be necessary in some other
places, to insist upon the magnitude of the evil to which this report
relates. What is at stake is nothing less than the vitality of
representative government. If the majority or a preponderant portion of
the House of Commons represented only their own pockets, we should,
indeed, have what Mr. Disraeli called a Venetian Constitution,1 and that
in a very bad form. It would be a great mistake to suppose that we have
seen the worst of this evil. I am persuaded that we are only in the
beginning of it. When we consider the rapid growth of manufacture and
commerce, and the number of persons that are constantly becoming
wealthy, whose sole ambition is to obtain what wealth alone has not yet
given them, namely, position, we see what a rapidly increasing number of
persons there is to whom it is worth any money to acquire the only thing
purchaseable by money, which will give them the grand object of their
desire. I have been told by one who has filled a distinguished position
in Australia2 that there were within his knowledge five or six persons,
Australians, who were only waiting for a general election to offer
themselves to English constituencies, with the object I have mentioned.
I mean nothing uncomplimentary to Australians. I believe them to be a
very intelligent community. But the instance suggests the class of
persons who make this evil an increasing one—the vulgar rich, to whom it
is worth while to spend any amount of money for the sake of station in
society. Persons of established position are often wishing to spend
money corruptly, but there is a limit to the amount they will spend.
They can gain comparatively little in importance by lavish expenditure.
Their position is made, and they may even impair instead of advancing it
if they spend too lavishly. But to a person of the other kind a seat in
Parliament may be worth half his fortune. Now I think the Society must
feel that, saving exceptions (admirable exceptions there are sure to
be,) this class of persons, whether they act the part of flunkies,
crouching at the feet of the aristocracy, or of envious demagogues
anxious to bring them down, or, as will often be the case, are ready to
turn from either of these parts to the other, according to convenience,
are about the most undesirable and the most dangerous class of persons
who can obtain admission to Parliament. It may be thought that the only
evils to be apprehended from them are those of what may be called
plutocracy; but, in reality, we should Edition: current; Page: [11] have
those of democracy too, for if the costliness of elections limited the
choice to such men, the electors, finding no one to vote for whom they
could trust to act according to his own judgment and conscience, if they
themselves have any regard to their own particular opinions, will bind
them strictly by pledges to abide by subjects which the electors care
about. The House of Commons would be an assembly of delegates, while on
other subjects the member would vote according to his own interests or
caprice, or according to the questions in which he desired to curry
favour. Now as to the remedying of this, I am not one of those who think
that legal means would necessarily be insufficient. I think there are
legal measures which could be made effectual, but only if backed by a
moral demonstration of a sufficient number of honest men, who would
league themselves together against the political crime, expressly or
virtually pledging themselves both to abstain from it personally, and to
use all their influence to prevent it. They would probably be able to
obtain from the Legislature any such enactments as may be desirable,
while they would supply the only powers which could enable those
enactments to be enforced. Great credit is due to Mr. Christie for
having, as it seems to me, “hit the right nail on the head.” As to the
persons who should take this in hand, I think there is none so fit as
this Society. aNo individual, and no self-elected committee could
address themselves to the leaders of parties, and to influential
politicians throughout the country, nor would they be listened to if
they did. But this Association, not to mention the larger society of
which it now forms a part, could address itself to anyone.a

[ concluded by moving the reception and adoption of the report; the
motion was seconded by Frederick Hill, and adopted after discussion. A
report on Walter Crofton’s paper on the convict question was read,
received, and adopted, and the meeting adjourned.]


4.: Hare’s Plan for the Metropolis
 10 APRIL, 1865

Morning Star, 11 April, 1865, p. 3. Headed: “Corrupt and Pernicious
Influences at Elections.” Also reported in summary form on 11 April in
the Daily News, and The Times, and (apparently copied from the Morning
Star) in The National Reformer, 16 April, pp. 250–1. The well-attended
evening meeting, with many women members present, of the National
Association for the Promotion of Social Science and the Society for
Promoting the Amendment of the Law was held in the Rooms, Adam Street,
Adelphi, with Lord Stanley in the Chair. The principal speaker was
Thomas Hare (1806–91), author of A Treatise on the Election of
Representatives, Parliamentary and Municipal (London: Longman, et al.,
Edition: current; Page: [12] 1859), which had a profound effect on 
(see Autobiography, CW, I, 262–3). Hare read his paper, “On such an
organisation of the metropolitan elections as would call into exercise
the knowledge and judgment of the constituencies, and as far as possible
discourage all corrupt and pernicious influences” (The Times, 11 Apr.,
p. 10). In the ensuing discussion seven members spoke before .

mr. j. stuart  dilated at much length on the details of the plan
submitted by Mr. Hare, and pointed out that the objections raised to it
were caused by a misapprehension on the part of those who, either
through a want of interest in the matter or a determination to adhere to
the present state of things, neglected to pay sufficient attention, so
as to properly understand it. aIt seemed to him that the plan proposed
was as simple as possible, easy to be understood, and if given a trial
would be found to be effectual and salutary in its results. Mr. 
then referred in caustic terms to the manner in which contending parties
under the present system get themselves represented, dwelling
particularly on the part the great clubs play during election times.a
bFor instance, he remarked that no sooner a vacancy for a Liberal or
Conservative candidate occurred than some one went down from a club with
3,000l. or 4,000l. at his back, saying, “I am a Liberal,” “I am a
Conservative,” as the case might be.b But by the plan proposed by Mr.
Hare this system would be checked. cBoobies would no longer be able to
go down to constituencies with any chance of success; and besides,
public interest would be elicited to a far greater extent than at
present.c dHe referred to the injustice of the existing system, in
leaving the minority, say 19,000 out of 40,000—the election being
carried by 21,000—practically unrepresented.d He considered the
proposition of Mr. Hare both feasible and just, and he trusted the
discussion that evening, and a little better understanding of the plan
submitted, would have the effect of gaining for it that public support
it so well deserved, and that the result would be that it would at all
events get a fair trial. eThis evil would be remedied by the Edition:
current; Page: [13] proposed plan, which, in answer to the objection
that it was complex and impracticable, he said was much more simple than
the multiplication table, and might be easily understood by anyone who
took the trouble to examine it fairly. Mr. Hare’s plan, he knew, was
anxiously thought of by some of the leaders of the working classes, and
he should not be surprised if, before long, it became part of their
political programme. He claimed for it the merit of giving ascendancy to
none and justice to all.e He considered that the metropolitan
constituencies offered a good field for the purpose of trying the
experiment, and he urged the desirability of doing so.

[After discussion, Hare replied. A motion of thanks to Hare, calling for
his paper to be printed and circulated to members, was passed, and the
meeting concluded with a vote of thanks to the Chair.]


5.: The Westminster Election of 1865 [1]
 3 JULY, 1865

Daily Telegraph, 4 July, 1865, p. 3. Headed: “Election Intelligence. /
Westminster.” The evening meeting was called by ’s general committee
in one of the large rooms of St. James’s Hall. This was ’s first
speech on his return to England to stand for election, and, as he
indicates, it was impromptu; he had prepared for a speech on the 5th
(see No. 6). This occasion clearly involved a surprise: “although it was
only what was termed a meeting of the general committee, it was to all
intents and purposes an open meeting, between 300 and 400 gentlemen
being present” (Daily News). There “were present on the platform most of
the leading Reformers not only of the city of Westminster but of the
metropolis at large.” Though many were present “who formed no part of
the body invited to meet Mr. , . . . the proceedings throughout were
undisturbed” (The Times). “The chair was taken at eight o’clock by Dr.
Brewer [William Brewer (d. 1881), a prominent physician and medical
writer, a consistent supporter of ], who introduced Mr.  in a
highly eulogistic speech.” Then , who “was received with great
cheering,” spoke.

gentlemen, I can most sincerely say that our excellent chairman has not
in the slightest degree exaggerated anything in what he has said
respecting my want of preparation for a speech to-night. I did not at
all expect that I should be called upon to make an address. I understood
there was a day appointed when I should make a speech and express my
sentiments as far as you desire to hear them. I thought that I should
only be expected to meet you to-night as friends, and for the purpose of
joining in friendly conversation—(hear, hear)—and thus have the
opportunity of giving any explanation that you might wish respecting my
political views—upon points which I have not sufficiently made known, or
may not have sufficiently explained. For this, I was ready, but I was
not in the least aware of the public character of this meeting
(referring to the reporters). Therefore, I hope you will, Edition:
current; Page: [14] in consideration of my want of experience in such
cases, excuse the imperfections which must necessarily arise from my
want of preparation. (Applause.) Let me begin by saying, that if our
chairman has not made any exaggeration in that respect, I am afraid that
he has in many others, for I do not know how it will be possible that I
should fulfil all that he has said respecting me, in case I have the
honour of being elected your representative. I say it will be difficult
for me to fulfil the high expectations which must have been
raised—(no)—by the friendly and favourable opinions which have been
uttered respecting me throughout the whole of this election—friendly and
favourable opinions, too, from quarters whence I could little expect
them. The mere fact of the number of distinguished persons who have
consented to have their names placed on my committee is a matter for
which personally I cannot possibly be too thankful. It is a most
distinguished honour itself, besides the fact of having been selected by
such a body, as a candidate for the important post of representing
Westminster, perhaps the most important seat in the whole House of
Commons. (Hear, hear.) A higher honour than this can scarcely be
conceived. But, though one of the highest, it ought not to be considered
as a favour. (Applause.) If it be considered as a favour I have no right
to ask ita, and the electors would have no right to confer ita. It is
not a favour; it is an onerous duty which you are anxious to impose upon
me, and which I cannot but feel flattered to the highest degree at being
thought worthy and capable of properly holding. (Cheers.) If I should
receive your support and be elected to the House of Commons, I feel that
I must fall below your expectations. (Loud cries of No, no.)
Notwithstanding the utmost exertions which I could make, I feel that I
must necessarily remain behind. (Renewed cries of No, no.) One thing I
will say, no one can feel stronger than I do the importance of that part
in the contest which has nothing to do with me individually—and that is
purity of election. (Cheers.) I am obliged to say that you give me too
much honour when you bestow on me the glory of that. If you are
victorious, the praise will not be mine, the praise will be wholly
yours. (No.) It is all very well for me to say how desirable are these
things, but you have to accomplish them, therefore to you will be the
credit. You have to maintain the fight to elect me on what you suppose
are my qualifications, and which are my only recommendation. I am a
person almost entirely unknown to you except through my writings. You
have not only undertaken to elect a person on these grounds, but you
have also undertaken to do it and bear all those expenses—ordinary
expenses—which ought never to be borne by the candidate. (Great
applause.) For those charges which are legitimate ought to be borne by
the public or the municipal body—(hear, hear)—and those which are
illegitimate ought never to be incurred at all. (Cheers.) You have
undertaken to abstain from the illegitimate expenses, and to bear the
burden of the legitimate. (Yes, and cheerfully.) This you have
performed, and not only so, but you have done it Edition: current; Page:
[15] having to bear up against a candidature which is conducted on
opposite principles1—a candidature conducted on principles of the most
lavish expenditure. (Hear, hear, and cheers.) And neither is this all,
for you have not only to contend against this, but you have to evoke a
spirit in the constituency which shall rise superior to those opposite
principles, and to a level with those which you have adopted. (Hear,
hear.) Therefore the praise will be yours. It is easy for me to say that
I will use no illegitimate or even bwhat were usually consideredb
legitimate means. Yours will be the deserved credit. I do not think that
it is right a candidate should make any other pledge than a complete
sincerity cand that he ought not to canvass the electorsc. (Hear, hear.)
It costs me nothing to say this, but it costs you much, for it is you
who have to bear the burden. (Cheers.) Whatever honour I may receive, it
will be you who have gained it for me. I cannot help thanking the worthy
chairman for having paid the tribute he has done to one to whom in my
early life I owe everything—to my father (applause)—a man who has done
more, infinitely more, for the public cause than I can ever do; because
he lived in times when there were few to do it—when the fact of being
Liberal—Liberalism which was worth anything—stood most seriously in the
way of a man’s advancement in life, and especially of men who had their
bread to gain.2 He had to win his bread by his pen, and had to do this
at a time when his opinions were such as necessarily to produce not only
the ill-favour of the chiefs and recognised leaders of political
parties, but to compromise him with all the powerful classes of this
country. I say he did this at a time when there were very few to favour
or praise him. Nothing that I can do will compare with this—it will not
have a tenth, a hundredth, a thousandth part of the merit which belongs
to those who went before me. To him I am indebted for everything which
has made me at all capable of following in his footsteps. As it is, I
may say, if there is a time when a person may be allowed to speak of
himself, it is on such an occasion as this. I may perhaps say something
which may make you better satisfied with me, when I affirm that I have
sat by the cradle of all the great political reforms of this and the
last generation; and I have not only sat by the cradle of these reforms,
but before I was out of my teens I was up and stirring, and writing
about them. (Hear.) I have stood by these reforms, which now count
followers by ions when their followers did not count tens of
thousands, nay, not thousands, nor hundreds. (Cheers.) When they only
counted tens I was Edition: current; Page: [16] amongst them. Nay, I may
say, when their followers only counted units—when that which is now the
universally received principle respecting the government of our colonies
was not always so. I can recollect the time when there were two men
amongst the active political writers of this country who recognised
it—two men, Mr. Roebuck and myself.3 (Great cheering.) I can remember
another thing which many of you may—which, indeed, you must have
heard—the Wakefield doctrine for finding funds for supplying the
population of the colonies.4 The Wakefield principle is to put a price
on uncultivated land, and employ the proceeds in paying the expenses of
immigrationd, which would prevent them from settling down as Irish
cottiersd; the price, at the same time, being an obstacle to the too
great dispersion of the inhabitants. That was in 1831, when there were
three persons who held that—Mr. Wakefield, the inventor or discoverer,
myself, and one other.5 And we so worked the principle that in four
years a new colony, South Australia, was founded on the principle.
(Cheers.) eIn a few years afterwards it was a principle which was very
greatly extended over all our Australian Colonies. From that date, long
before the discovery of the gold mines, these colonies entered upon a
career of prosperity which has continued, and those colonies now
constitute one of the most splendid offshoots of the English people.e
(Cheers.) I have said this for the purpose of showing I have never been
one of those who have left difficult things for others. (Cheers.) I have
never been one of those who have left things alone when they have been
an uphill fight, but I have left them when the fight was no longer
difficult. When the thing was prosperous I have left it for a time, and
have said, “This matter no longer requires me,” and I have therefore
transferred my services to those who did. (Loud cheers.) I have left
that prosperous thing, and have turned to something else—to something
that was still a crotchet, still an abstraction, still something that no
practical person would battle with. (Hear, hear.) For I have been
accustomed even in my life—and all history confirms the same thing—I
have been accustomed to see that the crotchet of Edition: current; Page:
[17] to-day, the crotchet of one generation, becomes the truth of the
next and the truism of the one after. (Cheers.) I have lived long enough
to see the three steps of this process taking place with a number of my
opinions. I have told you a number of my crotchets now, and perhaps they
will be truisms by-and-by. (Hear, hear.) I think, gentlemen, as all of
you have consented to be members of my committee, I may take it for
granted that you have a sufficient general idea of my political opinions
for you to be aware what course I should take if you do me the honour of
electing me. (We will.) But if there is anything respecting which you
wish to know more, or anything upon which you would wish further
explanation, and to ask my sentiments, here I am to answer. (Hear,
hear.) Coming, as I said, unprepared, I have stated that which came
uppermost in my mind. It rests with you upon what other topic I shall
speak. If any of you will do me the honour of putting any question, I
will endeavour to answer it. (Cheers.)

Mr. Probyn said that a rumour had been circulated by the Conservatives
that Mr.  did not intend to go to the poll. fThis was utterly false;
for not only did they intend to go to the poll, but they believed by
next Tuesday night that Mr.  would be one of the members for
Westminster. (Cheers.)f He would simply venture to mention the American
question as one upon which he would wish to ask Mr.  to give them
some little explanation—viz., with respect to the doctrine of
non-intervention. He read a paper of Mr. ’s, which in 1857 was
published in Fraser’s Magazine, and which well pleased him.6 Its
doctrine was that we as a country ought not to intervene in the
domestic, in the purely internal events which occurred in any particular
country, whatever our sympathies might be; but this did not preclude our
interfering in the affairs of the continent when any one power or any
two by their attitude or acts jeopardised a third power, and which might
be a free power. In that case we ought to interfere for the sake of
freedom, and in so doing we did not contravene the real doctrine of
non-intervention.

Mr.  said that this was a correct quotation from his writings. gHe
did not think it was possible for a nation more than an individual to
say that if it should cost anything, it would not help people who were
struggling in a good cause. He thought intervention was generally wrong,
not on account of the nation interfering, but of the nation with which
it interfered. He thought every nation was the best judge of its own
affairs.g (Cheers.)

Professor Masson strongly advocated the claims of Mr. .

Edition: current; Page: [18]
A gentleman in the body of the room asked the honourable candidate’s
views respecting Church and State and the Maynooth grant.7

Mr.  said that as he had said before he would not give a pledge; but
this would not prevent him from stating what was his sincere opinion.
His sincere opinion was that it was best that Church and State should be
perfectly distinct. He was against all connection between Church and
State. As things stood, he did not think this was a practicable object.
hHe thought their object should be to exercise all the influence the
State had over the Church, to improve its spirit.h He thought most
present would agree with him that the State was considerably more
Liberal than the Church. (Cheers.) iThere had been occasions on which
the State had tended to corrupt the Church, but at present matters stood
the other way.i He had a great opinion that at present those who held
the most liberal sentiments—and by liberal he did not mean lax, but who
took the most Christian view of religion—had a much greater chance of
being in the highest places of the Church than if the Church were
separated from the State. Respecting the Maynooth grant, he should be
quite ready to discontinue it as soon as no State endowment was granted
to any other religion. (Hear, hear.) As long as there was, and
especially that jutterly condemnablej body, the Irish Church
Establishment—(hear, hear)—he should think it a very great shame to take
away from the religion of the body of the people the small pittance
which they were allowed. (Applause.)

kNo resolutions were moved, and the proceedings concluded by the
announcement of a series of meetings which Mr.  would attend.k8


6.: The Westminster Election of 1865 [2]
 5 JULY, 1865

Morning Star, 6 July, 1865, p. 2. Headed: “Election Intelligence. /
Meeting of Mr. J.S.  with the Electors of Westminster.” The speech
exists in a shorter version in manuscript (-Taylor Collection,
printed in Appendix D), and was reported fully on 6 July also in the
Daily Telegraph, the Daily News, and The Times (the last in the third
person). The meeting was held in St. James’s Hall in the evening. “A
considerable time before the hour for the commencement of the meeting
the hall was crowded to excess by an audience, a large portion of whom
seemed to be electors. The meeting displayed a feature not common
Edition: current; Page: [19] at election assemblies. Both side galleries
were occupied by ladies, who appeared to take a warm interest in the
proceedings.” (Morning Star.) Edwin Lankester (1814–74), surgeon,
coroner for central Middlesex, and professor of natural history, long
known to , was in the Chair. He said “it gave him great pleasure in
introducing Mr. John Stuart  as a candidate for the suffrages of the
electors of the ancient city of Westminster. (Cheers.) Mr.  was not
unknown to them by name: he was not unknown to the people of England by
reputation. (Hear.) He was known wherever the interests of humanity lay
deep in the hearts of men, wherever progress and civilisation formed an
element in the thoughts of men. (Hear, hear.)” (Morning Star.) “They saw
before them the great philosopher of the day, and he should have been
still better pleased if they could have elected him without seeing him”
(Daily News). “They would find that Mr.  was not an advocate of
chimerical theories as had been represented, but a man of large and
practical views. He was a great politician and a great practical
philosopher, [“and though some of his ideas were termed crotchets, they
would turn out to be the seed from which they would hereafter have
abundant results” (Daily News)]; and he trusted they would not from any
imaginary difference of religious views push him from the pedestal on
which he now stood. (Cheers.). The opposition to Mr.  on account of
his religious opinions was disgraceful to Westminster. (Loud and
prolonged cheers.)” He mentioned the “great religious teachers of the
day”: Charles Kingsley (1819–75), Anglican priest and author; Frederick
Denison Maurice (1805–72), also priest and author, an acquaintance of
’s since the 1820s; Connop Thirlwall (1797–1875), historian and
Bishop of St. David’s since 1840, also known to  since the 1820s;
and Arthur Penrhyn Stanley (1815–81), author and professor of
ecclesiastical history at Oxford, Dean of Westminster since 1864: all
had publicly expressed support for ’s candidature, in the face of
his anti-Church attitudes. Those men, Lankester said, “had perfect
confidence in his opinions; and he hoped therefore that they would away
with the wickedness and uncharitableness which sought to reject Mr. 
on account of his religious views. (Loud cheers.)” (Morning Star.) “Mr.
, on rising to address the meeting, was received with the utmost
enthusiasm. The people rose en masse, and waved their hats and cheered,
and again and again renewed the cheers. When silence was restored” (The
Times),  spoke.

ladies and gentlemen, it is probable that many persons present desire
that I should explain why I have hitherto abstained from all the
ordinary practices of candidates, and from appearing at public meetings
of the electors. My reasons for doing so have been stated in the letter
in which I consented to be made a candidate;1 but that is no reason why
I should not repeat them here. When I stated in my letter that for my
own sake I should not desire to sit in Parliament, I meant what I said.
I have no personal objects to be promoted by it. It is a great sacrifice
of my personal tastes and pursuits, and of that liberty which I value
the more because I have only recently acquired it after a life spent in
the restraints and confinements of a public office; for, as you may not
perhaps know it, and as many people think that a writer of books, like
myself, cannot possibly have any practical knowledge of business, it is
a fact that I have passed amany hours of every day fora thirty-five
years in the Edition: current; Page: [20] actual business of
government.2 These personal considerations I have cast
aside—(cheers)—but there is one thing which it is not so easy to cast
aside—a rooted dislike to the mode in which the suffrages of electors
are ordinarily sought. To be selected by a great community as the
representative of what is highest in their minds, their consciences, and
their understanding—of their sincere convictions and their patriotic
sentiments—is one of the highest honours which it is possible for the
citizen of a free country to receive. (Hear, hear.) But to be sent into
Parliament as representative of that part of the electors whose minds
are to be got at by money—who are to be reached by trickery—by saying
one thing and meaning another—by making professions which are not
intended to be acted upon, and which being contrary to one’s own
convictions it would be a greater breach of morality to keep than to
violate—that I regard not as an honour but as a disgrace. (Cheers.)
Therefore, when a body of this great constituency did me the honour to
make the most unexpected and flattering proposal of presenting me as a
candidate for your suffrages, I answered that I should not be willing to
spend £10,000 in corrupting and debauchingb the constituents who are
debauchable and corruptible; that neither would I give any pledge except
the single pledge to be always open and above board (loud cheers); and
that neither would I solicit your votes. I hold the whole system of
personal solicitation to be a mistake. Not that I would condemn those
who merely have conformed to a bad custom, and have done nothing to make
that custom worse than they found it. A seat in Parliament ought not to
be a matter of solicitation, because it cannot be a matter of favour. I
have no right to ask it as a favour; you have no right to grant itc. You
have no right but to select the man who appears to you to be fittest.
That was my answer, and to the honour of Westminster—I may say that
much, though I am a party concerned—a body of men were found who were
sufficiently alive to what is due to public principle, who were
sufficiently solicitous for their own honour, and for the honour of this
constituency, to say dthat not the man who did those things, but the man
who would not do them, was the man of their choice. (Cheers.) It
remained to be seen if the electors of Westminster thought so too.
(Cheers.)d That, gentlemen, is the way in which I became a candidate,
and it would have been quite inconsistent with a candidature grounded on
these considerations to have gone about amongst you and asked for your
votese. (Hear, hear.) My principle is that you are bound to elect the
fittest man. Would it have been decent in me to have gone among you and
said, “I am the fittest man”? (Hear, hear.) What would have been thought
of the candidate who said, “It is your duty to elect a man of merit;
here am I, elect Edition: current; Page: [21] me.” (A laugh and cheers.)
Gentlemen, I am not here because I proposed myself; I am here because I
am proposed by others. I hope you don’t suppose that I think all the
fine things true about me which have been said and written with so much
exaggeration, but with a depth and strength of kind feeling towards
myself, for which I never can be sufficiently grateful, by numbers of
persons almost all personally unknown to me. I know that you will excuse
fthese strong encomiumsf, knowing how much a man is liable to be
overpraised, as well as unjustly attacked, at a contested election.
(Hear, hear.)

Perhaps you may ask, since for those reasons I have during all these
weeks not come among you, why I come now. I come for two reasons. I was
told by those who had good means of judging that many of you desired to
know more of me than you have been able to collect from what I have
written. Such a statement as that left me no option, for you have a
right to know my opinions and to have an opportunity of judging for
yourself what man you are to select. Whatever you think right to ask
concerning my political opinions it is my duty to tell you, I stand
pledged to answer you—and it is the only pledge I will give—not only
truly, but with perfect openness. (Cheers.) It would have been as easy
for me, as it is for many others, to have put forth a plausible
profession of political faith. It need not have been one of those
wishy-washy, meaningless, and colourless addresses—(cheers)—of which the
papers are now so full, and which a Tory, Whig and Radical might equally
have signed—which bind them to nothing, and which are consistent with
almost any vote that they can give. (Cheers.) I need not have been
reduced to such an extremity. (Hear, hear.) I might have made out a long
gbona fideg list of political questions on which I have the high
satisfaction of believing that I entirely agree with you. I might have
passed gently over all subjects of possible difference and observed a
discreet silence about any opinion that might possibly have startled
anybody. (Laughter and cheers.)h I did the very reverse. I put forth no
address, but instead I undertook that whatever questions you put to me
concerning my political opinions I would answer fully. (Hear, hear.) The
questions that you did put to me I answered with a degree of unreserve
which has been a sort of scandal in the electioneering world. (A laugh
and cheers.) What compelled me to say anything about women’s votes or
the representation of minorities? Is it likely that any one would have
questioned me upon those points? Not one of you probably would, but you
asked what my opinions on Reform were, and being asked, I did not think
it consistent with plain dealing to keep back any of them. (Cheers.) I
dare say I lowered myself prodigiously in the eyes of those persons who
think that the cleverest thing in a candidate is to dissemble, to
finesse, and to commit himself to nothing if he can possibly help it.
“How injudicious!” said one; “How impractical!” said another; “How can
he possibly expect to be elected on such a Edition: current; Page: [22]
programme?” thought even sincere friends. In answer to all that I beg
them to consider—1st, that perhaps if I had the choice I would rather be
honest than be elected—(loud cheers, which continued for several
minutes); and 2nd, that perhaps the electors of Westminster have a taste
for honesty and may think that man who deals honestly with them before
he is elected is the more likely person to deal honestly with them after
he is elected. (Renewed cheers.) Of one thing I am sure—thati, even
though a man should lose his election by it,i the most practical thing
in the world is honestyj, and perhaps they would live to learn this
lessonj. (Hear, hear.)

I suppose you would hardly expect me to travel over a whole catalogue of
political questions, and tell you things which you know quite as well as
I do. kIt would be better that I should answer questions afterwards, and
give you any explanations that you may desire on particular points. What
I will do now is to attempt to give you an idea of the general tendency
of my opinions.k I am here as the candidate of advanced
Liberalism—(cheers)—and I should like to tell you what in my estimation
these words mean. Mr. Gladstone (cheers) in one of those memorable
speeches which have made every sincere reformer look to him as our
future Parliamentary leader—(cheers)—has given us a definition of the
difference between Tory and Liberal. He has said that Liberalism is
trust in the people, limited only by prudence; that Toryism is distrust
of the people, limited only by fear. (Cheers.)3 That is a distinction
which in one of its aspects is a most important one; but there is a
still larger view that may be taken of the difference. A Liberal is he
who looks forward for his principles of government; a Tory looks
backward, (Cheers.) A Tory is of opinion that the real model of
government lies somewhere behind us in the region of the past, from
which we are departing further and further. Toryism means the subjection
and dependence of the great mass of the community in temporal matters
upon the hereditary possessors of wealth, and in spiritual matters to
the Church, and therefore it is opposed lto the last moment,l to
everything which could lead us further away from this model. When beaten
the Tory may accept defeat by a necessity of the age, but he still
hankers after the past, and still thinks that good government means the
restoration in some shape mor otherm of the feudal principle—(hear,
hear)—and continues to oppose all further Edition: current; Page: [23]
progress in a new direction. The Liberal is something very different
from this. nThe probability is,n that we have not yet arrived at the
perfect model of government—that it lies before us and not behind
us—that we are too far from it to be able to see it distinctly except in
outline, but that we can see very clearly in what direction it lies—not
in the direction of some new form of dependence, but in the emancipation
of the dependent classes—more freedom, more equality, and more
responsibility of each person for himself. (Loud cheers.) That,
gentlemen, is the first article of my political creed. Now for the
second. Believing as I do that osociety ando political institutions are,
or ought to be, in a state of progressive advance; that it is the very
nature of progress to lead us to recognise as truths what we do not as
yet see to be truths; believing also that pby diligent study, by
attention to the past, by constant application,p it is possible to see a
certain distance before us, and to be able to distinguish beforehand
some of these truths of the future, and to assist others to see them—I
certainly think there are truths which qthe time has now arrived forq
proclaiming, although the time may not yet have arrived for carrying
them into effect. (Cheers.) That is what I mean by radvancedr
Liberalism. sBut does it follow that, because a man sees something of
the future, he is incapable of judging of the past? Does it follow that,
because a man thinks of to-morrow, he knows nothing of to-day?s That is
what the dunces will tell you. (Cheers and laughter.) I venture to
reverse the proposition. The only persons who can judge for the
present—who can judge for the day truly and safely—are those who include
to-morrow in their deliberations. tWe can see the direction in which
things are tending, and which of those tendencies we are to encourage
and which to resist. That is a policy to which we look for all the
greater good of the future.t But while I would refuse to suppress one
iota of the opinions I consider best, I confess I would not object to
accept any reasonable compromise which would give me even a little of
that of which I hope in time to obtain the whole. (Cheers.)

Edition: current; Page: [24]
There is one more topic upon which I have something to say. I have told
you one reason why I have now come amongst you. There is another. The
contest has changed its character. It uno longer relates to me
personallyu. What you are called upon to decide is not whether you
prefer me to somebody else: it is whether the representation of
Westminster, up to this time the most honourable seat in the House of
Commons, is to continue hereafter, as it has been heretofore, to be
obtained by the honest choice of the constituents, or is to be had for
money? (Cheers.) The very fact that such a question can be put—much more
that there should be a doubt as to the result—is enough to fill with
shame any inhabitant of Westminster who knows the ancient reputation of
his city. (Cheers.) vWev Reformers have been accustomed to demand that
the great landed nobility and gentry should no longer have it in their
power to hoist their sons and protégés into Parliament over the heads of
the constituents, passing over their minds, and addressing themselves
either to their personal interests or to their hereditary subserviency.
wWe object to this, and with reasonw; but what shall we gain, what will
it profit us, to weaken aristocratic ascendancy if seats in Parliament
are to be put up to auction? (Hear, hear.) What is it but putting them
up to auction if they are to be knocked down to the man xwith the
longest purse, and who is willing to spend his moneyx? (Cheers.) Of all
the political nuisances of the day this is one which it most behoves
everyone to make a stand against, because it is the only one which is
increasing while almost all the others are rapidly diminishing. The
great facilities for money-getting which arise from the unexampled
prosperity of the country are raising up a crowd of persons who have
made large fortunes or whose fathers have made large fortunes for
them—(laughter)—and whose main object in life is by means of these
fortunes to purchase position—that is to say, admission into the society
of persons of higher rank than themselves. In this country there is only
one way in which that can be done by money, and that is by getting a
seat in Parliament: Was it for this purpose that the House of Commons
was instituted? (Cheers.) I am the very last person to say anything
disparaging of the class of persons I am speaking of and to assert that
they have no business in Parliament. Many of them have strong claimsy,
by their knowledge and abilities,y to a seat in the House of Commons,
and are an element which it could ill spare. (Hear, hear.) But the
mischief is that it is precisely those who have the least chance of
getting elected on their own merits zwho have no chance of getting into
good society by Edition: current; Page: [25] their talents, their
education, and their breeding. It is exactly those personsz who are
under the strongest temptation to employ the only other means open to
them—viz., a lavish expenditure of money, in corrupting the electors—I
say corrupting, not meaning necessarily a violation of the law. There is
a great deal of corruption which is not technically bribery. (Hear,
hear.) aIt makes no difference if a working man is paid for his vote or
paid for putting a placard in his window.a Everyone who gets into
Parliament by such means as these—by opening the public-houses—goes
there to represent the vices of the constituency. (Cheers.) It is vain
to hope that men will be shamed out of these things as long as they are
not cut in societyb. But if you cannot prevent them from doing these
things you can prevent them from succeeding. (Cheers.) The experiment is
being tried upon you. A strong effort is being made to bring in a Tory
candidate by an expenditure of money more profuse than a Tory ever
attempted in this city. (Cheers.) It is tolerably well known that the
majority of the electors of Westminster are not Tories—(a laugh)—and it
is not uncharitable to suppose that the supporters of the Tory candidate
rested their hopes upon money. If they thought that you had turned
Conservative, that you had had enough of Reform, that constitutional
improvements had gone far enough, and that it was now time to stop—(a
laugh)—they would have selected for the distinction of representing this
city one of their eminent men—one of the men who are an honour to their
party—such a man as Lord Stanley.4 (Cheers.) When, instead of the man of
the greatest merit they offer you a man who is willing to spend most
profusely, they show plainly in what it is that they put their trust.
(Cheers.)

Will you let them succeed? (Cries of No, no.) It is no exaggeration to
say that all eyes are upon you. Every friend of freedom and purity of
election in the country is looking to you with anxious feelings. There
is another class of persons who are also looking at you, and they are
thosec—and there are many of them—c who cultivate contempt of the
people. All these are watching you, and hoping to find you worthy of
their contempt. They are chuckling in the hope of succeeding in the
attempt to debauch you. They say dthat it is not in you to elect any man
except he is willing to spend his money, thatd you have no public
virtue, and that public Edition: current; Page: [26] virtue is not to be
expected from such people as you are. They are waiting eagerly and
anxiously for you to justify their opinion. I hope you will disappoint
them. (Cheers.) If you elect me and I should turn out a total failure—if
I disappointed every expectation—you would have nothing to be ashamed
of. You would have acted an honest part and done that which at the time
seemed to be best for the public good. Can the same thing be said if you
return the candidate of a party against which for a century past
Westminster has in the most emphatic manner protested, for his money? If
this great constituency should so degrade itself it will not only be the
deepest mortification to all who put faith in popular institutions, but
Westminster will have fallen from her glory, and she can never hold her
head as high as she has done, because the progress of popular
institutions, which cannot possibly be stopped, will have to go on ein
futuree without her. (Mr.  resumed his seat amid loud and prolonged
cheers.)

fMr. Harrow (a non-elector) asked what were Mr. ’s views with
respect to marriage with a deceased wife’s sister.5 (Great laughter and
cries of Oh, and Hear, hear.)f

Mr.  said he ghad not considered the outs and ins of the question of
marriage with a deceased wife’s sisterg, but as he did not see any
hconclusiveh reason why such marriages should not be permitted, he would
vote for freedom in the matter. (Cheers.)

[In reply to Mr. Morrison, an elector of the City of London] Mr. 
said he would do away with the Irish Church, root and branch. (Cheers.)

[An elector, Mr. Whitely, asked if  was in favour of the Permissive
Bill.]6

iMr.  replied that this was a question on which it was painful for
him to Edition: current; Page: [27] touch, because the answer which he
was conscientiously compelled to give was one contrary to the opinions
of persons for whom he had a sincere respect and sympathy. (Hear, hear.)
He agreed thoroughly with the teetotallers and the temperance leagues in
the objects they had in view, because he believed that the prevalence of
drunkenness was one of the greatest obstacles to real national progress.
(Cheers.) But for all that he could not say that because some persons
abused the liberty now given to use intoxicating liquors, others should
be deprived of the power of using them temperately. The Permissive Bill
gave the power to the majority to coerce the minority in that respect,
and therefore he could not assent to such a measure. (Cheers.) He
trusted to improved education to render all such coercive legislation
unnecessary. (Cheers.)

Mr. Whitely—I am perfectly satisfied. (Cheers.)i

In reply to other questions,

Mr.  said he was jnot opposed toj capital punishment in extreme
cases—in cases where murder was aggravated by brutalityk—because,
although death by hanging was less painful than death in bed, and was
more merciful than imprisonment for life, it had a more deterrent effect
on the imaginationk. He was in favour of the opening of the British
Museum and similar institutions on Sundays, under proper regulations.

Mr. Malleson then moved a resolution declaring Mr.  a fit and proper
person to represent Westminster, and pledging the meeting to make every
effort to secure his return. (Cheers.) He announced, amid loud cheers,
that the split in the Liberal party was likely, he might say certainly,
to be removed, and hoped that the great Liberal party would vote for
 and Grosvenor.

[The resolution was supported by Fawcett, Lord Stanley who “appealed to
the constituency of Westminster as the ‘aristocracy of democracy’ to set
a good example to the country at large by electing Mr. ,” Potter,
Montague Chambers, and Henry Vincent.]

lBefore the resolution was put, a lady in the body of the room obtained
permission to make a speech. Addressing the assemblage as “Gentlemen and
ladies,” she, in a vigorous and well-finished style of public speaking,
said she supposed it would be needless for her to tell them she was not
an elector of Westminster—(laughter)—but she had heard as a secret, and
as a woman was bound to tell it, that Mr.  was in favour of manhood
suffrage and womanhood suffrage. (Loud cheers and laughter.) It seemed
to her that the complaints against Mr.  on that account were not
complaints against vice, but against excess of Edition: current; Page:
[28] virtue. (Cheers.) The electors of Westminster had been called the
aristocracy of democracy. Let then their honour be on the side of
virtue. (Cheers.) It was said that men consulted their wives as to whom
they should vote for—(laughter, and a voice, That’s true)—and she had
heard that members of Parliament also who had wives asked them what
votes they should give. (Laughter and cheers.) It was a motto of the
ancient Spartans that a free man could never be the son of a bond woman.
That might be so; but wherever there was intellect, wherever there was
character, conscience, responsibility, there ought to be representation,
although the sex might be female. (Cheers.)

The lady’s remarks were attentively heard, but at this part of her
speech the Chairman, finding time was pressing, requested her to
postpone further observations until the resolution was put.l

[The resolution was carried unanimously, amidst long-continued cheers,
and the meeting ended with a vote of thanks to the Chair.]


7.: The Westminster Election of 1865 [3]
 6 JULY, 1865

Daily News, 7 July, 1865, p. 3. Headed: “Westminster.” Reported also in
the Daily Telegraph, 7 July. The evening meeting of the Westminster
electors was held in the Regent Music Hall, Regent Street, Vincent
Square, which “was densely crowded by an enthusiastic audience” (Daily
Telegraph). Thomas Hughes took the chair and, alluding to ’s great
practical qualifications, mentioned his advocacy of cooperation and
exhorted the electors to vote on Monday or Tuesday. Hughes being obliged
to leave the chair, Westerton took his place. , who was “received
with loud cheers, the assemblage rising and waving their hats” (Daily
Telegraph), then spoke.

he explained in almost precisely the same terms as he used at St.
James’s-hall1 the reasons that had induced him to come forward and to
meet the electors personally. He said that he accepted the office of
candidate on the condition that he should neither solicit nor buy votes.
There was an old saying, not altogether true, perhaps, that he who buys
will sell, and it was certainly not fair that a candidate who did not
intend to sell the votes should be called upon to buy them. This meeting
had been called for the purpose of giving what were termed the working
classes an opportunity of seeing him and asking him any questions. He
did not like the phrase “working classes,” because it implied the
existence of non-working classes, and nobody in this country had any
business to be idle. Indeed there was a growing feeling among those who
could afford to be idle that they ought to be Edition: current; Page:
[29] usefully employed. There was abundant scope for the spread of
education among the richer classes as well as among the working men. For
his part he never desired to be paid for being idle or for work which he
did not do. His sympathies were all with working people. (Cheers.) There
was a much greater distinction than there ought to be between those who
worked with their head and those who worked with their hands. It would
probably be better for the head workers if they worked a little more
with their hands; it would be better for their health, it would tend to
make them more cheerful, and it would lead to increased human fellow
feeling and public spirit. It was, perhaps, not generally known that he
was one of the first persons in the kingdom who had suggested the
adoption of the principles of co-operation in a practical shape. aFive
years before the Rochdale Pioneers society was established he wrote an
article in the Westminster Review,2 the object of which was to show the
radical party of the House of Commons, then almost on the eve of
dissolution, how it might be reconstructed and rendered more in unison
with the radicals out of doors.a At that time the radicals in the house
did not go for universal suffrage, while those out of doors demanded
nothing less, and his object in writing that article was to show the
radical party in the house that the best way of getting out of its
difficulty was to redress the practical grievances of the working
classes, and he then pointed out the fact that by the operation of the
then existing law co-operative societies could not be established; when
the law was altered,3 and co-operative societies were established, they
went on with surprising rapidity (hear, hear), and a way was soon found
by which the working classes could raise themselves without pulling down
anybody, but, on the contrary, with advantage, not only to themselves,
but the country at large. The principle of co-operative societies went
on extending itself, and the conviction of the truth of that principle
eventually became so strong that it found an advocate bof all other
places in the worldb in the pages of the Quarterly Review (oh).4 That
implied an immense change in public opinion; the working men were in
fact emancipated, and their cause was in their own hands. With respect
to the extension of the suffrage, he went much further in his views of
the concessions which he thought ought to be made to working men than
did even those who sympathised warmly with working men, although, on the
other hand, some might imagine that he had not gone far Edition:
current; Page: [30] enough. It could not be a perfect government cin
which one class of the community could legislate for another which was
not representedc, and he certainly agreed in the opinion that no man who
was competent to manage his own affairs ought to be without a vote. He
thought the House of Commons ought to be placed in the position of da
fair, just, and impartial umpire ord arbitrator between contending
interests, and that any mode which would secure the return of one-half
of the members who were devoted to the interests of the employed, the
other half representing landed property, capital and their sympathisers
would be in a position to reason justly on any grievance of the working
men. Class distinctions should be abolished were it possible to do so;
but so long as they existed they ought to be fairly represented in
parliament. He would not permit the employer class to be represented in
such a way as to be able to outvote the representatives of the employed,
while so far as the suffrage itself went, he thought it ought to be
given to all persons of age who could read, write, and cypher. eBut,
though he was prepared to give to every man and woman who was of age,
and capable of managing his or her affairs, a voice, he was not prepared
to give them such an equality that, whether they were right or wrong,
they should be able to outvote everybody else. (Hear, hear.)e fAlthough
he had suggested plans of his own to accomplish this,5 he was quite
ready to consider those of any other person. If he was returned to
Parliament, he would give his earnest attention to any reform measure
which might be proposed, and anything which would bring them nearer to
that which they wanted would receive his support, as a compromise; but
he would accept nothing which did not increase the influence of the
working classes, and give a great many more representatives in
Parliament. (Hear, hear.)f

gA person in the body of the hall put a question, quoting from a placard
by the Tories, to this effect: “ ‘The result of observation is borne out
by experience in England itself. As soon as any idea of equality enters
the mind of an uneducated English working man, his head is turned by it.
When he ceases to be servile he becomes insolent.’—’s Principles of
Political Economy, People’s Edition, p. 68.”6

Edition: current; Page: [31]
Mr.  said that he did not want uneducated men voters, and was in
favour of an educational test—reading, writing, and simple arithmetic.
If the suffrage were not to depend upon that, it would be universal. The
honourable candidate then highly praised the conduct of the Lancashire
operatives, and expressed his belief that it was owing to their
intelligence they knew the cause of their distress.7 This was mainly
owing to the cheap press. (Loud applause.) They had seen the discussions
respecting the subject, and that they owed to the cheap press. If they
had not learnt to read, they could not have benefited by the cheap
press, and the press now gave to any man, however humble his
circumstances, the means of acquiring the best information respecting
political knowledge, written by some of the most able men of the
country. (Cheers.) To men, therefore, who had the qualification of
reading, writing, and arithmetic, he would entrust a share in the
management of the destinies of this country, when they had those
excellent means of learning the opinions of the ablest men. (Applause.)
Respecting the malt tax, Mr.  said a question had been sent up to
him, “Will you vote against it?”8 If that meant, would he advocate free
trade in intoxicating drinks, without asking leave of any person in
opening a public-house, he would say, “No”—(hear, hear)—because
public-houses were very often a nuisance, and it was of great importance
that nuisances should be out of the way. (Cheers.) There must be such
things, but they should be out of the way as much as possible consistent
with the public convenience. He would have some public authorities whose
duty it should be to see that they were not a nuisance. He thought that
it was much better to tax stimulants than necessary articles. He would,
in the present state of affairs, vote for the Maynooth grant, and was in
favour of opening museums on Sundays. The ballot should be an open
question. The shopkeepers were much more in need of it than the working
classes.

Other questions having been satisfactorily answered, a vote approving of
Mr.  as a candidate was carried, and the meeting separated.g


8.: The Westminster Election of 1865 [4]
 8 JULY, 1865

Daily Telegraph, 10 July, 1865, p. 2. Headed: “Election Intelligence. /
Westminster.” Reported fully on the same day in the Morning Star; brief
summaries appeared also in the Daily News and The Times. The meeting of
electors and non-electors on Saturday evening Edition: current; Page:
[32] in the Pimlico Rooms, Winchester Street, was chaired by Charles
Westerton. “The room was densely crowded by a most enthusiastic
audience” (Daily Telegraph).

mr. j.s. , who upon rising to speak was received with loud cheers,
again and again repeated, said that, as the electors of Westminster must
all pretty well know what were the principles upon which he rested his
candidature, it was not necessary that he should occupy their time by
recapitulating them. But he should like to say a few words upon a most
important principle, which was involved in this contest—that this was a
protest against the “money power” employed in elections. (Cheers.) He
was not going to say anything which could possibly offend any party or
anybody—nothing about the misuse of money—about using it for the
purposes of corruption, giving it to electors to return any particular
candidate. If it were stated to candidates that before going to the poll
they must spend £2,000, £3,000, £4,000, or any other sum of money, “for
the good of the public,” things would be pretty much as they now stood,
with the important difference, that then the candidate who had to pay
this money, as most had, would know that it was used for some other
purpose than it was now, viz., the demoralisation of the electors.
(Cheers.) Did they think it was the right and best thing that the House
of Commons should be composed exclusively of rich men, or men with rich
connections? (No.) There were a good many reasons why this was not
desirable, and one was that the rich naturally sympathised with the
rich. (Hear, hear.) The rich had sympathies enough for the poor when the
poor came before them as objects of pity. Their feelings of charity were
often highly creditable to their dispositions; and, besides, they had
almost universally a kind of patronising and protective sympathy for the
poor, such as shepherds had for their flocks—(laughter and cheers)—only
that was conditional upon the flock always behaving like sheep. (Renewed
laughter, and Hear, hear.) But if the sheep tried to have a voice in
their own affairs, he was afraid that a good many shepherds would be
willing to call in the wolves. (Cheers.) Now this sympathy of the rich
for the rich had manifested itself in a very decided way during the last
two or three years, by the extraordinary good wishes of the higher
classes of this country for the success of the American slaveholders. He
did not make this a matter of reproach against the rich and higher
classes of this country, for he was quite ready to let bygones be
bygones; but they were not at liberty to renounce the privilege, nay,
the duty, of drawing lessons from the very things before their
eyes—(hear, hear)—and he should like to make a few remarks upon the
cause and meaning of the sympathy of the rich for these slaveholders. It
was not that they loved slavery; he acquitted them of that. (Hear,
hear.) But he could not acquit them of not having realised to their own
minds by experience or reflection what a dreadful thing slavery really
is, and what are the results it produces and gives rise to. It gives a
power—whether those who have it use it or not—of torturing human beings
to death at their caprice. (Hear, hear.) The government which the
slaveholders endeavoured to establish, Edition: current; Page: [33] has
fortunately been frustrated, or there would have been a kind of reign of
evil on the earth. It is this which has given rise to the Bowie knife
and the revolver—not the pure government of democracy. (Hear, hear.) Our
privileged classes did not consider this, or he believed that they would
have acted in a different manner from that which they did. They merely
saw one thing—a privileged class opposed by those who they thought
wanted to take the privilege away; and when they saw that, they said
“These (the Southerners) must be gentlemen, with whom gentlemen ought to
sympathise.” He believed that to be exaggerated. (Hear, hear.) The man
who nearly murdered Mr. Sumner on the floor of the House of
Congress—that man was a gentleman!1 and the wives and daughters of
slaveholders, who raised subscriptions to mark their approval of his
conduct—they were gentlewomen! but the refined and polished, the highly
intellectual society of Massachusetts, the poets, orators, philosophers,
the popular preachers, the brightest and best, those who took a lead
against these enormities—men such as Channing, Emerson, Theodore Parker,
Palfrey, Lowell, Bancroft, Motley, etc.—these were not gentlemen, they
were low Radicals and vulgar demagogues.2 (Cheers.) So blind were these
people—these privileged ones—on our side of the water, that they did not
know or care that the people whom they were thus attacking were those
known to all Americans as lovers of England, lovers of English
literature, sympathisers with the English people, admirers of us, and
ignorant of much that was bad in our institutions. He did not make this
a matter of reproach to any one, because when so many joined in it, it
would not be right to apportion a share. Many who were well worthy of
their respect had yielded to this general perversion of sentiment: and
the moral he drew from it was this, that they had here one of the most
signal instances, and so recent that it could not be objected to as
belonging to olden times, of how far men could be carried away by their
bias, unconscious and unintentional bias he was persuaded, but still one
that made the rich sympathise with the rich, the privileged with the
privileged; and the practical lesson which he deduced from it was this,
that it was a very just and proper thing that there should be rich men
in Parliament for the purpose of watching over the interests of the
rich, but also, if they wanted a similar care to be taken of the poor,
they had better not shut the door of the House of Commons upon the poor
man. (Loud cheers.) The only people they would do well to keep clear of
were those kind of poor men who would be glad to use a seat in
Parliament to get rich—(hear, hear),—or pin themselves to the skirts of
those who were rich. They would not suppose that he was one of those.
Edition: current; Page: [34] (Loud cries of No, no.) A great writer had
said that those who wanted to be well governed should look out for those
who did not want to be governors.3 They knew that he had not thrust
himself upon them. (True.) If he were as certain of being up to the mark
in everything else as he was that he had not sought to force himself
upon them, his mind would be quite at ease. Perhaps they might wish him
to refer to his general ideas of reform as applied to the
Constitution—(hear)—and also whether he would be a supporter or
non-supporter of the present Ministry. He could not look forward to any
time in the history of this country when he should not think any Liberal
Ministry preferable to any Conservative Ministry. (Cheers.) Whatever the
shortcomings of a Liberal party or Government might be, they did not
bear in their very names the profession of wishing to keep things as
they were.4 (Hear, hear.) Their name implied that they wished to improve
them; and although between the least liberal of Liberals and the most
liberal of Conservatives there might only be a little difference, a
short distance, still it should be ever borne in mind, and seriously
remembered, that this least liberal of Liberals was surrounded by those
who were far better men than himself, politically speaking, while this
most liberal of Conservatives was surrounded by men who, politically
speaking, were far worse than himself. (Loud applause.) Suppose York was
half-way between Edinburgh and London, and two travellers met there from
either place, there would be very little, if any, difference in the
respective distances they had to go, but that did not decrease in the
least the hundreds of miles which London was distant from Edinburgh.
(Hear, hear.) If he were returned to Parliament, what he should do, and
that which he should recommend others to do, would be to vote for any
Liberal Government on questions as between them and the Tory Government,
but he should not let himself be muddled under the pretence of keeping a
Liberal Government in; therefore he would advise the independent
Liberals always to vote as they thought best, and to let the Government
or Ministry shift for themselves, and take their chances of whatever
might be the result of a full and free discussion. As regarded Reform
and improvements of details, he thought they might be pretty sure that
they would go on under any Government. One of the admirable effects of
the reforms and improvements which had already taken place was that the
spirit of improvement had penetrated even into the Tory camp—(hear,
hear)—and he thought that in all the subordinate departments of public
affairs the Tories and the Whigs would vie and compete with each other
in improvements of that sort. The fact was, they had a difficult problem
to solve, let alone how to deal with what were called “proved abuses.”
There was a general conviction, and one in which he fully shared, that
most of the departments of public affairs—almost all the public Edition:
current; Page: [35] business—was either badly done or done not nearly so
well as it ought to be done. (Cheers.) What they had to do to remedy
this—without introducing fresh evils—was to reconcile a skilful
management of public affairs by trained and specially qualified people
with the preservation and extension of their local liberties and the
responsibility of all public functionaries to the people. (Cheers.) In
short, they wanted a system of administration which should at once be
skilful and popular. This was not an easy matter. It would task the best
minds, both in and out of Parliament, for a considerable time. But that
was what they had to do. He had no doubt that in this some assistance
would be rendered by the Conservatives, because, without speaking of
such a brilliant exception as Lord Stanley, there were Sir John
Pakington, Sir Stafford Northcote,5 and others, who would be glad to
assist in improvements of that sort—(hear, hear)—as far as they saw the
way, and they often saw a good way. But still, while good service could
be got out of such men, the Tories must be looked to as a body, as a
party; and as a party they showed what they were, a long way behind the
Liberals. The only way in which the Tories could at all distinguish
themselves was by actually showing that they were “a little bit worse”
than the Liberals. (Laughter.) This at least was the best excuse that
could be found for them, though recently they had showed that they were
a good deal worse than the Liberals, in dealing with such subjects as
the church rates and the Catholic Oaths Bill.6 (Hear, hear.) In
conclusion Mr.  expressed his readiness to answer any questions, and
resumed his seat amidst considerable applause.

Several of those present availed themselves of the opportunity to
examine Mr.  respecting certain of his political doctrines.

Question: How do you explain your writing that the upper classes are
liars, and the lower classes—the working classes—habitual liars?7

Mr.  said such was his writing. He thought so, and so did the most
intelligent of the working classes themselves, and the passage applied
to the natural state of those who were both uneducated and subjected. If
they were educated and became free citizens, then he should not be
afraid of them. Lying was the vice of slaves, and they would never find
slaves who were not liars. It was not a reproach that they were what
slavery had made them. But those persons who Edition: current; Page:
[36] quoted this passage were not candid enough to read on. (Applause.)
He said that he was not speaking of the vices of his countrymen, but of
their virtues, and that they were superior to most other countrymen in
truthfulness—(cheers)—and that the lower classes, though they did lie,
were ashamed of lying, which was more than he could venture to say of
the same class in any other nation which he knew. (Hear, hear.)

aAn Elector inquired on what ground Mr.  thought the working classes
had not the right to have large families as well as the higher classes.
(Oh, oh.)

Mr.  said he would have no difficulty in answering the question. For
one thing he never had said that the working classes had not as much
right as the higher classes, but that they had no more right.8 Neither
had a right to have more children than they could support and educate.
The higher classes had no more right than the lower classes to overstock
the labour market. If this was a reproach it was a reproach which
attached to almost all the writers on political economy during the last
half century. Their views on this subject were dictated by the strongest
wish for the best interest of the working classes. They felt that as
long as wages were as low as they then were, and as they still were, it
was not possible to hope for a great political and moral improvement in
the country. The interests of the working classes required that their
wages should be higher, not only for the obvious reason that they were
not sufficient, but because it was a necessary condition of proper
education. They felt that wages, though other causes might have helped,
were a great deal kept down by excessive competition for employment, and
although that excessive competition had been to some extent relieved by
emigration, they saw no hope for altering this state of things except by
a moral resolution on the part of the labouring classes not to overstock
the labour market. Some people said it was absurd to expect this. He
said that, on the contrary, all morality was a triumph over some of
their natural propensities. The strongest of their natural propensities
had been overcome by the various inducements that had been addressed to
mankind—by public opinion, by education, by religion, none of which
influences had ever been sufficiently or satisfactorily brought to bear
on this particular end. Such was his faith in human nature and in the
effect of these influences, that when they were brought to bear on the
over-multiplication of mankind they would have an influence on all
classes of the community. No class who might be called rich had a right
to have more sons and daughters than they could provide for, because if
they could not leave them well off they might be quartered on the
public. (Cheers.)a

Question (from a person on the platform): How can Mr.  reconcile his
doctrine with the Scriptural injunction, that we are to increase and
multiply?9 (Much laughter.)

Edition: current; Page: [37]
Mr. : It says we are to eat and drink, but not to over-eat and
over-drink ourselves.10 (Cheers and laughter.)

bAn Elector asked how Mr.  thought the representation of minorities
was practicable?

Mr.  said he was sure that the opinion which he had expressed on
this point was only not shared by reformers generally because it was not
understood. His idea of representation was that not a part only, even if
it were a majority, but that everybody should be represented. cFor
instance, if there was a constituency of 5,000, and it had to elect one
member, and there were two candidates, and 3,000 voted for one candidate
and 2,000 for the other, the man elected would represent the 3,000
voters; but why were the 2,000 to go unrepresented if there could be
found another 1,000 to agree with it in returning some other person? The
number to be fixed would of course depend on the proportion between the
number of representatives and the number of voters; but he would
certainly give a member to every 10,000 or 8,000, whatever the number
might be, who could agree in electing a representative.c This was what
they had heard of as Mr. Hare’s plan, otherwise the system of personal
representation which, instead of being the complicated and
unintelligible thing which some people represented, was the simplest
thing in the world.11 Mr. Hare’s was the most practical and organising
head that he knew, and he believed that they could not carry out the
principle of popular representation or democratic government without
this plan.b

Question: Will you support a bill for purifying the Church of England
from Romanising practices and tendencies?

Mr.  had often thought that one of the most important uses of a
representative constitution was that it caused great questions to be
discussed. He was never more sensible of this truth than just now, and
this question had given him an opportunity of saying something which he
had not been able to do before. The question meant, would he chase out
of the Church of England the Tractarian party?12 That he would not do,
because he thought the greatest argument against an Edition: current;
Page: [38] Established Church was that it tied up the minds of its
clergy. He wanted, within certain bounds, that the clergyman should not
have to sign away his mental liberty; that he should have the power, as
far as was consistent with an Established Church, of forming his own
sincere convictions as to what Christianity was; and although many of
the clergy might come to different, and perhaps some to wrong
perceptions, he would not turn them out for that, so long as they
thought their opinions ought not to turn them out—which some of the
Tractarians had done. But if they asked him whether he would leave it in
the power of any single clergyman to suppress any of the customary
services, or introduce others, he would not give them such power.
(Applause.) If any body of persons wanted any particular sort of
worship, let them have it at their own expense. He did not admit that
the clergy had a right to determine what the ceremonials of the Church
should be. That ought to rest, if any one had to determine it, with the
majority of the parishioners. In short, although in the Church he would
have the utmost mental liberty, yet with respect to the ceremonial part,
of whatever kind, that ought to rest with the laity, and not with the
clergy. For it was not the collective clergy, much more one clergyman,
who were the Church, but the clergy and laity. No clergyman, or
collective clergy, therefore, ought to have the power of introducing
ceremonials into the services against the wishes of the parishioners.
(Hear, hear.)

Question: How do you reconcile this—to open the museums on Sundays and
obey the Divine command to keep the Sabbath day holy?13 (Hear, hear.)

Mr.  said that those who were of opinion that this injunction was
intended for the Christians, and not for the Jews exclusively, were
quite right in not being able to reconcile it. But his opinion was that
the Sabbatical institution was an institution for the Jews alone. (Hear,
hear.) The Christian Sunday appeared to him to be an institution of
quite a different character. (Hear, hear.)

Question: Has Mr.  any confidence in and sympathy with the religion
taught by Jesus Christ and his apostles; and does he believe that a
State Church is a benefit to this nation or otherwise? (Cries of Don’t
answer.)

Mr. : He had already declared that he could not consent to answer
any questions about his religious creed. (Loud applause, and “Quite
right.”) The question about the State Church was very different, and his
opinion was this, that in principle there ought to be no such thing, but
he did not think the time had yet arrived when it would be any use to
try and abolish it. The thing was not pressing, and at all events the
State was more Liberal than the Church, and now the best men in the
Church had an opportunity of getting the highest places in it. At
present he thought it would be much better to try and improve the Church
itself through the State, than to abolish the connection which in
principle he objected to; and he had no hesitation in saying that they
ought not to be combined.

Edition: current; Page: [39]
dQuestion: What are the disadvantages we labour under in not having a
vote, and the advantages we should possess in having one? (Oh.)d

Mr. : The gentleman who had asked that question had asked him in
effect to make a speech which would last the rest of the evening. The
difference would be this—the man would be a citizen—(loud cheers)—and he
would feel that he was a citizen. Let them look at America now. Look at
the grand display of patriotism; was it not the wonder of the world? Did
anybody dream it would be so? Did anybody think that all those ions
would be ready to give the blood of their families, and incur a national
debt equal to ours—putting it at the lowest—for the nationality of their
country? He did not suppose there was a family in New England which had
not lost a member. Was it not something to have such a feeling in the
whole body of the people? Did they not think that that had something to
do with everybody having a vote? (Hear, hear.) eIt seemed to him that
the interests of citizenship—an equal right to be heard—to have a share
in influencing the affairs of the country—to be consulted, to be spoken
to, and to have agreements and considerations turning upon politics
addressed to one—tended to elevate and educate the self-respect of the
man, and to strengthen his feelings of regard for his fellow-men.
(Cheers.) These made all the difference between a selfish man and a
patriot. (Hear, hear.) To give people an interest in politics and in the
management of their own affairs was the grand cultivator of mankind.
(Cheers.)e That was one of the reasons why he wanted women to have
votes; they needed cultivation as well as men. He could not conceive
that a country was what it ought to be without an extension of a share
of political right to all. (Cheers.) Those left without it seemed a sort
of pariahs. Independently of this, there were plenty of practical
considerations. There were many, many questions before Parliament in
which it was of the greatest consequence that those who had so large an
interest in them should be heard on their own behalf, and that in the
very place where the questions had to be decided. It was as necessary
that they should be heard when they were wrong as when they were right.
When such was the case, if a man asked more than he ought, then he had
the chance of either being enlightened or shamed out of it. (Cheers.)

Question: What are your principles of non-intervention?

Mr. : He did not understand what was meant by “principle” of
non-intervention, because that would be a principle of utter
selfishness. His opinion was that every nation was much more capable of
settling its own affairs than another Power for it. (Hear, hear.) But if
a Power in trying to establish its own affairs was threatened by a
foreign despot, that was another thing, and then it was perfectly
legitimate to interfere—not to prevent the first Power from doing that
which they thought best for themselves, but to protect them from being
persecuted by the despot. (Cheers.)

Edition: current; Page: [40]
Question: Is it legitimate for a voter to be told that he must vote for
Mr. Smith, or lose custom; or for a person to order a pair of boots and
not demand the “exact” price? (Loud cries of Shame! shame!)

Mr. : I think that the feeling of the meeting has sufficiently
answered the question already.

Question: What are your opinions respecting primogeniture?

Mr. : Entirely against it, both politically and privately. He
thought that the practice of making the oldest son heir by law was in
itself unjust. fHe thought that a man should be allowed to leave what
belonged to him to whom he liked, but that in cases of intestacy it
should be divided equally among the children.f

Question: The ballot?

Mr.  did not think it was now necessary, especially to the working
classes, and that if it was necessary it was amongst shopkeepers.

[After other speeches, a resolution was passed by acclamation approving
of Mr.  as a fit and proper candidate, and pledging the meeting to
support his election; the proceedings terminated.]


9.: The Westminster Election of 1865 [5]
 10 JULY, 1865

Morning Star, 11 July, 1865, p. 2. Headed: “Westminster.” The nomination
meeting, at the hustings in front of St. Paul’s Church, Covent Garden,
at midday, was also reported on the 12th in the Daily Telegraph, The
Times, the Daily News, and the Standard (the last two in the third
person). There was considerable excitement, for this would be “a great
political contest such as Westminster had not seen for many years”; by
11:30 nearly 3000 people had assembled, and just before noon they began
“to show signs of animation. The quiet which had hitherto prevailed was
relaxed, and some good-humoured larking and hustling commenced.”
(Morning Star.) The High Bailiff, H. Scott Turner, the returning
officer, appeared, followed by the first of the candidates, Robert
Wellesley Grosvenor (1834–1918), a member of the leading Whig family in
Westminster and (after an initial period of uncertainty as to his
political credentials) ’s Liberal running mate. He “was received
with cheers by his supporters, and yells by the rest of the crowd.” Next
came Smith, “who received a warm welcome from his supporters,” and then
 arrived, to be “greeted with enthusiastic cheers from his
supporters, mingled with yells from the friends of Mr. Smith.” 
occupied the central position, with Smith on his right and Grosvenor on
his left. The crier in vain called for silence during the reading of the
writ by the high bailiff. “Indeed throughout the whole proceedings, a
continuous volley of yells and howls, mingled with cheers for the
respective candidates, was kept up. The speeches of neither proposers,
seconders, nor candidates could be heard except by those close beside
them, and in most cases the speakers wisely addressed their remarks to
the reporters, and made them as brief as possible. It is right to state
that the uproar came chiefly, not from the respectable portion of
Edition: current; Page: [41] the electors and non-electors, but from
bands of ruffianly lads, who seemed to be organised for the purpose.”
(Morning Star.) Grosvenor was proposed and seconded, and then Brewer
nominated  “amidst great uproar. He alluded to Mr. ’s high
intellectual character and attainments, and to his Liberal and practical
and statesmanlike views, and said it would be an honour to Westminster
to be represented by such a man.” Malleson seconded. Smith,
characterized as a man of moderate opinions, was proposed and seconded.
Grosvenor was the first of the candidates to speak.  then stood
forward to address the electors, and “was received with great enthusiasm
by his friends in the assemblage. But the shouting and noise still
prevailing his remarks could only be heard by those in his immediate
vicinity.” (The Daily Telegraph says he “obtained a much better hearing,
though great noise prevailed.”)

gentlemen,—

It would be entirely useless for me to attempt to make a speech, which
it would be impossible that any of you could hear; and I will only
therefore attempt to say a few words. (Noise and cheers.) I am not here
by my own seeking; I am here because a numerous and distinguished body
of the electors of Westminster, thinking that that numerous and
important portion of this constituency who are advanced Liberals are
entitled to a representative (cheers), and that my opinions, which have
been fully, freely, and unreservedly expressed both in amy letters and
at very crowded meetings of the electorsa, qualify me to be that
representative. They thought also that in electing me you would be
asserting a principle which has been honoured in Westminster—the
principle of selecting your representatives for some other reason than
for their money. (Cheers.) It now rests with the electors of
Westminster, who have bhad the means of forming their ownb opinions on
the manner in which the contest has been carried on, to judge whether I
have a claim to the votes of the friends of purity of election and of
advanced cLiberalism as against a Conservative opponent of all
Liberalism whatever. I have nothing further to say.c (Cheers from Mr.
’s supporters.)

[Smith spoke, amidst continued uproar. Again silence was ordered, and
the high bailiff called for a show of hands.] dFor Captain Grosvenor a
considerable number were held up; for Mr.  the display of hands was
much larger; and for Mr. Smith a great number were held up. As far as
could be judged, the numbers in favour of Mr. Smith and Mr.  were
nearly equal, and there can be no doubt that each of them was larger by
three to one than the numbers in favour of Captain Grosvenor. To the
surprise, however, of everybody, the high bailiff declared the show of
hands to be in favour of Mr. Smith and Captain Grosvenor. We do not know
whether this functionary’s organs of vision are imperfect, or whether in
the Edition: current; Page: [42] excitement he did not attend
sufficiently to the show of hands for each of the candidates but that he
made a mistake was manifest to every one who had a view of the
assembly.d Mr. ’s supporters demanded a poll, and the mistake will
be of little importance if he and Captain Grosvenor should be placed at
the top of the poll.1

[Smith moved and Grosvenor seconded a vote of thanks to the high
bailiff.]

Each of the candidates, on leaving the hustings, was loudly cheered by
his supporters. The assembly, which though noisy and uproarious
throughout, was in no way mischievous, then gradually dispersed.


10.: The Westminster Election of 1865 [6]
 10 JULY, 1865

Daily Telegraph, 11 July, 1865, p. 4. Unheaded; the account comes
immediately after the report of ’s speech at the hustings on the
same day (No. 9). The meeting was not reported in other papers. “Last
night, at eight o’clock, Mr. John Stuart  addressed a meeting at St.
Martin’s Hall, Long-acre. The large room was densely crowded by a most
enthusiastic audience, amongst whom was a large number of ladies. The
Count de Paris occupied a seat on the platform.”

the honourable candidate, who was received with great applause, referred
to most of the subjects upon which he spoke at the meeting at the
Pimlico Rooms on Saturday night, which was fully reported in yesterday’s
Daily Telegraph,1 especially on the purity of election, the great
questions between employers and employed, and co-operation. He next
noticed the vast improvements which had taken place in the condition of
the working classes. Mr. Gladstone had done a great deal for the working
classes. (The name of Mr. Gladstone was received with enthusiastic
applause.) Mr. Gladstone was a statesman who did not hold back his good
things till they were wrung from him. He employed his mind in conceiving
measures for the benefit of his country, whether they had been demanded
or not. That was his (Mr. ’s) idea of a great Minister. (Applause.)
He believed that the future social condition of the working classes was
safe. He hoped some day there would be no such thing as a class
distinction; but, while it lasted, they had to take care that the House
of Commons should not exercise class legislation. They (the working
classes) would not be truly represented unless they had their fair
Edition: current; Page: [43] share of the voices in the national
tribunal. He thought that a Reform Bill would not give the labouring
classes an effectual share in and control of the House of Commons,
unless they had fully one half of the House of Commons—(cheers)—and the
remainder of society the other half. In answer to questions, Mr. 
said that he would vote for the opening of the Crystal Palace on Sunday.
He did not think it would be a wrong thing to open well-conducted
theatres on that day, though he should not be prepared to vote for that
at present, as he thought it would be considered an affront to the
religious opinions of a large and highly respectable portion of the
public. Neither upon this nor any other question would he press his
opinion on the Legislature, if he thought the vast majority of the
people were not prepared for the proposed change. He did not think that
the exercise of the franchise should depend on the payment of rates. The
duration of Parliament should be from three to five years. Mr. Hubbard’s
proposal respecting the income tax was, he thought, a good one.2 If a
primâ facie case were made out that it was necessary for convents to be
inspected, he would have them inspected; but if there were any such
“dreadful mysteries” in the convents,3 he believed the inmates of those
places would be a vast deal too clever for her Majesty’s inspectors to
find them out. A variety of other questions were put, and answered to
the complete satisfaction of the meeting. A resolution expressive of
confidence in Mr. J.S.  as a fit and proper candidate was carried
amidst great applause. Some other speeches were delivered, and the
meeting separated.


11.: The Westminster Election of 1865 [7]
 12 JULY, 1865

Morning Star, 13 July, 1865, p. 2. Headed “Westminster.” The meeting was
also reported in The Times, the Daily News, and (very briefly and in the
third person) in the Daily Telegraph. The official declaration of the
poll was at the hustings in Covent Garden at 2 p.m. A “dense mass of
people” gathered in front of the hustings, crying out such remarks as
“Where is Smith now?” A watering cart showered the crowd with cold
water, quieting them briefly. The candidates and their friends began to
appear on the hustings,  being “greeted with loud and long-continued
cheers.” Grosvenor was also given an enthusiastic reception; Smith did
not appear. The poll was declared: Grosvenor at the head with 4534; 
a very close second with 4525, and Smith with 3824. (The Daily News
uniquely gives Edition: current; Page: [44] 3224, undoubtedly in error.)
Grosvenor spoke first. “Mr.  then proceeded to address the assembled
crowd. Previous to doing so he was treated to a most enthusiastic
ovation. The vast mass of persons present set up a cheer of the most
hearty, thrilling character, which was kept up for some minutes, and
which certainly must have had rather a startling effect on those who did
not take part in it. Mr.  looked upon the exciting scene before him
with that quiet, benign, and thoughtful expression of countenance for
which he is so remarkable under all circumstances, and seemingly not the
least moved or discomposed, except what was denoted by a pleasing smile
which his intellectual features could not conceal, however desirous
their owner may have been to do so. When the enthusiasm had subsided,”
 spoke.

electors of westminster—not omitting the non-electors, many of whom have
worked most vigorously in this cause—you have achieved a great triumph.
(Cheers.) You have vindicated a principle awhich has been the glory ofa
Westminster for generations. (Renewed cheers.) That principle is that
members of Parliament should be elected on public grounds alone (Hear,
hear, and cheers) and you have done this against all the means,
legitimate and illegitimate, which could possibly have been brought to
bear to prevent you. (Cheers.) This victory of yours illustrates very
strongly two things. In the first place, it teaches a lesson which has
been renewed from age to age, but which many have found it extremely
hard to learn—bthe power there is inb sincere, earnest, and
disinterested conviction. All our working was the working of volunteers
against opponents who were a disciplined and paid body. (Hear, hear, and
cries of Smith.) All our friends voluntarily gave their time and their
labour, which to most of them is money, and to some of them their cmeans
of dailyc bread, and even many of them gave money in addition for the
purpose of defraying expenses rendered necessary by the bad system of
carrying on elections which prevailsd, but which they felt, even if
necessary, ought to be paid for by any one rather than the candidate
himself (hear, hear)d. All this they have done in the face of much
opposition, and they have been successful. (Cheers.) Another thing to be
learned from this victory is that it may induce persons to consider
whether that mode of returning representatives can be good under which
ethe side starting upon principles of electioneering purity is heavily
weighted in the race—so heavily weighted, indeed, as to make the contest
resemble a race between a man on foot and one on horseback? This simile
may be regarded ase literally true, because my supporters had to walk to
the poll, whilst the supporters of our opponents were carried there in
Edition: current; Page: [45] cabs and carriages not paid for by
themselves. (Hear, hear, and a cry of Why did Grosvenor do it?) One of
the greatest writers and orators which this country has produced, and
who was at the head of the Liberal party fduring the bestf years of his
life—I mean Burke—gsaid, “That system cannot be good which rests upon
the heroic virtues.”1 I dog say that the mode of election which rendered
necessary such heroic exertions as have been made during the last few
weeks to maintain purity of election cannot be good. (Hear, hear.) There
is one more lesson which the electors of Westminster have given by the
victory they have achieved. They have shown that whatever differences of
opinion may exist amongst the several shades of Liberals, whatever
severe criticisms they may occasionally make on each other, they are
ready to help and co-operate with one another when the time of need
arrives. This has been very provoking to many people. (A Voice: Yes, to
Mr. Smith, and laughter.) I have often observed that those who are in
the wrong think it a great shame when those who are in the right show
some degree of common sense, as in the present instance—(hear, hear)—and
that they entertain the notion that those who are honest must be fools
as well. (Great laughter and cheering.) But you have proved to these
persons that it is possible to be honest, sensible, hand patriotic at
the same time.h The Tories have done their worst. They have exercised
all the powers that they could, particularly the force of money
power—(hear)—but they have received a lesson they will not soon forget,
and possibly they will think twice before they repeat it iamongst the
electors of Westminsteri. j(Loud cheers.) Gentlemen, I have done. (Loud
and prolonged cheering.)j

This concluded Mr. ’s remarks. On ceasing to address the assembly
the enthusiasm which greeted his first appearance on the hustings was
renewed.

On the motion of Dr. Brewer, seconded by Capt. Grosvenor, a vote of
thanks was, amidst cries for Smith, who did not put in an appearance,
passed to the High Bailiff for the courtesy and efficiency he had
displayed in the election.

Edition: current; Page: [46] Edition: current; Page: [47]


February to August 1866


12.: The Cattle Diseases Bill [1]
 14 FEBRUARY, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 181, cols. 488–92. Reported in The Times, 15
February, p. 7, from which the variant and responses are taken. This,
’s maiden speech in the House of Commons, was delivered in the
debate on the second reading of “A Bill to Amend the Law Relating to
Contagious or Infectious Diseases in Cattle and Other Animals,” 29
Victoria (12 Feb., 1866), PP, 1866, I, 423–44.  says in his
Autobiography that the speech “was thought at the time to have helped
get rid of a provision in the Government measure which would have given
to landholders a second indemnity, after they had already been once
indemnified for the loss of some of their cattle by the increased
selling price of the remainder”

(CW, I, 277n).

mr. j. stuart  said, that in the course of the discussion on the
Bill many important points had been raised, respecting some of which he
was not in a position to form an opinion; and that being the case, he
thought it better that he should leave all other topics to Her Majesty’s
Government, who had the best means of information, and who were
responsible for the failure or success of the measures they might
introduce. There was one question, however, which it required no
agricultural or special knowledge to understand—that of compensation—it
was a purely economical question, and upon this part of the Bill alone
he thought himself competent to speak. This question had been raised by
his honourable Friend the Member for Birmingham,1 and as his honourable
Friend had been rather severely dealt with by the right honourable
Gentleman behind him (Mr. Lowe),2 he thought that any one who shared the
sentiments of his honourable Friend would be acting unworthily if he did
not stand forward and avow them. (Hear.) He did not object to the
principle of compensation, but he did object, in the highest degree, to
the amount proposed in the Bill, and to the manner in which it was
proposed to be provided. It was perfectly true, as his right honourable
Friend (Mr. Lowe) had pointed out, that the farmers were to receive
compensation, not for their losses as such, but for what they lost
through the interference of the Government.3 He (Mr. J.S. ) quite
agreed that there could not be a more just Edition: current; Page: [48]
claim for compensation than this; and, moreover, the grant of it was
expedient on account of the inducement it would give not to evade the
provisions of the Act. He quite adopted the conclusion of his right
honourable Friend, that the farmers who might be the owners of diseased
cattle ought not to be placed under the temptation of concealing the
fact. But, on the other hand, the more reason there was for granting
compensation, the more necessity was there for taking care that the
compensation should not be excessive. If, on the one hand, the owner
were not to be compensated at all for his loss, there was a strong
inducement for him to do, what it was the very object of this Bill to
prevent him from doing—namely, to keep the infected animals as long as
possible, and thus to be the means of propagating the infection. If, on
the other hand, the compensation were excessive, an inducement would
exist to be careless as to the spread of the disease; because if his
animals on becoming infected were ordered to be slaughtered, he knew
that he should get an exaggerated compensation for them. The
compensation provided by the Bill for diseased animals slaughtered was
two-thirds of the value, when that sum did not exceed £20. But what were
the necessary conditions to render that sum a just compensation? It was
that the animal should have two chances out of three of surviving,
because if it had a less chance of recovery than this, the owner would
be an absolute gainer by the compensation he would receive on its
slaughter by authority. The value of an animal in the market was its
value in its existing astate and with its existing prospects (murmurs)a;
unless, therefore, the marketable value of an animal after infection was
two-thirds of its value when healthy, the compensation proposed by the
Bill was excessive. Whatever the chances were of the animal’s surviving,
that would be the measure of compensation which a reasonable person
would propose. He came now to another question—in what manner, and at
whose expense, the funds for compensation ought to be raised. In order
to judge of that, they ought to consider what would be the natural
working of economical laws, supposing no compensation were granted at
all. If, setting aside merely momentary effects, they took into
consideration the ultimate, and indeed speedy, result, there could be no
doubt that in whatever proportion the supply of cattle was diminished,
in that proportion the price would be enhanced; and, therefore, in the
end, the whole burden of the loss would be borne, not by the producer,
but the consumer. Farmers and landlords would indeed suffer, but only to
the same extent as other members of the community—that is to say, as
consumers. As far as it was the whole community which suffered, no class
of the community, as a class, had the smallest claim to compensation
from the rest. Some, indeed, were less able to bear the loss than
others, and it would not have been surprising if a proposal had been
made to compensate them; but now, on the contrary, it was proposed to
tax them, in order to compensate those who were able Edition: current;
Page: [49] to bear the loss much better. It appeared to him that the
farmers as a class had no claim whatever to compensation, and the only
reason for granting compensation at all was, not that the loss fell
peculiarly upon the agricultural interest, but because it fell upon that
interest with such extreme inequality. He apprehended that in real
justice the compensation ought to be paid to the less fortunate by the
more fortunate of the class: thus establishing what would be equivalent
to a compulsory system of mutual insurance amongst the owners of stock.
This Bill did the very contrary—though he did not blame the Government
for introducing it, considering the way in which the House was
constituted. It compensated a class for the results of a calamity which
was borne by the whole community. In justice, the farmers who had not
suffered ought to compensate those who had; but the Bill did what it
ought not to have done, and it left undone that which it ought to have
done,4 by not equalizing the incidence of the burden upon that class,
inasmuch as, from the operation of the local principle adopted, that
portion of the agricultural community who had not suffered at all would
not have to pay at all, those who suffered little would have to pay
little, while those who suffered most would have to pay a great deal.
The only argument of any validity which he could anticipate against the
opinion he had expressed, was that a portion of our cattle supply is not
derived from home production, but from importation; and, as far as that
portion was concerned, the compensation which the consumer would pay
through the enhanced price of the commodity would not be received by our
own agriculturists, but by the importers. This he must admit; but the
importation of cattle, though considerable and increasing, bore so very
small a proportion to the entire consumption, that it would diminish the
indemnity reaped by the home producers only to a very small extent; and
this being the case, it would be unworthy of the landed interest to lay
any stress upon so small a matter. An aristocracy should have the
feelings of an aristocracy, and inasmuch as they enjoyed the highest
honours and advantages, they ought to be willing to bear the first brunt
of the inconveniences and evils which fell on the country generally.
This was the ideal character of an aristocracy; it was the character
with which all privileged classes were accustomed to credit themselves;
though he was not aware of any aristocracy in history that had fulfilled
those requirements. (Laughter.) It might also be said that the farmers
would derive no benefit from the ultimate high price, because one of the
effects of the cattle plague was by making them bring their cattle
prematurely to market, temporarily to keep down the price. This, no
doubt, was the case, but after the grant of compensation, it would no
longer be so, since the inducement to hurry cattle to market would then
no longer exist.

[The Bill was read a second time, and committed for the next day.]

Edition: current; Page: [50]


13.: The Cattle Diseases Bill [2]
 16 FEBRUARY, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 181, cols. 609–10, 620. Reported in The Times, 17
February, p. 7, from which the variant readings and responses are taken.
’s observations were made in Committee on the Cattle Diseases Bill,
Clause 31. (For the Bill, see No. 12.) Clause 31 provided, inter alia,
that “All expenses incurred by a Local Authority in pursuance of this
Act, including any Compensation payable by it in respect of Animals
slaughtered in pursuance of this Act, shall be defrayed, as to Two-third
Parts thereof, out of the Local Rate.” Acton Smee Ayrton (1816–86) moved
to amend this clause by omitting the words “as to two-third parts
thereof,” thereby throwing the full cost on the local rate, and made
reference to No. 12, saying that he “had been much impressed by the able
speech,” because he thought that  had “given admirable reasons” why
a poll-tax to cover one-third of the cost should not be imposed (col.
608). ’s response immediately follows on Ayrton’s conclusion.

mr. j. stuart  said, the honourable and learned Member for the Tower
Hamlets (Mr. Ayrton) had referred to some remarks of his with reference
to this subject, and as, in all probability through his own (Mr. ’s)
fault, the honourable and learned Member had not seized the point of his
argument, he hoped he might be allowed, with the permission of the
Committee, to repeat the substance of what he then said. The honourable
and learned Member had laid down a principle which no one could
dispute—namely, that taxation ought not to be partial. On that ground he
urged that a particular class ought not to be taxed to defray the
expense of compensation for the consequences of a calamity by which they
had already suffered to so great an extent. But his (Mr. Stuart ’s)
argument1 was grounded expressly on this—that although they suffered
more immediately, they would not ultimately suffer more than the rest of
the community who were consumers of food (no). It followed that if they
were now to tax the whole of the community in order to give a special
indemnity to that class for what they suffered, they would, instead of
taxing them, tax the rest of the community in order to relieve them.
That was his argument, and nothing he had heard had tended to weaken it;
and, consequently, that part of the provision for compensation to which
the honourable and learned Member objected, the poll tax on cattle, was
the only part which he considered sound in principle. (A laugh.) It
appeared to him that the valid claim for compensation was not for the
burden, but for the inequality of the burden, inasmuch as some cattle
owners suffered much less than others, and some not at all. The class on
whom the calamity had immediately fallen would, as a class, be
compensated in the natural course of things, by the increased price of
meat consequent on the diminished supply; but the individuals of the
class who had not suffered at all, or who had suffered less than their
neighbours, should Edition: current; Page: [51] contribute for the
relief of those who had not been so fortunate. In principle, therefore,
the tax, whatever it might be, ought to be a rate on land only. (Oh!)
Although the clause as it stood was very objectionable, it would be made
still more so by the proposal of the honourable and learned Member for
the Tower Hamlets.

[Several members contributed to the discussion, including Lowe (cols.
618–20), who referred to Ayrton’s having accepted ’s arguments. 
replied:]

As the arguments of my right honourable Friend (Mr. Lowe) derive great
weight from his knowledge, his character, and his talents, it seems
desirable that anything which can be said in reply should be said as
soon as possible, and while the impression of his arguments is still
fresh. (Hear, hear.) I think what is necessary may be said in a very few
sentences. My right honourable Friend thinks it a complete answer to the
arguments which I submitted to the notice of the House, to say that the
object of the tax is not compensation, but to give a motive to the
farmer to declare the disease. Now, Sir, I really think that the motive
held out to the farmer to make this disclosure does not depend on the
quarter from whence the compensation comes, but on the compensation
itself. (Hear, hear.) I should like to know whether, if the farmer
receives £20 or any other sum for his beast, it makes any difference in
the motive held out to him whether it is paid from a cattle tax, or from
the county rate, or out of the Consolidated Fund. (Hear, hear.) In the
next place, my right honourable Friend stated that the scarcity of a
commodity does not always raise the price in full proportion to the
deficiency in the quantity. Well, Sir, that is very true, but it is also
an extremely common thing that the effect should be to raise the price a
great deal beyond the proportion of the loss, and the case in which this
is peculiarly known to happen is when the article in deficiency is one
of food. (Hear, hear.) Take, for instance, the commodity which the right
honourable Gentleman the Member for Droitwich (Sir John Pakington) has
brought forward into the prominence which belongs to it, the article of
milk.2 In the case of milk, an article which is of first necessity to
even the poorest people in the country, it is hardly conceivable that a
scarcity should take place without raising the price immeasurably beyond
the proportion of the loss. (Hear, hear.) aNow, that is an extremely
important element in the case.a In the next place, my right honourable
Friend thought it an extremely unreasonable thing in me to neglect and
leave out of sight that portion of the supply of cattle which comes by
importation. He said I did not mention it on a former occasion. Sir, I
did mention it, and referred to it in a most special manner.3 (Hear.)
And the answer which I made then I make now, in the words which my right
honourable Friend himself quoted—de minimis non curat lexb. (Hear, hear,
and laughter.) It seems to have excited a good deal of Edition: current;
Page: [52] scorn on the other side of the House because I said it was
unworthy of the landed interest of this country or of any aristocracy.
(Cries of Oh, oh! in which the conclusion of the sentence was lost.)b
There is one more point in my right honourable Friend’s speech which I
would wish to notice. He asked, “Is it not absurd that because a man or
any of his family is not mad, he should object to being taxed for a
lunatic asylum?”4 I ask, is there any economical law by which the
patients of a lunatic asylum are compensated for the expense of their
maintenance in that asylum? (Much laughter.) If there is, the cases are
parallel; if not, not.

[After further debate, Ayrton’s amendment was accepted.]


14.: Suspension of Habeas Corpus In Ireland
 17 FEBRUARY, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 181, cols. 705–6. Not reported in The Times. ’s
speech was on Sir George Grey’s motion for leave to bring in “A Bill to
Empower the Lord Lieutenant or Other Chief Governor of Ireland to
Apprehend and Detain until the First Day of March 1867, Such Persons as
He or They Shall Suspect of Conspiring against Her Majesty’s Person and
Government,” 29 Victoria (16 Feb., 1866), PP, 1866, III, 121–4. Of the
speech he says in his Autobiography: “In denouncing, on this occasion,
the English mode of governing Ireland, I did no more than the general
opinion of England now admits to have been just; but the anger against
Fenianism was then in all its freshness; any attack on what Fenians
attacked was looked upon as an apology for them; and I was so
unfavourably received by the House, that more than one of my friends
advised me (and my own judgment agreed with the advice) to wait, before
speaking again, for the favourable opportunity that would be given by
the first great debate on the Reform Bill” (CW, I, 277). (For his
successful use of that opportunity, see No. 16.)

mr. j. stuart  said, that some asperity had been introduced into
this discussion which he should not imitate. The occasion was one for
deep grief, not for irritation. He agreed with the honourable Member for
Birmingham (Mr. Bright) that this Bill was a cause for shame and
humiliation to this country.1 We were present at the collapsing of a
great delusion. England had for a considerable number of years been
flattering itself that the Irish people had come to their senses; that
they were now sensible that they had got Catholic Emancipation and the
Incumbered Estates Bill,2 which were the only things they could possibly
want; and had become aware that a nation could not have anything to
complain of when it Edition: current; Page: [53] was under such
beneficent rulers as us, who, if we do but little for them, would so
gladly do much if we only knew how. We all knew that in times past
England had been unjust to Ireland. Of that national sin this nation had
repented; and we were not now conscious of any other feelings towards
Ireland than those which were perfectly honest and benevolent, and he
did not say this of one party, or of one side of the House only, he said
it of all. But we had fallen into the mistake of thinking that good
intentions were enough. We had been in the habit of saying pleasant
things on this subject in the hearing of foreigners, till, from
iteration, foreigners were beginning to believe that Ireland was no
longer our weak point—England’s vulnerable spot—the portion of our
territory where we might perhaps be successfully assailed, and which, in
any case, by neutralizing a great portion of our available force,
disabled us from doing anything to resist any iniquity which it might be
sought to perpetrate in Europe. This pleasing delusion was now at an
end. Every foreigner, every continental writer, would believe for many
years to come that Ireland was a country constantly on the brink of
revolution, held down by an alien nationality, and kept in subjection by
brute force. (No, no!) He did not mean that he shared that opinion; he
disclaimed it. He hardly knew to what to compare the position of England
towards Ireland, but some illustration of his meaning might be drawn
from the practice of flogging. Flogging in some few cases was probably a
necessary abomination, because there were some men and boys whom long
persistence in evil had so brutalized and perverted that no other
punishment had any chance of doing them good. But when any man in
authority—whether he was the captain of a ship or the commander of a
regiment, or the master of a school, needed the instrument of flogging
to maintain his authority—that man deserved flogging as much as any of
those who were flogged by his orders. He was not prepared to vote
against granting to Her Majesty’s Government the powers which, in the
state to which Ireland had been brought, they declared to be absolutely
necessary. He was not responsible—they were. They did not bring Ireland
into its present state—they found it so, through the misgovernment of
centuries and the neglect of half a century. He did not agree with his
honourable Friend the Member for Birmingham in thinking that Her
Majesty’s Ministers, if they could not devise some remedy for the evils
of Ireland, were bound to leave their seats on the Treasury Bench and
devote themselves to learning statesmanship.3 From whom were they to
learn it? From the Gentlemen opposite, who would be their successors,
and who, if they were to propose anything which his honourable Friend or
himself would consider as remedies for Irish evils, would not allow them
to pass it? The Government had to deal with things as they were, and not
with things as they might wish them to be. He did not believe that the
power granted to the Government would be strained beyond the necessity
of the case. He would not suggest a suspicion that tyranny and
oppression would be practised. He Edition: current; Page: [54] knew
there would be nothing of the kind, at least with their cognizance or
connivance. He was not afraid that they would make a Jamaica in Ireland;
and, to say truth, the fountains of his indignation had been so drained
by what had taken place in that unfortunate island that he had none left
for so comparatively small a matter as arbitrary imprisonment. When,
however, the immediate end had been effected, he hoped that we should
not again go to sleep for fifty years, and that we should not continue
to meet every proposal for the benefit of Ireland with that eternal “non
possumus”4 which, translated into English, meant, “We don’t do it in
England.” If his honourable and learned Friend the Member for Sheffield
thought that nothing was now amiss in Ireland except the Irish Church,5
he would be likely to hear much more on the subject before long, if he
would only listen.

[The Bill went through all its stages in one day and was finally
approved in the Commons by a vote of 354 to 6 (’s name is not listed
in either lobby).]


15.: Representation of the People [1]
 12 APRIL, 1866

Daily Telegraph, 13 April, 1866, p. 6. Headed: “Reform Meeting in
Westminster.” Reported also on the same day in the Daily News (in the
third person), the Morning Star, and (in brief summary) in The Times.
(Clippings of all the reports but the last are in the -Taylor
Collection.) The evening meeting of Westminster electors, in St. James’s
Hall, Piccadilly, was in support of the Government’s “Bill to Extend the
Right of Voting at Elections of Members of Parliament in England and
Wales,” 29 Victoria (13 Mar., 1866), PP, 1866, V, 87–100, which was
under discussion in Parliament (see Nos. 16 and 23). Charles Westerton,
who chaired the meeting, explained that it could not be held earlier
because such a large crowd could not be accommodated anywhere but in St.
James’s Hall, which had not been available. He said that  and
Grosvenor were both in the House of Commons, but would appear later.
W.T. Mallinson proposed a motion in favour of the Bill; during his
speech, Grosvenor arrived, and made a speech in seconding the motion.
During that speech,  arrived, and after Probyn had spoken in favour
of the motion, he rose. , “who upon presenting himself was received
with enthusiastic applause,” then spoke to the resolution.

i sincerely congratulate my honourable colleague on having been
beforehand, and not for the first time. I have had the satisfaction of
hearing the excellent speech which he made on the first reading of the
Reform Bill.1 My attendance in Edition: current; Page: [55] the House of
Commons this evening prevented me from hearing more than a part of his
speech now, but what I did hear was equally excellent to that which he
made in the House of Commons. I think that those who foretold and who
calculated that the people of England no longer cared about reform, or
if they did that they do not care about this measure, would cease so to
think if they could see this present meeting—they would be convinced of
their mistake. But, indeed, I think they must be pretty well convinced
of that already if the demonstrations that have taken place over the
country, and the multitude and quality of the petitions which I have
seen this evening presented to the House of Commons—(cheers)—can
convince them. It must have shown the most incredulous of them that they
have made a great mistake. (Cheers.) It has been said that the electors
don’t wish reform—that they don’t wish to extend the privilege to other
people. Then of the non-electors it was said that they had grown
indifferent to politics—that the only questions which occupied their
attention were those of wages and co-operation—that they had grown quite
Conservative—(a laugh)—and that those who did care about reform wanted
so much more reform than this bill gave them, and that they would not
stop to pick it up. Again, he believed that some members of Parliament
thought they would lose their seats if they supported reform, whereas he
hoped now that they would lose their seats if they did not support
reform. a(Cheers.) This was a very crafty calculation, but there were
many things overlooked in it.a It was overlooked that in all those
constituencies in which the electors were the most numerous, there had
been, and always would be, a strong feeling for further reform;
secondly, it had been overlooked that there existed such persons as
sincere reformers—(hear, hear)—reformers in principle, who had faith in
a popular Government. Again, some people were foolish and fanatic enough
to believe that nothing could be safe which differed from their
opinions. It was forgotten that the £10 electors had not been long
enough a privileged class to acquire the odious feelings of one.
(Cheers.) The ten-pounders, as they were fond of calling them, had not
grown into an oligarchy just yet, nor did he think they would. (Hear,
hear.) There was another consideration, and that was that the
ten-pounders knew they had but a small portion of power. Land and money
now, as always heretofore, were the leading powers in this country. In
order to make head against these influences—which are not always
salutary—they must be glad to take in you and I to share it with them.
(Hear, hear.) Now, respecting the non-electors, if there ever was a
delusion on the face of the earth I think it is this, because people—the
mass of the people—had acquired a degree of education, a degree of
cultivation and of knowledge of politics, a degree of familiarity with
newspapers and public events, that they never had before, nor anything
approaching to it; and because with these things they had acquired
powers of intelligence and combination—which excited the admiration even
of Conservatives—in the promotion of their own interests, such as
co-operation; because these changes and improvements had taken place,
Edition: current; Page: [56] was it true that they had grown less
interested in politics—(No, no)—less desirous of the good of their
country, and less desiring that they themselves should share in its
destiny? I think such a delusion is one of the densest that was ever
entertained by human beings. (Cheers.) Do they wish for more than this?
No doubt they do. I do myself. What is more, I believe Mr. Gladstone
does. (Cheers.) I heard him say this evening that he did not think there
would have been any danger in extending the franchise further than this
bill; but he said, and said justly, it is the way of this country, a
prudent and just way, not to attempt to do everything at once.2 And I do
not think any of us—not even those who desire a much greater change than
this bill promises—ever thought that we should step into all that we
want at a single stride. But there is one thing that I may remark, and
that is that I am very glad to see from all the demonstrations of the
unenfranchised classes on this question, that they take this extremely
rational view of the matter. We are told continually that the working
classes desire this bill only as a stepping-stone to something else.3 We
think it will give us a better Legislature, and it is because we think
that it is good in itself that we think it will give us a better
Legislature—a Legislature more likely to give us further reform when the
time is come for it. Our opponents have thought it best for their
interests not to meet the question by a direct negative, but to meet it
by what is called a sidewind—by an amendment which merely turned on the
order of proceeding, in the expectation that they will be able to add to
their minority a certain number of those who habitually vote with the
Government.4 They will—I believe they will—succeed in getting some
votes, though not many I think. But it would be a mistake to suppose
that all who vote with them on this occasion are insincere reformers, or
that they will ultimately vote against the bill. (Hear, hear.) I am not
speaking of Mr. Horsman5 or Mr. Lowe. (Hisses and laughter.) They are
not insincere. There is no duplicity about them. They tell us they want
no reform; that they bwere afraid of it, that they would resist it to
the last. (Loud hisses.)b At least, I know that Mr. Lowe says it, and I
believe Mr. Horsman says it.6 I think we ought to be obliged to them for
telling us the worst at once that is in them. (A laugh.) Still, I have
no doubt that some who will vote for the amendment will ultimately vote
for the future stages of the bill. I do not think that this amendment
need discourage us in the least. Nobody doubts that the Edition:
current; Page: [57] amendment will be defeated, and we shall see the
bill carried by increasing instead of diminishing majorities. (Great
cheering.) I never formed any decided opinion as to which part of reform
it would be best to begin with. I could not judge of it so well as those
whose duty it is to judge of it; and what is the use of leaders unless
we can trust them on a mere matter of tactics? (Hear, hear.) This is the
first time since 1832 that a Government has pledged itself to stand or
fall by a Reform Bill. (Cheers.) I confide in the Ministry. cRumours
have been current in the back slums of the Tory encampment that some
members of the Government are not sincere, and—though I hope it is not
for that reason—(laughter)—that they will vote and co-operate with the
Tory party. They calculate on a possible combination between some
members of the Government and themselves. Well, all know how often the
wish is father to the thought—(laughter)—and how very difficult it is to
get some people to believe in the political sincerity and honesty of
others. But I shall requirec dsomething better than the gossip of the
Tadpoles and Tapers (as Mr. Disraeli would term it)d7 ebefore I shall
believe there is any member of the Government who is not sincere in this
question. (Loud cheers.) There are two members of the Government,
however—Earl Russell and Mr. Gladstone—whose sincerity no one ventures
to suspect, and that is the reason the Tories are so inveterate against
them.e Their sincerity and earnestness on this subject is so obvious, so
transparent, and so indisputable, that no one for a moment can doubt
them. (Cheers.) fThey all know from past history that Earl Russell had
the greatest share in giving the people the greatest improvement of
modern times—the Reform Bill8—f to which we owe the next greatest
improvement—the repeal of the Corn Laws.9 gWhat the Tories now reproach
Earl Russell with is, after having resisted any further alteration in
the representative system,10 all at once to reopen the question of
Reform, which is the highest misdemeanour possible in the eyes of the
Tories. (Laughter.) But the people know that the question of Reform was
never closed. (Hear, hear.)g Respecting Mr. Gladstone. (Cheers.) What
was the Edition: current; Page: [58] use to speak of him on a question
of sincerity? (Cheers.) Every year of his official life had been marked
by a succession of measures—no year being without them—some great, some
small, but all aiming at the public good—to the good of the people of
this country, and especially of the poorer classes. These measures were
not even suggested to him; they were the offspring of his own mind,
will, and purpose—the free gift from him to his countrymen, unprompted,
unsuggested. (Loud cheers.) And his countrymen would reward him as they
had done already. (Hear, hear, and cheers.) Mr. Gladstone seems to be
the first statesman who has come up to the idea of a great modern
statesman: a Minister should be the leader of a free people—not
employing his mind only to do that which the people wished, but pointing
out to them that which was for their benefit—offering it to them without
even being asked—leaving it to them to accept or refuse it—not thinking
that it was his business to act only as he was acted upon, and yielding
to pressure. What constituted a great statesman was to take the
initiative for the good of his fellow-countrymen. Was it not Mr.
Gladstone who first broke silence on the subject of reform after the
ridiculous failure of 1860?11 hand he was the man who made that
celebrated declaration that every human being, inasmuch as he had an
interest in good government, had a primâ facie cause for admission to
the suffrage.h12 If we do not stand by him as he is doing by our work—if
he fails from any defect of ours, from the want of encouragement to go
on—the consequence will be that we shall richly deserve to suffer, for
we shall not easily find another to serve us in the same way. (Loud
cheers.)

[The resolution was carried unanimously. A petition was moved calling
for the Commons to pass the Bill without delay, and, after other
speeches and demonstrations, the meeting ended.]


16.: Representation of the People [2]
 13 APRIL, 1866

Speech of J. Stuart  Esq., M.P. for Westminster, upon the Reform
Bill, Delivered in the House of Commons, April 13th, 1866. From the
“Daily Telegraph.” (London: Diprose and Bateman, 1866). (The title page
of the penny pamphlet is headed by a quotation from the Daily Telegraph
of the 14th: “All will read it, and in reading it will learn the views
of the boldest, and yet the most sure and measured thinker of the day.”)
PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 182, cols. 1253–63. Reported in The Times, 14 April,
p. 6, from which variant readings and Edition: current; Page: [59]
responses are taken. ’s manuscript draft of the speech (printed in
Appendix D) is extant (Harvard); it lacks, of course, ’s responses
to the debate. Another pamphlet version appeared: Speech of John Stuart
, Esq., M.P. for Westminster, During the Debate on the Second
Reading of the Representation of the People Bill, in the House of
Commons, April 13, 1866. Reprinted from “The Morning Star.” (London:
Judd and Glass, [1866]). The copies of the pamphlets in Somerville
College have inked corrections that are here accepted; in all cases
except the second and the final two, the changes result in the PD
version: at 62.4, “consequences they” is altered to “consequences—they”;
at 62.27, “classes, in” is altered to “classes; on”; at 63.38, “this or”
is altered to “this and”; at 65.20, “and most” is altered to “and much”;
at 67.1, “interests” is altered to “interest”; at 68.5, “and is honest”
is altered to “and honest” (PD reads “good, honest”); and at 68.11–12,
“(hear)—unless I am mistaken. And (it” is altered to “(hear).—Unless I
am mistaken, (and it)”.  spoke on the second reading of Gladstone’s
Reform Bill (see No. 15), specifically on Earl Grosvenor’s motion
(technically an amendment) on 12 April: “That this House, while ready to
consider, with a view to its settlement, the question of Parliamentary
Reform, is of opinion that it is inexpedient to discuss a Bill for the
reduction of the Franchise in England and Wales, until the House has
before it the entire scheme contemplated by the Government, for the
amendment of the Representation of the People” (col. 1227).

although the question which will be put from the chair relates
ostensibly to the mere order of proceeding, it will hardly be denied,
and least of all after the speech of the right honourable baronet,1 that
the question we are really discussing is whether the bill ought to pass.
(Hear, hear.) Indeed, the noble Lord the member for King’s Lynn is the
only speaker on the Opposition side who has argued the nominal issue as
if he thought that it was the real one, or has even laid any great
stress upon it.2 That noble lord, in a speech marked by all the fairness
and candour which were known to be his characteristics, and by even more
than the ability—at least by more varied and sustained ability—has said,
I think, the most and the best that can be said in favour of the
amendment, considered as a substantive motion. He has brought forward
considerations well calculated to make an impression, but only on one
part of his audience—on those who, though they may be willing to consent
to some reform, look with extreme jealousy on the most important part of
it, the enfranchisement of a portion of the working classes—who regard
this less as a good to be desired, than as a doubtful and perhaps
perilous experiment, and tremble lest they should eventually find
themselves committed to giving those classes a trifle more
representation than they were duly warned of beforehand. (Cheers.) What
is the very worst extremity of evil with which the noble lord threatens
the House, in case it should be so unguarded as to pass this bill
without the other measures of Parliamentary Reform by which it is to be
succeeded? Why, it is this—that if something happens which it requires
the most improbable Edition: current; Page: [60] concurrence of chances
to bring about, something against which neither the personal honour of
the Government, nor the inexorable dates fixed by the Registration
Acts,3 nor even the expressed will of Parliament, if Parliament should
think fit to express its will, can guarantee us; in this all but
impossible case, there may happen—what? That the redistribution of seats
may, in spite of all that can be done, possibly devolve upon a House of
Commons elected under the enlarged franchise. (Hear, hear.) Now, I put
it to the noble lord’s clear intellect—and impartial because clear—is
this an argument which can have any weight with anybody who thinks the
enlarged franchise an improvement—(cheers)—who thinks it calculated to
give us a better Legislature? If the Legislature it gives us is a better
one for all other purposes, will it not be a better one for this
purpose? (Hear, hear.) If it can be trusted to govern us, if it can be
trusted to tax us, if it can be trusted to legislate for us, can it not
be trusted to revise its own constitution? (Hear, hear.) Does experience
teach us to expect that this of all things is the work in which
legislative bodies in general, and British Parliaments in particular,
are likely to be rash, headstrong, precipitate, subversive,
revolutionary? (Loud cheers.) I think, Sir, that a Parliament which was
cautious in nothing else might be depended on for caution in meddling
with the conditions of its own power. (Hear.) Sir, this formidable one
chance in a thousand with which the noble lord threatens us, is only
terrific to those in whose eyes the bill is a rash and portentous
transfer of power to the working classes. To those who think that the
enfranchising provisions are good in themselves, good even if there were
no redistribution of seats (hear, hear), and still better if there is
(cheers), this phantom of evil has no terrors. (Hear, hear.) And that I
believe to be the opinion of the great body of reformers, both in and
out of the House. (Cheers.) We are, I dare say, as sincerely desirous as
the noble mover of the amendment that family and pocket boroughs should
be extinguished, and the inordinate political influence of a few noble
and opulent families acurtaileda. (Cheers and laughter.) We are, I
believe, as anxious to bcontrolb the power which wealth possesses, of
buying its way into the House of Commons, and shutting the door upon
other people—as the wealthiest gentleman present. c(Hear, hear.)c But
though we are quite orthodox on these great points of Conservative
Parliamentary Reform—(hear)—and look forward with delight to our
expected co-operation with gentlemen on the opposite benches in the
congenial occupation of converting them from theories into facts—(hear,
hear, and laughter)—we yet think that a measure of enfranchisement like
this bill—moderate, indeed—far more moderate than is desired by the
majority of Edition: current; Page: [61] reformers, but which does make
the working classes a substantial power in this House—is not only a
valuable part of a scheme of Parliamentary Reform, but highly valuable
even if nothing else were to follow. And as this is the only question
among those raised on the present occasion, which seems to me in the
smallest degree worth discussing, I shall make no further apology for
confining myself to it. (Cheers.) Sir, measures may be recommended
either by their principle, or by their practical consequences; and if
they have either of these recommendations, they usually have both. As
far as regards the principle of this measure, there is but little to
disagree about; for a measure which goes no further than this, does not
raise any of the questions of principle on which the House is divided,
and I cannot but think that the right honourable baronet, in intruding
these questions into the debate has caused it to deviate somewhat from
its proper course. If it were necessary to take into consideration even
all the reasonable things which can be said pro and con about democracy
d—and I fully admit that the right honourable baronet has said things
both reasonable and unreasonable on that subject (laughter)—d the House
would have a very different task before it. But this is not a democratic
measure. It neither deserves that praise, nor, if honourable members
will have it so, that reproach. It is not a corollary from what may be
called the numerical theory of representation. It follows from the class
theory, which we all know is the Conservative view of the constitution;
the favourite doctrine, not only of what are called Conservative
reformers, but of Conservative non-reformers as well. (Hear, hear.) The
opponents of reform are accustomed to say, that the constitution knows
nothing of individuals, but only of classes. (Hear, hear.) Individuals,
they tell us, cannot complain of not being represented, so long as the
class they belong to is represented. But if any class is unrepresented,
or has not its proper share of representation relatively to others, that
is a grievance. Now, all that need be asked at present is that this
theory be applied to practice. There is a class which has not yet had
the benefit of the theory. While so many classes, comparatively
insignificant in numbers, and not supposed to be freer from class
partialities or interests than their neighbours (cheers), are
represented—some of them I venture to say, greatly over-represented, in
this House—here is a class, more numerous than all the others, and,
therefore, as a mere matter of human feeling, entitled to more
consideration—weak as yet, and therefore needing representation the
more, but daily becoming stronger, and more capable of making its claims
good—and this class is not represented. We claim, then, a large and
liberal representation of the working classes, on the Conservative
theory of the constitution. (Cheers.) We demand that they be represented
as a class, if represented they cannot be as human beings; and we call
on honourable gentlemen to prove the sincerity of their convictions by
extending the benefit of them to the great majority of their countrymen.
(Cheers.) But, honourable gentlemen say, the working classes are
Edition: current; Page: [62] already represented. It has just come to
light, to the astonishment of everybody, that these classes actually
form 26 per cent. of the borough constituencies.4 They kept the secret
so well—it required so much research to detect their presence on the
register—their votes were so devoid of any traceable consequences—they
had all this power of shaking the foundations of our institutions, and
so obstinately persisted in not doing it—(loud cheers)—that honourable
gentlemen are quite alarmed, and recoil in terror from the abyss into
which they have not fallen. (Renewed cheers and laughter.) Well, Sir, it
certainly seems that this amount of enfranchisement of the working
classes has done no harm. But if it has not done harm, perhaps it has
not done much good either; at least not the kind of good which we are
talking about. A class may have a great number of votes in every
constituency in the kingdom, and yet obtain scarcely any representation
in this House. Their right of voting may be only the right of being
everywhere outvoted. (A laugh, and hear.) If, indeed, the mechanism of
our electoral system admitted representation of minorities; if those who
are outvoted in one place could join their votes with those who are
outvoted in another; then, indeed, a fourth part, even if only of the
borough electors, would be a substantial power, for it would mean a
fourth of the borough representatives. 26 per cent. concentrated would
be a considerable representation; but 26 per cent. diffused is almost
the same as none at all. The right honourable baronet ewho just preceded
me has brought forward a very plausible argument on that point. Hee has
said that a class, though but a minority, may by cleverly managing its
votes, be master of the situation, and that the tenant farmers in
Hertfordshire, fthough only a third of the constituencyf can carry an
election.5 They may be able to decide whether a Tory or a Whig shall be
elected; they may be masters of so small a situation as that.
(Laughter.) But what you are afraid of is their carrying points on which
their interest as a class is opposed to that of all other classes; on
which if they were only a third of the constituency the other two-thirds
would be against them. Do you think they would be masters of such a
situation as that?—(cheers)—Sir, there is no known contrivance by which
in the long run a minority can outnumber a majorityg. What might be done
in that way by preternatural contrivance I do not know (laughter) but by
no natural contrivance can one-third be made to outvoteg the other
two-thirds. (Renewed laughter and cheers.) The real share of the working
classes in the representation is measured by the number of members they
can return—in other words, the number of constituencies in which they
are the majority: and even that only marks the extreme limit of the
influence which they can exercise, but by no means that which Edition:
current; Page: [63] they will. (Hear, hear.) Why, Sir, among the recent
discoveries, one is, that there are some half-dozen constituencies in
which working men are even now a majority;6 and I put it to honourable
gentlemen, would anybody ever have suspected it? At the head of these
constituencies is Coventry. Are the members for Coventry generally great
sticklers for working-class notions? (Hear, hear.) It has, I believe,
been observed that these gentlemen usually vote quite correctly on the
subject of French ribbons—(laughter)—and as that kind of virtue comes
most natural to Conservatives—(renewed laughter)—the members for
Coventry often are Conservative. But probably that would happen much the
same if the master manufacturers had all the votes. (Cheers.) If,
indeed, a tax on power-looms were proposed, and the members for Coventry
voted for it, that might be some indication of working class influences;
though I believe that the working men, even at Coventry, have far
outgrown that kind of absurdities. (Cheers.) Even if the franchise were
so much enlarged that the working men, by polling their whole strength,
could return by small majorities 200 of the 658 members of this House,
there would not be 50 of that number who would represent the distinctive
feelings and opinions of working men, or would be, in any class sense,
their representatives. (Hear, hear.) And what if they had the whole 200?
Even then, on any subject in which they were concerned as a class, there
would be more than two to one against them when they were in the wrong.
They could not succeed in anything, even when unanimous, unless they
carried with them nearly a third of the representatives of the other
classes; and if they did that, there would be, I think, a very strong
presumption of their being in the right. (Hear, hear, and cheers.) As a
matter of principle, then, and not only on liberal principles, but on
those of the Conservative party, the case in favour of the bill seems
irresistible. (Loud cheers.) But it is asked by my right honourable
friend the member for Calne, what practical good do we expect?7 What
particular measures do we hope to see carried in a reformed House, which
cannot be carried in the present? If I understand my right honourable
friend correctly, he thinks we ought to come to the House with a bill of
indictment against itself (a laugh)—an inventory of wrong things which
the House does, and right things which it cannot be induced to do (hear,
hear)—and when, convinced by our arguments, the House pleads guilty and
cries peccavi, we have his permission to bring in a Reform Bill. (Hear,
hear, and laughter.) Sir, my right honourable friend says we should not
proceed on a priori reasoning, but should be practical. I want to know
whether this is his idea of being practical. For my part, I am only
sorry it is not possible that in the discussion of this question special
applications should be kept entirely out of view: for if we descend to
particulars, and point out this and that in the conduct of the House,
which we should like to see altered, but which the House, by the very
fact that it does not alter Edition: current; Page: [64] them, does not
think require alteration, how can we expect the House to take this as a
proof that its constitution needs reform? We should not at all advance
our cause, while we should stir up all the most irritating topics in the
domain of politics. (Hear, hear.) Suppose now—and I purposely choose a
small instance to give the less offence—suppose we were to say that if
the working classes had been represented, it would not have been found
so easy for honourable gentlemen whose cattle were slaughtered by Act of
Parliament8 to get compensated twice over—(cheers and laughter)—once by
a rate, and again by a rise in price. I use the case only for
illustration: I lay no stress on it; but I ask, ought the debate on a
Reform Bill to consist of a series of discussions on points similar to
this, and a hundred times more irritating than this? Is it desirable to
drag into this discussion all the points on which any one may think that
the rights or interests of labour are not sufficiently regarded by the
House? (Hear, hear.) I will ask another question. If the authors of the
Reform Bill of 18329 had foretold—which they scarcely could have done,
since they did not themselves know it—if they had predicted that through
it we should abolish the corn laws—that we should abolish the navigation
laws—(cheers)—that we should grant free trade to all foreigners without
reciprocity—(renewed cheers)—that we should reduce inland postage to a
penny—that we should renounce the exercise of any authority over our
colonies—all which things have really happened10—does the House think
that these announcements would have greatly inclined the Parliament of
that day towards passing the bill? (Loud cheers.) Whether the practical
improvements that will follow a further Parliamentary reform will be
equal to these, the future must disclose; but whatever they may be, they
are not at the present time regarded as improvements by the House, for
if the House thought so, there is nothing to hinder it from adopting
them. (Cheers.) Sir, there is a better way of persuading possessors of
power to give up a part of it: not by telling them that they make a bad
use of their power—which, if it were true, they could not be expected to
be aware of—but by reminding them of what they are aware of—their own
fallibility. Sir, we all of us know that we hold many erroneous
opinions, but we do not know which of our opinions these are, for if we
did, they would not be our opinions. (Hear, hear.) Therefore, reflecting
men take precautions beforehand against their own errors, without
waiting till they and all other people are agreed about the particular
instances; and if there are things which, from their mental habits or
their position in life, are in danger of escaping their notice, they are
glad to associate themselves with others of different habits and
positions which very fact peculiarly qualifies them to see the precise
things which they themselves do not see. Believing the House to be
composed of reasonable men, this is what we ask them Edition: current;
Page: [65] to do. (Hear, hear.) Every class knows some things not so
well known to other people, and every class has interests more or less
special to itself, and for which no protection is so effectual as its
own. These may be a priori doctrines, but so is the doctrine that a
straight line is the shortest distance between two points; they are as
much truths of common sense and common observation as that is, and
persons of common sense act upon them with the same perfect confidence.
I claim the benefit of these principles for the working classes. They
require it more than any other class. The class of lawyers, or the class
of merchants, is amply represented, though there are no constituencies
in which lawyers or merchants form the majority; but a successful lawyer
or merchant easily gets into Parliament by his wealth or social
position, and, once there, is as good a representative of lawyers or
merchants as if he had been elected on purpose; but no constituency
elects a working man, or a man who looks at questions with working men’s
eyes. (Cheers.) Is there, I wonder, a single member of this House who
thoroughly knows the working men’s views of trades unions, or of
strikes, and could bring these subjects before the House in a manner
satisfactory to working men? (Hear, hear.) My honourable friend the
member for Brighton, if any one;11 perhaps not even he. Are there many
of us who so perfectly understand the subject of apprenticeships, let us
say, or of the hours of labour, as to have nothing to learn on the
subject from intelligent operatives? I grant that, along with many just
ideas and much valuable knowledge, you would sometimes find pressed upon
you erroneous opinions—mistaken views of what is for the interest of
labour; and I am not prepared to say that if the labouring classes were
predominant in the House, attempts might not be made to carry some of
these wrong notions into practice. But there is no question at present
about making the working classes predominant. (Hear, hear.) What is
asked is a sufficient representation to ensure that their opinions are
fairly placed before the House, and are met by real arguments, addressed
to their own reason, by people who can enter into their way of looking
at the subjects in which they are concerned. (Cheers.) In general, those
who attempt to correct the errors of the working classes do it as if
they were talking to babies. (Cheers.) They think any trivialities
sufficient. If they condescend to argue, it is from premises which
hardly any working man would admit; they expect that the things which
appear self-evident to them will appear self-evident to the working
classes; their arguments never reach the mark, never come near what a
working man has in his mind, because they do not know what is in his
mind. Consequently, when the questions which are near the hearts of the
working men are talked about in this House—there is no want of good will
to them, I cheerfully admit (hear, hear)—but all that it is most
necessary to prove to them is taken for granted. Do not suppose that
working men would always be unconvincible by such arguments as ought to
satisfy them. (Hear, hear.) It is Edition: current; Page: [66] not one
of the faults of democracy to be obstinate in error. (Hear, hear.) An
Englishman who had lived some years in the United States12 lately summed
up his opinion of the Americans by saying, “They are the most teachable
people on the face of the earth.” Old countries are not as teachable as
young countries, but I believe it will be found that the educated
artisans, those especially who take interest in politics, are the most
teachable of all our classes. They have much to make them so; they are,
as a rule, more in earnest than any other class; their opinions are more
genuine, less influenced by what so greatly influences some of the other
classes—the desire of getting on; their social position is not such as
to breed self-conceit. Above all, there is one thing to which, I
believe, almost every one will testify who has had much to do with them,
and of which even my own limited experience supplies striking examples;
there is no class which so well bears to be told of its faults—to be
told of them even in harsh terms, if they believe that the person so
speaking to them says what he thinks, and has no ends of his own to
serve by saying it.13 (Cheers.) I can hardly conceive a nobler course of
national education than the debates of this House would become, if the
notions, right and wrong, which are fermenting in the minds of the
working classes, many of which go down very deep into the foundations of
society and government, were fairly stated and genuinely discussed
within these walls. (Hear, hear.) It has often been noticed how readily,
in a free country, people resign themselves even to the refusal of what
they ask, when everything which they could have said for themselves has
been said by somebody in the course of the discussion. (Hear, hear.) The
working classes have never yet had this tranquillising assurance. They
have always felt that not they themselves, perhaps, but their opinions,
were prejudged—were condemned without being listened to. But let them
have the same equal opportunities which others have of pleading their
own cause—let them feel that the contest is one of reason, and not of
power—and if they do not obtain what they desire, they will as readily
acquiesce in defeat, or trust to the mere progress of reason for
reversing the verdict, as any other portion of the community. (Cheers.)
And they will, much oftener than at present, obtain what they desire.
Let me refer honourable gentlemen to Tocqueville, who is so continually
quoted when he says anything uncomplimentary to democracy, that those
who have not read him might mistake him for an enemy of it, instead of
its discriminating but sincere friend. Tocqueville says that, though the
various American legislatures are perpetually making mistakes, they are
perpetually correcting them too, and that the evil, such as it is, is
far outweighed by the salutary effects of the general tendency of their
legislation, which is maintained, in a degree unknown elsewhere, in the
direction Edition: current; Page: [67] of the interest of the people.14
Not that vague abstraction, the good of the country, but the actual,
positive well-being of the living human creatures who compose the
population. (Hear, hear.) But we are told that our own legislation has
made great progress in this direction—that the House has repealed the
corn laws, removed religious disabilities,15 and got rid of I know not
how many more abominations. Sir, it has; and I am far from disparaging
these great reforms, which have probably saved this country from a
violent convulsion. As little would I undervalue the good sense and good
feeling which have made the governing classes of this country h(unlike
those of some other countries)h capable of thus far advancing with the
times. But they have their recompense—habes pretium, lloris non
urerisl.16 Their reward is that they are not hated, as other privileged
classes have been. (Hear.) And that is the fitting reward for ceasing to
do harm—for merely repealing bad laws which Parliament itself had made.
(Cheers.) But is this all that the Legislature of a country like ours
can offer to its people? Is there nothing for us to do, but only to undo
the mischief that we or our predecessors have done? Are there not all
the miseries of an old and crowded society waiting to be dealt with
(hear, hear)—the curse of ignorance, the curse of pauperism, the curse
of disease, the curse of a whole population born and nurtured in crime?
(Cheers.) All these things we are just beginning to look at—just
touching with the tips of our fingers; and, by the time two or three
more generations are dead and gone, we may perhaps have discovered how
to keep them alive, and how to make their lives worth having. I must
needs think that we should get on much faster with all this—the most
important part of the business of government in our days—if those who
are the chief sufferers by the great chronic evils of our civilisation
had representatives among us to stimulate our zeal, as well as to inform
us by their experience. (Hear, hear.) Of all great public objects, the
one which would be most forwarded by the presence of working people’s
representatives in this House is the one in which we flatter ourselves
we have done most—popular education. And let me here offer to my right
honourable friend, the member for Calne, who demands practical
arguments, a practical argument which I think ought to come Edition:
current; Page: [68] home to him. If those whose children we vote money
to instruct had been properly represented in this House, he would not
have lost office on the Revised Code.17 (Hear, hear, and a laugh.) The
working classes would have seen in him an administrator of a public fund
honestly determined that the work for which the public paid should be
good and honest work. (Cheers.) They are not the people to prefer a
greater quantity of sham teaching to a smaller quantity of real teaching
at a less expense. Real education is the thing they want, and as it is
what he wanted, they would have understood him and upheld him. (Hear,
hear.) I have myself seen those services remembered to his honour, even
at this moment of exasperation, by one of the leaders of the working
classes—(hear). j[Mr. Bright was here understood to say, So have
I.]j—Unless I am mistaken, (and it is not my opinion alone), very few
years of a real working-class representation would have passed over our
heads, before there would be in every parish a school-rate, and the
school doors freely open to all the world; and in one generation from
that time England would be an educated nation. (Hear, hear.) Will it
ever become so by your present plan, which gives to him that hath, and
only to him that hath? Never. If there were no reason for extending the
franchise to the working classes except the stimulus it would give to
this one alone of the imperial works which the present state of society
urgently demands from Parliament, the reason would be more than
sufficient. (Hear.) These, Sir, are a few of the benefits which I expect
from a further Parliamentary Reform; and as they depend altogether upon
one feature of it, the effective representation of the working classes,
their whole weight is in favour of passing the present bill, without
regard to any bill that may follow. I look upon a liberal
enfranchisement of the working classes as incomparably the greatest
improvement in our representative institutions, which we at present have
it in our power to make (hear); and as I shall be glad to receive this
greatest improvement along with others, so I am perfectly willing to
accept it by itself. Such others as we need we shall, no doubt, end by
obtaining; and a person must be very simple who imagines that we should
have obtained them a day sooner if Ministers had encumbered the subject
by binding up any of them with the present bill. (Loud cheers.)

Many members, as they passed down the gangway, close to where the
honourable member sits, shook hands with him in congratulation for his
able address.

[The debate was later adjourned to 16 April; see No. 17.]

Edition: current; Page: [69]


17.: Representation of the People [3]
 16 APRIL, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 182, col. 1477. Reported in The Times, 17 April, p.
10, from which the response is taken. During the adjourned debate on the
second reading of Gladstone’s Reform Bill (see Nos. 15 and 16), 
responded to an interpretation by Hugh Cairns of his remarks in No. 16.
Cairns said (cols. 1476–7), “It is saying nothing but what the majority
of the House think when I state that, on this point [the whole question
of Reform], the speech of the noble Lord the Member for King’s Lynn
[Lord Stanley] was both unanswerable and has been unanswered. When I say
‘unanswered,’ I will make one exception. The honourable Member for
Westminster did give an answer, and to anybody looking at the question
from the same point of view I have no doubt the answer was perfectly
satisfactory. The honourable Member said, ‘Here is a Bill which will
enfranchise 200,000 borough voters. You are apprehensive that possibly
200,000 or 300,000 more may possibly be enfranchised, when the effect of
the redistribution of seats is felt, but I am of opinion that the more
enfranchised the better.’ ”

mr. j. stuart : I said nothing of the kind.

Sir Hugh Cairns: I should be sorry to misrepresent anything that fell
from the honourable Member, but I understood him to say that every
considerable enfranchisement in itself was good.

Mr. J. Stuart : I said that the enfranchisement which this Bill
gives is an absolute good; and that if it produced an improved
Legislature, that Legislature might be entrusted to make the
redistribution of seats. (Hear, hear.)


18.: The Malt Duty
 17 APRIL, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 182, cols. 1524–8. Reported in The Times, 18 April,
p. 6, from which the variants and responses are taken.  says in the
Autobiography that this speech, insisting “on the duty of paying off the
National Debt before [the nation’s] coal supplies [were] exhausted,”
following on the success of No. 16, further improved his position in the
House (CW, I, 277). Fitzroy Kelly (1796–1880), then M.P. for Suffolk,
moved “That upon any future remission of indirect taxation, this House
will take into consideration the Duty upon Malt with a view to its
immediate reduction and ultimate repeal” (ibid., col. 1509). Charles
Neate (1806–79), M.P. for Oxford, moved an amendment to substitute:
“That in the present state of the taxation and resources of the Country,
it is the duty of Parliament to make provision for the systematic
reduction of the National Debt, and not to sanction any proposal for any
repeal or change of taxes which is likely to be attended with a
diminution of the Revenue” (cols. 1523–4). ’s seconding speech
follows on immediately.

Edition: current; Page: [70]
in rising to second the Amendment of my honourable Friend the Member for
Oxford, I hope I shall not be suspected of any disposition to abuse the
indulgence which the House has so recently and so kindly extended to me.
But I have for some time felt so serious, I may say so solemn a
conviction upon the subject which my honourable Friend has brought
forward, that it is almost a matter of conscience with me not to let
slip an occasion of endeavouring to impress that conviction on some
honourable Members of this House. (Hear.) Not long ago it might not
altogether unreasonably be supposed that the unrivalled growth of this
country in every kind of wealth—the limits of which it seemed impossible
to define—was an excuse to us, and even a justification, for leaving our
pecuniary obligations, without any serious attempt to reduce them, to
weigh upon posterity, whom we might reasonably expect to be better able
to support them than we ourselves are. This, however, was at no time a
conclusive argument or a sound excuse, because future generations will
have their own exigencies too; and we have had an example of it in the
fact that not many years ago two years of war sufficed to re-add to our
National Debt nearly as much as had been subtracted from it by the
savings of fifty years.1 (Hear, hear.) But, more recently, facts have
been brought to our notice, which have been too much overlooked; showing
that the excuse we made to ourselves is not admissible in the case of a
nation whose population greatly exceeds that which with the existing
resources of science can be supported from its own soil; who are
therefore dependent for subsistence on the power of disposing of their
goods in foreign markets; and whose command over those markets depends
upon the continued possession of an exhaustible material. The
termination of our coal supplies, though always certain, has always
until lately appeared so distant, that it seeemed quite unnecessary for
the present generation to occupy itself with the question. The reason
was that all our calculations were grounded upon the existing rate of
consumption; but the fact now is that our consumption of coals increases
with such extraordinary rapidity from year to year, that the probable
exhaustion of our supplies is no longer a question of centuries, but of
generations. (Hear.) I hope there are many honourable Members in this
House who are acquainted with a small volume written by Mr. Stanley
Jevons, entitled The Coal Question.2 It appears to me, so far as one not
practically conversant with the subject can presume to judge, that Mr.
Jevons’ treatment of the subject is almost exhaustive. He seems to have
anticipated everything which can possibly be said against the conclusion
at which he has arrived, and to have answered it; and that conclusion
is, that if the consumption of coal continues to increase at the present
Edition: current; Page: [71] rate, three generations at the most, very
possibly a considerably shorter period, will leave no workable coal
nearer to the surface than 4,000 feet in depth; and that the expense of
raising it from that depth will entirely put it out of the power of the
country to compete in manufactures with the richer coal-fields of other
countries. I think that if there be anyone in this House, or out of it,
who knows anything which will invalidate these conclusions of Mr.
Jevons, it will be right for him to come forward and make it known. I
have myself read various attempts to answer Mr. Jevons,3 but I must say
that every one of them, admitting the truth of everything said, has only
made out that our supplies will continue a few years longer than the
term which Mr. Jevons has assigned. In fact, it has now come to this,
that instead of being at liberty to suppose that future generations will
be more capable than we are ourselves of paying off the National Debt,
it is probable that the present generation and the one or two which will
follow, are the only ones which will have the smallest chance of ever
being able to pay it off. Now, what is the duty which facts of this sort
impose upon this country? Are we going to bequeath our pecuniary
obligations undiminished to descendants, to whom we cannot bequeath our
assets? Suppose the property of a private individual had come to him
deeply mortgaged, and that the bulk of it consisted of a mine, rich
indeed, but certain to be exhausted in his lifetime, would he think it
honourable to waste the whole proceeds of the mine in riotous living,
and leave to his children the apayment of the debt out of the residue of
the estatea? Then what would be vicious and dishonourable in a private
individual is not less dishonourable in a nation. We ought to think of
these things while it is still time. This country is at present richer
and more prosperous than any country we ever knew or read of, and it can
without any material inconvenience or privation set aside several
ions a year for the discharge of this important duty to our
descendants. I do not think we are much to blame as far as we have yet
gone. It was perfectly right to get rid of all very bad taxes, all those
which produced a greater quantity of incidental mischief than advantage
to the revenue from their imposition. Thanks to the progress of opinion,
and thanks also to the enlightened and far-sighted Minister who has
administered our finances for some years back (hear, hear),4 this work
has been nearly performed. There are very few taxes remaining which are
utterly unfit to exist. If there are any, they do not yield so large a
revenue but that we may hope, without much difficulty, to get rid of
them also. The bulk of our revenue is derived from a comparatively small
number of Edition: current; Page: [72] imposts, each yielding a
considerable sum, and none of which, I think, is now very seriously
objectionable in principle, or greatly mischievous in practice, any
further than is inevitably incident on the payment of taxes. I think it
is perfectly legitimate to try experiments upon these taxes, if there be
any chance, by lowering the amount, to increase the revenue. It is also
legitimate to vary the mode of imposing taxes; for example, by levying
them at a later stage in the production of the article, by which means
we may get rid of objections such as some which have been brought
forward by the honourable and learned Member opposite.5 But if we are to
abolish any tax which yields a revenue of £5,000,000 or £6,000,000,
merely in order to have the satisfaction of expending the amount in some
other way, it will be, as it appears to me, a criminal dereliction of
duty. (Hear, hear.) If we are able either by increasing our resources or
by a retrenchment of our expenditure to dispense with the malt tax, how
much wiser and worthier it would be if we were to set apart this tax as
a fund for the extinguishment of our Debt. (Hear, hear.) I beg
permission to press upon the House the duty of taking these things into
serious consideration, in the name of that dutiful concern for
posterity, which has been strong in every nation which ever did any
thing great, and which has never left the mind of any such nation until,
as in the case of the Romans under the Empire, it was already falling
into decrepitude, and ceasing to be a nation. There are many persons in
the world, and there may possibly be some in this House, though I should
be sorry to think so, who are not unwilling to ask themselves, in the
words of the old jest, “Why should we sacrifice anything for posterity;
what has posterity done for us?”6 They think that posterity has done
nothing for them: but that is a great mistake. Whatever has been done
for mankind by the idea of posterity; whatever has been done for mankind
by philanthropic concern for posterity, by a conscientious sense of duty
to posterity, even by the less pure but still noble ambition of being
remembered and honoured by posterity; all this we owe to posterity, and
all this it is our duty to the best of our limited ability to repay.
(Hear, hear.) All the great deeds of the founders of nations, and of
those second bfoundersb of nations, their great reformers—all that has
been done for us by the authors of those laws and institutions to which
free countries are indebted for their freedom, and well governed
countries for their good government; all the heroic lives which have
been led, and all the heroic deaths which have been died, in defence of
liberty and law against despotism and tyranny, from Marathon and Salamis
down to Leipsic and Waterloo; all those traditions of wisdom and of
virtue which are enshrined in the history and literature of the past—all
the schools and Universities by which the culture of former times has
been brought down to us, and Edition: current; Page: [73] all that
culture itself—all that we owe to the great masters of human thought and
to the great masters of human emotion—all this is ours because those who
preceded us have cared, and have taken thought, for posterity. (Hear,
hear.) Not owe anything to posterity, Sir! We owe to it Bacon, and
Newton, and Locke, cand Bentham; aye,c and Shakespeare, and Milton, and
Wordsworth.7 I have read of an eminent man—I am almost sure it was Dr.
Franklin—who, when he wished to relieve the necessities or assist the
occasions of any deserving person by pecuniary help, had a way of his
own of doing it, and it was this. He said to them, “I only lend you
this; if you are ever able, I expect you to repay it; but not to me:
repay it to some other necessitous person, and do it under the same
stipulation, that so the stream of benefits may still flow on, as long
and as far as human honesty can keep it flowing.”8 (Hear, hear.) What
Franklin did from beneficence, in order that the greatest possible
amount of good might be extracted from a limited fund, our predecessors,
to whom we owe so much, have done from the necessities of the case. The
debt of gratitude due to them is such as makes it at times almost an
oppressive thought that not one tittle of that vast debt can ever be
directly repaid to those from whom we have received so much. But, like
the objects of Franklin’s beneficence, we can indirectly repay it, by
paying it to others—to those others whom also they cared for, and for
whom, and not merely for us, their labours and sacrifices were
undergone. What are we, Sir—we of this generation, or of any other
generation, that we should usurp, and expend upon our particular and
exclusive uses, what was meant for mankind?9 It is lent to us, Sir, not
given: and it is our duty to pass it on, not merely undiminished, but
with interest, to those who are in the same relation to us as we are to
those who preceded us. So shall we too deserve, and may in our turn hope
to receive, a share of the same gratitude. (Hear, hear.)

[Neate withdrew the amendment, and the motion was defeated 234 to 150,
 voting with the majority.]

Edition: current; Page: [74]


19.: Inclosure of Hainault Forest
 25 APRIL, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 182, col. 2012. Reported in The Times, 26 April, p.
6.

mr. j. stuart  said, he would beg to ask the Secretary of State for
the Home Department,1 Whether the Inclosure Commissioners have finally
signed and sealed their award for the Inclosure of the newly-created
Common set out for the ratepayers of the parish of Chigwell; if he is
aware that the timber on the fifty acres of recreation ground granted by
Parliament in 18622 for the use of the Metropolitan public is being cut
down, thereby destroying the forestal appearance of the spot, which the
intention of the Legislature was to keep uninclosed and preserved in its
natural wildness; and if the destruction of the timber has been
sanctioned by the Inclosure Commissioners?

Sir George Grey: Sir, the Inclosure Commissioners have not finally
signed and sealed their award for this inclosure. The appeal meeting was
held only on the 17th of this month, and they have not yet received the
Report of their Assistant Commissioner on that meeting. With regard to
the latter part of the Question of the honourable Member, the
Commissioners have no knowledge of the timber on these fifty acres being
cut down, and if it is so it is entirely without their sanction. The
timber, they believe, belongs to the lady of the manor within which the
fifty acres are situated.


20.: Representation of the People [4]
 26 APRIL, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 182, col. 2100. Reported in The Times, 27 April, p.
6. During the seventh day of debate on the Second Reading of the Reform
Bill (see No. 15), Robert Lowe in a long speech (cols. 2077–99) made
repeated attacks on ’s position concerning representation of the
working classes, and concluded by complaining of ’s “narrowness and
illiberality” in “saying that those who differ from [him] must be wrong,
and that if it were not for the faulty constitution of this House we
should see and judge things in the same narrow manner as he does.” 
immediately rose and, “(amid loud cries of Order)” (The Times), replied.

i wish to correct the last assertion of my right honourable Friend. I
never Edition: current; Page: [75] imputed to honourable Gentlemen in
this House, or to the landed interest, that they were wilfully wrong.


21.: Chichester Fortescue’s Land Bill
 17 MAY, 1866

Chapters and Speeches on the Irish Land Question (London: Longmans, et
al., 1870), 97–107. The speech appears in PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 183, cols.
1087–97. Reported in The Times, 18 May, pp. 7–8, from which variants and
responses are taken. Writing to John Elliot Cairnes on 4 December, 1869,
 says: “The ‘Chapters and Speeches’ will be out shortly. The reports
of the speeches are taken from Hansard. The first of the two, that of
1866 [i.e., this speech], was printed verbatim from my MS.” (CW, Vol.
XVII, p. 1667.) There are, however, some substantive variants. (For the
second speech, see No. 88.)  spoke on the second reading of “A Bill
Further to Amend the Law Relating to the Tenure and Improvement of Land
in Ireland,” 29 Victoria (30 Apr., 1866), PP, 1866, V, 353–64.

it was in an auspicious hour for the futurity of Ireland, and of the
Empire of which Ireland is so important a part, that a British
Administration has introduced this Bill into Parliament. I venture to
express the opinion that nothing which any Government has yet done, or
which any Government has yet attempted to do, for Ireland—not even
Catholic Emancipation itself—has shown so true a comprehension of
Ireland’s real needs, or has aimed so straight at the very heart of
Ireland’s discontent and of Ireland’s misery. It is a fulfilment of the
promise held out by the Chancellor of the Exchequer at the beginning of
the Session, when, in discharging the painful duty of calling on
Parliament to treat Ireland once more—let us hope for the last time—as a
disaffected dependency, he declared his purpose, and that of the
Government of which he is a Member, to legislate for Ireland according
to Irish exigencies, and no longer according to English routine.1 To
have no better guide than routine is not a safe thing in any case; but
to make the routine of one country our guide in legislating for another,
is a mode of conduct which, unless by a happy accident, cannot lead to
good. It is a mistake which this country has often made—not perhaps so
much from being more liable to it than other countries, as from having
more opportunities of committing it: having been so often called on to
legislate, and to frame systems of administration, for dependencies very
unlike itself. Sir, it is a problem of this sort which we still have
before us when we attempt to legislate for Ireland. Not that Ireland is
a dependency—those days are over; she is an integral part of a great
self-governing nation: but a part, I venture to say, very unlike the
remaining parts. I am not going to talk about natural differences, race
Edition: current; Page: [76] and the like—the importance of which, I
think, is very much exaggerated; but let any honourable gentleman
consider what a different history Ireland has had from either England or
Scotland, and ask himself whether that history must not have left its
impress deeply engraven on Irish character. Consider again how
different, even at this day, are the social circumstances of Ireland
from those of England or Scotland; and whether such different
circumstances must not often require different laws and institutions.
(Hear, hear.) People often ask—it has been asked this evening2—why
should that which works well in England not work well in Ireland? or why
should anything be needed in Ireland which is not needed in England? Are
Irishmen an exception to all the rest of amankinda, that they cannot
bear the institutions and practices which reason and experience point
out as the best suited to promote national prosperity? Sir, we were
eloquently reminded the other night of that double ignorance against
which a great philosopher warned his cotemporaries—ignorance of our
being ignorant.3 But when we insist on applying the same rules in every
respect to Ireland and to England, we show another kind of double
ignorance, and at the same time disregard a precept older than
Socrates—the precept which was inscribed on the front of the Temple of
Delphi: we not only do not know those whom we undertake to govern, but
we do not know ourselves.4 (Cheers.) No, Sir, Ireland is not an
exceptional country; but England is. Irish circumstances and Irish ideas
as to social and agricultural economy are the general ideas and
circumstances of the human race; it is English circumstances and English
ideas that are peculiar. Ireland is in the main stream of human
existence and human feeling and opinion; it is England that is in one of
the lateral channels. If any honourable gentleman doubts this, I ask, is
there any other country on the face of the earth in which, not merely as
an occasional fact, but as a general rule, the land is owned in great
estates by one class, and farmed by another class of capitalist farmers
at money rents fixed by contract, while the actual cultivators of the
soil are hired labourers, wholly detached from the soil, and receiving
only day wages? (Cheers.) Parts of other countries may be pointed out
where something like this state of things exists bas an exceptional
factb, but Great Britain is the only country where it is the general
rule. In all other places in which the cultivators have emerged from
slavery, and from that modified form of slavery, serfage, and have
Edition: current; Page: [77] not risen into the higher position of
owning land in their own right, the labourer holds it, as in Ireland,
directly from the landowner, and the intermediate class of well-to-do
tenant-farmers has, as a general rule, no existence. Ireland is like the
rest of the world, and England is the exceptional country. Then, if we
are making rules for the common case, is it reasonable to draw our
precedents from the exceptional one? (Hear.) If we are to be guided by
experience in legislating for Ireland, it is Continental rather than
English experience that we ought to consider, for it is on the
Continent, and not in England, that we find anything like similarity of
circumstances. And this explains why so much has been said in Ireland
about tenant-right and fixity of tenure. For what does Continental
experience tell us, as a matter of historical fact? It tells us that
where this agricultural economy, in which the actual cultivator holds
the land directly from the proprietor, has been found consistent with
the good cultivation of the land or with the comfort and prosperity of
the cultivators, the rent has not been determined, as it is in Ireland,
merely by contract, but the occupier has had the protection of some sort
of fixed usage. (Hear, hear.) The custom of the country has determined
more or less precisely the rent which he should pay, and guaranteed the
permanence of his tenure as long as he paid it. Such a social and
agricultural system as exists in Ireland has neverc, or next to never,c
succeeded without tenant-right and fixity of tenure. Do I therefore ask
you to establish customary rents and fixity of tenure as the rule of
occupancy in Ireland? (Hear, hear.) Certainly not. It is perhaps a
sufficient reason that I know you will not do it (laughter); but I am
also aware that what may be very wholesome when it grows up as a custom,
approved and accepted by all parties, would not necessarily have the
same success if, without having ever existed as a custom, it were to be
enforced as da lawd. (Hear, hear.) Only I warn you of this. Peasant
farminge, as a rule,e never answers fanywheref without fixity of tenure.
If Ireland is ever to prosper with peasant farming, fixity of tenure is
an indispensable condition. But you do not want to perpetuate peasant
farming; you want to improve Ireland in another way. You prefer the
English agricultural economy, and desire to establish that. The only
mode of cultivation which seems to you beneficial is cultivation by
well-to-do tenant-farmers and hired labourers. Well, Sir, there is a
good deal to be said against this doctrine—it is very disputable, but I
am not going to dispute it now. I accept this as the thing you have got
to do, and assuming it to be desirable, I ask, how is it to be brought
about? This is not the first time that a problem of this sort has been
propounded. The French Economists of the eighteenth century—on the whole
the most enlightened thinkers of their time—tried to deal with a state
of things not unlike what you have to deal with; and they wanted exactly
what you want. They had a wretched, down-trodden, half-starved race of
peasant cultivators, and they wanted to have, instead of these, Edition:
current; Page: [78] comfortable farmers. Some of the more enlightened of
the great landlords of France adopted the doctrines of the Economists,
and would gladly have carried them into practice; but nothing came of
it, and the reform of the agricultural economy of France had to wait for
a revolution. (Cheers.) Now, to what do the best writers attribute the
failure of these agricultural reformers? To this—that they aimed at
putting farmers in the place of the peasants, when they should have
aimed at raising the peasants into farmers. If you are going to succeed
where they failed, it can only be by avoiding their error. Instead of
bringing in capitalist farmers over the heads of the tenants, you have
got to take the best of the present tenants, and elevate them into the
comfortable farmers you want to have. You cannot evict a whole nation
(cheers)—the country would be too hot to hold you and your new tenants
if you attempted it. And supposing even that things could be made smooth
for the successors of the existing peasantry by means of emigration, are
you going to expatriate a whole people? (Cheers.) Would any honourable
gentleman desire to do that? Would he endure the thought of doing it?
Supposing even that you sought to use the right of landed property for
such a purpose, is there any human institution which could have such a
strain put upon it and not snap? (Cheers.) Well, then, how are the
present tenantry, or the best of them, to be raised into a superior
class of farmers? There is but one way, and this Bill which is before
you affords the means. Give them what you can of the encouraging
influences of ownership. (Cheers.) Give them an interest in improvement.
Enable them to be secure of enjoying the fruits of their own labour and
outlay. Let their improvements be for their own benefit, and not solely
for those whose land they till. There is no parallel problem to be
resolved on this side of St. George’s Channel. The system of tenancy in
England is found to be at least not incompatible with agricultural
improvement. In England and Scotland a large proportion of the
landowners either give leases to their tenants which afford them
sufficient time for reaping the benefit of whatever improvements they
may make, or, when there are no leases, there is generally such a degree
of confidence and mutual understanding between landlord and tenant, that
they make their improvements in concert; or at all events the tenant, as
a general rule, has no fear that the landlord will take an unfair
advantage of him, and, by accepting a higher offer over his head, will
possess himself without compensation of the increased value which the
tenant has given to the land. This is the case in England: but how is it
in Ireland? The reverse in all respects. (Oh, oh!) There are few leases,
except old and expiring ones, and no confidence at all between landlords
and tenants. g(Oh, oh!) Well, at least one-halfg of the landlords, or
some other proportion of them, do not deserve confidence, and the
consequence is that the tenants dare not trust the other half. (Hear,
hear, and laughter.) If a tenant does trust his landlord, he does not
trust, for he does not know, the next heir, or the stranger who may buy
the property Edition: current; Page: [79] in the Landed Estates Court.
The extent to which this want of confidence reaches is really one of the
most remarkable facts in all history. There have been incontestable
proofs of late years that the tenant farmers of Ireland often possess a
considerable amount of savings. Where do these savings go to? They go
into banks of deposit; they go into the English funds; they go under the
thatch; everywhere but to their natural investment, the farm. (Hear,
hear.) There is something, to my mind, almost tragical in this state of
things. For the fact is decidedly honourable to Irish landlords that
these savings have been made by their tenants; it exculpates a large
proportion of them from the indiscriminate charges often brought against
the entire hclassh (hear, hear); it proves that a much greater number of
them than has often been supposed are neither greedy nor grasping, do
not rack-rent their tenants, or take the last farthing in payment of
rent; and in spite of this, the tenants are so absolutely without
confidence in them, that even the sums which the landlord’s forbearance
has enabled them to accumulate are sent away everywhere—are employed for
any purpose—except the most obvious and natural purpose, the improvement
of their farms. (Hear, hear.) Now, are you going to let this state of
things continue? If we all deplore it—if we all are ashamed of it—what
remedy is there but one? Give the tenant compensation, awarded by an
impartial tribunal, for whatever increased value—and only for the
increased value—he has given to the land. Do not use the fruits of his
labour or of his outlay without paying for them, or without giving him
assurance of being paid for them. (Hear.) The Bill appoints an impartial
tribunal. When the parties do not agree, the case is to be adjudged by
authorities who even in Ireland deserve and possess the confidence alike
of landlords and tenants. Valuers appointed by the Government Board of
Works will decide in the first instance, and the assistant barrister,
the stipendiary Chairman of Quarter Sessions, is the Judge in appeal.5 I
believe no one doubts that such arbitrators as these would be impartial,
and would be trusted by the Irish people. But the right honourable
gentleman who spoke last (Mr. Lowe) said it was not so much the giving
compensation he objected to, as to the fact that improvements might be
made under the Bill, to which the consent of the landlord had not been
previously obtained.6 That provision, however, if we consider the
matter, is the very essence of the Bill, and is indispensable to its
operation. If improvements are only to be made by the landlord’s
permission, and on his voluntary promise of an indemnity, that can be
done now; saving, indeed, some insufficiency in the legal power of a
limited owner to bind his successors. But experience proves that when
there is a want of confidence between landlords and tenants,
improvements which require the previous consent of the landlord are not
made at all. The tenant is afraid to serve a notice on his landlord. He
is afraid to announce before hand to the Edition: current; Page: [80]
landlord that he is in a condition to make improvements, lest, being
mostly a tenant-at-will, he should be thought to be also in a condition
to pay a higher rent. Or he fears that the landlord will do what some
landlords have been known to do—withhold his assent, on the speculation
that the tenant may make the improvement notwithstanding, and the
landlord may be able to profit by it without paying any indemnity.
(Hear, hear.) Or he thinks that the landlord may dislike an improving
tenant, from a mere wish to keep his tenantry in a state of dependence.
And what does the landlord sacrifice by renouncing the condition of
previous consent? Nothing whatever but the power of taking for himself
the fruits of the labour of others. (Hear, hear.) He will still be free
to improve the estate himself, if he can and will. But if he does not,
and his tenant does, he will be prevented from appropriating the value
which the tenant has created, without paying him an equivalent. What he
will have to pay, will be determined not by the outlay of the tenant,
but by ithei value actually added to the farm by the tenant’s labour or
outlay, in the opinion of an impartial tribunal. It is of no consequence
how much the tenant may have expended; unless he has made the land worth
more money to the landlord for the landlord’s uses, he will receive
nothing. Even in such a case as that to which the right honourable
gentleman alluded, and to which reference was frequently made before the
Committee7—the case of a landlord wishing to consolidate his farms, and
the buildings erected by the tenant not being required when such
consolidation takes place—this circumstance would be taken into
consideration by the valuer, and the tenant would have to bear the loss.
Indeed, in no case would the landlord sustain any pecuniary loss. He
would simply have to pay for value received. The objection is what would
be called on almost any subject but the present, a purely abstract
objection. The Bill is thought to violate a certain abstract right of
property in land. I call it an abstract right, meaning that it is of no
value to the possessor though it is hurtful to other people. Of what
earthly use to any landed proprietor is the right of preventing
improvement? (Hear, hear.) It is the right of the dog in the manger.
Yet, wonderful to relate, even this the Bill does not take away; it
leaves to the landlord the power of preventing the tenant’s improvements
by a previous stipulation. But it does this in the confidence—I believe
the well-grounded confidence—that the power will seldom be used, except
when there is something to justify it in the special circumstances of
the case. The framers of the Bill place a just reliance in the influence
of a sound moral principle when once embodied in the law. They know that
there is a great difference between requiring the tenant to ask
permission from the landlord to make improvements, and throwing the onus
on the landlord of prohibiting by anticipation a public benefit (hear),
which the law, if this Bill passes, will have Edition: current; Page:
[81] declared its purpose of encouraging. I maintain, Sir, that the
claim of the improver to the value of his improvements, so far from
conflicting with the right of property in land, is a right of the very
same description as landed property, and rests on the same foundation.
What is the ground and justification of landed property? I am afraid
some honourable Members think that I am going to give utterance to some
grave heresy on this subject. At least, those honourable gentlemen who
have been so obliging as to advertise my writings on an unexampled
scale, and entirely free of expense either to myself or jto myj
publisher (a laugh), seemed to be much scandalized by some passages they
had discovered, to the effect that landed property must be more limited
in its nature than other proprietary rights, because no man made the
land.8 Well, Sir, did any man make the land? If not, did any man acquire
it by gift, or by bequest, or by inheritance, or by purchase, from the
maker of it? These, I apprehend, are the foundations of the right to
other property. Then what is the foundation of the right to property in
land? The answer commonly made to this question is enough for me, and I
agree in it. Though no man made the land, men, by their industry, made
the valuable qualities of it; they reclaimed it from the waste, they
brought it under cultivation, they made it useful to man, and so
acquired as just a title to it as men have to what they have themselves
made. Very well: I have nothing to say against this. But why, I ask, is
this right, which is acquired by improving the land, to be for ever
confined to the person who first improved it? If it requires improving
again, and some one does improve it again, does not this new improver
acquire a kind of right akin to that of the original improver? Of course
I do not pretend that when one person has acquired a right to land by
improving it, another, by improving it again, can oust the first man of
his right. But neither do I admit that the man who has once improved a
piece of land, acquires thereby an indefeasible right to prevent any one
else from improving it for the whole remainder of eternity (hear, hear);
or a right to profit, without cost to himself, by improvements which
some one else has made. Landed property in its origin had nothing to
rest upon but the moral claim of the improver to the value of his
improvement; and unless we recognise on the same ground a kindred claim
in the temporary occupier, we give up the moral basis on which landed
property rests, and leave it without any justification but that of
actual possession—a title which can be pleaded for every possible abuse.
We have heard a good deal lately about “thoughtful Reformers” kwho
seemed to be held in some sort of contempt of late (a laugh)k. It seems
there are a great many thoughtful Reformers in this House—some of them
very thoughtful ones indeed. I wish there were as many Edition: current;
Page: [82] thoughtful Conservatives; but I am afraid they keep most of
their thoughtfulness for Reform. However, we know there are thoughtful
Conservatives, and they cannot be all on this side of the House. Let me
remind them of a writer with whose works they must all of them be
familiar—the most thoughtful mind that ever tried to give a philosophic
basis to English Conservatism—the late Mr. Coleridge. In his second Lay
Sermon, this eminent Conservative propounds a theory of property in
land, compared with which anything which I ever hinted at is the merest
milk and water.9 (A laugh.) His idea of landed property is, that it is a
kind of public function—a trust rather than a property—which the owner
is morally justified in using for his own advantage, only after certain
great social ends, connected with the cultivation of the country and the
well-being of its inhabitants, have been amply fulfilled. I am not
claiming anything comparable to this. All I ask is, that the improvement
of the country and the well-being of the people may be attended to, when
they are proved not to be inconsistent with the pecuniary interest of
the landowners. This modest demand is the only one I make; because I
believe, and because it is believed by those who are better judges of
the condition of Ireland than I can pretend to be, that no more than
this is necessary to cure the existing evils. Sir, the House has now a
golden opportunity. When I think how small a thing it is which is now
asked of us, and when I hear, as I have heard, Members of this House,
usually classed as of extreme opinions—men who are Irish of the Irish,
who have the full confidence of what is called the National party—when
such men assure us that the tenantry, who have been scarcely touched by
any of the things you have hitherto done for the benefit of Ireland,
will, as they hope, and as they think there is ground to believe, be
reconciled to their lot (hear, hear), and changed from a discontented,
if not disloyal, to a hopeful and satisfied part of the nation, by so
moderate—I had almost said so minute—a concession as that which is now
proposed;10 I confess I am amazed that those who have suffered so long
and so bitterly are able to be conciliated or calmed by so small a gift
(hear); and deplorable would it indeed be if so small a gift were
refused to them. Even if we ourselves had not full confidence in this
remedy, there is nothing in it so alarming that we need be afraid to
try, as an experiment, what is so ardently wished for by a country to
which we owe so much reparation that she ought to be the spoilt child of
this country for a generation to come—to be treated not only with
justice but with generous indulgence. (Cheers.) I am speaking in the
presence of many who listened, like myself, to that touching speech
which was delivered on the last night Edition: current; Page: [83] of
the Reform debate, by the honourable Member for Tralee (The
O’Donoghue)—when he, who is so well entitled to speak in the name of the
Irish people, and of that portion of them of whom we have had the
hardest thoughts, and who have had the hardest thoughts of us, held out
his hand to us and declared that if there is even one party in this
House and in this country who reciprocate the feeling he then showed,
and really regard the Irish as fellow-countrymen, they will be
fellow-countrymen to us—they will labour and contend by our side, have
the same objects with us, look forward to the same and not to a
different future, and let the dream of a separate nationality remain a
dream.11 Many, I am sure, must have felt as I felt while I listened to
his eloquent and feeling words, that if this House only wills it, that
speech is the beginning of a new era. Let us not fling away in want of
thought—for it is not want of heart—the reconciliation so frankly
tendered. History will not say that we of the present generation are
unwilling to lgovern Ireland as she ought to be governed:—let us not go
down to posterity with the contemptible reputation of being unable to do
sol. Let it not be said of us that, with the best possible intentions
towards Ireland, no length of time or abundance of experience could
teach us to understand her—whether it is insular narrowness, making us
incapable of imagining that Ireland’s exigencies could be in any way
different from England’s; mor because the religious respect we cherish
for everything which has the smallest savour of a right of property, has
degenerated, as is sometimes the case with other religions,m into a
superstition. Let us show that our principles of government are not a
mere generalization from English facts; but that in legislating for
Ireland we can take into account Irish circumstances: and that our care
for landed property is an intelligent regard for its essentials, and for
the ends it fulfils, and not a servile prostration before its mere name.
(Loud cheers.)

[After further debate on 25 July the Bill was withdrawn.]


22.: Representation of the People [5]
 31 MAY, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 183, cols. 1590–2. Reported in The Times, 1 June, p.
6, from which the variants and responses are taken. The continued debate
was on the motion to go into Committee on the Reform Bill (see No. 15)
and “A Bill for the Redistribution of Seats,” 29 Victoria (7 May, 1866),
PP, 1866, V, 33–48. The discussion was on an amendment Edition: current;
Page: [84] opposing the government’s proposal to group boroughs. After
considerable debate Pakington spoke, followed by .

honourable gentlemen opposite in considerable numbers have shown a very
great desire to inform the House, not so much as to their views on the
question before us, as with regard to what I have said or written upon
the subject, and they have also shown a great desire to know the reasons
I have for the course which they suppose I am going to take upon the
question.1 I should be sorry to refuse any honourable Gentleman so very
small a request, but I must first of all correct a mistake made by the
right honourable Baronet (Sir John Pakington) who has just sat down. I
did not allow myself to be persuaded not to speak upon the Bill of my
honourable Friend the Member for Hull (Mr. Clay).2 I had various reasons
for the silence which I observed on that occasion. One of these I have
the less hesitation in stating, because I think it is one with which the
House will fully sympathize—a decided disinclination for being made a
catspaw of. (Hear, hear.) What other reasons I had may possibly appear
in the very few observations that I am now about to make, for the
gratification of those honourable Gentlemen who show so much friendly
concern for my consistency. No doubt it is a very flattering thing to
find one’s writings so much referred to and quoted; but any vanity I
might have felt in consequence has been considerably dashed, by
observing that honourable Gentlemen’s knowledge of my writings is
strictly limited to the particular passages which they quote. (Hear,
hear, and laughter.) I suppose they found the books too dull to read any
further. But if they had done me the honour to read on, they would have
learnt a little more about my opinions than they seem to know. It may be
that I have suggested plurality of votes and various other checks as
proper parts of a general system of representation; but I should very
much like to know where any Gentleman finds I have stated that checks
and safeguards are required against a £7 franchise? (Laughter.) The
proposals I made had reference to universal suffrage, of which I am a
strenuous advocate. It appeared to me that certain things Edition:
current; Page: [85] were necessary in order to prevent universal
suffrage from degenerating into the mere ascendancy of a particular
class. Is there any danger that the working class will acquire a
numerical ascendancy by the reduction of the franchise qualification to
£7? It is ridiculous to suppose such a thing. (Hear.) The effect of the
present Bill will not be to create the ascendancy of a class, but to
weaken and mitigate the ascendancy of a class; and there is no need for
the particular checks which I suggested. I must, however, except one of
them, which is equally desirable in any representative constitution—the
representation of minorities; and I heartily congratulate the right
honourable Baronet on the qualified adhesion which he has given to that
principle.3 It is not intended specially as a check on democracy—it is a
check upon whatever portion of the community is strongest—on any abuse
of power by the class that may chance to be uppermost. Instead of being
opposed to democracy, it is actually a corollary from the democratic
principle, for on that principle every one would have a vote, and all
votes would be of equal value; but without the representation of
minorities all votes have not an equal value, for practically nearly
one-half of the constituency is disfranchised, for the benefit, it may
happen, not even of the majority, but of another minority. Suppose that
a House of Commons is elected by a bare majority of the people, and that
it afterwards passes laws by a bare majority of itself. The outvoted
minority out of doors, and the outvoted minority of the Members of this
House who were elected by the majority out of doors, might possibly
agree; and thus a little more than one-fourth of the community would
actually have defeated the remaining three-fourths. (Hear, hear.) On the
principle of justice, therefore, and on the principle of democracy above
all, the representation of minorities appears to me an absolutely
necessary part of any representative constitution which it is intended
should permanently work well. If the right honourable Gentleman who has
declared in favour of the representation of minorities (Sir John
Pakington) will bring forward a Motion, in any form which can possibly
pass, with a view to engraft that principle upon any Bill, I shall have
the greatest pleasure in seconding him. (Hear, hear.) I desire to make a
brief explanation in reference to a passage which the right honourable
Gentleman has quoted from a portion of my writings, and which has some
appearance of being less polite than I should wish always to be in
speaking of a great party. What I stated was, that the Conservative
party was, by the law of its constitution, necessarily the stupidest
party.4 (Laughter.) Now, aI do not retract this assertion; but I did not
mean that Conservatives are generally stupid;a I meant, that stupid
persons are generally Conservative. (Laughter and Edition: current;
Page: [86] cheers.) I believe that to be so obvious and undeniable a
fact that I hardly think any honourable Gentleman will question it. Now,
if any party, in addition to whatever share it may possess of the
ability of the community, has nearly the whole of its stupidity, that
party, I apprehend, must by the law of its constitution be the stupidest
party. And I do not see why honourable Gentlemen should feel that
position at all offensive to them; for it ensures their being always an
extremely powerful party. (Hear, hear.) I know I am liable to a retort,
an obvious one enough, and as I do not intend any honourable Gentleman
to have the credit of making it, I make it myself. It may be said that
if stupidity has a tendency to Conservatism, sciolism and half-knowledge
have a tendency to Liberalism. Well, Sir, something might be said for
that—but it is not at all so clear as the other. There is an uncertainty
about half-informed people. You cannot count upon them. You cannot tell
what their way of thinking may be. It varies from day to day, perhaps
with the last book they have readb, and therefore they are as likely to
prove Conservatives as Liberals, and as likely to be Liberals as
Conservativesb. They are a less numerous class, and also an uncertain
class. But there is a dense solid force in sheer stupidity—such, that a
few able men, with that force pressing behind them, are assured of
victory in many a struggle; and many a victory the Conservative party
have owed to that force. (Laughter.) I only rose for the purpose of
making this personal explanation (hear, hear), and I do not intend to
enter into the merits of the Amendment, especially as I concur in all
that has been said in the admirable speech of my right honourable Friend
the Member for London (Mr. Goschen).5 (Cheers.)

[After lengthy debate, there was an adjournment to the following day;
another long debate then led to a further adjournment to 4 June, when
there was agreement to go into Committee.]


23.: The Ministerial Crisis
 23 JUNE, 1866

Daily News, 25 June, 1866, p. 3. Headed: “The Ministerial Crisis. /
Westminster.” Reported identically in substantives in the Morning Star,
and the Daily Telegraph; the version in The Times is a generally
compressed rewording with some additions. (Clippings of the Daily News
and The Times reports are in the -Taylor Collection.) The meeting of
the electors of Westminster was held on Saturday evening in the Pimlico
Rooms, Winchester Street, W.T. Malleson in the chair, “to urge the
propriety of dissolving Edition: current; Page: [87] Parliament, and
voting unabated confidence in the Ministry,” following Gladstone’s
defeat on the Reform Bill (see the debate and votes on 18 June in PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 184, cols. 536–643). The room was about half full, and
there were only some eight or nine on the platform. Malleson apologized
for Grosvenor’s unavoidable absence, assuring the audience of his
loyalty to the cause. Of  he said, “the whole country was proud, and
he believed that they would seldom find in the history of the House of
Commons any occasion on which a new member had so suddenly risen to so
prominent a position, had so rapidly established himself in the House of
Commons, and had so soon made a firm place for himself in the hearts of
his fellow-countrymen. (Cheers.)” (Daily Telegraph.) Probyn moved,
Merriman seconding, a resolution expressing confidence in the Ministry.
, “on rising, was greeted with tremendous applause, the whole
assembly rising and cheering with extraordinary vehemence.”

he said they were called together that evening in order that they might
ask themselves the question whether or not the people of Westminster
cared for reform. That was the question before them, and that was the
only question. Who would be the men for whom her Majesty would send to
form an administration if she accepted the resignation of her present
advisers of course they could not tell, but he could state what her
Majesty ought to do, if she followed the old constitutional practice of
sending for the leader of the victorious party, and that was to send for
Mr. Lowe. (Hear, hear, and laughter.) It was he who carried with him the
triumphant majority the other night, for although he was the only man
amongst the opponents of the present bill who in direct terms declared
he was against all reform whatever, yet all who had heard, as he had
done, the shouts of rejoicing which greeted every anti-popular sentiment
to which Mr. Lowe gave utterance, would know that the whole of the
sympathies of the tory party were against any measure of reform,
whatever it might be.1 He believed that there were only two opinions as
to what might be the course the conservatives would pursue if they were
able to form a ministry—first, whether they would propose a reform bill
at all; and second, whether they would propose a reform bill which was
not reform. They said that any bill on this subject must be a
compromise. Well, the liberal party made a compromise at the
commencement of the session, and a very great compromise it was. They
gave up the best part of the matter in dispute to the tories, and now
after the liberals had given up to them the better half they cried
halves for the remainder. (Laughter.) The difference was split with them
in the first instance, and now they wanted to split the other part. But
it was worse even than that, and he was going to tell them something
which they had all the means of knowing, but which few had paid much
attention to, and a very significant and characteristic process it was.
He would tell them what was proposed by one of the best of the tory
party. They all knew, perhaps, that a political party had heads and
tails. The tails of Edition: current; Page: [88] the liberal party
sometimes thought that the heads were not quite so good as they should
be, but the tory heads were unquestionably a great deal better than the
tails. One of the best of the tory heads was Sir Stafford Northcote, a
gentleman for whom every one ought to entertain a very sincere respect,
because it was to him, in conjunction with Sir Charles Trevelyan, that
they owed those competitive examinations by which government
appointments, instead of being given, as they used to be, to party
connexions for political purposes, were given to proved fitness tested
by fair examination.2 Now, when a man agreed that all the spoils of
office and all the booty of political life, which unprincipled
politicians desired to appropriate for the interests and advancement of
their party, should be given up not for the reward of political
subserviency, but to persons of whatever class or rank who could prove
themselves qualified for public appointments, although they might never
have, perhaps, seen the face of a member of parliament, nothing should
persuade him that such a man was really a tory, aor wished to postpone
the interests of the people in order that he might advance the
prosperity of his own party. That was what he thought of Sir Stafford
Northcote. Well, what did theya put Sir Stafford Northcote up to do?
They followed out their usual tactics in putting up their best men to do
their shabbiest things. All present knew how much had been said about
large numbers of working people being admitted to the franchise, and how
solemnly parliament had been warned that if they let in many more there
might be a majority, who would be induced to let in others, until at
length the door was opened so wide that all were let in, and that then
Heaven knew what would be the result. Now what did they think Sir
Stafford Northcote proposed?3 If a working man could occupy a 10l. house
it must in most cases be by letting some part of it, but Sir Stafford
Northcote proposed to disfranchise all such persons, unless they were
able to show that, after deducting all they received from letting, they
paid 10l. or 7l., or whatever other sum might be agreed upon, to their
landlord. bProbably he would have spared those who were at present on
the register, but he would not consent that any one hereafter should be
on the register who did not pay to his landlord that 10l. or 7l., or
other sum. That was a condition which very few working men could
fulfil;b and if that proposition came from one of the best, most honest,
and most liberal members of the conservative party, what might they
Edition: current; Page: [89] expect from the others? (Hear, hear.) Now,
as to the foreign policy of the tories, he wished all those present
could have listened as he had done to the five hours of solemn abuse of
the Italians, in which the tories had indulged when the Reform Bill
should have been brought under discussion.4 Liberals, panting to help
and defend the noble Italians against the calumnies heaped upon them,
were restrained from entering upon the discussion, clest they should
have delayed the bill on which the hearts of reformers were setc. But
now came the question of the present government. All knew the noble
manner in which they had held up the banner of the people through the
late stormy session. Their political enemies had been taunting them and
insulting them day after day, saying that here was a government which
started with a clear majority of seventy, and had converted it into a
minority of eleven. Well, so they had, and why had they done it? There
was a majority of seventy pledged to support a liberal government, and
who would have supported them if they had followed out Lord Palmerston’s
policy of doing nothing, and glossing it off as an excellent joke.5 The
government might have a seven years’ undisturbed lease of power if they
had adopted a similar course—that is, if they had determined on doing
nothing in the way of reform. But they had chosen to resign office, to
receive baiting, taunts, and insults, directed against them all; but
more particularly against Mr. Gladstone, the greatest parliamentary
leader which the country had had in the present century, or, perhaps,
since the time of the Stuartsd, by those who ought to have been in
ecstacies of admiration at the way in which he outdid himself and at the
beautiful feeling which animated his eloquence. Like Hotspur, he had
been nettled and stung by pismires,6 that annoyance had been inflicted
in the hope that either he might be led to give way to something like
foolish irritability, or that those eloquent lips, which gave such happy
expression to every feeling that became an honest and upright
politician, might deny to themselves the utterance of honest
indignationd. Whatever the speculation might have been, it had been
defeated—the hopes of the opponents of the government had not been
fulfilled. (Hear, hear.) eAs to dissolution, he, as member for
Westminster, was the last who should speak to his constituents of a
dissolution; because, perhaps, he was the only member of the House of
Commons whose election had cost him nothing.e It would appear to him the
most natural thing that Edition: current; Page: [90] his constituents
might not like to incur this great expense twice in the same twelve
months. (Yes, yes.) It was very natural that they should not wish it,
and he should not have the face to ask it for himself. If they thought
they could fight this battle more advantageously with any other
candidate than himself—any candidate who would bear the expenses that
must necessarily be incurred, or part of them—he trusted that no
consideration for himself would induce them to refrain from taking that
course. fSo far from thinking himself slighted, he would be the first to
condemn them if they lost the seat on the chance of preserving it for
him.f They had, above all things, to consider how they could carry this
bill and support the government, and he most sincerely hoped that no
other consideration would induce them to allow that object to be
interfered with.

gAt the close of the honourable member’s speech the meeting with one
accord declared that the electors would pay the expenses of his election
50 times, if necessary, and would esteem themselves honoured in having
him as their representative. The resolution was then agreed to. In reply
to a question from an elector, Mr.  said that Captain Grosvenor had
not suffered in the estimation of his political friends by his vote in
favour of Sir R. Knightley’s amendment for an instruction to the
committee to add to the Reform Bill provisions against bribery and
corruption.7 It was a question of tactics. He voted the other way; but,
no doubt, Captain Grosvenor thought his vote was in favour of the best
policy, and it had not shaken the confidence of the Liberal party in the
honourable and gallant gentleman’s political honesty.g

[Another resolution in support of the Ministry was moved and accepted
unanimously. The meeting concluded, as usual, with a vote of thanks to
the chairman.]


24.: The Jamaica Committee
 9 JULY, 1866

Daily News, 10 July, p. 3. Headed: “The Jamaica Committee.” Reported
also in the Morning Star, The Times, and (in brief summary) in the Daily
Telegraph. This special meeting of the Jamaica Committee was held in the
evening in Radley’s Hotel, Bridge Street, with P.A. Taylor in the chair.
The meeting was called because Charles Buxton had published a letter in
The Times, 30 June, p. 12, and other papers resigning his chairmanship
and strongly criticizing the Committee’s action. He believed that the
Executive Committee had decided by a vote of 11 to 3 to prosecute the
ex-Governor of Jamaica, Edward John Eyre Edition: current; Page: [91]
(1815–1901), for the murder of George William Gordon 1818–65), a popular
Jamaican leader. The meeting opened with a summary of events by Taylor,
who condemned the way Buxton had proceeded, his view being that the
general opinion at the earlier meeting, not confirmed by a vote, was
that the Committee should press the Government to prosecute Eyre for
murder, failing which they should give assistance to Gordon’s widow to
carry on a prosecution. When Buxton defended himself, Bright countered
in scathing terms. Ludlow moved “That this committee approves and
confirms the resolutions passed by the executive committee on the 26th
of June”; Goldwin Smith seconded. T.F. Buxton spoke in support of
Charles Buxton’s actions, and after further speeches the resolution was
passed with one dissenting vote. A motion by Beales that  be elected
chairman was adopted unanimously. Then  spoke.

gentlemen, I think you for this honour and mark of your confidence. I
accept the post you have given me. (Cheers.) I do so in the full
conviction that the objects of this committee are simply to ascertain
whether there exist in this country any means for making a British
functionary responsible for blood unlawfully shed—(applause)—and whether
that be murder or not. I believe it to be murder. (Hear, hear.) This
committee ought not to rest until it obtains from the legislature the
assurance that men like Mr. Eyre will be made responsible for their
criminal actions. (Hear, hear.)

[Votes of thanks were passed to Messrs. Gorrie and Payne, solicitors,
for their services in Jamaica, and to the chair, and the meeting
separated.]


25.: Electoral Franchise for Women
 17 JULY, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, cols. 996–8. Reported in The Times, 18 July, p.
8, from which the variant and responses are taken.  spoke in moving
“for an Address for ‘Return of the number of Freeholders, Householders,
and others in England and Wales who, fulfilling the conditions of
property or rental prescribed by Law as the qualification for the
Electoral Franchise, are excluded from the Franchise by reason of their
sex.’ ”

sir, I rise to make the Motion of which I have given notice.1 After the
petition which I had the honour of presenting a few weeks ago, the House
would naturally expect that its attention would be called, however
briefly, to the claim preferred in that document.2 The petition, and the
circumstances attendant on its preparation, Edition: current; Page: [92]
have, to say the least, greatly weakened the chief practical argument
which we have been accustomed to hear against any proposal to admit
women to the electoral franchise—namely, that few, if any, women desire
it. Originating as that petition did entirely with ladies, without the
instigation, and, to the best of my belief, without the participation of
any person of the male sex in any stage of the proceedings, except the
final one of its presentation to Parliament, the aamount of response
which became manifest, the number of signatures obtained in a very short
space of time, not to mention the quality of many of those signatures,
may not have been surprising to the ladies who promoted the petition,
but was certainly quite unexpected by mea. I recognize in it the
accustomed sign that the time has arrived when a proposal of a public
nature is ripe for being taken into serious consideration—namely, when a
word spoken on the subject is found to have been the expression of a
silent wish pervading a great number of minds, and a signal given in the
hope of rallying a few supporters is unexpectedly answered by many. It
is not necessary to offer any justification for the particular Motion
which I am about to make. (Hear, hear.) When the complaint is made that
certain citizens of this nation, fulfilling all the conditions and
giving all the guarantees which the Constitution and the law require
from those who are admitted to a voice in determining who shall be their
rulers, are excluded from that privilege for what appears to them, and
for what appears to me, an entirely irrelevant consideration, the least
we can do is to ascertain what number of persons are affected by the
grievance, and how great an addition would be made to the constituency
if this disability were removed. I should not have attempted more than
this in the present Session, even if the recent discussions in reference
to Reform had not been brought to an abrupt close. Even if the late
Government had succeeded in its honourable attempt to effect an amicable
compromise of the Reform question; any understanding or any wish which
might have existed as to the finality, for a certain period, of that
compromise, could not have effected such a proposal as this, the
adoption of which would not be, in any sense of the term, a lowering of
the franchise, and is not intended to disturb in any degree the
distribution of political power among the different classes of society.
Indeed, honourable Gentlemen opposite seem to think, and I suppose they
are the best judges, that this concession, assuming it to be made, if it
had any effect on party politics at all, would be favourable to their
side (hear); and the right honourable Member for Dublin University, in
his humorous manner, advised me on that ground to withdraw this article
from my political programme;3 but I cannot, either in jest or in
earnest, adopt his suggestion, for I am bound to consider the permanent
benefit of the community before the temporary interest of a party; and I
entertain the firmest Edition: current; Page: [93] conviction that
whatever holds out an inducement to one-half of the community to
exercise their minds on the great social and political questions which
are discussed in Parliament, and whatever causes the great influence
they already possess to be exerted under the guidance of greater
knowledge, and under a sense of responsibility, cannot be ultimately
advantageous to the Conservative or any other cause, except so far as
that cause is a good one. And I rejoice in the knowledge that in the
estimation of many honourable Gentlemen of the party opposite, the
proposal made in the petition is, like many of the most valuable
Reforms, as truly Conservative, as I am sure it is truly Liberal. I
listened with pleasure and gratitude to the right honourable Gentleman
who is now Chancellor of the Exchequer, when in his speech on the second
reading of the Reform Bill,4 he said he saw no reason why women of
independent means should not possess the electoral franchise, in a
country where they can preside in manorial courts and fill parish
offices—to which let me add, and the Throne. (Hear, hear.)

[Spencer Walpole said he would consent to the motion, without pledging
himself to any future action, and the motion was agreed to.]


26.: The Disturbances in Jamaica [1]
 19 JULY, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, cols. 1064–6. Reported in The Times, 20 July, p.
5.

mr. j. stuart  said, wishing to spare the House the monotonously
painful details contained in the Questions of which he had given notice,
he would simply ask the right honourable Gentleman the Chancellor of the
Exchequer,1 Whether any steps had been or would be taken by Her
Majesty’s Government for bringing to justice those who had been
concerned in the commission of various illegal acts in Jamaica?

The Chancellor of the Exchequer:

I should prefer, Sir, that the honourable Gentleman should ask the
Questions in detail. I think the Questions which the honourable
Gentleman has thought proper in his discretion to address to the
Executive should be well known to the House, as many honourable Members
have not really had an opportunity of making themselves acquainted with
them. Under these circumstances, it is due to the House and to the
subject that the honourable Edition: current; Page: [94] Gentleman
should address himself now to the House, and let them hear what the
Questions are. (Hear, hear.)

Mr. J. Stuart :

Does the right honourable Gentleman desire me to read the whole?

The Chancellor of the Exchequer:

The whole.

Mr. J. Stuart :

I beg to ask Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Whether any steps have
been or will be taken to bring to trial Lieutenant Adcock,2 for
unlawfully putting to death two men named Mitchell and Hill without
trial, and six persons, after alleged trial by Court Martial, on charges
not cognizable by a Military Court; for flogging, without trial, John
Anderson and others, and authorizing one Henry Ford to flog many men and
women without trial, one of whom, named John Mullins, died in
consequence: Whether any steps have been or will be taken to bring to
trial Captain Hole for hanging one Donaldson without trial; for
shooting, and permitting to be shot, various persons without trial; for
putting to death by hanging, or shooting, thirty-three persons, after
trial by a so-called Military Court, for acts not cognizable by a
Military Court, and without observance of the rules prescribed by the
Articles of War; for flogging various men and women without trial; and
for being accessory, after the fact, to the unlawful putting to death of
numerous persons by soldiers under his command: Whether any steps have
been or will be taken to bring to trial Lieutenant Oxley, for putting
John Burdy to death after a similar unlawful trial, and for permitting
the men under his command to fire at unarmed peasants and cause the
death of several persons: Whether any steps have been or will be taken
to bring to trial Ensign Cullen and Dr. Morris, for putting three men3
to death without trial, and Dr. Morris for shooting one William Gray:
Whether any steps have been or will be taken to bring to trial
Stipendiary Magistrate Fyfe, for burning houses of peasantry, putting to
death one person without trial,4 and being accessory to the unlawful
putting to death of various others: Whether any steps have been or will
be taken to bring to trial Attorney General Heslop, Lieutenant Brand,
Captain Luke, and Captain Field, for sitting as presidents or members of
alleged Courts Martial, by whom numerous persons were unlawfully put to
death: Whether any steps have been or will be taken to bring to trial
General O’Connor, for having been accessory before and after the fact to
numerous unlawful executions, some of them without trial, and others
after the illegal trials already specified: Whether any steps have been
or will be taken to bring to trial Colonel Nelson, Brigadier General in
Jamaica, for unlawfully causing to be tried, in time of peace, by
Military Courts irregularly composed, for acts alleged to have been done
before the proclamation or beyond the jurisdiction Edition: current;
Page: [95] of Martial Law, and after such trial to be unlawfully put to
death, the following persons:—George William Gordon, Edward Fleming,
Samuel Clarke, William Grant, George Macintosh, Henry Lawrence, Letitia
Geoghan, and six other women, one of them in a state of pregnancy;5
Scipio Cowell, Alexander Taylor, Toby Butler, Jasper Hall Livingston,
and various other persons who had been previously flogged, and about 180
other alleged rebels; and for authorizing the flogging without trial of
Alexander Phillips, Richard Clark, and numerous others: Whether any
legal proceedings have been or will be ordered to be taken against Mr.
Edward John Eyre, lately Governor of Jamaica, for complicity in all or
any of the above acts, and particularly for the illegal trial and
execution of Mr. George William Gordon: And, if not, whether Her
Majesty’s Government are advised that these acts are not offences under
the Criminal Law?

[In response, after expressing his annoyance at the way in which 
had embodied opinions in his questions, thus “trespassing in some degree
upon the liberty and freedom of expression” of the House, Disraeli
pointed out that the first nine questions assumed that illegal actions
had been taken by individuals, while the tenth asked if the Government
was of opinion that the actions were illegal. Not only were the
questions put in a form that could lead to great inconvenience, but in
substance they were inaccurate. First,  ignored the fact that
martial law was in force in Jamaica, and so ordinary law was superseded.
Second, he ignored the fact that the cases against Cullen and Morris
were not proved on the evidence presented, and that further inquiries
were being made. Similarly, the statements  made against Nelson were
not founded on fact. Disraeli then went on to state what had happened:
the former Government had—properly in his view—set up a Commission of
eminent men whose inquiry led them to recommend the removal of Eyre, and
had acted on the Commission’s recommendation. The Commission also
recommended that the conduct of subordinate officers should be
investigated by the Admiralty and the Horse Guards; the former had
decided no fresh inquiry was needed, and the latter was still
considering the matter. In the circumstances,  was quite wrong to be
impatient and press for actions that would, if necessary, be taken at
the appropriate time. “This being the state of the case,” Disraeli
concluded, “I am not prepared to offer any further information to the
honourable Gentleman.”]

Edition: current; Page: [96]


27.: The Reform Meeting in Hyde Park [1]
 19 JULY, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, col. 1075. Reported in The Times, 20 July, p. 3,
from which the variant is taken. P.A. Taylor first asked the Home
Secretary, Spencer Walpole (1806–98), then M.P. for Cambridge
University, by whose authority, and under what law, the Police
Commissioner, Richard Mayne, had issued an order forbidding a public
meeting in Hyde Park. Walpole replied that he had himself instructed
Mayne, on the grounds that a meeting in a Royal Park would interfere
with the recreation of quiet and orderly people.  then put his
question.

i wish, sir, to ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department,
Whether we are to understand that the prohibition which he authorized to
be issued as to the contemplated public meeting is based only on the
circumstance that the meeting was announced to be held in one of the
parks? If so—a(Cries of Order, order, which prevented the honourable
member from proceeding.)a

Mr. Walpole: I may perhaps be permitted to say that the notice which has
been issued is grounded on the circumstance that the meeting was to have
been held in Hyde Park; and I may venture to add, as this Question has
been put to me, that I hope the notice which I have caused to be issued
will not be interpreted as being intended in the least degree to prevent
the holding of ordinary public meetings for political discussion, but
simply for the preservation of the public peace.


28.: W.E. Gladstone [1]
 21 JULY, 1866

Daily Telegraph, 23 July, 1866, p. 2. Headed: “The Cobden Club.”
Reported fully in The Times, the Morning Post, and (in shorter form) the
Daily News. (A clipping of the last is in the -Taylor Collection.)
The report in the Daily Telegraph gives the background to the formation
of the Club, mentions its advanced liberalism, and gives a list of the
eighty-five members from the Commons, including . The occasion was
the inaugural dinner of the Cobden Club, on Saturday evening, at the
Star and Garter Hotel, Richmond. A meeting of the Club was held before
the dinner, at which fifteen members, including , were appointed as
a governing committee. Gladstone presided at the dinner,  being one
of the vice-chairs. Just before the speeches began, several ladies took
seats in a small gallery placed at the side of the room. After the
traditional toasts to the Queen and other members of the Royal Family,
Gladstone gave the toast of the evening, “To the Revered Memory of Mr.
Cobden,” in a long speech. The toast was drunk in silence, and then
Goldwin Smith, “in a very animated” (but unreported) speech, gave the
“Health of Lord Russell,” to which Edition: current; Page: [97] Russell
replied at length; Russell next proposed the health of Mrs. Cobden.
, “who met with the most cordial reception,” then spoke.

there is one part of the business of the evening which still remains to
be performed; and though I am sensible of my incompetency to do it
justice, I cannot but feel some pride in its having been entrusted to
me. It is that of tendering our grateful acknowledgments to the
distinguished statesman who has done this club the honour of presiding
at its inauguratory meeting. (Loud cheers.) The nature of this
commemoration, which is not of a party, nor even, in the narrower sense
of the term, of a political character, adisclosesa to us on this
occasion many of the most important topics which are connected in all
our minds with Mr. Gladstone’s name. (Hear, hear.) One thing, however,
not only may but ought to be said on such an occasion as the present;
that to him of all men belonged the post of honour in a celebration of
the great apostle of commercial freedom, being, as he is, the one
survivor of the three eminent men by whom, as Ministers, that cause has
been most effectually served. (Cheers.) If Mr. Huskisson opened the long
and arduous campaign; if Sir Robert Peel achieved its most signal and
most decisive victory,1 Mr. Gladstone will be for ever remembered as he
who completed the conquest, and who not only made freedom of trade and
industry the universal rule of the institutions of our country, but by
the brilliant success of his application of it is fast converting the
whole of Europe to its principles. (Cheers.) There is another thing
which this is, perhaps, a suitable opportunity for saying. Veneration
for the memory of Mr. Cobden is not confined to any section of the
Liberal party, nor even to the Liberal party itself. (Hear, hear.) But
it has so happened, owing principally to the cast of Mr. Cobden’s own
political opinions, that an unusual proportion of the original members
of this club is composed of gentlemen who would be classed, and who
would class themselves, as what are called advanced Liberals. (Cheers.)
As being one of these, I may say for myself, and I believe they would
all join with me in saying, that we claim our fair share, and no more
than our fair share, in the great leader of the Liberal party. (Cheers.)
It is one of the differences between a party of Progress and any
Conservative party, that its political sympathies are not restricted to
those who conform, or who pretend to conform, to those of a distinctive
creed. We have not bound ourselves by any narrow articles of
orthodoxy—ours is a broad church. (A laugh.) The bond which holds us
together is not a political confession of faith, but a common allegiance
to the spirit of improvement, which is a greater thing than the
particular opinions of any politician or set of politicians. And if
there ever was a statesman in whom the spirit of Edition: current; Page:
[98] improvement was incarnate—of whose career as a Minister the
characteristic feature has been to seek out things which required or
admitted of improvement, instead of waiting to be compelled or even to
be solicited to it—that honour belongs to bthe late Chancellor of the
Exchequer and leader of the House of Commonsb. (Cheers.) I might stop
here; but, fresh as most of us are from listening to that magnificent
speech which went forth last night2 to the furthest extremity of Europe
as the utterance, in the noblest language, of what is felt and thought
by all the best part of the British nation—(loud cheers)—for sympathy
with freedom and national independence is not exclusively confined to
any section, or even to any party, among us—I should not do justice to
the feelings of those present were I to sit down without giving
expression to the pride, and more than pride, to the hopefulness with
which we are filled when we see the author of that speech standing at
the head of the Liberal party to lead it to victory. (Cheers.) That
speech was not only a splendid specimen of oratory, it was also a good
action; for it will ccheerc those who are struggling and suffering in
the cause of freedom and progress; while its value is inestimable in
raising—when I remember certain speeches, I might almost say in
redeeming—the character of England. I propose “The health of the Right
Honourable William Gladstone.” (Loud cheers.)

[Gladstone in reply] expressed his sincerest thanks to Mr.  for the
kind way in which he had given the toast, and to the company for the
reception they had been pleased to pay it. He was the more grateful to
Mr.  because he could not forget that he was one of the most
distinguished and powerful critics of the day, and, at the same time,
possessed the most generous feelings of the heart. (Hear, hear.) [He
also expressed thanks to Russell and to colleagues in the House for
their support. The dinner concluded about eleven o’clock.]


29.: The Reform Meeting in Hyde Park [2]
 24 JULY, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, cols. 1410–12. Reported in The Times, 25 July,
p. 7, from which the variants and responses are taken. The debate was
initiated by a question from Bernal Osborne (cols. 1385–6) to the Home
Secretary about the instructions given to Mayne (see No. 27). Ayrton
rushed in with other questions in a long speech, in which, after asking
what steps Walpole had taken “for disabusing the minds of the people of
the erroneous impression that they have a right to use the park for
their own purposes” and for preserving the peace of the metropolis, he
moved adjournment.  joined the ensuing debate.

Edition: current; Page: [99]
sir, I have no intention of taking up much of the time of the House, but
this is no ordinary occasion, and it seems to me that noble Lords and
honourable Gentlemen opposite are by no means aware of the extreme
seriousness of it, and of the serious consequences to which it may lead
aif some steps be not taken, of which at present there appears no
promisea. (Hear.) I am not going to enter into the question of the right
of the people to meet in Hyde Park. We know that Her Majesty’s
Government have the opinion of eminent lawyers to the contrary.1 We know
that they believe they have the right to exclude the people. But lawyers
are not unanimous on the subject; there are other distinguished lawyers,
who, on legal and high constitutional grounds, have contended that the
people have a right to meet there. But I do not desire to lay any stress
on this circumstance. I maintain that if the people have not that right
now, they ought to have it. (Hear.) I maintain further, that if, for
reasons unintelligible to me, it was thought necessary for the
maintenance of any supposed or nominal right that the people should ask
permission to hold a meeting there, that permission ought to have been
granted. (Hear.) And it ought ten thousand times more to have been
granted to them under such circumstances as these, when they believed,
erroneously or not, that they had the right; for surely this
circumstance, when the people were already in an excited state of mind
on another subject, ought to have warned right honourable Gentlemen
opposite that the consequences would be such as have actually occurred,
and which I believe the people deplore equally with himself. But I
maintain that the public ought to have the use of the Park for this
purpose, for if not, what other place is there that can suit them? In
what other place can they meet where there would be less interruption to
recreation? Is there likely to be less interruption to traffic, or to
other pursuits or persons, in Trafalgar Square than in Hyde Park? Does a
public meeting, if it were held once ba month—in the evening, too—b
cause a thousandth part of the interruption that an ordinary review or
meeting of Volunteers in the Park does? If such reasons as these are to
exclude the public from meeting in the Parks, which assuredly must be
held to belong to the public, for they have been ceded by the Crown to
the public for a consideration—like other Crown lands—if these reasons
are to prevail to exclude the people, there is no place for which
equally strong reasons might not be given for their exclusion. Perhaps
this is what honourable Gentlemen opposite wish. I give full credit,
indeed, to the assurance which the Home Secretary has given us, that he
has no desire to prevent political meetings.2 I believe in the perfect
sincerity of what he said; but I cannot say that it has altogether
reassured me. He said he had no objection to open air meetings at proper
hours and in the proper places; but he did not tell us what the proper
times or the proper places were in his opinion, and Edition: current;
Page: [100] the newspaper scribes of the Government are already
declaring that no open air meeting ought to be tolerated in the
metropolis.3 I advise them to try that. I promise them that they will
have to encounter an opposition of a very different kind, and from
different persons, to any they have yet encountered. (Hear, hear, from
the Ministerial side of the House.) Noble Lords and right honourable
Gentlemen opposite may be congratulated on having done a job of work
last night which will require wiser men than they are, many years to
efface the consequences of. (Hear, hear.) It has been the anxious wish
of all those who understand their age, and are lovers of their country,
that the necessary changes in the institutions of the country should be
effected with the least possible, and if possible without any,
alienation and ill blood between the hitherto governing classes and the
mass of the people. Her Majesty’s present advisers seem resolved, so far
as it depends upon them, that this anxious desire should be frustrated.
(Cries of Oh, oh, and Hear, hear.) We know that there is a kind of
people who can do more mischief in an hour than can be repaired in a
lifetime. (Ministerial cheers.) I am afraid that the Members of the
present Government are animated by the noble ambition of inscribing
their names on the illustrious list of those cpersonsc. (Hear.)

[The debate was ended by the withdrawal of Osborne’s question (col.
1416).]


30.: The Value of Land
 25 JULY, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, col. 1482. Reported in The Times, 26 July, p. 6.
’s intervention came during the second reading of the Tenure and
Improvement of Land Bill (see No. 21), after Frederick William Heygate
(1822–94), M.P. for Londonderry, had said that  had (in No. 21) made
an error when comparing rents in England and Ireland without taking the
larger Irish acre into account. , however, made no such error, nor,
apparently, did anyone else in the debate.

mr. j. stuart  explained, that he had made no comparison of the
value of land per acre in England and Ireland. Either, therefore, he
must have ill expressed himself, or the honourable Baronet must have
attributed to him remarks made by some other Member.

[The Bill was withdrawn after a few more speeches.]

Edition: current; Page: [101]


31.: The Reform Meeting in Hyde Park [3]
 26 JULY, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, cols. 1540–1. Reported in The Times, 27 July, p.
2. from which the variants and responses are taken. In his Autobiography
 puts great weight on his intervention in this affair: “At this
crisis I really believe that I was the means of preventing much
mischief. . . . I was invited, with several other Radical members, to a
conference with the leading members of the Council of the Reform League;
and the task fell chiefly upon myself of persuading them to give up the
Hyde Park project, and hold their meeting elsewhere. It was not Mr.
Beales and Colonel Dickson who needed persuading; on the contrary, it
was evident that those gentlemen had already exerted their influence in
the same direction, thus far without success. It was the working men who
held out: and so bent were they on their original scheme that I was
obliged to have recourse to les grands moyens. I told them that a
proceeding which would certainly produce a collision with the military,
could only be justifiable on two conditions: if the position of affairs
had become such that a revolution was desirable, and if they thought
themselves able to accomplish one. To this argument after considerable
discussion they at last yielded: and I was able to inform Mr. Walpole
that their intention was given up. I shall never forget the depth of his
relief or the warmth of his expressions of gratitude. . . . I have
entered thus particularly into this matter because my conduct on this
occasion gave great displeasure to the Tory and Tory-Liberal press, who
have charged me ever since with having shewn myself, in the trials of
public life, intemperate and passionate. I do not know what they
expected from me; but they had reason to be thankful to me if they knew
from what I had in all probability preserved them. And I do not believe
it could have been done, at that particular juncture, by any one else.
No other person, I believe, had at that moment the necessary influence
for restraining the working classes, except Mr. Gladstone and Mr.
Bright, neither of whom was available: Mr. Gladstone, for obvious
reasons; Mr. Bright, because he was out of town.” (CW, Vol. I, pp.
278–9.) Bernal Osborne having put questions to the Home Secretary
concerning his discussions on 25 July about the Reform League’s plan to
hold a meeting in Hyde Park on the following Monday, Walpole replied
that the situation had been much exacerbated by the League’s action in
announcing that the Government had given permission, when in fact no
permission for a meeting in Hyde Park had been or would be given until
legal opinion had been received. A meeting could be held on Primrose
Hill if the League wished.  spoke immediately after Walpole.

sir, I rise to make a statementa, with the indulgence of the House,a
which I believe will give satisfaction to the whole House. I have just
had an interview with Mr. Beales1 and several leading members of the
League, including all those who were present at the second interview to
which the right honourable Gentleman has referred.2 I have full
authority from them to say this, that so far as they are concerned there
is no intention of renewing the attempt to meet in the Park. There
Edition: current; Page: [102] has been no council of the League held,
and they are not, therefore, in a position to speak for the League.
(Laughter.) That ribald laugh might well have been spared. Do honourable
Members suppose that Reformers do not mean what they say? I tell them
that they do. What I have to say is that these gentlemen regret
exceedingly that a misunderstanding should have occurred with regard to
the communication made to them by the right honourable Gentleman the
Secretary of State for the Home Department. They are perfectly certain
that the misunderstanding is in no way imputable to him. The interview
left on them the most favourable impression of his feelings,
disposition, and character, and there is nothing which they would more
regret than to say anything which bcould in the slightest degree reflect
onb him. (Hear, hear.) That being the case, it is unnecessary to enter
into the circumstances, though I might state something that might,
perhaps, account for this misunderstanding. But the misunderstanding
having taken place, the same motives which induced them to exert
themselves last night so as to prevent what they believed would have
otherwise resulted in bloodshed, preclude them from taking any advantage
of, or in any way acting on, what is now shown to have been a
misconception. Whether they will accept the offer of Primrose Hill, or
consider that on this occasion it is better to abstain from meeting
altogether, I am not authorized to state, and probably they do not
consider themselves authorized to decide on that offer without
consulting the council of the League. But, so far as their influence
goes, nothing will be done that can possibly afford cause for any
further cdisturbancec. (Hear, hear.)


32.: The Reform Meeting in Hyde Park [4]
 30 JULY, 1866

Daily News, 31 July, 1866, p. 3. Headed: “The Reform League
Demonstration in the Agriculture-Hall.” Reported also in The Times, the
Daily Telegraph, the Morning Star, and the Morning Post (in The Times
and the Morning Post ’s speech is given in the third person, in the
latter case in brief summary) (A clipping of the Daily News version is
in the -Taylor Collection.) The meeting, held in the Agriculture
Hall in Islington at 8 p.m., was chaired by Edmond Beales. Placards had
announced that several Members of Parliament would be present, including
 (who, the Morning Post says, “did not seem in good health”). In his
Autobiography, following his account of his role in the discussions
between Walpole and the leaders of the Reform League (see No. 31), 
says: “After the working men had conceded so much to me, I felt bound to
comply with their request that I would attend and speak at their meeting
at the Agricultural Hall: the only meeting called by the Reform League
which I ever attended.” (He dissented from the League’s proposals for
Edition: current; Page: [103] manhood suffrage and the ballot.) (CW,
Vol. I, p. 278.) The enormous building, in which it was very difficult
to hear speeches under ideal conditions, was occupied by thousands of
working men, and some women. While admission to the body of the hall was
free, entrance to the galleries cost 1s., while a few reserved seats on
and adjacent to the platform were priced at 10s. The turbulent and noisy
crowd, stimulated by songs (the “Marseillaise” being particularly
popular), made it virtually impossible for any of the speakers to be
heard; the reporters’ table, originally protected by the reserved seats,
was eventually exposed to the surges of the crowd, making even less
reliable the reports of the speeches. When the platform party arrived,
Beales was unable to act in the normal fashion, and had to mount a table
to make his opening remarks, which could be heard only after fifteen
minutes. His truncated speech was followed by the reading of a
resolution: “That the present Government, by assisting to defeat the
Bill introduced by the late Government for the amendment of the
representation, and by themselves indefinitely postponing the whole
question of Reform, and finally by their employing the police to
forcibly prevent the working classes from peaceably meeting in Hyde Park
on Monday last to complain of the suffrage being withheld from them,
have forfeited all claim to the confidence and support of the country.”
The resolution was seconded, and then  rose. “The friends of the
honourable member upon the platform were loud in their manifestations of
applause when he rose to speak, but those in the body of the hall, even
within tolerable hearing distance, were evidently unacquainted with the
personal appearance of the honourable member for Westminster, for one of
their number, under the full conviction that he had gained an insight
into what was coming, led an encouraging cry of ‘Bravo, s!’ The
chairman pressed the honourable member to address the meeting, like the
other speakers, from the table; but the offer was politely declined. Mr.
 doubtless felt it to be questionable whether in the universal
clamour any advantage of position would enable him to make his
utterances audible; certain it is that beyond the reporters’ table, and
not even to all who were there collected, did his meaning penetrate.”
(The Times.) , “who seemed deeply impressed by the spectacle of the
teeming and swaying multitude before him,” spoke (according to the
Morning Post) “in so low a tone that scarcely a word could be gathered.”

ladies and gentlemen, this avast meetinga is a sufficient guarantee that
the cause of reform will suffer nothing by your having determined to
hold your meeting here instead of repeating the attempt to hold it in
the park. (Cheers.) But I do not want b(so the honourable member was
understood)b to talk to you about reform, you do not need to be
stimulated by me on that subject. This meeting is a sufficient reply to
any one who supposes that you do cwant to be stimulated. (Cheers.) You
want to discuss reform.c You have been very much attacked for holding
such large meetings, on the ground that they are inconsistent with
discussion. (Loud laughter and cheers.) But discussion is not the only
use of public meetings. One of the objects of such gatherings is
demonstration. d(At this point the address was interrupted for some
minutes by a violent lurch of the main Edition: current; Page: [104]
body below in the direction of the platform, which seemed in danger of
being carried by storm. An appeal from some of the principal members of
the League restored order, but not till two or three gentlemen had been
propelled bodily to within a few feet of where Mr.  was standing.)
The honourable member proceeded:d—eYou want to make a display of your
strength, and I tell you that the countries where the people are allowed
to show their strength are those in which they are not obliged to use
it.e As regards the parks, your chairman, who is a lawyer, does not
doubt your right to meet in them. I am not a lawyer, and know nothing
about the matter. But you thought it right to assert your claim, and
only to withdraw under protest. Your protest has been made, and you
have—I think wisely—determined not to renew it. (Interruptions.) You
have been promised a fair opportunity of having the question settled by
judicial decision, and you have wisely resolved that until that decision
is given the question shall remain where it is. f(The soundness of this
advice was unquestionable, but just at that moment the crowd manifested
a disposition to do anything but remain where they were, for a further
and more violent surging in the direction of the platform took place.)f
gThe government, without abandoning what they thought were their legal
rights, might have permitted the park for one meetingg when permission
was asked, and I think it would have been a wise policy and a gracious
act to have granted it—(tremendous cheers)—but it was refusedh, and the
consequence was—(The meeting was not destined to hear more, for a fresh
invasion of the platform took place, and the aspect of affairs at the
moment was so threatening that although there were cries of “I will
defend you, Mr. ,” “Our friends will be steady again in a minute,”
“This is a meeting of men and not of children,” etc., the honourable
member felt it hopeless to persist in his address and retired at once
from the hall.)h

[After an interval to allow order to be established, the resolution was
passed, and Bradlaugh moved a second one, calling for a petition to the
House of Commons to establish a committee of inquiry into the conduct of
Sir Richard Edition: current; Page: [105] Mayne and the police under his
command in preventing the meeting in Hyde Park on 23 July and during the
next two days. In the course of his remarks he said “Mr. John Stuart
 has just enunciated a proposition in which I cordially concur. He
said if you have not a legal right to meet in the parks you ought to
have it. (Loud cheers.)” The resolution was seconded, and passed after
another interruption by newly-arrived marchers. Then Colonel Dickson
moved a third resolution calling for financial contributions to the
Reform League, which after seconding was also passed, and the meeting
concluded at 9:30 with the usual vote of thanks to the Chair and three
cheers for Bright, Gladstone, and Beales, and then three “For all who
strive to preserve the right dearest to England—the right of public
meeting.” Sectional meetings were held in different parts of the hall.
Then the main part of the spectators (“sightseers,” The Times says, for
“auditors they could not be called”) formed again into processions
behind their bands, being joined by the huge crowd outside the hall, and
did not finally clear the area until 11 p.m.]


33.: The Disturbances in Jamaica [2]
 31 JULY, 1866

“Mr. ’s Speech on Mr. Buxton’s Motion,” in Jamaica Papers, No. III.
Statement of the Committee and Other Documents (London: Jamaica
Committee, [1866]), 7–18. A manuscript fragment (Yale University
Library, John Stuart  Papers, Box 2, MS #350) is printed in full in
variant note u-u. In PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, cols. 1797–1806. Published
in The Times, 1 August, p. 7, from which variants and responses are
taken. Charles Buxton (1823–71), M.P. for East Surrey, moved the
following Resolutions: “1. That this House deplores the excessive
punishments which followed the suppression of the disturbances of
October last in the parish of St. Thomas, Jamaica, and especially the
unnecessary frequency with which the punishment of death was inflicted.
/ 2. That this House, while approving the course taken by Her Majesty’s
Government in dismissing Mr. Eyre from the Governorship of the Island,
at the same time concurs in the view expressed by the late Secretary of
the Colonies, that ‘while any very minute endeavour to punish acts which
may now be the subject of regret would not be expedient, still, that
great offences ought to be punished;’ and that grave excesses of
severity on the part of any Civil, Military, or Naval Officers ought not
to be passed over with impunity. / 3. That, in the opinion of this
House, it is the duty of Her Majesty’s Government to award compensation
to those whose property was wantonly and cruelly destroyed, and to the
families of those who were put to death illegally. / 4. That, since
considerably more than 1,000 persons are proved to have been executed or
severely flogged on the charge of participating in these disturbances,
all further punishment on account of them ought to be remitted.” (Col.
1763.) When Buxton had finished his speech, Adderley replied, and then
 spoke.

those who seek to obtain an authoritative condemnation of the
transactions in Jamaica, whether they take the milder view of my
honourable friend the mover of the resolutions, or the severer one of
the body which has been so disrespectfully Edition: current; Page: [106]
spoken of, the Jamaica committee, could have desired nothing better for
their cause than that the speech which has just been delivered* ashould
go forth to the country as the defence of the Government for not taking
any measures to bring those events under the cognisance of a judicial
tribunal. I would myself be well content to go to the country on my
honourable friend’s speech, and that of the right honourable gentleman,
without any further discussion. (Hear, hear.) But since nothing has
byetb been said in vindication of the view I take as to the proper
course to be pursued, which is different from that recommended by my
honourable friend, cI shall state to the house what to my mind justifies
that coursec. The honourable mover of the resolution has called upon the
house to consider the proceedings of the civil and military authorities
in Jamaica, which have been so deservedly but so mildly condemned by her
Majesty’s commissioners of inquiry,1 and has invited the house to
express an opinion on those proceedings, to the same effect and nearly
in the same language as the commissioners. I, also, contend that the
acts which have been committed demand the particular attention of the
house, not however for the purpose of itself pronouncing any judgment on
them, but for the purpose of requiring that they be referred to an
authority more competent than this house—the only authority that is
competent to pass a binding judgment on such acts—the authority of a
judicial tribunal. (Hear, hear.) According to the catalogue furnished by
the commissioners, 439 of her Majesty’s subjects, men and women, have
been put to death, not in the field, not in armed resistance to the
Government, but unarmed, after having fallen into the hands of the
authorities, many after having voluntarily surrendered to them. (Hear,
hear.) dA partd were executed without any semblance of a trial; the
remainder after what were called trials, by what were called
courts-martial.2 eBesidese those who were put to death, not fewer than
600 men and women were flogged, partly without trial, and partly by
sentence of the same courts-martial; and about 1,000 houses, besides
other property, were destroyed by military violence. Now, if after due
investigation the Government and the country generally had made up their
minds that all these lives were justly and properly taken, and all these
floggings and burnings justly and properly inflicted, there would have
been no ground on which to require the Government to prosecute the
agents and authors, though private individuals would be at liberty to
Edition: current; Page: [107] do so if they pleased. The case, however,
is far otherwise. Respecting the degree of culpability of these
transactions there is a wide difference of opinion, but that there has
been serious culpability no one now disputes. (Hear, hear.) The events
have undergone a minute inquiry, by commissioners carefully selected,
and invested with full power to ascertain the facts, but not, I must
remind the right honourable gentleman, empowered to declare what is the
character of those facts in the eye of the law. The commissioners have
emphatically condemned a large portion of the proceedings.3 They declare
that many more persons have been put to death than ought to have been
put to death; some of these on evidence which they declare to have been,
so far as it appears on record, wholly insufficient to justify the
findings: while in other cases, assuming the evidence to be
unimpeachable, the sentences were not justified by the facts deposed to.
The floggings they pronounce to have been reckless, and some of them
positively barbarous; the flogging of women they reprobate under any
circumstances, and in that I am sure the house will not differ from
them. The burnings they pronounce wanton and cruel. There is no need to
go one step beyond the verdict of the commissioners. I am almost ashamed
to speak of such acts with the calmness and in the moderate language
which the circumstances require. The house has supped full of horrors
throughout the speech of my honourable friend. But we need not go beyond
the dry facts of the commissioners’ summary. On their showing, the lives
of subjects of her Majesty have been wrongfully taken, and the persons
of others wrongfully maltreated; and I maintain that when such things
have been done, there is a primâ facie demand for legal punishment, and
that a court of criminal justice can alone determine whether such
punishment has been merited, and if merited, what ought to be its
amount. The taking of human lives without justification, which in this
case is an admitted fact, cannot be condoned by anything short of a
criminal tribunal. Neither the Government, nor this house, nor the whole
English nation combined, can exercise a pardoning power without previous
trial and sentence. I know not for what more important purpose courts of
law exist than for the security of human life. fIt has been the boast
off this country gthat officers of Government must answer for their acts
to the same laws and before the same tribunals as any private citizen;
and if persons in authority cang take the lives of htheir fellowh
subjects improperly, ias has been confessedly done in this case,i
without being called to a judicial account, and having the excuses they
make for it sifted and adjudicated by the tribunal in that case
provided, we are giving up altogether the principle of government by
law, Edition: current; Page: [108] and resigning ourselves to arbitrary
power. (Hear, hear.) jThe most proper course, therefore, which could in
my opinion be taken by any memberj of this house, was to attempt to
elicit from her Majesty’s Government, before the end of the session,
some statement of their intentions respecting what, to me and others,
appears the solemn duty of bringing the authors of at least the most
flagrant of these universally condemned acts before a criminal tribunal.
The house knows that this attempt was made,4 and it knows what was the
result. We obtained by it no direct, but a good deal of indirect,
information. Since then I have redoubled my efforts to learn, or to
divine, what reasons there are against the propriety of a criminal
prosecution: and I have arrived at the conclusion that if those I have
heard are the best, there will not be much difficulty in resisting any
of them. I have been told, for instance (but by whom or on what occasion
the rules of the house forbid me to recollect), that to warrant a
criminal prosecution for homicide, it is necessary that the act should
have been done with malice prepense.5 But the right honourable the
Chancellor of the Exchequer cannot make such a mistake as this; for if
not a lawyer himself, he has able lawyers for his advisers, and one need
not be a lawyer at all to know that there is such an offence as
manslaughter k(for example)k which I have hitherto in my ignorance
believed to differ from murder precisely by the absence of malice
prepense. The wonder which I felt at this singular specimen of legal
knowledge would have been still greater than it was, if I had not just
before been told by a very eminent person (but it could not be the right
honourable gentleman) that I was grossly inconsistent in assuming
through nine questions that certain acts were unlawful, and asking in
the tenth whether they were unlawful or not?6 Now, since what I asked
was, whether they were offences under the criminal law, I must conclude
that, in the opinion of this eminent person, no actions are unlawful but
those which are offences under the criminal law. Did he ever hear, I
wonder, of such a thing as an action for damages? which everybody knows
will lie in many cases in which a criminal proceeding could not be
sustained. And, again, is he not aware of cases in which the law imposes
pecuniary penalties, but leaves them to be enforced by anybody who
chooses to sue for them by a civil action? lSince it Edition: current;
Page: [109] appears to be the opinion of this high authority that acts
which cannot be prosecuted criminally are not unlawful, I presume he
thinks that the courts give damages, and the law imposesl penalties, for
lawful acts. (Hear, hear.) mI hope the right honourable gentleman will
tell us this evening that he disclaims all participation inm these
peculiar views. I am nwilling to defer to himn as an authority on omanyo
subjects, but I shall be quite unable to accept his guidance in any
matter of criminal law (hear), unless he entirely throws over that other
great luminary to whom I have been referring. Then, again, it is asked,
how can we think of prosecuting anybody for putting people to death,
when we cannot possibly suppose that those who did it believed them to
be innocent? Well, very probably they did not, though even this is by no
means a thing which it is permissible to take for granted. But admitting
the fact, it is an excuse that may be made for actions of still greater
atrocity than I claim any right to attribute to these. Did the
perpetrators of the massacre of St. Bartholomew think their victims
innocent?7 pDidp they not firmly believe them to be hateful to God and
to all good men? qDidq the authors of the September massacres—did the
French revolutionary tribunals and the Terrorist Government, believe in
the innocence of those whom they put to death?8 Were they not fully
persuaded that they were traitors and enemies of their country? I do not
want to compare Governor Eyre and his subordinates to Robespierre and
Fouquier Tinville, though I confess that their modes of proceeding
sometimes remind me very forcibly of some of the minor actors in that
great tragedy: but the same sort of excuse may be made for Robespierre
and Fouquier Tinville as for them. I dare say that if gentlemen on the
other side of the house, and I am afraid some on this side, had had the
duty of sitting in judgment on those very vigorous rulers, they would
have thought it quite enough to visit them with the penalty with which,
for example, Governor Darling has been visited for following his
constitutional advisers in an erroneous interpretation of the
constitution of Victoria.9 We should perhaps have been told that the
case as respects Robespierre was closed by dismissal from his office as
a member of the Committee of Public Edition: current; Page: [110]
Safety. As for Fouquier Tinville, it probably would not have been
thought advisable, after so many errors of judgment, to re-appoint him
to the responsible situation of public prosecutor. We might have been
told, in words with which the house is probably familiar, that it would
be desirable “to entrust that arduous task to some other person, who may
approach it free from all the difficulties inseparable from a
participation in the questions raised by the recent troubles,” and that
by placing the office “in new hands,” Government were “taking the course
best calculated to allay animosities, to conciliate general confidence,
and to establish on firm and solid grounds the future welfare of”
France.10 Again, we are told that in proposing to make the authors of
those acts criminally responsible for them, we forget that those acts
were done under martial law. Sir, we are not at all likely to forget
that (hear, hear); we remember it but too well: and we shall remember as
long, what it has been declared by the leading member of the Government
that martial law is—the total suspension of all law.11 The right
honourable gentleman r(Mr. Adderley)r will admit that this is something
worth remembering. Well; martial law while it lasts, is the negation of
all law; and therefore (such is the conclusion of the right honourable
gentleman)12 it is the negation of all responsibility. Not only, as soon
as martial law is proclaimed, the civil and military authorities and
their agents may run amuck, if such is their pleasure—may do, as far as
any legal restraint is concerned, anything they please; but, if they
please to do what is wrong, they cannot be made to account for it
afterwards, except to their official superiors, nor to suffer any but
the official penalties which those superiors can inflict. If that is our
condition, and if any Government or any local administrator that chooses
to proclaim martial law can place us under this regimen, we have gained
little by our historical struggles, and the blood that has been shed for
English liberties has been shed to little purpose. (Hear, hear.) But it
is not so, sir; it is not so. I do not deny that there is good
authority, legal as well as military, for saying that the proclamation
of martial law suspends all law so long as it lasts; but I defy any one
to produce any respectable authority for the doctrine that persons are
not responsible to the laws of their country, both civil and criminal,
after martial law has ceased, for acts done under it. The legal
opinions, which the right honourable gentleman misunderstands, affirm
only this, that martial law is another word for the law of necessity,
and that the justification of acts done under that law consists in their
necessity. Well, then, we have a right to dispute the necessity. If the
right honourable gentleman will consult his legal advisers, he will
Edition: current; Page: [111] find that the law is perfectly settled on
this point. With the permission of the house I will read a short extract
from a law opinion given specifically on the point by two gentlemen,
both of them ornaments of their profession, and one of them a member of
this house:13

The officers of the crown are justified in any exertion of physical
force extending to the destruction of life and property to any extent,
and in any manner, that may be required for this purpose. They are not
justified in the use of excessive or cruel means, but are liable civilly
or criminally for such excess. They are not justified in inflicting
punishment after resistance is suppressed, and after the ordinary courts
of justice can be reopened. The principle by which their responsibility
is measured is well expressed in the case of Wright v. Fitzgerald. Mr.
Wright was a French master, of Clonmel, who, after the suppression of
the Irish rebellion in 1798, brought an action against Mr. Fitzgerald,
the sheriff of Tipperary, for having cruelly flogged him without due
inquiry. Martial law was in full force at that time, and an act of
indemnity had been passed to excuse all breaches of the law committed in
the suppression of the rebellion. In summing-up, Justice Chamberlain,
with whom Lord Yelverton agreed, said: “The jury were not to imagine
that the legislature, by enabling magistrates to justify under the
indemnity bill,14 had released them from the feelings of humanity, or
permitted them wantonly to exercise power, even though it were to put
down rebellion. They expected that in all cases there should be a grave
and serious examination into the conduct of the supposed criminal, and
every act should show a mind intent to discover guilt, not to inflict
torture. By examination or trial he did not mean that sort of
examination and trial which they were now engaged in, but such
examination and trial the best the nature of the case and existing
circumstances would allow of. That this must have been the intention of
the legislature was manifest from the expression ‘magistrates and all
other persons,’ which provides that as every man, whether magistrate or
not, was authorised to suppress rebellion, and was to be justified by
that law for his acts, it is required that he should not exceed the
necessity which gave him the power, and that he should show in his
justification that he had used every possible means to ascertain the
guilt which he had punished; and, above all, no deviation from the
common principles of humanity should appear in his conduct.” Mr. Wright
recovered £500 damages; and when Mr. Fitzgerald applied to the Irish
parliament for an indemnity, he could not get one.15

In the year 1866, thirty-four years after the passing of the Reform Act,
we have to reaffirm the principle of this judgment, and reassert the
responsibility of all officers of the executive to the tribunals, in
order that in our regard for law and liberty we may be on a level with
the Orange Government and the Orange Parliament of Ireland in the most
tyrannical period of modern Irish history, the rebellion of 1798. (Hear,
hear.) And great cause is there why we should assert this
responsibility. If martial law indeed is what it is asserted to be,
arbitrary power—the rule of force, subject to no legal limits—then,
indeed, the legal Edition: current; Page: [112] responsibility of those
who administer it, instead of being lightened, requires to be enormously
aggravated. So long as the power of inflicting death is restricted by
laws, by rules, by forms devised for the security of innocence, by
settled usage, by a long series of precedents—these laws, these forms,
these usages and precedents, are a protection to those who are judged;
but they are also eminently a protection to those who judge. If a law is
prescribed for their observance, and they observe the law, they are, in
general, safe from sfurthers responsibility. The less we leave to their
discretion, the less necessity is there, in the interest of the general
safety, for making them personally accountable. But if men are let loose
from all law, from all precedents, from all forms—are left to try people
for their lives in any way they please, take evidence as they please,
refuse evidence as they please, give facilities to the defence or
withhold those facilities as they think fit, and after that pass any
sentences they please, and irrevocably execute those sentences, with no
bounds to their discretion but their own judgment of what is necessary
for the suppression of a rebellion—a judgment which not only may be, but
in a vast proportion of cases is sure to be, an exasperated man’s
judgment, or a frightened man’s judgment of necessity (hear, hear); when
there is absolutely no guarantee against any extremity of tyrannical
violence, but the responsibility which can be afterwards exacted from
the tyrant—then, sir, it is indeed indispensable that he who takes the
lives of others under this discretion should know that he risks his own.
(Cheers.) I do not wonder that there are conscientious military men who
shrink from so vast a responsibility, and prefer any view whatever of
martial law to that which we are given to understand is the true one. I
hold in my hand a letter written to me by a retired general officer,16
which, after saying that the intelligent officers of the army feel
bewildered at the very idea of martial law, from the absence of all
precise instructions on the subject, goes on to say,

I had fully made up my mind how I should act if ever called upon to
enforce martial law. I had resolved, as the only safe and prudent plan,
to consider martial law as simply military law extended to civilians,
feeling convinced that a fixed or written code was indispensable, and
that what was sufficient to curb soldiers in war was surely sufficient
to restrain civilians in revolt.

He adds:

Taken fighting with arms in their hands should alone justify the summary
execution of rebels; whilst the composition and powers of the
courts-martial on rebels should follow the articles of war, which are
amply sufficient to cover all cases that could ever arise under martial
law. (Hear, hear.)

We are now informed that neither the Articles of War nor the Mutiny
Act17 are Edition: current; Page: [113] in force at all during the
proclamation of a martial law, and that the courts-martial are not bound
by their provisions. But the oath which is administered to the members
of every court-martial, and which was taken by all the members of the
courts-martial in Jamaica, begins with these words: “You shall duly
administer justice according to the rules and articles for the better
government of her Majesty’s forces, and according to an act now in force
for the punishment of mutiny and desertion.”18 This is what they swore
to do: nobody pretends that they did it; and tthe Government now
justifies themt by saying that they were not bound by their oath. Sir, I
have stated to the house the principles on which I am acting, and on
which those act with whom on this subject I am co-operating. We want to
know—as the noble lord, the secretary for India, said on a not more
important occasion19—we want to know who are to be our masters: her
Majesty’s judges and a jury of our countrymen, administering the laws of
England, or three naval and military officers, two of them boys,
administering, as the Chancellor of the Exchequer tells us, no law at
all.20 This we want to know; and this, if it be humanly possible, we
mean to uknow. It remains to be seen whether the people of vthis country
will sustainv us in the attempt to wprocure au solemn reassertion of the
principle, that whoever takes human life without justification must
account for it to the laww. This great public duty may be discharged
without help from the Government, but without help from the people it
cannot. It is their cause; and we will not be wanting to them if they
are not wanting to us. (Hear, hear.)

[Eventually the first resolution was accepted, and the others were
withdrawn following Governmental concessions (cols. 1839–40).]

Edition: current; Page: [114]


34.: The Reform Meeting in Hyde Park [5]
 2 AUGUST, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, col. 1905. Reported in The Times, 3 August, p.
4, from which the variants and response are taken. For the meeting
alluded to, see No. 31.

mr. j. stuart  presented the petition adopted at the meeting in the
Agricultural Hall, complaining of the exclusion of the public from Hyde
Park on Monday week, and praying the House to institute an inquiry into
the conduct of the Chief Commissioner of Police,1 and of the Police
generally.

Major Stuart Knox2 said, he would beg to ask the honourable Gentleman,
awho he understood was connected with the Reform League,a Whether a
letter which appeared in that morning’s paper from Mr. Beales was
genuine;3 and, if so, whether he can inform the House who the “bpublicb
leaders” mentioned in it were?

Mr. J. Stuart : Sir, cI can assure the honourable and gallant
Gentleman that I have not the slightest objection to give him any
information which I can command in reply to his question.c Sir, I am not
in the least degree authorized to make any communication to the House on
behalf of the Reform League, of which I am not even a member; and I beg
to refer the honourable and gallant Gentleman to those who are members,
and particularly to Mr. Beales himself. (A laugh.)


35.: Public Health
 2 AUGUST, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, col. 1908. Not reported in The Times. ’s
interjection came in the debate on the third reading of “A Bill [as
Amended by the Select Committee . . .] to Amend the Law Relating to the
Public Health,” 29 Victoria (29 June, 1866), PP, 1866, IV, 425–48,
Clause 39. This clause, concerning proof that inmates of a house or part
thereof were family members, put the onus of proof on the claimants.
Ayrton moved (unsuccessfully) to strike out this clause. He was followed
by Thomas Chambers, who said “nothing Edition: current; Page: [115]
could be easier than for the parties charged to show that they were one
family, while it would be an impossibility for the police to prove the
negative.”  replied.

mr. j. stuart  said, the only proof that would be required would be
repute.


36.: The Extradition Treaties Act [1]
 3 AUGUST, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, cols. 2023–6. Reported in The Times, 4 August,
p. 7, from which the variants and reponses are taken.  spoke in the
debate on the second reading of “A Bill Intituled An Act for the
Amendment of the Law Relating to Treaties of Extradition.” 29 & 30
Victoria (26 July, 1866), PP, 1866, III, 39–42. The Bill eventually
passed (see No. 39), though  says in the Autobiography that he
“joined with several other independent Liberals in defeating an
Extradition Bill, introduced at the very end of the session of 1866 and
by which, though surrender avowedly for political offences was not
authorised, political refugees, if charged by a foreign government with
acts which are necessarily incident to all attempts at insurrection,
would have been surrendered to be dealt with by the criminal courts of
the government against which they had rebelled: thus making the British
Government an accomplice in the vengeance of foreign despotisms” (CW,
Vol. I, pp. 282–3). He may have in mind that his proposal to limit the
duration of the Act to one year had later been accepted (No. 39). In any
case, as he says further: “The defeat of this proposal led to the
appointment of a Select Committee (in which I was included) to examine
and report on the whole subject of Extradition Treaties; and the result
was that in the Extradition Act, which passed through Parliament after I
had ceased to be a member, opportunity is given to any one whose
extradition is demanded, of being heard before an English Court of
justice to prove that the offence with which he is charged is really
political. The cause of European freedom has thus been saved from a
serious misfortune, and our own country from a great iniquity.” (Ibid.,
p. 283.) For ’s part in the Select Committee, see App. B.

sir, I do not mean to say anything against the French Government, but I
think it is neither in any way improper nor at all impertinent to the
question to say something about the French law, and particularly those
parts of it which are thought most defective by the best Judges in
France itself. There are many things in that law which are worthy of
great praise, and many from which we in this country have a great deal
to learn; but I never met with any enlightened Frenchman who did not
think that the worst part of the French law is the law of criminal
procedure, and that the mode in which the preliminary evidence is taken
is the worst part even of that.1 The depositions which are taken
preparatory to a criminal trial in France by the juge d’instruction are
taken in secret. They are not taken in the presence of the Edition:
current; Page: [116] accused; he is not confronted with the witnesses,
much less has he any opportunity of cross-examination. It is, therefore,
the easiest thing in the world to get up a false charge against a
person, if on the part of any other person there is the slightest
disposition to do so. I have, indeed, much confidence in the love of
justice and the integrity and dignity of the French Judges, who, very
often, when the trial comes on, are able to prevent these great defects
in the preliminary proceedings from issuing in final injusticea, but
with this final trial the House has nothing to do, fora we are now
called upon to surrender the accused persons upon the original
depositions only. (Hear.) Now, we are told2—and it is true—that the
committing magistrate has the power, and is bound, to consider whether
the evidence is such as would in his own opinion establish a primâ facie
case against the accused, sufficient to warrant a committal for trial.
But there is great danger lest the magistrate, not being fully aware of
the differences between French and English criminal procedure, might be
led, unless something is put in this Bill to guard against it, to attach
the same weight, or nearly the same weight, to those depositions as if
they had been taken in his presence. It would be very desirable if the
magistrate is to have the power of ordering the extradition of an
accused person, that something should be done in the way of directing
him how to exercise it. When even so experienced a magistrate as the
Chief Magistrate at Bow Street, appears to have laboured under some
misapprehension in this respect,3 it appears to me important that
magistrates should receive warning from their superiors not to attach
more than the due weight to those depositions. If, however, they attach
no more than the due weight to those depositions, the effect desired
will not be produced. Consequently, either the French Government will
have to waive the point of honour which they are said to entertain,4 or
the new Act will be as much a dead letter as was the old one.5 We are
told by high authorities, in a place not far from this, that the old Act
was an entirely dead letter;6 and it has been said by every one who has
spoken in favour of the Bill that the objection to it is equally an
Edition: current; Page: [117] objection to the law as it stands, under
which we are subject to the same obligations as are now sought to be
imposed on us. I admit that nothing can be more harmless in appearance
than this Bill. No substantial alteration, it is argued, is proposed in
the law, and therefore nobody can possibly object to the Bill. But it
unfortunately happens that although nominally there is no alteration,
practically there is the greatest alteration in the world. bThe old Act,
we are told, has not been acted upon at all—nobody has been surrendered
under that Act—and it is precisely in order to call the Extradition
Treaty7 out of the condition of a dead letter into that of a practical
fact, that this Bill is brought in. If it does not do this, it answers
no purpose. Therefore, if the Bill passes, one of two things must ensue:
either our magistrates will give up offenders, on evidence which would
be in great danger of being insufficient, or it will be necessary to
come to us again on some other occasion to reinforce this Bill and make
it still more easy to effect the extradition of accused persons. I can
conceive that in the case of ordinary offences it may not be necessary
to insist upon these considerations. But as soon as an application is
made for the extradition of a political offender, we shall find the
strongest reasons for hesitating on the question. If the laws of any
country afford facilities for getting up a false case, that false case
is very much more likely to be got up where political offences are
concerned. Political offences eo nomine are not, it is true, included in
the Extradition Treaty, but acts really political often come within the
definition of offences which are so included. Apply this observation to
the case of the French Emperor at Boulogne,8 and you will perceive—as
doubtless the Emperor himself would perceive—the force of what I am
advancing.b The noble Lord who has introduced this Bill (Lord Stanley)
has expressed his willingness, if it be possible, to exempt offences
really political from being made the grounds for extradition, under the
name of murder, or attempt to murder.9 This declaration is worthy of the
noble Lord, and is such as might be expected from his character. I
perfectly sympathize in the difficulties he feels. His difficulty is the
case of political Edition: current; Page: [118] assassination. I do not
pretend, if the only question were with reference to persons who had
really done these things, that I should have much to say against it.
People who do such things ought to make up their minds to sacrifice
their lives; and if they have any honest feeling in the matter they
generally do. (Hear, hear.) When there has been an actual attempt at
political assassination, it is not perhaps difficult, in most cases, to
distinguish between a false charge and a true one. But it is often
uncommonly so in the case of complicity in such an attempt; and these
are precisely the cases in which there is most danger of a false charge.
It is a thing which may happen any day, our being called upon to deliver
up some person charged with complicity in such an offence; and this
charge may be the most false imaginable, and yet such as is extremely
likely to be entertained. If I may offer, merely by way of illustration,
a case fresh in the memory of every Member of this House, I will say
that Governor Eyre felt convinced that Mr. Gordon was an instigator of
the insurrection in Jamaica,10 and on that ground Mr. Gordon was put to
death, although the evidence has been pronounced by those who have
examined it judicially—one of them expressed himself very strongly on
the point in this House11—utterly insufficient to establish this charge.
Well, we have heard no end of testimony from both sides of the House as
to what a good man, a clever man, and a blameless man Mr. Eyre was.
Well, then, let Mr. Eyre be all this: it follows, that let a man be as
good, and wise, and blameless as it is possible for a man to be, he may
yet make this mistake; and, if a Governor may make it, a King or an
Emperor may make it. We cannot doubt that in such cases depositions will
always be forthcoming, and that, if undue weight were attached to these
depositions, it would be extremely difficult to resist the extradition
of anyone charged with complicity in an attempt on the life of any
foreign Sovereign or statesman. The great majority of people, especially
people in power, are ready to believe almost anything against their
political enemies, especially those who have said or published things
tending to excite disapprobation of their conduct; as witness the case
of Mr. Gordon. I am not contending for the impunity of these persons.
Even those who look with the least horror on political assassination do
not doubt that it ought to be punished as murderc. The least the
Government of this country could demand in such cases is that the
foreign Government should send over here the same evidence that would be
necessary to put the man on his trial in the country that shelters him.
(Hear, hear.) I cannot approve a Bill under which our magistrates will
be called upon to surrender prisoners upon depositions taken in secret,
and under no circumstances ought an extradition treaty to deal with
political offenders. (Hear, hear.)c

Edition: current; Page: [119]


37.: The Extradition Treaties Act [2]
 4 AUGUST, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, cols. 2056–7. Not reported in The Times. A
motion had been made to take the Extradition Treaties Act Amendment Bill
(see No. 36) into Committee.

mr. j. stuart  appealed to the Government to postpone the further
consideration of this Bill, on the ground of the absence of his
honourable Friend the Member for Reading (Sir Francis Goldsmid), who had
an Amendment on the paper, to which he attached great importance.1 His
honourable Friend was obliged to leave the House yesterday before the
division, and was probably unaware of the intention of the Government to
have a sitting of the House that day, in order to pass that as well as
other measures on the paper through their remaining stages.

Mr. Walpole asked, whether the honourable Member for Westminster was not
prepared to move the Amendment?

Mr. J. Stuart  doubted whether he should be able to do justice to
the subject, as he had come to the House totally unprepared to undertake
the task.

[The Committee was deferred until the 6th.]


38.: The Naval Dockyards
 4 AUGUST, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, col. 2067. Reported in The Times, 6 August, p.
6, from which the variant is taken. Adjournment had been moved by John
Pakington (cols. 2057–60) so that the House could discuss allegations of
extravagance by officials in the Royal Dockyards.

mr. j. stuart  thought the conclusion to be drawn from this
discussion was, that a great improvement had been attempted in the mode
of conducting public business, but that, as is often the case with first
attempts, it had not proved very successful. Every one must feel the
great advantage it would be to this House and the public if the facts in
any matter relating to public expenditure could be authenticated and
agreed upon on both sides aby previous inquirya before the question
founded on those facts was brought before the House. His honourable
Friend the Member for Lincoln (Mr. Seely), with great credit to himself,
applied Edition: current; Page: [120] to be allowed to ascertain his
facts in the best possible way, and with the assistance of those best
qualified to help him:1 and the Admiralty consented to that
arrangement,2 though they did not appear to have persevered in that
laudable intention to the end. The misunderstanding which appeared to
have arisen was to be regretted, as they all knew how much more
information could be obtained on a complicated matter across a table
than across this House, and how much more complete and intelligible that
information was likely to be when asked for in a friendly than in a
hostile manner.


39.: The Extradition Treaties Act [3]
 6 AUGUST, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, cols. 2115–18. Reported in The Times, 7 August,
p. 7, from which the variant and response are taken. Goldsmid, now being
in the House (see No. 37), moved his amendment to the Bill (see No. 36
for it and the related Acts), to add a clause: “That nothing in this
Act, nor in any previous Act relating to Treaties of Extradition, shall
be construed to authorize the extradition of any person in whose case
there shall be reasonable grounds for belief that his offence, if any,
had for its motive or purpose the promotion or prevention of any
political object, nor to authorize the extradition of any person the
requisition for the delivery of whom shall not contain an undertaking on
the part of the Sovereign or Government making such requisition, that
such person shall not be proceeded against or punished on account of any
offence which he shall have committed before he shall be delivered up,
other than the offence specified in the requisition.”  spoke after
Lord Stanley.

mr. j. stuart  felt that many of the sentiments which they had just
heard from the noble Lord1 were of a very reassuring character, and if
the noble Lord were always to be Foreign Secretary, he should not
require much further security; but since the country was not likely to
be always so far favoured, he could not help regretting that the
deliberations of the noble Lord had not led him to frame some other
clause, if that already proposed did not meet with his approbation. It
should be remembered that if a person charged with political
assassination were not given Edition: current; Page: [121] up, he would
not necessarily escape punishment; for he might still be prosecuted in
the country where he had sought refuge. Nobody wished that political
should enjoy any more impunity than any other kind of assassination; but
if we had only the alternative of trying in this country persons charged
with political offences, or of giving up everybody charged with homicide
of a political character, he (Mr. Stuart ) should prefer the former.
At the same time, he did not think it impossible to define political
offences. Various attempts at definition had, to his knowledge, been
communicated to the noble Lord. aOne of them, suggested by a learned
Gentleman, he would mention. It was,a “Any offence committed in the
course or in furtherance of any civil war, insurrection, or political
movement.”2 That he thought would not include political assassination.
It appeared to him that this matter required much more consideration
than it had yet received; the more one examined into it the worse it
looked. There was at the present moment the utmost uncertainty as to the
nature of the inquiry which an English magistrate was bound to make,
previous to delivering up any person charged with a political offence.
He found in the papers before the House two entirely different views of
the law of this country. The Extradition Act said—

It shall be lawful for any justice of the peace, having power to commit
for trial, to examine upon oath any person or persons touching the truth
of such charge, and upon such evidence as according to the law of that
part of Her Majesty’s dominions would justify the apprehension and
committal of the person accused if the crime had been there committed,
it shall be lawful for the magistrate to commit the prisoner into the
custody of the officers of the Power so demanding him.3

Now, it was stated in the able and excellent letter of Lord Clarendon to
Lord Cowley, that a magistrate, when called upon in this country to
commit any person for trial, was authorized to examine into the truth of
the charge; that, according to our practice, when a person has made oath
that another person has committed a certain crime, a warrant is issued
for his apprehension; and that the next step is to bring the accused
person before a magistrate, when the accuser must appear with his
witnesses and be confronted with him in open court, and it must be
proved to the satisfaction of the magistrate, before committing the
prisoner for trial, that there was sufficient primâ facie ground for
believing, first, that the crime had been committed, and next, that the
prisoner was the party who had committed it.4 According to this view of
the law, it would be in the power of the person accused, Edition:
current; Page: [122] before the order is passed for delivering him up,
to produce witnesses and have them examined. By the treaty now entered
into, the prisoner might be delivered up on the production of written
depositions. But he had always understood that, although the depositions
might be received in evidence, yet conformably with our practice it
would be open to the prisoner to produce counter evidence in
contradiction to them, which might show them to be untrustworthy. But
now look at the memorandum of the Conference at the Foreign Office on
the 8th of February. It was there stated that an impression prevailed in
France that the English magistrate actually tried the case; and that
that impression was unfounded.5 Of course it was, because there was a
great deal of difference between the inquiry previous to committal and
the actual trial. But, then, the memorandum went on to say, that when
the prisoner was brought before the magistrate he would be entitled to
have the depositions read in his presence; but that he would not be
allowed to controvert the truth of those depositions, or to produce
counter evidence, except as to his identity. Could there be a more
flagrant case of contradiction between theory and practice? They were
entitled to ask Government whether the law laid down in the Act or the
practice laid down in the Foreign Office memorandum was right. If the
practice were to prevail over the law, a law should be made to legalize
it; but it ought to be considered whether such a law would not be an
absolute enormity. Could it be dreamt of that even in respect to an
ordinary offence, depositions taken unknown to the person charged—which
he had no opportunity of disputing—with reference to which he was not
permitted to cross-examine his accusers, should be sufficient to require
his surrender?6 Were these depositions, produced in evidence in a court
in this country, to be made the grounds for delivering up a person to be
tried in the country in which the depositions were made, on the sole
condition that he was not shown to be the person named in the warrant?
If he really were the person charged, was he not to be allowed to tender
any evidence to show that the depositions did not establish a case
against him? That was a subject on which the noble Lord the Secretary of
State should tell them his mind. Then they had been led to think that
there was an understanding with foreign Powers, including the Government
of France, that political prisoners should not be delivered up. It now
appeared, however, that there was no such understanding, but it was
assumed that the French Government would not ask them to deliver up such
persons. If that was the case, it was extremely honourable to the French
Government, or to our own, perhaps to both—honourable to the French
Government if they did not desire to have such persons delivered up,
honourable to the reputation of our own Government in foreign countries,
if the absence of the demand was grounded on a conviction that it would
not be complied with. They had the noble Lord’s assurance that he would
not deliver up such persons, but they ought to have some Edition:
current; Page: [123] more complete security. Was that intention grounded
on an understanding that the treaty did not require us to give up
persons charged with political murder, or on a belief that, although the
treaty did bind us to deliver them up, the demand would not be made?
Surely it would have been better to have some words inserted in the Act
showing that it was not the intention of Parliament that the Act should
authorize the extradition of political offenders. It was admitted that
the Act in terms admitted the extradition of political offenders, but we
were told that the right was not exercised. That might be the case with
regard to a particular Sovereign, but what security had they for the
conduct of his successors. It seemed now that there had not been even a
verbal understanding, and that absence of any demands from which it had
been sought to infer one, might have arisen only from the circumstance
that during the period which had elapsed there had not been a
sufficiently strong desire for the surrender of any person included in
the class referred to, to induce the French Government to demand his
extradition. It was said that we could get rid of the treaty in six
months, but that could not or would not be done until something
irrevocable had taken place, until, perhaps, some illustrious exile had
been delivered up, whose surrender would cover this country with
ignominy. He entreated the noble Lord to apply his mind to the subject,
and see if it were possible to insert words that would show at least the
will and intention of Parliament that the extradition should not extend
to political cases, so that there might be something to be relied upon
by the Secretary of State in justification of the course he might have
to take. This Act was an experiment which they were going to try for the
first time, and surely it would be worth while to try it avowedly as an
experiment. Would the noble Lord limit the duration of the Act to twelve
months? At the expiration of that time they would perhaps have better
means of judging than they had now, and might be able to renew the Act
from time to time for a longer period. (Hear, hear.)

[Later in the debate Kinglake suggested acceding to ’s suggestion of
limiting the duration of the act to one year, so that the House could
consider the matter more carefully; Goldsmid’s amendment was withdrawn,
and Kinglake’s clause added (col. 2124). The Bill thus amended passed
its third reading.]


40.: The Disturbances in Jamaica [3]
 10 AUGUST, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, col. 2160. Reported in The Times, 11 August, p.
6.

mr. j. stuart  said, he wished to ask the Under Secretary of State
for the Colonies, Whether any further information has been received as
to the apprehensions Edition: current; Page: [124] which he stated to be
entertained by the authorities in Jamaica of a new outbreak in the
Colony;1 and whether he has any objection to state more particularly to
the House the information which had previously been received on that
subject?

Mr. Adderley said, in answer to the honourable Member’s question, he
must beg to state that just before the recent debate on the subject of
Jamaica despatches were received, from which it appeared that
disturbances were apprehended by the Custos of the parish of Metcalfe, a
Member of the Colonial Government, as likely to take place in his
district during the present month of August. Her Majesty’s Government
immediately took such precautions as they deemed fully adequate to
secure the peace of the colony, and they ascertained from the Admiralty
that a considerable naval force was about the island, and available for
any emergency which might arise. The Governor, Sir Henry Storks, felt no
distrust in the powers which he possessed to meet any such disturbances
as were apprehended. No further information had been received since the
arrival of those despatches, but he had laid papers on the table that
day which gave the despatches in extenso, together with the fullest
information up to the most recent period respecting the late lamentable
occurrences.


41.: The Lord Chief Baron
 10 AUGUST, 1866

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 184, col. 2165. Reported in The Times, 11 August, p.
6.

mr. j. stuart  said, he rose to move for an Address for Copies of
all the Correspondence which has taken place between Members of the
Government and Mr. Rigby Wason in relation to the appointment of Sir
FitzRoy Kelly to be Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer;1 and of any
Correspondence between the Members of Government and Sir FitzRoy Kelly
upon the same subject.

Mr. Walpole said, he had no objection to the first part of the Motion;
but as the Edition: current; Page: [125] second part related to
communications made to him by the Lord Chief Baron which were of a
private character, he (Mr. Walpole) could not assent to their
production. There might be an investigation into the matter in another
Session, and in that case he thought that the Lord Chief Baron should
have an opportunity of considering what answer he should make.

[’s motion, which came on the last day of the Session, was not acted
upon.]

Edition: current; Page: [126] Edition: current; Page: [127]


February to August 1867


42.: Political Progress
 4 FEBRUARY, 1867

Manchester Examiner and Times, 5 February, 1867, p. 6. Headed: “Opening
of the Manchester Reform Club.” (A clipping of this version is in the
-Taylor Collection.) The speech was reported in London on the 6th in
the Daily News and the Morning Star.  had travelled down from St.
Andrews, where on 1 February he had delivered his Inaugural Address as
Rector (see CW, Vol. XXI, pp. 215–57), to attend the inaugural luncheon
meeting of the Manchester Reform Club at Spring Gardens. Hugh Mason
presided. In addition to , Goldwin Smith was present as a guest (see
No. 43 for ’s speech in his honour later the same day). After the
formal business of the meeting was concluded, toasts were offered,
including one by Thomas Bayley Potter (1817–98), M.P. for Rochdale, who
proposed “Political progress, the only safeguard of civil liberty,” with
which he coupled the names of  and Smith. “, on being called
upon to respond,” then spoke.

mr. chairman and gentlemen, you have done me the honour of associating
my name with the words of “political progress.” It is with you, it is
with the men of Lancashire, that that idea should be more particularly
connected. We of the south are accustomed to look to you—to the north—as
invariably leading the van, not only in the industrial and the
commercial progress, but in the political progress of this country. And
in doing so you have only confirmed the idea which we have heard from
our childhood, which is admitted and even asserted as a general
principle by Conservative as well as Liberal thinkers, that
manufacturing and commercial populations are always the leaders on the
side of progress—(hear),—and that agricultural populations, and
particularly the territorial aristocracy and the great landowners, have
a different function in the community—a function sometimes necessary,
although often it has become excessive—the Conservative function, the
function of keeping that which is good, and I am afraid sometimes that
which is bad too. a(Cheers and laughter.) But to you it particularly
belongs—toa the manufacturing and commercial communities of the world,
and to the manufacturing and commercial part of mixed communities,
belongs the lead in improvement, both in ideas and above all in the
application of those ideas to practice. It is natural that it should be
so, because those who are constantly employed in devising more and more
new contrivances for making the laws of nature bavailableb for the
increase of the national wealth, and for attaining Edition: current;
Page: [128] all the objects that are pursued in the economical
department of things with ever-increasing facility; those of us, a very
large proportion of whom are always men who have made their own position
and their own fortunes, who are always rising, a succession of them
rising from inferior to higher positions—those are the persons whose
practice and whose whole course in life naturally ought to make them,
and very generally does make them, habitual improvers and reformersc.
(Hear, hear.) Those are the industriesc which turn men’s minds to
improvement in all departments of things as well as in their own. I wish
it were not, unfortunately, to be set down to the general infirmities of
human nature, that even these very men, after they have raised
themselves, their fortune completely made, they and their descendants
dvery often cherishd the rather low ambition of passing over to the
class of territorial magnates—(hear, and cheers), and from that time
ewee rather see their influence employed on the Conservative side—often,
wholesomely, sometimes perhaps not quite so wholesomely, than on the
side on which they have themselves made their position. (Cheers.) Still,
it is to them, it is to this class that we must look in all great
national movements for political improvement, and it is to them we look
mainly for fsuccess for the futuref in the great battle in which we are
now engaging against what remains of privilege in this country.
(Cheers.) The sentiment which has been given by my friend Mr. Potter
gassociatesg political progress, with civil liberty, as being the sole
condition of it; and I think no person who uses the smallest reflection
can doubt that this is true, for hour history and our principles
together combineh in showing, in the first place, that the nation which
is not going forward always goes back; the nation which is not
constantly employed in improving whatever it has both of iphysical and
moral good,i and also of spiritual good, which is not constantly engaged
in improving, gets into a state of stagnationj, and actual indolence and
indifferencej, the sure consequence of which is decline kin these
things, and with decline in these things, with decline either in mental
prosperity, in mental or moral culture,k comes necessarily—where a
people has been free—the gradual loss of liberty. (Hear, hear.)
Consequently it is not to be expected that any country should long
retain its liberty which is not engaged in political progress, which
does not keep political progress constantly going. And more than this,
there is a point which more especially tempts and invites our attention
at this present moment, namely, the question of how a country—in the
lnewl state of the world—is to protect, not only Edition: current; Page:
[129] its liberty, but its national independence, against foreign
countries. Look at the armed hosts that are rising up all over the world
just now. Look at the immense extent to which the governments of
Europe—all the more powerful governments—are devoting their
resources,—the whole, almost we may say, of their population,—to the
maintenance of enormous armies, and not merely defensive but aggressive
armies. (Hear, hear.) Is not that menacing to this country? Does anybody
suppose that these governments look with pleasure on the degree of
freedom that we enjoy, or upon the contrast whereby, in many respects,
our position offers to that of their subjects, min all thism freedom?
Not at all. Yet what position are we in? We, with our small army, and I
hope we shall never have a large and an aggressive army—we actually
cannot keep it up, we cannot get recruits, because—and this is the point
to which the most attention, I think, should be turned, as being one of
the most remarkable signs of the times—the people of this country, and,
indeed, of other countries, but especially of this country, will no
longer fight for a cause that is not their own. Men will not be soldiers
as a mere profession, or at least the number is constantly diminishing,
who will hire themselves out to shed the blood of others when it is not
for the protection of their own freedom and laws. And we have a noble
example of what a people will do—how a people will fight—when it is for
themselves, for their own cause, for their own liberty, or for moral
principles which they regard equally with their liberty. We have seen
that in the late heroic and glorious struggle of the United States.
(Loud cheers.) We have seen there a ion of men in arms for their own
freedom, but chiefly for the freedom of others, chiefly for the general
cause of liberty; a ion of men in arms—every family in the country
almost had some one of its members in that force, and scarcely a family
in the ncountry, or in the free states, is notn in mourning in
consequence of that war. Nevertheless they fought on until they had
triumphed. They have triumphed, and they have gone back to their ploughs
and to their looms, and have resumed the pursuits of civil life, no more
thinking to continue a military life, or to make oany invidious
encroachmentso on their neighbours, or to engage in any war but such a
one as they have carried so nobly to a conclusion—(hear, hear)—any more
than if they had never handled a musket. (Hear, hear.) That is the
defensive army which we require—(loud cheers)—it is the defensive force
we seek—(cheers)—and we ought with the utmost vigour to oppose any
attempt to increase it so as to give us an aggressive force. What we
want is a defensive force; what we want is that the people shall be a
disciplined people, shall be an armed people, shall be ready to fight,
and to go forth as the Americans did, in their own cause, por in any
cause in which they feel a disinterested concern;p that it shall be for
themselves and not for others—and that they shall offer the highest
places in that force not to those who Edition: current; Page: [130] have
bought, or who are born to it, but to those who qcan showq that they
have earned it, and that they deserve it. (Loud applause.)

[Goldwin Smith also responded, and after several more toasts and replies
the meeting ended.]


43.: Goldwin Smith
 4 FEBRUARY, 1867

Manchester Examiner and Times, 5 February, 1867. Headed: “Mr. Goldwin
Smith’s Lectures. / William Pitt.” (A clipping of the report is in the
-Taylor Collection.) No other report has been located. ’s second
public appearance on this day (see No. 42) was in the evening at the
Assembly Room of the Free Trade Hall. , who was in the Chair,
“received a very enthusiastic reception from the audience.” His speech
introduced Goldwin Smith (1823–1910), Regius Professor of Modern History
at Oxford, who was to deliver the last of his four lectures on the
Political History of England, which were given to raise funds for the
Jamaica Committee.

ladies and gentlemen, if Mr. Goldwin Smith were a stranger here, there
are many things which it would be my duty, and still more my pleasure,
to have said respecting him; but he was no stranger here before he
delivered the lectures which have been so well received here, and which
have so well deserved it; and he is still less a stranger after them. I
therefore need not tell you who or what Mr. Goldwin Smith is. I will
only say this, that what makes him, in my estimation, a perfectly
invaluable man at this period in this country, is not his talents, not
his acquirements, not even his courage—rare as that quality is, which
ought to be the commonest of all public virtues—but it is that these
talents, and those acquirements, and that courage have been, above all,
exercised and called forth in defence of outraged moral principles.
(Applause.) Whenever there is a high moral principle to be asserted
against the insolence of power, or against the prevailing opinion of the
powerful classes, there Mr. Goldwin Smith is to be found. (Hear.) You
all know two of the most conspicuous instances—the stand which he made
against the sympathy with the worst of all rebellions, the slaveholders’
rebellion,1 and that which he is now making against the outrages in
Jamaica.2 Above all, when any outrage is committed against those united
principles, principles which never were dissevered in the best times of
our history, and never ought to be dissevered—liberty and law—it is then
that we most need the services and the aid, Edition: current; Page:
[131] the championship of a man in whom those two ideas are for ever
united—ideas which are now so separated in the minds of the powerful
that the most lawless outrages are condoned by the proper and authorised
defenders of law, provided they are perpetrated against liberty.
(Applause.)

[After Smith’s address, the meeting’s thanks to Smith for the series
were moved. The motion was carried by acclamation, and Smith responded,
commenting that when it was first suggested to him that his friend 
should preside, he had said that “it would be rather like drawing a
champagne cork with a steam engine. (Laughter.) But the steam engine was
so kind and unconscious of its own magnitude that it came. (Hear, and
laughter.)” Jacob Bright then took the Chair, so that T.B. Potter could
move a vote of thanks to . Bright, in putting the motion, remarked
that when  entered the House of Commons, he “found himself much too
large to be a Tory—(laughter)—he was too generous and had too much
courage to be a Whig, and he gave his great powers unsought to the cause
of the people, which was the cause of humanity. (Cheers.)” After the
vote was approved with loud applause,  rose again.]

Mr.  said: Ladies and gentlemen, I am most sincerely and deeply
grateful for the kind feelings with which you have received me, and for
the kind vote of thanks you have been pleased to pass, though I do not
feel that I at all deserve it, for having come here to give myself the
opportunity of hearing the noble address which has kept us all in such a
state of delight from beginning to end, and the opportunity also of
giving, so far as the case admits of it, my adhesion to the whole tone
and tenour of that discourse, and to nearly all the sentiments and
statements which it contains. I say nearly all, because it is impossible
that, in any address of that length, there should not be some things on
which differences of opinion might arise, and if I could wish to suggest
any difference of opinion from this noble discourse it would be to put
in a word for the poor French Revolutionists. (Applause.) Unfortunately,
there is too much of what Mr. Goldwin Smith has brought against them
which can neither be denied nor palliated; but I should be very sorry,
and I have no doubt Mr. Goldwin Smith himself would be very sorry, that
you should suppose that there is not another side to the question—that
there is nothing whatever to be said for them. On the contrary, in many
of what seem their most exceptionable acts, there were circumstantial
justifications of detail which, if they were stated, would very often,
in my opinion, justify, and always excuse their conduct. I am speaking
of the comparatively good period of the revolution. I would not, any
more than the best revolutionists did then, and their greatest admirers
have done since, palliate for one instant either the massacre of
September or the excesses of the reign of terror. There were many bad
men among them, and there were many bad acts; but there were also men of
the purest virtue, some of the most heroic characters that ever existed,
many of whom gave their lives, not only for their principles, but to
preserve the purity and the fame of those principles by preventing, as
far as could be, the atrocities with which they were stained, and
Edition: current; Page: [132] rather sacrificed their own lives when
they could have saved them, than tacitly connive at, or appear to be any
parties to those iniquities. For what there was—and there was very
much—for which no excuse can be offered, the greatest share of the blame
rests where Mr. Goldwin Smith placed it, upon the odious system under
which they had hitherto lived, the oppressions under which they had
suffered, and the entire failure of their governing classes to establish
any claim whatever on their forbearance. But even among those governing
classes there were exceptions—a minority of the noblesse in the first
States General, the minority which first joined with the people,
consisting of about forty-five, among which there is not one name that
was not eminent. Those 45 men, or thereabouts, I take to be about as
heroic a body of men as ever existed, Lafayette being at their head.3
(Applause.) However, this is not the occasion on which it would be
suitable to go any further into this subject. I have only entered upon
it at all because I thought that possibly, without any intention on the
part of the lecturer, a more unfavourable impression than he intended
might be given to some of those who had not studied the history of the
period; and I could not help saying what little depends upon myself to
reduce this too heavy catalogue of just accusations against the French
revolutionists within its legitimate bounds. (Hear.) I cannot
sufficiently congratulate this assembly and this city upon what Mr.
Brodrick4 has so well called the union between Oxford and
Manchester—that is, between the best part of Oxford and
Manchester—(laughter and applause)—which is inaugurated, I hope, by Mr.
Goldwin Smith’s presence here. (Applause.) Mr. Goldwin Smith is one of
that band of reformers who have made Oxford so different from what it
was not long ago. (Hear.) There was a time not very distant when it
seemed as if the University of Oxford existed for the purpose of
preventing all which a university is supposed to exist in order to
create. That time has gone by. There is abundant need for reform in
Oxford still; but there is abundance of good there. There is a race of
men now rising in Oxford in whom the spirit of improvement is as strong
and as enlightened as in any other class or body of men who can be found
in this country—(applause), who are taking the lead in all Liberal
improvements—not only in politics, but in all that with which Oxford is
more particularly connected—in ecclesiastical matters. We have an
example of this in the two Fellows5 of an illustrious college at Oxford
who have appeared among you on this occasion, and uttered sentiments
which all present will appreciate. They also form part of this noble
band of men from whose exertions England will yet reap admirable fruits,
and fruits which will doubtless Edition: current; Page: [133] increase
year after year. The improvements which are taking place, and which will
take place, are being prepared and will be forwarded and carried into
effect in a great degree, as I fully believe, by them all, such men as
they are. I am sure that my friend, Mr. Goldwin Smith, may well leave
this city with the feelings of satisfaction, of pleasure, and of
thankfulness which he has expressed. (Hear.) And I am sure that no less
those whom I am addressing sincerely feel the thanks which they have
voted to Mr. Goldwin Smith. I am sure that from the lectures he has
delivered, and of which I have only had the satisfaction of hearing one,
but, if the others were like it, I know what I must have lost—you must
be quite aware how much you have yet to look to from him. (Applause.)
How he can possibly suppose that his sole means of usefulness is his
pen, I know not, and I think the statement must have surprised all of
you as much as it surprised me. But I have no doubt that the faculty
which appears to have been a secret to himself, but which he has
manifested in so remarkable a manner to us, will be yet exercised in
many other ways and on many other occasions, equally with his very
active pen, for the service, not only of parliamentary reform, but of
all other public improvements. (Applause.)

[The meeting then terminated.]


44.: The Royal Commission on Trades’ Unions
 15 FEBRUARY, 1867

Morning Star, 16 February, 1867, p. 5. Headed: “The Trades’ Unions
Commission. / Deputation to the Home Secretary.” Reprinted without
substantive variants in Report of the Various Proceedings Taken by the
London Trades’ Council and the Conference of Amalgamated Trades, in
Reference to the Royal Commission on Trades’ Unions, and Other Subjects
in Connection Therewith (London: Kenny, 1867), pp. 33–4. The deputation
of representative working men called on Spencer Walpole at the Home
Office.  introduced them and, after others exchanged comments,
spoke.

i have no doubt the commission will examine every person that may be
produced, and that any person the working classes wish to represent them
will get a fair hearing, but if I understand the matter rightly the
difficulty was not that witnesses will not get opportunities of giving
all the evidence they consider desirable, but that some persons in the
interests of the trades’ unions, and properly understanding their
working, should be present to answer any charge that may be made
affecting the character of any one of the trades. I believe what is
desired is, that some persons having practical acquaintance with trades’
unions should be put in position to contradict anything that may be
said, through, perhaps, ignorance, damaging to the character of these
societies, or to put such questions as would have Edition: current;
Page: [134] the effect of enabling the commission to form a better and
more impartial opinion than perhaps they otherwise could have done. Very
likely Mr. Harrison may do it well,1 but Mr. Harrison with a working man
may be able to do it better. If the commission had the power to do what
the trades’ unions desired with regard to the attendance of persons to
watch the interests of each trade as questions affecting that trade came
up for inquiry, no doubt it would be better.

Mr. Walpole: I think the commission can do so, but I should not like to
interfere any further.

Mr.  then thanked Mr. Walpole for the courteousness of his
reception, and the delegation withdrew.


45.: The Metropolitan Poor Bill [1]
 8 MARCH, 1867

Saint Stephen’s Chronicle, Vol. II, p. 148. Not in PD. The Times, 9
March, p. 6, summarizes ’s intervention in a clause. On 7 March (PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 185, col. 1510) Gathorne Gathorne-Hardy (1814–1906), M.P.
for the University of Oxford and President of the Poor Law Board, moved
that the House go into Committee pro forma on “A Bill for the
Establishment in the Metropolis of Asylums for the Sick, Insane, and
Other Classes of the Poor, and of Dispensaries; and for the Distribution
over the Metropolis of Portions of the Charge for Poor Relief; and for
Other Purposes Relating to Poor Relief in the Metropolis,” 30 Victoria
(7 Mar., 1867), PP, 1867, IV, 283–324 (as amended). He proposed that the
discussion proper should begin on the next day, and  spoke at the
beginning of that session, concerning the scheduling of the Bill. In
reply to a question, Gathorne-Hardy said that he intended to proceed
with the Committee on the Metropolitan Poor Bill that evening, and 
intervened.

the bill with the amendments of the right honourable gentleman is not
yet in the hands of honourable members, and they are therefore hardly in
a position to go into committee upon it.

[Sir Thomas Chambers (1814–91), M.P. for Marylebone, agreed with ,
but Gathorne-Hardy concluded the discussion by saying that the
importance of the matter entailed continuing immediately, and that the
amended version would soon be in members’ hands. For the ensuing
discussion, see Nos. 47–9.]

Edition: current; Page: [135]


46.: The Straits Settlements
 8 MARCH, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 185, cols. 1606–7. Reported in The Times, 9 March, p.
7. Myles William O’Reilly, M.P. for Longford, asked questions of
Adderley, the Colonial Secretary, concerning the treatment of officers
as a result of the transfer of the Settlement from the India to the
Colonial Office. Adderley replied, saying in part that the Colonial
Office did not communicate with the superseded officers because it dealt
only with its own appointees, not those of the Indian Department. 
then spoke.

mr. j. stuart  said, he knew nothing of these particular cases, but
he did know something of the Straits Settlements. He hoped that the
general proceedings of the Colonial Office were not such as they
appeared to have been in this instance. The reason why Parliament
desired to transfer the Straits Settlements from the India to the
Colonial Office was, he apprehended, because those settlements were
totally different from India, in a totally different state of society,
and had always been under a totally different system of government.
There was no natural connection between the Straits Settlements and
India; but as soon as the transfer was made it was thought necessary by
the Colonial Office that the officers, who had been conducting the
affairs of the Settlements, as seemed to be implied, upon the Indian
system, should be superseded by others who would conduct them upon the
colonial system. He wanted to know what the colonial system was. He
hoped and trusted that there was no such thing. How could there be one
system for the government of Demerara, Mauritius, the Cape of Good Hope,
Ceylon, and Canada? What was the special fitness of a gentleman who had
been employed in the administration of the affairs of one of those
colonies, for the government of another of which he knew nothing, and in
regard to which his experience in other places could supply him with no
knowledge? What qualifications had such a man, that should render it
necessary to appoint him to transact business of which he knew nothing,
in the place of gentlemen who did understand it, and who had been
carrying it on, not certainly upon the Indian system, and he believed
upon no system whatever but the Straits Settlements system? He did not
know upon what principle the government of the Straits Settlements was
to be carried on by the Colonial Office; but he did know that the
principle upon which such trusts were administered by the old East India
Company was that of retaining a man in the position the duties of which
he understood, and they would never have thought of removing a man from
an office of which he understood all the details, and replacing him by
one who knew nothing about them. He knew nothing of the gentlemen who
had administered the government of the Straits Settlements. He was not
even aware whether they desired to retain their offices: but he was sure
that Edition: current; Page: [136] if they did, it would have been for
the public advantage that they should be allowed to keep them. At all
events, if they were to be removed, they ought to have been informed of
that intention by some Department of the Government, and ought not to
have been allowed to learn it from reading in a newspaper that their
successors had been appointed.1 That that should have occurred was very
discreditable to somebody; and for his own part he should have thought
that it was the duty of the Colonial Office to communicate with these
gentlemen, because they were still serving in a territory which had been
transferred to that Department, and were not then acting under the India
Office. They must, indeed, until they ceased to exercise their
functions, have been in communication with the Colonial Office upon a
hundred other subjects, and it was curious that the only topic upon
which the Colonial Department did not think it necessary to intimate its
sentiments to them, was that of their removal from their posts, and the
appointment of their successors.


47.: The Metropolitan Poor Bill [2]
 8 MARCH, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 185, cols. 1608–10, 1616. Reported in The Times, 9
March, p. 7, from which the variant and responses are taken. 
indicated in a letter of 9 March to Chadwick that his comments were
“imperfectly reported,” though the account in the Morning Star—which
Hansard would have used in his collation—was “the best” (LL, CW, Vol.
XVI, pp. 1254–5).  spoke during Committee consideration of the
Metropolitan Poor Bill (for which, see No. 45). Clause 5, on which 
first spoke, and which was approved, read: “Asylums to be supported and
managed according to the provisions of this Act may be provided under
this Act for Reception and Relief of the Sick, Insane, or Infirm, or
other Class or Classes of the Poor Chargeable in Unions and Parishes in
the Metropolis.” ’s second intervention came on Clause 9—“the
Managers shall . . . be partly elective and partly
nominated”—immediately after speeches by Chambers and Torrens that are
summarized in the text below.

(Chambers’s amendment was defeated.)

mr. j. stuart  said, he was too much alive to the extreme difficulty
of carrying any measure for the improvement of the law or its
administration to be over critical in regard to the present Bill, as it
was brought forward with a real desire to improve the administration of
the Poor Law,1 and really did so in many important particulars. But he
wished to make a few observations, chiefly for the purpose of eliciting
the views of the right honourable Gentleman (Mr. Gathorne-Hardy), and of
entering a caveat in respect to principles of administration which
Edition: current; Page: [137] seemed to him true and just, but which
that measure was very far from carrying out to the extent which he was
persuaded the House and the country would come in time to think
desirable. He wished to ask the reason why the Bill, in the new system
which it originated, preserved so much of the fractional character of
the old system. Why was it necessary, for example, that there should be
one set of managers for asylums, and a different set for dispensaries?
Why were asylums to be provided according to districts marked out by the
Poor Law Board, while dispensaries were to be provided according to
parishes and unions? Both of those institutions, being kindred
institutions, must be managed in a certain degree on the same
principles, and those who were capable of managing the one must be
capable of managing the other. Why was it thought necessary that the
management of every separate asylum should be under a separate body, and
that every separate dispensary should be under a separate management? No
doubt, the right honourable Gentleman meant that there should be the
same system of administration for them, and trusted to the powers
reserved for the Poor Law Board for establishing it.2 But it was a sound
rule that the administration of the same kind of things ought to be, as
far as possible, on a large scale, and under the same management. A
Central Board would be under the eye of the public, who would know and
think more about it than about local Boards. It would act under a much
greater sense of responsibility. The number of persons capable of
adequately performing the duties in question was necessarily limited,
and such persons would be more easily induced to undertake duties on a
large scale than on a small one. It was probable that a considerable
number of powers now reserved to the Poor Law Board might safely be
exercised by such a Central Board; which would, to that extent, preserve
the principle of the administration of the local affairs of the people
by their own representatives. (Hear.) He was not one of those who
desired to weaken the power of the Poor Law Board to guide local
authorities, and supersede them when they failed in their duty, for Poor
Law administration is not a local but a national concern. But there was
much force in what was said by some local authorities, who did not
object to the main principles of this Bill, who admitted that its
proposals were necessary, who applauded the right honourable Gentleman
for making them, yet had fair ground for urging that they ought to have
the opportunity of themselves doing what was required, and that
interference should take place only when they had failed. With a view to
future legislation it would be well worth considering whether the
administration of the relief of the sick poor for the whole of London
should not be placed under central instead of local management, the
Central Board to be constituted by election, or partly by election and
partly by nomination. He did not wonder that the right honourable
Gentleman (Mr. Gathorne-Hardy) had not chosen to leave the sick poor in
the hands of the vestries. Edition: current; Page: [138] Vestry
government was hole and corner government, and he hoped the time was
coming when they would not tolerate hole and corner administration for
any purpose whatever. He hoped, before long, to have the opportunity of
bringing this matter before the House in connection with the general
subject of metropolitan local government. Of course, some of the
vestries had suffered wrongfully for the deficiencies of those who had
done worse; but it was in the essence of hole and corner government to
be comparatively irresponsible, inefficient, jobbing, and carried on by
inferior persons—objections which would not apply to a Central Board.
With a Central Board in existence, the duties of the vestries would be
those of superintendence rather than of execution. A numerically large
Board was unfit for executive or administrative duties, but admirably
fitted for looking after those who were intrusted with such duties.
Administrative duties were best intrusted to a single hand, which should
be responsible, and, if possible, paid (hear, hear); and the executive
administration of the Poor Laws should principally devolve on paid
officers, who would be watched in the districts by the vestries, which
would consist of ready-made critics superintending others with a
vigilance with which they did not like others to superintend them.
(Hear, hear.) aIn this way an addition might be made to the provisions
of this Bill for securing appropriate superintendents.a The proposal to
make the asylums medical schools, and thus to secure to them a high
degree of publicity and the constant supervision of skilled persons, did
the greatest credit to whoever suggested it, and was a proof of a real
capacity for practical legislation.3 (Hear, hear.)

[In the discussion of Clause 9, Thomas Chambers moved an amendment to
the effect that all the managers should be elected. McCullagh Torrens,
while expressing great anxiety that the Bill should pass, argued in
favour of the amendment, asserting that opinion outside the House was
unanimous that control should not be taken out of the ratepayers’
hands.4]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, he agreed with the honourable Gentleman, and
did not see any reason for the provisions in the Bill by which the Poor
Law Board were empowered to appoint a certain number of guardians.5
According to his view, the guardians were, or ought to be, quite
competent to perform their duties without any assistance from the
Government of any kind; but in the case of the appointment of a manager,
in whom special skill was required, popular election might not be
altogether so satisfactory as the appointment of a responsible
functionary. He was therefore fully disposed to support this particular
clause, although he should oppose, with his honourable Friend the Member
for Finsbury, that part of the Bill which left the nomination of the
guardians in the hands of the Poor Law Board.

Edition: current; Page: [139]


48.: The Metropolitan Poor Bill [3]
 11 MARCH, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 185, cols. 1678–9, 1680, 1685, and 1696. Reported in
The Times, 12 March, p. 7, from which the variant and response are
taken.  wrote to Chadwick on the 12th to say that his remarks were
“better reported this time than last [see No. 47], though briefly” (LL,
CW, Vol. XVI, p. 1256). The Committee consideration of the Metropolitan
Poor Bill (see No. 45) continued, with  speaking on Clause 45, which
provided that the District Medical Officers for the Unions and Parishes
should be appointed by the Dispensary Committee, subject to the rules
and orders of the Poor Law Board, except that those in employment when
the Dispensary Committee was first set up should continue in office
under such modifications of their duties and remuneration as should be
made by the Poor Law Board.

mr. j. stuart  said, he had ventured on a former clause to make some
suggestions which had been received very courteously,1 and he was now
going to make two other suggestions, which were not new, but had been
frequently made by, perhaps, the highest authority on the subject, Mr.
Chadwick, the only surviving member of the Royal Commission which drew
up the Poor Law.2 That Commission was one of the most enlightened and
able that ever sat, and so long ago as 1834 proposed principles on the
subject of education, which, Parliament being afraid of doing too many
good deeds at once, left for adoption by generations to come. He
regretted Mr. Chadwick was not himself a Member of that House; there was
scarcely any one whose services would be more valuable on many points of
administrative improvement. (Hear.) The first suggestion he had to offer
was this—if they wished the poor to be effectually taken care of, the
medical officers appointed should not be in private practice.3 It was
not to be expected in the ordinary run of human affairs that public duty
would not be neglected for private practice. It was eminently honourable
to the profession that public duties were so well attended to as they
were; but medical officers should be under no temptation to postpone
their public duties to private practice. Could any one suppose that in a
time of epidemic and disorder, when their services would be most
required by the poor, that they would not be under the temptation of
postponing their public duties for their private practice? One had heard
of people advertising for perfection in a schoolmaster for £40 a year,
which they were just as likely to get as a Board of Edition: current;
Page: [140] Guardians were likely to get a competent medical officer for
£100 a year. The other point was as to the mode of the appointment of
the medical officers. He thought we might well adopt the practice of the
hospitals of Paris, which were the best managed in Europe, where the
medical officers were appointed by a medical board after examination;
and he would suggest whether it would not be in the power of the College
of Physicians and the College of Surgeons, in combination with the Civil
Service Commissioners, to have a system of competitive examinations in
order to test the capacity of those medical officers who were
appointed.4 It was clear that the House was not at present prepared to
adopt this suggestion; but he laid it before the House and the right
honourable Gentleman, in the hope that it might be taken into
consideration on some future occasion.

aIn reply to the Chairman,

Mr.  saida He did not move any Amendment on the subject.

[Gathorne-Hardy replied (cols. 1679–80) that it would not be possible to
employ officers if they were prohibited from engaging also in private
practice. As to ’s suggestion of competitive examinations, he had no
experience of them in such cases, and thought that such a system would
lessen the responsibility of those appointing the officers. In fact, the
present checks were sufficient. Gathorne-Hardy was followed by John
Brady, F.R.S., M.P. for Leitrim, who expressed surprise that , “so
well informed on subjects in general,” should argue a case on which he
knew nothing. Were he to visit the hospitals, he would find eminent men
attending without any salary; if private practice were denied, the
officers would be drawn from inexperienced men who would give up the
post for private practice as soon as they were qualified. Further, the
present examinations for physicians and even more for surgeons were
sufficiently severe.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, that as the suggestion which he ventured to
make was an administrative, not a medical, suggestion, he did not see
why he should be prevented from making it, though he was not a medical
man. As to the question of remuneration, he had said before what he now
repeated, that if his suggestions were agreed to, the remuneration to
medical officers must be considerably raised. Whatever money was spent
in this direction was most usefully employed, because they ought to have
the best medical assistance that could be obtained for the poor.

[Clause 45 was agreed.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, the clause,5 as he understood it, would empower
the Poor Law Board to dismiss the officers of any Poor Law district, on
grant of compensation at their discretion, though those gentlemen had
hitherto held office Edition: current; Page: [141] for life, except in
case of misconduct. Whatever the confidence which those officers felt in
the right honourable Gentleman (Mr. Gathorne-Hardy), they did not like
to be in the power absolutely of an unlimited line of his successors.
They would accordingly be very glad if the right honourable Gentleman
would either sanction an appeal or a reference to arbitration, so that
they might not be at the mercy or discretion of a single officer.

[Gathorne-Hardy responded negatively (cols. 1685–6). The Clause was
agreed.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, he wished to ask if it were worth while risking
the popularity of the measure for the sake of the clause.6 Boards of
Guardians, who had hardly any power left, except in relation to the
outdoor poor, would be quite as fit to inspect asylums, etc., without
nominee guardians as with them.

[The Clause was approved, amended to limit such nominees to one-third of
the total number.]


49.: The Metropolitan Poor Bill [4]
 14 MARCH, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 185, cols. 1861–2. Reported in The Times, 15 March,
p. 5, from which the variants and response are taken.  was the first
speaker in debate on the third reading of the Bill

(see No. 45).

i wish to make only one or two observations. This Bill effects a great
improvement in the existing state of things, and the chief thing to be
regretted is that it does not go further. (Hear, hear.) The right
honourable Gentleman (Mr. Gathorne-Hardy) has reserved to himself1 the
decision of a point which he was urged by several deputations to decide
by the Bill itself—namely, the extent and boundaries of the districts,
each of which is to have an asylum to itself.2 I wish to urge upon the
right honourable Gentleman the importance of making these districts
large; as large as the present or future Parliamentary districts. Less
than this will not answer the purpose; and I hope the right honourable
Gentleman will give us this evening some idea of what are his purposes
on this subject. Another point of Edition: current; Page: [142] more
importance is, that there should be created, to stand between the Poor
Law Board and the local Boards, an intermediate representative body,
which might be intrusted with the aexecution of those rules and
principles which concerneda the metropolis as a whole, and which,
although elected, might have the exercise delegated to it of some of the
functions now reserved to the Poor Law Board. I much regret that the
right honourable Gentleman has not taken powers to establish such an
authority, for we know that he is himself favourable for it.3 The value
of large bodies representing large constituencies, as compared with
small bodies representing small districts, is indisputable. I will at
present confine myself to suggesting one or two practical cases in which
it will be found of importance. Take the case of an epidemic likely to
affect the whole metropolis, but for the present confined to a single
district. In that case the resources of the entire metropolis could,
through the administration of the general Board, be applied to the
district in which they were wanted. Something like this was done lately
in apprehension of a visit of the cholera, by the establishment of a
central committee sitting at the Mansion House.4 That committee
centralized the charity of the whole of London. Again, there is the case
of bsevereb destitution confined to certain districts. In these cases
the buildings and beds in some parts of the metropolis are empty, while
in the districts suffering the distress they are crowded. The value of a
central or intermediate Board between the Poor Law Board and the local
bodies, to superintend the application of the resources of the whole
metropolis to the immediate exigencies of the distressed districts, is
in such cases obvious. This function might well be discharged by a
Central Board composed partly of the ratepayers’ nominees, and partly of
persons selected by the Commissioners. Another most important
consideration is that referring to the providing of food, medicine, and
other necessaries for the hospitals. In many cases, also, relief is most
advantageously given in kind, which makes it very important that
provision should be made for obtaining the best articles possible. To
make contracts for the supply of these things is an operation for which
no local or small body can be by many degrees so fit as is a central
body either in point of efficiency or economy. Jobbing, which is
inseparable from hole-and-corner proceedings, need not be apprehended in
the case of a body representing the whole metropolis, making purchases
on a large scale, and entering into large contracts competed for by
opulent firms, for these transactions, being of a public nature, would
be carried on under the eyes of the world, and subject to public
criticism. No one can dispute, and the right honourable Gentleman must
be perfectly aware, that efficiency and Edition: current; Page: [143]
economy in contracts are better secured when the body which makes them
must do so with publicity—when it stands conspicuous in the public eye.
To any one disposed to object to the suggestion for creating an
intermediate or central elected Board, like the one I am speaking of,
that it is a step on the road to centralization, I would say that if the
establishment of such an intermediate body be denied, the denial of it
would be a far greater step towards centralization. The powers which
such a body is best qualified to exercise have become indispensable.
They will therefore be necessarily assumed by a purely Government Board,
without any elected body at all—by the Poor Law Board. These are the
suggestions I offer to the right honourable Gentleman, and the reasons
by which I support them.

[After a few more observations, including Gathorne-Hardy’s that they
might institute such a Board if the need for new powers became apparent
in the next year and a half (cols. 1864–5), the Bill was given third
reading.]


50.: The Reform Bill [1]
 8 APRIL, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 186, col. 1321. Not reported in The Times. Under
Public Business, the House was discussing the scheduling of debate on “A
Bill Further to Amend the Laws Relating to the Representation of the
People in England and Wales,” 30 Victoria (18 Mar., 1867), PP, 1867, V,
521–46 (the Second Reform Bill), and on “A Bill to Provide for the More
Effectual Prevention of Corrupt Practices and Undue Influence at
Parliamentary Elections,” 30 Victoria (9 Apr., 1867), ibid., II, 213–32.
 followed Ayrton, who suggested putting the Reform Bill first, and
deciding when it had got into Committee whether or not to proceed with
the Bribery and Corrupt Practices Bill.

mr. j. stuart  said, there was a great deal of inconvenience in
leaving a matter of so much importance in vagueness and uncertainty. He
spoke feelingly on the subject, as he had a Motion on the paper which
would be the first Amendment on the Reform Bill when they got into
Committee,1 and he was naturally anxious therefore to know whether the
Bill would come on on Thursday. He was perfectly ready to bring forward
his Motion on that day, or later if the House thought fit; but it was
extremely important that he should know on what day he would be called
upon to bring it forward.

[Disraeli followed immediately on ’s speech (cols. 1321–2), and
accepted Ayrton’s proposal.]

Edition: current; Page: [144]


51.: Trades Unions
 10 APRIL, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 186, cols. 1452–3. Reported in The Times, 11 April,
p. 6. The variant reading is taken from the St. Stephen’s Chronicle,
Vol. III, p. 112. Moving the second reading of “A Bill to Exempt
Associations of Workmen from Certain Disabilities for a Limited Time,”
30 Victoria (14 Feb., 1867), PP, 1867, I, 129–30, Charles Neate, M.P.
for Oxford, said its main aim was to restore to trade societies the
right of summary process against defaulting treasurers that they had
enjoyed prior to a recent judgment in the Court of Queen’s Bench. The
Government’s contention was that the second reading should not be
proceeded with, because the Bill proposed to give sanction to what had
just been declared illegal; the societies should change their
constitutions to avoid the illegality, and then they would enjoy the
protection of the Friendly Societies Act.  spoke after two further
interventions.

mr. j. stuart  said, that if he were a party man he should be
enchanted at the course taken by the Government on this subject; since
what they were now doing took away all the grace from the concession
they had made in granting an inquiry into the subject of trades unions.1
As far as mere words went, nothing could sound fairer than to say to the
unions—Set yourselves right before the law, and we will then see what
can be done for you. But, what was the fact? The law which they were
said to have violated was a mine sprung under them.2 No one dreamt of it
until the recent decision of the Court of Queen’s Bench.3 Under the
power which our law allowed the Judges to assume, of declaring that
whatever was in restraint of trade was illegal, anything might be made
law; but when a law was made in this way, it was to all intents and
purposes a new law. As the law which these societies were said to have
violated was a law of which they and everybody else had been entirely
ignorant, the only rational course was to preserve the status quo until
the whole subject had been reconsidered, which would only be done by
legalizing provisionally the course which the societies had pursued, and
allowing them to continue in that course until a final settlement was
come to. It was a highly demoralizing practice to attempt to prevent
people from doing what it was desired they, should not do, not by
punishing them, but by enabling any scoundrel to plunder them—by
granting him complete immunity for acts which in any other case would be
severely punished. The Legislature should not employ the vices of
mankind, but their virtues, to carry out its intentions. It would have
been infinitely Edition: current; Page: [145] better athat these
societies, or their officers, should have been punished long ago for
violating the law, than that they should now be put in the position they
were placed in by the recent decisionsa.

[Following an argument that the Bill should be withdrawn, the debate
adjourned, and the Bill was not proceeded with.]


52.: The Reform Bill [2]
 11 APRIL, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 186, cols. 1492–3. Reported in The Times, 12 April,
p. 4, from which the variant and response are taken. Hugh Lupus
Grosvenor (Earl Grosvenor) having moved adjournment with the aim of
postponing consideration of Reform until after the Easter holidays, the
discussion turned on whether ’s or Gladstone’s amendments should be
first given consideration. For ’s amendment, see No. 55. The Times
reported that, “Mr.  and Mr. Henley having risen at the same time,
loud calls arose for Mr. Henley; but Mr. , declining to give way,”
proceeded to speak.

sir, I confess I attach the highest importance to the Amendment awhich
stands on the paper in my name. Nevertheless, I shall waive my right to
proceed with it now, entertaining as I do a confident hope that the
House, on both sides of which that proposition has most distinguished
supporters and sympathizers, will with one consent allow me at some
early period an opportunity for a full discussion upon a proposal which
I can assure honourable Gentlemen is a most serious one, and is becoming
every day more serious from the number as well as the quality of its
supporters. I should not for a moment think of interposing this Motion
in the way of anything so important as the Amendment of my right
honourable Friend the Member for South Lancashire,1 upon which the House
is desirous, no doubt, of coming to a decisive judgment before we either
adjourn or are dissolved. I am sure that the House is not so eager for
its own amusement as not to be willing, if necessary, to sit through a
part of next week. (Hear, hear.) To think that the House would rather
leave the question as it is than submit to this minute sacrifice of its
pleasure or recreation would be so disgraceful to its character, that I
cannot think of entertaining so uncourteous a supposition.

[After a long discussion, Grosvenor’s motion was withdrawn, and the
House went into Gommittee, where eventually Gladstone’s amendment was
considered (col. 1525); it was defeated the next day (col. 1699).]

Edition: current; Page: [146]


53.: The Reform Bill [3]
 9 MAY, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 280–4. Reported in The Times, 10 May, p.
7, from which the variants and responses are taken. The St. Stephen’s
Chronicle, Vol. III, pp. 336–7 agrees with The Times in the variants. In
Committee on the Reform Bill, when considering Clause 3, dealing with
qualifications for voting in boroughs, Disraeli had proposed inserting
the italicized words in the third qualification: “Has during the Time of
such Occupation been rated as an ordinary occupier in respect of the
Premises so occupied by him within the Borough to all Rates (if any)
made for the Relief of the Poor in respect of such Premises . . .”
(cols. 15–19). The Times reported that  “spoke in a low and at times
inaudible tone.”

it must be admitted that the Government, by the last concession which
they have made, have abated one of the most obvious objections to the
most objectionable of all the provisions of the Bill. The
compound-householders are not to be burdened with any fine. They are to
pay it, but they will be allowed to deduct it from their rent, and will
thus be subject to one disadvantage the less. So much has been said
about this single disadvantage—so great stress has been laid on what is
called the fine—that attention has not been sufficiently directed to the
many other impediments which will remain. The honourable Member (Mr.
Hibbert) has called the Amendment a great improvement.1 He should rather
have called it a real, but a small improvement. Not only will the voter
have to keep money by him for a quarterly payment, instead of a weekly
payment which gives no trouble, being confounded with his rent; not only
will he have to lie out of his money until he has recovered it—perhaps
by weekly instalments; but another most essential condition is
requisite, on which the honourable Member has justly laid much
stress—his landlord must consent.2 And who is his landlord? One of that
powerful class, destined henceforward to be more powerful than ever—not
a popular class either with this House or with the public—the owners of
small tenements: every one of whom, if his solvent tenants take
advantage of the Bill, will lose, to say the least, a profitable
contract. Let honourable Gentlemen realize to themselves what an
obstacle this is, and then say whether it is likely that in the face of
it, the Bill will give more than a very limited amount of honest
enfranchisement. But I might be better inclined to accept it as an
instalment, if it did no worse; if it was satisfied with keeping almost
every small householder out, and did not let anybody in by unfair means.
But awhat will happen?a If the Bill becomes law in its present shape, no
sooner will it have passed than the scramble will begin for the 465,000
Edition: current; Page: [147] compound-householders. It is safe to say
that whichever party can put the greatest number of these people on the
register, and, what is of still greater consequence, can keep them
there, will have a tolerably secure tenure of power for some time to
come. Now, success in this will be principally a question of money. We
need not necessarily suppose any direct bribery, any payment of rates,
anything distinctly illegal. But there will have to be, and there will
be, a perpetual organized canvass of the 465,000. Organizations will be
formed for hunting up the small householders who are not rated, and
inducing them to come on the rate book. The owners of small tenements
must be canvassed too, that they may give their tenants leave to
register. Every motive that can be brought to bear on either class will
be plied to the utmost. Perpetual stimulus will be applied to the
political feelings of those who have any, and to the personal interests
of all. Both sides in politics will be prompted to this conduct by the
strongest possible motive—by that which makes so many men, not wholly
dishonourable or without a conscience, connive at bribery—the conviction
that the other party will practise it, and that unless they do the same,
their side, which is the right, will be at an unfair disadvantage. Now,
this annual, or rather perennial, rating and registering campaign among
the small householders, will cost much money. I hope that honourable
Gentlemen on this side of the House, who, loving household suffrage not
wisely but too well,3 have brought matters to this state, intend to come
down handsomely to the registration societies in their own
neighbourhoods; for the registration societies are destined henceforth
to be one of the great institutions of the country. I wonder if any one,
possessed of the necessary pecuniary statistics, has estimated how much
will be added to the already enormous expenses of our electoral system
when this Bill has passed. The Chancellor of the Exchequer knows
perfectly well which side is likely to carry off the prize when it comes
to a contest of purses (Hear, hear, and Oh!); though, after the profound
contempt which I was happy to hear that he entertains for all such
considerations,4 it would be uncourteous to suppose that he is in any
way influenced by them. But this serviceable piece of knowledge, though
the right honourable Gentleman is indifferent to it, is one which I
should like to impress upon the clever Gentlemen who are going to outwit
the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and make his Bill bring forth pure and
simple household suffrage, contrary to the intentions of everybody
except themselves who will vote for it. Now, if the Conservatives do,
what without doubt the right honourable Gentleman intends they
should—namely, by dint of money, bring everybody on the register who is
dependent on them, or who they think for any reason is likely to vote
with them; what is it expected that the Radicals will do? Every creature
must fight with its own natural weapons: honourable Gentlemen opposite
carry theirs in their pockets (Oh, oh!): the natural weapon of the
Radicals is political agitation. In Edition: current; Page: [148] mere
self-defence they will be compelled to be greater agitators than ever,
more vehement in their appeals to Radical feeling, more strenuous in
counter-working the voter’s personal interest by exalting to the highest
pitch every political passion incident to his position in life. This is
what will happen even if we make the chimerical assumption, that the
money expended in making voters will all be expended in modes which are
conventionally innocent—that there will be nothing scandalous, nothing
absolutely illegal; not even that decent form of bribery, payment of
rates. But is any one so simple as to believe that this will be the
case? Encouraged by the brilliant success of your bribery laws,5 you are
going to make payment of rates for political purposes an offence against
those laws:6 and your reward will be, that whereas you do now and then
detect a case of bribery, it is questionable if there will ever be a
single conviction for the other offence. You find it difficult enough to
prove bribery, committed where all eyes are watching for it, amidst the
heat and publicity of a contested election. Will it be an easy matter,
think you, to prove judicially that the non-rated householder, who a
month or two before the registration, goes quietly to the parochial
officer and pays his full, not his composition rate, has had it put into
his hands a few days previous, when no one but the registration agent
was thinking about him? And if you could prove it, whom could you
convict? Not the candidate; at the time of the registration there is no
candidate. The offender is a society of gentlemen in the neighbourhood.
If you can convict any one, it will be some needy agent, some man of
straw, unauthorized by anybody, beyond general instructions to do the
best he can for the Conservative or the Liberal interest. I just now
called what would take place a scramble for the compound-householders. I
might have called it an auction. Except under the impulse of strong
political excitement, we may expect that the small householders who will
get on the register will generally get there at some other person’s
expense. And the work which begins in this way will not end with it.
Once paid for his vote, the integrity of the elector is gone. (Hear,
hear.) Many a one will go further, and take payment in a grosser and
more shameless form. This is the futurity which the Government Reform
Bill provides for us. There was but one thing wanting to complete the
picture, and that one thing has been vouchsafed to us. It is, that the
Minister who is in this way sowing bribery broadcast with one hand,
should hold a Bill for the better prevention of bribery in the other.7
That Bribery Bill completes the irony of the situation. (Laughter.) Sir,
the point on which we are now deliberating is, in the judgment of this
side of the House, the most important of all the points which we shall
have to decide. I sincerely hope, in spite of what was said Edition:
current; Page: [149] by the honourable and learned Gentleman who spoke
last,8 that it is not so in the eyes of the Government. No one now wants
to throw out the Bill. (Hear, hear, and Oh, oh.) If it is wrecked it
will be by its authors; nobody can wreck it but themselves. The Bill,
however, has now come out in its true colours, as a Bill which restricts
the suffrage. Of course, I do not mean that it does nothing else. But if
it passes, it will make the franchise more difficult of access to a
considerable portion of those who are by the present law entitled to it.
As regards the new electors, the right honourable Gentleman the
Chancellor of the Exchequer has framed his measure very skilfully to
effect the greatest apparent, and the smallest real, enfranchisement of
independent voters (No, no, and Hear, hear), and the greatest, both
apparent and real, enfranchisement of the bribeable and the dependent.
Perhaps the House thinks I mean this as a reproach to the right
honourable Gentleman, as if there were something tricky and insincere in
it. But I am bound to say that the right honourable Gentleman, from as
long ago as I remember, has seemed to me remarkably constant to a
certain political ideal, which may be defined, an ostensibly large and
wide democracy, led and guided by the landed interest. (Laughter.) He
has always aimed at shaping our institutions after this type, whenever
he has meddled with them, either as a theoretical or a practical
politician; and there need be no doubt that he sincerely thinks it the
best form of Government. But that is no reason why we should follow him,
who like neither his end nor his means. (Hear, hear.) I am afraid that
this Bill, so far as it relates to compound-householders, will make ten
electors with other people’s money, for other people’s purposes, for
every one who will make himself an elector by the exercise of the social
virtues: and will greatly increase, instead of diminishing, the
influence of money in returning Members to Parliament. I believe that in
consequence, instead of attaining the end to which so many honourable
Members are willing to sacrifice everything, that of putting the
question to sleep, and giving a long truce to agitation, this Bill, if
it passes with its present provisions, will achieve the unrivalled feat
of making a redoublement of agitation both inevitable and indispensable.
Thinking these things, I must resist to the utmost these parts of the
Bill; and must vote for bthe Amendment of the honourable member for
Oldham (Mr. Hibbert), and for every otherb Amendment (Ministerial
cheers) which tends to diminish, either in a great or in a small degree,
the obstructions, removeable by money, which the Bill throws in the way
of a small householder’s acquisition of the suffrage. (Hear, hear.)

[After a long debate Disraeli’s amendment was carried,  voting in
the negative.]

Edition: current; Page: [150]


54.: The Reform Bill [4]
 17 MAY, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 738–9. Reported in The Times, 18 May, p.
7, from which the responses are taken. Continued discussion in Committee
of the Reform Bill had moved to consideration of an amendment to Clause
3 (see No. 53) proposed by Grosvenor Hodgkinson (1818–81), M.P. for
Newark, that would have the effect of removing the issue of compound
householders by having all householders pay rates directly

(cols. 708–12).

it appears to me that the Chancellor of the Exchequer has held out to us
a great and splendid concession,1 which it has been the whole occupation
of those of his supporters, who have since spoken, to explain away.2
(Hear, hear.) In the opinion of some of them, we cannot have the
complete embodiment of the principle of the honourable Member (Mr.
Hodgkinson); and it appears to be the opinion of the Attorney General
that we cannot have that embodiment this year at all. That is to say, we
are called upon to pass a Reform Bill this year, and to wait until next
year for the measure that is necessary to render that Bill tolerable. In
what position will the House be placed if they give way to that? A
General Election may occur in the meantime, with all the evils which
have induced us to oppose that part of the Bill which relates to the
compound-householders. We ought to have some security against that.
(Hear.) We could have some security, but it must consist in something
more than mere general words, which, however sincere they may be, are
not to be acted upon until after an indefinite time, and in an
indefinite way. No one can be more eager or anxious than I am that the
arrangement which the Chancellor of the Exchequer has offered to us
should be fairly and honourably carried into effect. I am sure we are
all most sincere in that. At the same time, it is absolutely necessary
that we should not proceed with the clauses relating to
compound-householders as preparatory to doing away with
compound-householders altogether. The country feel a great deal more
doubt about the sincerity of the House than the Chancellor of the
Exchequer seems to think, and I do not think the country will believe
that we intend to do away with the compound-householders if we pass the
Bill this year, and postpone till next the measure for the abolition of
compound-householders. As to the difficulties anticipated by the
honourable and learned Member (Mr. Ayrton),3 and by the last speaker,4 I
will not undertake to say what reality there may be in them; but the
Edition: current; Page: [151] greater the practical difficulties in the
way of carrying out the principle of my honourable Friend the Member for
Newark, the more important and absolutely essential it is that the House
should see the Bill by which these things are to be done before they
commit themselves to the Bill of the Chancellor of the Exchequer. (Hear,
hear.) There is no need to lose time, because there is a great portion
of the Bill which does not relate to the borough franchise, and with
that we can go on: If we are only assured by the Chancellor of the
Exchequer that he will bring in a Bill to give effect to his
undertaking, and that we shall see that Bill before we part company with
the present one, it would, in my opinion, be the best course to suspend
further action upon the borough franchise clauses, and proceed with the
other clauses, and only resume the borough franchise clauses when we
have seen the promised Bill. At all events, I think we ought not to read
the present Bill a third time until we have read the promised Bill a
second time. (Hear, hear.)


55.: The Admission of Women to the Electoral Franchise
 20 MAY, 1867

Speech of John Stuart , M.P. on the Admission of Women to the
Electoral Franchise. Spoken in the House of Commons, May 20th, 1867
(London: Trübner, 1867), and PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 842–3. The
text of the pamphlet is reproduced ibid., cols. 817–29,  having
instructed Trübner to send a copy to Hansard; see CW, Vol. XVI, p. 1277.
That Hansard used that text is indicated by the asterisk in PD. (There
are no substantive differences except two misprints in PD: “Nor, Sir”
for “Now, Sir” at 152.6, and “indirect” for “in direct” at 157.27.)
Reported in The Times, 21 May, p. 9, from which variants and responses
are taken; the variants are all supported by the report in the St.
Stephen’s Chronicle, Vol. III, pp. 475–81. The copies in SC have no
corrections or emendations.

i rise, sir, to propose an extension of the suffrage which can excite no
party or class feeling in this House; which can give no umbrage to the
keenest assertor of the claims either of property or of numbers; an
extension which has not the smallest tendency to disturb what we have
heard so much about lately, the balance of political power; which cannot
afflict the most timid alarmist with revolutionary terrors, or offend
the most jealous democrat as an infringement of popular rights (hear,
hear), or a privilege granted to one class of society at the expense of
another. There is nothing to distract our attention from the simple
question, whether there is any adequate justification for continuing to
exclude an entire half of the community, not only from admission, but
from the capability of being ever admitted within the pale of the
Constitution, though they may fulfil all the conditions legally and
constitutionally sufficient in every case but theirs. Sir, within the
limits of our Constitution this is a solitary case. There is no other
example of an exclusion which is absolute. If the law denied a vote to
all but the Edition: current; Page: [152] possessors of £5000 a year,
the poorest man in the nation might—and now and then would—acquire the
suffrage; but neither birth, nor fortune, nor merit, nor exertion, nor
intellect, nor even that great disposer of human affairs, accident, can
ever enable any woman to have her voice counted in those national
affairs which touch her and hers as nearly as any other aperson in the
nationa. (Hear, hear.)

Now, Sir, before going any further, allow me to say, that a primâ facie
case is already made out. It is not just to make distinctions, in rights
and privileges, without a positive reason. I do not mean that the
electoral franchise, or any other public function, is an abstract right,
and that to withhold it from any one, on sufficient grounds of
expediency, is a personal wrong; it is a complete misunderstanding of
the principle I maintain, to confound this with it; my argument is
entirely one of expediency. But there are different orders of
expediency; all expediencies are not exactly on the same level; there is
an important branch of expediency called justice; and justice, though it
does not necessarily require that we should confer political functions
on every one, does require that we should not, capriciously and without
cause, withhold from one what we give to another. As was most truly said
by my right honourable friend the Member for South Lancashire, in the
most misunderstood and misrepresented speech I ever remember;1 to lay a
ground for refusing the suffrage to any one, it is necessary to allege
either personal unfitness or public danger. Now, can either of these be
alleged in the present case? Can it be pretended that women who manage
an estate or conduct a business,—who pay rates and taxes, often to a
large amount, and frequently from their own earnings,—many of whom are
responsible heads of families, and some of whom, in the capacity of
schoolmistresses, teach much more than a great number of the male
electors have ever learnt,—are not capable of a function of which every
male householder is capable? (Hear, hear.) Or is it feared that if they
were admitted to the suffrage they would revolutionize the State,—would
deprive us of any of our valued institutions, or that we should have
worse laws, or be in any way whatever worse governed, through the effect
of their suffrages? No one, Sir, believes anything of the kind.

And it is not only the general principles of justice that are infringed,
or at least set aside, by the exclusion of women, merely as women, from
any share in the representation; that exclusion is also repugnant to the
particular principles of the British Constitution. It violates one of
the oldest band most cherishedb of our constitutional maxims—a doctrine
dear to reformers, and theoretically acknowledged by most
Conservatives—that taxation and representation should be co-extensive.
Do not women pay taxes? Does not every woman who is sui juris contribute
exactly as much to the revenue as a man who has the same electoral
Edition: current; Page: [153] qualification? If a stake in the country
means anything,2 the owner of freehold or leasehold property has the
same stake, whether it is owned by a man or a woman. There is evidence
in our constitutional records that women have voted, in counties and in
some boroughs, at former, though certainly distant, periods of our
history.

The House, however, will doubtless expect that I should not rest my case
solely on the general principles either of justice or of the
Constitution, but should produce what are called practical arguments.
Now, there is one practical argument of great weight, which, I frankly
confess, is entirely wanting in the case of women; they do not hold
great meetings in the parks, or demonstrations at Islington.3 (Oh!) How
far this omission may be considered to invalidate their claim, I will
not undertake to decide; but other practical arguments, practical in the
most restricted meaning of the term, are not wanting; and I am prepared
to state them, if I may be permitted first to ask, what are the
practical objections? The difficulty which most people feel on this
subject, is not a practical objection; there is nothing practical about
it; it is a mere feeling—a feeling of strangeness; the proposal is so
new; at least they think so, though this is a mistake; it is a very old
proposal. Well, Sir, strangeness is a thing which wears off; some things
were strange enough to many of us three months ago which are not at all
so now; and many are strange now, which will not be strange to the same
persons a few years hence, or even, perhaps, a few months. And as for
novelty, we live in a world of novelties; the despotism of custom is on
the wane; we are not now satisfied with knowing what a thing is, we ask
whether it ought to be; and in this House at least, I am bound to
believe that an appeal lies from custom to a higher tribunal, in which
reason is judge. Now, the reasons which custom is in the habit of giving
for itself on this subject are usually very brief. That, indeed, is one
of my difficulties; it is not easy to refute an interjection;
interjections, however, are the only arguments among those we usually
hear on this subject, which it seems to me at all difficult to refute.
The others mostly present themselves in such aphorisms as these:
Politics are not women’s business, and would distract them from their
proper duties: Women do not desire the suffrage, but would rather be
without it: Women are sufficiently represented by the representation of
their male relatives and connexions: Women have power enough already.
(Laughter.) I shall probably be thought to have done enough in the way
of answering, if I answer all this; and it may, perhaps, instigate any
honourable gentleman who takes the trouble of replying to me, to produce
something more recondite.

Politics, it is said, are not a woman’s business. Well, Sir, I rather
think that politics are not a man’s business either; unless he is one of
the few who are selected and paid to devote their time to the public
service, or is a member of this or of the other House. The vast majority
of male electors have each his own business, which Edition: current;
Page: [154] absorbs nearly the whole of his time; but I have not heard
that the few hours occupied, once in a few years, in attending at a
polling booth, even if we throw in the time spent in reading newspapers
and political treatises, ever causes them to neglect their shops or
their counting-houses. I have never understood that those who have votes
are worse merchants, or worse lawyers, or worse physicians, or even
worse clergymen than other people. One would almost suppose that the
British Constitution denied a vote to every one who could not give the
greater part of his time to politics: if this were the case, we should
have a very limited constituency. But allow me to ask, what is the
meaning of political freedom? Is it anything but the control of those
who do make their business of politics, by those who do not? Is it not
the very essence of constitutional liberty, that men come from their
looms and their forges to decide, and decide well, whether they are
properly governed, and whom they will be governed by? And the nations
which prize this privilege the most, and exercise it most fully, are
invariably those who excel the most in the common concerns of life. The
ordinary occupations of most women are, and are likely to remain,
principally domestic; but the notion that these occupations are
incompatible with the keenest interest in national affairs, and in all
the great interests of humanity, is a utterly futile as the
apprehension, once sincerely entertained, that artisans would desert
their workshops and their factories if they were taught to read. I know
there is an obscure feeling—a feeling which is ashamed to express itself
openly—as if women had no right to care about anything, except how they
may be the most useful and devoted servants of some man. But as I am
convinced that there is not a single member of this House, whose
conscience accuses him of so mean a feeling, I may say without offence,
that this claim to confiscate the whole existence of one half of the
species for the supposed convenience of the other, appears to me,
independently of its injustice, particularly silly. For who that has had
ordinary experience of human affairs, and ordinary capacity of profiting
by that experience, fancies that those do their own work best who
understand nothing else? A man has lived to little purpose who has not
learnt that without general mental cultivation, no particular work that
requires understanding is ever done in the best manner. It requires
brains to use practical experience; and brains, even without practical
experience, go further than any amount of practical experience without
brains. But perhaps it is thought that the ordinary occupations of women
are more antagonistic than those of men are to the comprehension of
public affairs. It is thought, perhaps, that those who are principally
charged with the moral education of the future generations of men,
cannot be fit to form an opinion about the moral and educational
interests of a people: and that those whose chief daily business is the
judicious laying-out of money, so as to produce the greatest results
with the smallest means, cannot possibly give any lessons to right
honourable gentlemen on the other side of the House or on this, who
contrive to produce such singularly small results with such vast means.
(Ironical cheers.)

Edition: current; Page: [155]
I feel a degree of confidence, Sir, on this subject, which I could not
feel, if the political change, in itself not great or formidable, which
I advocate, were not grounded, as beneficent and salutary political
changes almost always are, upon a previous social change. The notion of
a hard and fast line of separation between women’s occupations and
men’s—of forbidding women to take interest in the things which interest
men—belongs to a gone-by state of society, which is receding further and
further into the past. We talk of political revolutions, but we do not
sufficiently attend to the fact that there has taken place around us a
csilentc domestic revolution: women and men are, for the first time in
history, really each other’s companions. Our traditions respecting the
proper relations between them have descended from a time when their
lives were apart—when they were separate in their thoughts, because they
were separate equally in their amusements and in their serious
occupations. In former days a man passed his life among men; all his
friendships, all his real intimacies, were with men; with men alone did
he consult on any serious business; the wife was either a plaything, or
an upper servant. All this, among the educated classes, is now changed.
The man no longer gives his spare hours to violent outdoor exercises and
boisterous conviviality with male associates: the two sexes now pass
their lives together; the women of a man’s family are his habitual
society; the wife is his chief associate, his most confidential friend,
and often his most trusted adviser. Now, does a man wish to have for his
nearest companion, so closely linked with him, and whose wishes and
preferences have so strong a claim on him, one whose thoughts are alien
to those which occupy his own mind—one who can neither be a help, a
comfort, nor a support, to his noblest feelings and purposes? Is this
close and almost exclusive companionship compatible with women’s being
warned off all large subjects—being taught that they ought not to care
for what it is men’s duty to care for, and that to have any serious
interests outside the household is stepping beyond their province? Is it
good for a man to live in complete communion of thoughts and feelings
with one who is studiously kept inferior to himself, whose earthly
interests are forcibly confined within four walls, and who cultivates,
as a grace of character, ignorance and indifference about the most
inspiring subjects, those among which his highest duties are cast? Does
any one suppose that this can happen without detriment to the man’s own
character? Sir, the time is now come when, unless women are raised to
the level of men, men will be pulled down to theirs. The women of a
man’s family are either a stimulus and a support to his highest
aspirations, or a drag upon them. You may keep them ignorant of
politics, but you cannot prevent them from concerning themselves with
the least respectable part of politics—its personalities; if they do not
understand and cannot enter into the man’s feelings of public duty, they
do care about his personal interest, and that is the scale into which
their weight will certainly be thrown. They will be an influence always
at hand, Edition: current; Page: [156] co-operating with the man’s
selfish promptings, lying in wait for his moments of moral irresolution,
and doubling the strength of every temptation. Even if they maintain a
modest forbearance, the mere absence of their sympathy will hang a
dead-weight on his moral energies, making him unwilling to make
sacrifices which they will feel, and to forego social advantages and
successes in which they would share, for objects which they cannot
appreciate. Supposing him fortunate enough to escape any actual
sacrifice of conscience, the indirect effect on the higher parts of his
own character is still deplorable. Under an idle notion that the
beauties of character of the two sexes are mutually incompatible, men
are afraid of manly women; but those who have considered the nature and
power of social influences well know, that unless there are manly women,
there will not much longer be manly men. When men and women are really
companions, if women are frivolous, men will be frivolous; if women care
for nothing but personal interest and idle vanities, men in general will
care for little else: the two sexes must now rise or sink together. It
may be said that women may take interest in great public questions
without having votes; they may, certainly; but how many of them will?
Education and society have exhausted their power in inculcating on women
that their proper rule of conduct is what society expects from them; and
the denial of the vote is a proclamation intelligible to every one, that
whatever else society may expect, it does not expect that they should
concern themselves with public interests. Why, the whole of a girl’s
thoughts and feelings are toned down by it from her schooldays; she does
not take the interest even in national history which her brothers do,
because it is to be no business of hers when she grows up. If there are
women—and now happily there are many—who do interest themselves in these
subjects, and do study them, it is because the force within is strong
enough to bear up against the worst kind of discouragement, that which
acts not by interposing obstacles, which may be struggled against, but
by deadening the spirit which faces and conquers obstacles.

We are told, Sir, that women do not wish for the suffrage. If the fact
were so, it would only prove that all women are still under this
deadening influence; that the opiate still benumbs their mind and
conscience. But great numbers of women do desire the suffrage, and have
asked for it by petitions to this House. How do we know how many more
thousands there may be, who have not asked for what they do not hope to
get; or for fear of what may be thought of them by men, or by other
women; or from the feeling, so sedulously cultivated in them by their
education—aversion to make themselves conspicuous? Men must have a rare
power of self-delusion, if they suppose that leading questions put to
the ladies of their family or of their acquaintance will elicit their
real sentiments, or will be answered with complete sincerity by one
woman in ten thousand. No one is so well schooled as most women are in
making a virtue of necessity; it costs little to disclaim caring for
what is not offered; and frankness in the expression of sentiments which
may be unpleasing and may be thought uncomplimentary to their nearest
connections, is Edition: current; Page: [157] not one of the virtues
which a woman’s education tends to cultivate, and is, moreover, a virtue
attended with sufficient risk, to induce prudent women usually to
reserve its exercise for cases in which there is a nearer and a more
personal interest at stake. However this may be, those who do not care
for the suffrage will not use it; either they will not register, or if
they do, they will vote as their male relatives advise: by which, as the
advantage will probably be about equally shared among all classes, no
harm will be done. Those, be they few or many, who do value the
privilege, will exercise it, and will receive that stimulus to their
faculties, and that widening and liberalizing influence over their
feelings and sympathies, which the suffrage seldom fails to produce on
those who are admitted to it. Meanwhile an unworthy stigma would be
removed from the whole sex. The law would cease to declare them
incapable of serious things; would cease to proclaim that their opinions
and wishes are unworthy of regard, on things which concern them equally
with men, and on many things which concern them much more than men. They
would no longer be classed with children, idiots, and lunatics, as
incapable of taking care of either themselves or others, and needing
that everything should be done for them, without asking their consent.
If only one woman in twenty thousand used the suffrage, to be declared
capable of it would be a boon to all women. Even that theoretical
enfranchisement would remove a weight from the expansion of their
faculties, the real mischief of which is much greater than the apparent.

Then it is said, that women do not need direct power, having so much
indirect, through their influence over their male relatives and
connections. I should like to carry this argument a little further. Rich
people have a great deal of indirect influence. Is this a reason for
refusing them votes? Does any one propose a rating qualification the
wrong way, or bring in a Reform Bill to disfranchise all who live in a
£500 house, or pay £100 a year in direct taxes? Unless this rule for
distributing the franchise is to be reserved for the exclusive benefit
of women, it would follow that persons of more than a certain fortune
should be allowed to bribe, but should not be allowed to vote. Sir, it
is true that women have great power. It is part of my case that they
have great power; but they have it under the worst possible conditions,
because it is indirect, and therefore irresponsible. I want to make this
great power a responsible power. I want to make the woman feel her
conscience interested in its honest exercise. I want her to feel that it
is not given to her as a mere means of personal ascendency. I want to
make her influence work by a manly interchange of opinion, and not by
cajolery. I want to awaken in her the political point of honour. Many a
woman already influences greatly the political conduct of the men
connected with her, and sometimes, by force of will, actually governs
it; but she is never supposed to have anything to do with it; the man
whom she influences, and perhaps misleads, is alone responsible; her
power is like the back-stairs influence of a favourite. Sir, I demand
that all who exercise power should have the burthen laid on them of
knowing something about the things they Edition: current; Page: [158]
have power over. With the acknowledged right to a voice, would come a
sense of the corresponding duty. Women are not usually inferior in
tenderness of conscience to men. Make the woman a moral agent in these
matters: show that you expect from her a political conscience: and when
she has learnt to understand the transcendent importance of these
things, she will know why it is wrong to sacrifice political convictions
to personal interest or vanity; she will understand that political
integrity is not a foolish personal crotchet, which a man is bound, for
the sake of his family, to give up, but a solemn duty: and the men whom
she can influence will be better men in all public matters, and not, as
they often are now, worse men by the whole amount of her influence.

But at least, it will be said, women do not suffer any practical
inconvenience, as women, by not having a vote. The interests of all
women are safe in the hands of their fathers, husbands, and brothers,
who have the same interest with them, and not only know, far better than
they do, what is good for them, but care much more for them than they
care for themselves. Sir, this is exactly what is said of all
unrepresented classes. The operatives, for instance: are they not
virtually represented by the representation of their employers? Are not
the interest of the employers and that of the employed, when properly
understood, the same? To insinuate the contrary, is it not the horrible
crime of setting class against class? Is not the farmer equally
interested with the labourer in the prosperity of agriculture,—the
cotton manufacturer equally with his workmen in the high price of
calicoes? Are they not both interested alike in taking off taxes? And,
generally, have not employers and employed a common interest against all
outsiders, just as husband and wife have against all outside the family?
And what is more, are not all employers good, kind, benevolent men, who
love their workpeople, and always desire to do what is most for their
good? All these assertions are as true, and as much to the purpose, as
the corresponding assertions respecting men and women. Sir, we do not
live in Arcadia, but, as we were lately reminded, in faece Romuli:4 and
in that region workmen need other protection than that of their
employers, and women other protection than that of their men. I should
like to have a return laid before this House of the number of women who
are annually beaten to death, kicked to death, or trampled to death by
their male protectors: and, in an opposite column, the amount of the
sentences passed, in those cases in which the dastardly criminals did
not get off altogether. I should also like to have, in a third column,
the amount of property, the unlawful taking of which was, at the same
sessions or assizes, by the same judge, thought worthy of the same
amount of punishment. We should then have an arithmetical estimate of
the value set by a male legislature and Edition: current; Page: [159]
male tribunals on the murder of a woman, often by torture continued
through years, which, if there is any shame in us, would make us hang
our heads. Sir, before it is affirmed that women do not suffer in their
interests, as women, by the denial of a vote, it should be considered
whether women have no grievances; whether the laws, and those practices
which laws can reach, are in every way as favourable to women as to men.
Now, how stands the fact? In the matter of education, for instance. We
continually hear that the most important part of national education is
that of mothers, because they educate the future men. Is this importance
really attached to it? Are there many fathers who care as much, or are
willing to expend as much, for the education of their daughters as of
their sons? Where are the Universities, where the High Schools, or the
schools of any high description, for them? If it be said that girls are
better educated at home, where are the training-schools for governesses?
What has become of the endowments which the bounty of our ancestors
destined for the education, not of one sex only, but of both
indiscriminately? I am told by one of the highest authorities on the
subject, that in the majority of the endowments the provision made is
not for boys, but for education generally; in one great endowment,
Christ’s Hospital, it is expressly for both: that institution now
maintains and educates 1100 boys, and exactly 26 girls.5 And when they
attain womanhood, how does it fare with that great and increasing
portion of the sex, who, sprung from the educated classes, have not
inherited a provision, and not having obtained one by marriage, or
disdaining to marry merely for a provision, depend on their exertions
for subsistence? Hardly any decent educated occupation, save one, is
open to them. They are either governesses or nothing. A fact has
recently occurred, well worthy of commemoration in connection with this
subject. A young lady, Miss Garrett, from no pressure of necessity, but
from an honourable desire to employ her activity in alleviating human
suffering, studied the medical profession.6 Having duly qualified
herself, she, with an energy and perseverance which cannot be too highly
praised, knocked successively at all the doors through which, by law,
access is obtained into the medical profession. Having found all other
doors fast shut, she fortunately discovered one which had accidentally
been left ajar. The Society of Apothecaries, it seems, had forgotten to
shut out those who they never thought would attempt to come in, and
through this narrow entrance this young lady found her way into this
profession. But so objectionable did it appear to this learned body that
women should be the medical attendants even of women, that the narrow
wicket through which Miss Garrett entered has been closed after her, and
no second Miss Garrett Edition: current; Page: [160] will be allowed to
pass through it.7 And this is instar omnium.8 No sooner do women show
themselves capable of competing with men in any career, than that
career, if it be lucrative or honourable, is closed to them. A short
time ago, women might be Associates of the Royal Academy; but they were
so distinguishing themselves, they were assuming so honourable a place
in their art, that this privilege also has been withdrawn.9 This is the
sort of care taken of women’s interests by the men who so faithfully
represent them. This is the way we treat unmarried women. And how is it
with the married? They, it may be said, are not interested in this
motion; and they are not directly interested; but it interests, even
directly, many who have been married, as well as others who will be.
Now, by the common law of England, all that a wife has, belongs
absolutely to the husband; he may tear it all from her, squander every
penny of it in debauchery, leave her to support by her labour herself
and her children, and if by heroic exertion and self-sacrifice she is
able to put by something for their future wants, unless she is
judicially separated from him he can pounce down upon her savings, and
leave her penniless. And such cases are of quite common occurrence. Sir,
if we were besotted enough to think these things right, there would be
more excuse for us; but we know better. The richer classes take care to
exempt their own daughters from the consequences of this abominable
state of the law. By the contrivance of marriage settlements, they are
able in each case to make a private law for themselves, and they
invariably do so. Why do we not provide that justice for the daughters
of the poor, which we take care to provide for our own daughters? Why is
not that which is done in every case that we personally care for, made
the law of the land, so that a poor man’s child, whose parents could not
afford the expense of a settlement, may retain a right to any little
property that may devolve on her, and may have a voice in the disposal
of her own earnings, which, in the case of many husbands, are the best
and only reliable part of the incomings of the family? I am Edition:
current; Page: [161] sometimes asked what practical grievances I propose
to remedy by giving women a vote. I propose, for one thing, to remedy
this. I give these instances to prove that women are not the petted
children of society which many people seem to think they are—that they
have not the over-abundance, the superfluity of power that is ascribed
to them, and are not sufficiently represented by the representation of
the men who have not had the heart to do for them this simple and
obvious piece of justice. (Hear, hear.) Sir, grievances of less
magnitude than the law of the property of married women, when suffered
by parties less inured to passive submission, have provoked revolutions.
We ought not to take advantage of the security we feel against any such
consequence in the present case, to withhold from a limited number of
women that moderate amount of participation in the enactment and
improvement of our laws, which this motion solicits for them, and which
would enable the general feelings of women to be heard in this House
through a few male representatives. We ought not to deny to them, what
we are conceding to everybody else—a right to be consulted din the
choice of a representatived; the ordinary chance of placing in the great
Council of the nation a few organs of their sentiments—of having, what
every petty trade or profession has, a few members who feel specially
called on to attend to their interests, and to point out how those
interests are affected by the law, or by any proposed changes in it. No
more is asked by this motion; and when the time comes, as it certainly
will come, when this will be granted, I feel the firmest conviction that
you will never repent of the concession.

[At the end of his speech,  moved his amendment to substitute the
word person for the word man “(hear, hear)” in Clause 4 of the Reform
Bill, which dealt with the occupation qualifications for voters in
counties. Following seven other speakers,  concluded the debate.]

I will merely say, in answer to the noble Lord who requested me to
withdraw the Motion,10 that I am a great deal too well pleased with the
speeches that have been made against it—his own included—to think of
withdrawing it. There is nothing that has pleased me more in those
speeches than to find that every one who has attempted to argue at all,
has argued against something which is not before the House (hear, hear):
they have argued against the admission of married women, which is not in
the Motion; or they have argued against the admission of women as
Members of this House; or again, as the honourable Member for the Wick
boroughs (Mr. Laing) has done, they have argued against allowing women
to be generals and officers in the army;11 a question which I need
scarcely say is not before the House. I certainly do think that when we
come to universal suffrage, as Edition: current; Page: [162] some time
or other we probably shall come (oh, oh!)—if we extend the vote to all
men, we should extend it to all women also. So long, however, as you
maintain a property qualification, I do not propose to extend the
suffrage to any women but those who have the qualification. If, as is
surmised by one of the speakers,12 young ladies should attach so much
value to the suffrage that they should be unwilling to divest themselves
of it in order to marry, I can only say that if they will not marry
without it, they will probably be allowed to retain it. (Hear, and a
laugh.) As to any question that may arise in reference to the removal of
any other disabilities of women, it is not before the House. There are
evidently many arguments and many considerations that cannot be
overlooked in dealing with these larger questions, but which do not
arise on the present Motion, and on which, therefore, it is not
necessary that I should comment. I will only say that if we should in
the progress of experience—especially after experience of the effect of
granting the suffrage—come to the decision that married women ought to
have the suffrage, or that women should be admitted to any employment or
occupation which they are not now admitted to—if it should become the
general opinion that they ought to have it, they will have it.

[After ’s speech, the question was put, and the amendment lost, 196
to 73,  being a teller.]


56.: The Municipal Corporations Bill
 21 MAY, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 882–5, 891. Reported in The Times, 22 May,
p. 7, from which the variant and response are taken.  spoke in
moving for leave to introduce “A Bill for the Establishment of Municipal
Corporations within the Metropolis,” 30 Victoria (21 May, 1867), PP,
1867, IV, 447–66.

mr. j. stuart  said, he did not do so in any spirit of hostility to
the Report of the Committee relative to the Local Government of the
Metropolis, of which Committee he had the honour of being a Member.1 It
was true he had disagreed from the majority of the Committee on several
of their Resolutions, but as a whole their Report had his general
concurrence, and he considered it a great step in the Edition: current;
Page: [163] progress of this question. The Committee, in the first
place, freely acknowledged existing defects; and, in the second place,
it recognised the general principles upon which, in his opinion, a
reform of those defects should proceed. It recognised that good
municipal institutions for the metropolis must consist of two
parts—namely, local bodies representing districts, and a general body
representing the metropolis at large—the latter to take the place of the
present Board of Works. Neither was his Motion framed in hostility to
the Board of Works. It might at least be said for the Board that it had
been appointed to perform a great and laborious work,2 and that it had
actually done that work. The Report proposed increased powers and an
improved mode of election for the general Board; and with regard to the
local district bodies, the Report considered the present districts to be
too small, and virtually recommended the abolition of hole-and-corner
local government. The Report might be considered in that and other
respects as an outline of what municipal reformers desired; and the Bill
he proposed to introduce would do something towards filling up that
outline with regard to the local bodies only. He had given notice of his
intention to ask for leave to bring in a Bill for the establishment of a
central federal municipality for the whole of the metropolis,3 but he
was not yet prepared with that Bill, and he should not ask the House to
read the present Bill a second time until he was able to lay before them
the entire plan. The plan he was now about to propose was not his own,
but originated with one of the most important vestries in Westminster,4
and it had obtained the warm support of many of the leading vestrymen of
the metropolis. He had no hostility to the vestries. Our parochial
institutions, with all their defects, had done great things for the
country. They had carried down to comparatively low grades of society a
familiar acquaintance with the forms of public business and the modes of
carrying it on, and in consequence this country possessed an advantage
which, perhaps, no other country (except the United States)
enjoyed—namely, that when circumstances call for the expression of an
opinion by a collective body of citizens, there are numerous persons who
know how that opinion should be collected and expressed. These merits
could not be denied to our local system; but that system, as established
in the metropolis, appeared to him to be on too small a scale. The
Report of the Committee did not recognise that fact to so great an
extent as he could have wished, and therefore he ventured to propose his
plan. The Committee said Edition: current; Page: [164] that the
districts of the metropolis were too small and inconvenient in some
cases.5 He (Mr. Stuart ) believed they were too small in all cases,
and that the municipal boroughs of the metropolis ought to be
conterminous with the Parliamentary boroughs. He thought it necessary
that the municipal districts should be of considerable extent, and
highly desirable that they should also be units in themselves. Unless
the districts were considerable they were always more or less a kind of
hole-and-corner government. It was a common fallacy, now going the round
of Europe, but still a fallacy, that the mere circumstance of a body
being popularly chosen was a guarantee that it would conduct its
proceedings on popular principles. His faith in popular governments did
not depend on their being popularly elected. The real value of popular
institutions consisted in the popular power of correcting mistakes, and
enforcing responsibility to the people. Owing to this responsibility, it
would not be possible for any body long to retain its position if it
habitually exercised its powers contrary to the public interest as
generally understood. Another point was that the greatest attainable
publicity should be secured to the business transacted by these bodies;
but when the business was on a very small scale it did not excite much
attention. The check was not effectual unless the business was of such a
nature that the public eye would be fixed on it. It was further
desirable, for the sake of greater publicity, that not only should the
district be of considerable magnitude and the business important, but
that the districts should, if possible, be natural units in themselves,
or at least, should be units for other purposes than this special one.
The importance of this was, that it would tend to induce a higher class
of men to enter these bodies. Three of the metropolitan boroughs (the
City, Westminster, and Southwark) were, if not natural, at least
historical units; the other districts, though of more recent origin,
were gradually acquiring an esprit de corps, and a sense of common
interest. It had been at first thought desirable that an additional
district should be created out of parts of Marylebone and Finsbury. The
great importance, however, of making the municipal and Parliamentary
boundaries coincide, had led to the abandonment of this idea, except so
far as regarded the formation of a new police district, there being at
present no police-office between Marlborough Street and Worship Street
in the extreme east. The Bill provided for the division of the Tower
Hamlets; but this would be dealt with by the Bill for the Representation
of the People. aThere Edition: current; Page: [165] would also be a
district for Kensington and Chelsea.a6 He should not ask the House to
read the Bill a second time till he had introduced the remainder of the
plan of which it formed a part. Whatever merit the plan had, and that
merit appeared to him to be considerable, it belonged entirely to his
constituents who originated the plan. He himself had no part in it
except that, at his own special request, he was permitted to introduce
it to the House. (Hear, hear.) He now begged to move for leave to bring
in a Bill to establish Municipal Corporations within the Metropolis.

[ was followed, inter alia, by Ayrton, who had chaired the committee
on the Metropolis that  refers to, and Locke, who had served on the
committee; Gathorne-Hardy said the Government would not oppose the
introduction of the Bill, but indicated hesitation over such a complex
matter, on which the Metropolitan members were not themselves agreed.
’s concluding sentence follows on Gathorne-Hardy’s remarks.]

Mr. J. Stuart , in reply, observed, that he believed the Bill would
be approved of by the City when its provisions became known.

[The Bill was given first reading.]


57.: The Fenian Convicts
 25 MAY, 1867

Morning Star, 27 May, 1867, p. 6. Headed: “The Fenian Convicts.
Important Deputation to Lord Derby.” Reported in the Evening Star
(identically with the Morning Star), the Daily Telegraph, the Daily
News, and The Times (an abbreviated summary of ’s remarks).
(Clippings of the Morning Star and Daily News reports are in the
-Taylor Collection.) On Saturday, 25 May, in the afternoon, a
deputation of about sixty people, mainly Members of Parliament, called
on the Prime Minister, Edward George Geoffrey Smith Stanley (1799–1869),
14th Earl of Derby, at his residence, to ask for a Royal pardon for
“General” Thomas Francis Bourke, or Burke (b. 1840), who, having been
found guilty of high treason for his part in the March uprising in
Tipperary, had been sentenced to be hanged on 29 May. The delegation
would have been larger, had some Members not gone by mistake to the
Prime Minister’s official residence in Downing Street. , who was
“sensibly . . . moved by the affecting nature of the task,” spoke
second.

my lord, we have come here without distinction of party. (Loud cries of
Hear.) We come here with as deep and earnest a feeling as it is possible
for human beings to have, to implore your lordship not to erect the
scaffold in this Edition: current; Page: [166] country for political
offences. It is not, my lord, for the sake of these unfortunate men we
say it.1 Heaven knows the punishment of failure, under the desperateness
of these cases, is as painful a measure of punishment as almost any. The
punishment to which, at all events, those men have subjected themselves,
should their lives not be taken, for the rest of their existence, may be
supposed to be quite sufficient to vindicate the law, and deter
persons—as we all admit they ought to be deterred—from attempting a
revolution when there is not a feeling in the country which would enable
them to succeed. We most seriously apprehend that the effect of
executing these men will be to make them heroes and martyrs. You must
remember that the cause of Irish nationality has not yet had aitsa
martyrs. Irish wrongs have had martyrs, but long since this has been put
an end to as far as we are concerned. Emmett and Fitzgerald were not
martyrs to Irish nationality;2 but the execution of these unhappy men
will give a sanctity to the cause in which they embarked which must
bring about results most unhappy for Ireland and for this country. We
ought to think a little of what will be thought in foreign countries if
these men are executed. We know what the feeling of foreign countries is
on nationalities. They do not know the actual state of Ireland. They do
not know with what a deep and sincere desire we have tried to make
Ireland prosperous, and give her no cause to regret her union with us.
They know nothing of this. They only know that there is one oppressed
nationality which is ruled by another nationality, as they think, by
force. bI think that state of things can only be remedied when a country
can be induced to forget, as Scotland has forgotten, what is past.b In
this view, therefore, I think it would be the most fatal thing in the
world to put these men to death. The punishment of death, God knows, is
not the most severe punishment, but it is a punishment which excites
most sympathy. If these men be executed they will be dearly remembered,
their memory will be held sacred by the Irish people, and their example
will bring hundreds of their fellow-countrymen to their ruin. (Hear,
hear.) There is another point in this matter which is not unworthy the
consideration of a statesman, and it is this: It is much to be feared
that there must be an impression among the American people that when,
with respect to the invaders of Canada,3 many persons desired that the
severest punishment should be resorted to, yet with a correct
morality—for it was a correct morality to Edition: current; Page: [167]
condemn people to penal servitude instead of death—the execution of
these men did not take place, that that was done because her Majesty’s
Government thought the lives of the men could not be taken with safety.
There are many other gentlemen on the deputation anxious to address your
lordship, and I will not therefore further detain you.

[ was followed by a dozen other speakers before Derby replied at
length, explaining that while the Government had considered the case for
mercy most carefully before rejecting it, he would be willing to place
before Cabinet that afternoon any document they might prepare. The
deputation, after thanking the Prime Minister for his attention and
courtesy, assembled in Derby’s drawing room and prepared a document,
signed by them all, and given to Derby, saying: “We the undersigned
members of the House of Commons, very respectfully beg to express the
hope that the extreme sentence of capital punishment in the case of the
convict Burke may be commuted.”]


58.: Reform of Parliament
 25 MAY, 1867

Daily News, 27 May, 1867, p. 2. Headed: “Reform Meeting at St.
James’s-Hall.” Reported in the Daily Telegraph, the Morning Star
(identically in the Evening Star), and the Morning Post (all of these
with similar texts of ’s speech), The Times and the Evening Mail
(these two with similar reports that rearrange and summarize the
speeches and events), the Morning Post (a condensed version of the Daily
News text), and the Standard. (Clippings of the Daily News, Daily
Telegraph, and Evening Mail reports are in the -Taylor Collection.)
This second meeting of the National Reform Union (with many members of
the Reform League present) was held on Saturday evening at 7 p.m.,
chaired by Samuel Morley, who had also chaired the first meeting on
Wednesday, 15 May, at which  was on the platform though he did not
speak. It might have been expected that fewer would attend than at the
first, but “such was not exactly the case; for although there was not so
much pressure as to put the physical endurance of a large part of the
audience to a severe trial, yet every available place, whether for
sitting or standing, was occupied; while an ardour, not to say
enthusiasm, prevailed, which rivalled the demonstrativeness of the
former meeting. Doubtless owing to the fact that Mr. Stuart  was
announced as the leading orator of the evening, the fair sex was more
fully represented than on the previous occasion; many of them, we will
not say invading the platform, but occupying places there.” (Daily
Telegraph.) After preliminaries by the Chair, a resolution
congratulating the reformers of the country on having won from the
Government concessions in favour of household suffrage was moved and
seconded.  “rose to support the resolution, and was received with
loud and prolonged cheering, the audience rising in a body and waving
hats and handkerchiefs.”

brother and sister reformers—(laughter and cheers)—since I had the
satisfaction last week of looking from this platform upon you or other
reformers, Edition: current; Page: [168] equally numerous and equally
aearnesta, many things have happened. At the beginning of the week it
really seemed as if the greatest of the objects for which you are
agitating had actually been attained.1 It seemed as if we had got
household suffrage, real, honest household suffrage, and that there was
very little for us to do but to sit down and congratulate one another.
(Laughter.) It is very fortunate that you did not think so, and that you
stood to your guns, for here is our friend the compound-householder up
again, and as strong as ever. (Laughter.) We have the whole battle to
fight over again from the beginning. (Hear, hear.) We hope that we shall
fight it out successfully (hear, hear), and we shall have you to thank
for it. I will explain how this matter stands. It is not we who object
to the compound householder. We do not object to householders
compounding for their rates. It is a very great convenience, and it is
very desirable that we should ahve the whole subject properly discussed
without any reference to political questions, which ought to have
nothing to do with it. b(Hear, hear.) It is the government that has
forced this upon us; because the government—as it would not quite do to
say there was no principle at all in their bill, and as they did not see
that they had a very firm hold on any other—somehow attached all their
self-consequence to sticking to this little principle. (Laughter.) I am
very glad it is not a greater. (Laughter and Hear, hear.) For it seems
they would insistb to the very last—the principle that no one should
compound and vote too. (Laughter and cheers.) There is no reason in the
nature of things why a person should not compound and vote too.
Compounding may be a good thing, and I am sure voting is a good thing,
and I do not see any incompatibility between them. (Hear, hear.)
However, the government do (laughter), and they appear determined that
you shall not give every householder a vote unless you prevent him from
compounding. Mr. Hodgkinson proposed that, and we thought they had
conceded it. (Laughter.) But what have they done? They say, it is very
true, that everybody shall be rated unless he objects himself, but if
the landlord and he apply to compound they may be allowed to compound,
and then he shall lose his vote. Well, that does not suit us. (Laughter
and cheers.) cIt is not only that we want every householder to have a
Edition: current; Page: [169] vote, as we do;c dthat is not all. See
what would happend. If the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s clause pass,
the householder’s having a vote will depend upon his landlord.2 (Hear,
hear.) Now that is what we have been afraid of all along (hear, hear),
because it is the landlord’s interest that he should not have a vote if
he cannot have a vote and compound too. It is the landlord’s interest,
and it is the interest of vestries, local boards, and eother authorities
in parishese, that he should compound, and therefore it is their
interest that he should not have a vote unless he can compound too.
Well, if that is the case, observe what would happen. The landlord, it
being his interest that such householders should not have a vote, and
his consent being necessary, he will not consent unless it is made worth
his while; and we know what that means. (Laughter and cheers.) It means
that if the landlord wants the votes of his tenants for a political
purpose, or if anybody else fcan make it worth his while to want their
votes for a political purpose, they will have the vote; and if not,
notf. (Laughter and cheers.) That is not what we want, and we are not
disposed to stand it. (Loud cheers.) We know very well that if we once
get household suffrage, though we may be obliged to give up the
convenience of compounding, when all these small householders have got
votes, if they want to compound, if it is for their interest,
convenience, and advantage to compound they will soon alter the law so
that they may compound without the monstrous political consequences
wanted to be attached to the act. (Cheers.) This is very like all that
has been going on ever since the beginning of these reform discussions.
It has been a succession—I will not say of tricks, because I do not like
to use hard words, especially when I cannot prove them (laughter), but
of what is called in the vernacular, trying it on. (Great cheering and
laughter.) The object is just to see what you will bear, and anything
that you will bear you shall have to bear (laughter), but if you show
that you will not bear it, then perhaps it may not be required of you.
(Renewed laughter and cheers.) I dare say that it is thought by the
people who do it, and by many others, to be fair political strategy.
Well, if the government were our enemies, I mean the enemies of our
objects, if we are trying to get the most parliamentary reform that we
can, and they are trying to give us the least, if we are openly
attempting to take every advantage that we can against one another,
these things may be fair enough. If that is the case they should tell us
so. (Hear, hear, and a laugh.) But they do not, they leave us to find it
out. (Loud Edition: current; Page: [170] laughter.) I must say that Mr.
Disraeli cannot be charged with having broken faith with us. Men of his
ability seldom do gbreak faith with anybodyg. (Laughter.) He has been
very careful hand guarded, indeedh, and no one can say he has deceived
us; but I think he has encouraged us a good deal to deceive ourselves.
(Laughter.) I ought, perhaps, to be ashamed to make the confession, but
he certainly succeeded with me this time. (Loud laughter.) I certainly
thought when Mr. Disraeli came forward in the house, and with that bland
and conciliatory, and frank and open manner—(cheers and laughter)—which
he always exhibits when he chooses (laughter)—and during this session he
has often so chosen, except towards our great leader, Mr.
Gladstone—i(shame)i—when he came forward in this way, as soon as Mr.
Hodgkinson asked for the abolition of the compound household, jin order
that we might not disfranchise the small householders,j he claimed that
idea as his own—(laughter)—as what he had wanted from the beginning,
what he had not only no objection to, but what he positively loved.3
(Laughter.) When he did this I really thought we were going to have real
household suffrage. But he has taught me a lesson—(cheers and
laughter)—which I did not think I needed; but I did—(laughter)—and that
is, to be a precious great distance out of the wood before I holloa in
future. (Laughter and cheers.) This may not be so kbad as it looks. Some
of our friends—some of the liberal members—k place a deal of trust, I am
sorry to say, not in the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s virtues, but in
the bad opinion they have of him, for they think that in all this that
looks a little equivocal in his conduct, as if he is going both ways, he
is trying to impose upon his own party. I do not know that he is trying
to impose upon anybody. If I thought he was I should think at least if
he was going to impose on anybody it was not so likely to be on his
friends as on his foes. (Laughter.) I think rather that if he were
disposed to impose on anybody it is likely to be upon us. I hope we
shall be mistaken, and that on Monday next, when the subject comes up
again, we shall really get the household suffrage that we want. (Loud
cheers.) If we get that we can afford to smile when Mr. Disraeli gets up
in an exulting tone—whether we have beaten him or he us, it is all the
same to him—he always thinks it his victory—(laughter)—and we can smile
when he tells us that we have all come over to him. He tells us that
with the gravest face in the lworldl. But we are not quite so patient,
and ought not to be so, when he gibes at those to whom we really owe all
this, when he mcalls them “blunderers,”m talks of their “blundering
hands,”4 and gives it to Edition: current; Page: [171] be understood
that they have not been able to carry reform and he can, and that it is
not their measure. He is quite satisfied if he can say to Mr. Gladstone,
“You did not do it.” But Mr. Gladstone did do it. (Loud and
long-continued cheering.) He could not carry his measure last year5
because Mr. Disraeli and his friends opposed it; Mr. Disraeli can carry
his Reform Bill because Mr. Gladstone will not oppose anything but that
which is not real reform, and will support to the utmost that which is.
(Cheers.) I have no objection to thank everybody for their part in it
when once we have got it, but I will always thank most those to whom we
really owe it. (Cheers.) The people of England know that but for the
late government this government would have gone one hundred miles nout
of their wayn before they would have brought in any Reform oBill at all.
(Hear, hear.) Ando every good thing we have got in this bill, even that
which seems to be more than Mr. Gladstone was prepared to give, has only
been given for the purpose of outbidding Mr. Gladstone. (Hear, hear.) pI
have nothing more to say on this subject, but I should like to say
something on another. I am reminded by my friend on my right (Mr.
Gilpin)6—one of the most thorough and determined reformers in the House
of Commons—that I had the gratification of being along with him in thep
deputation to Earl Derby qwhich he mentioned to youq, to endeavour to
save the life of a poor convict. We do not know what the result will
be.7 rWe met under very great disadvantages.r The deputation was
arranged last night when the house was very thin, and when the news that
sthese poor men weres8 to be executed came upon us like a clap of
thunder. (Cries of Shame.) tWe had to hunt up all the members of
Parliament we could, many of them as it was the night before (Friday)
were out of town, or were going out, having formed engagements, and
under the circumstances we gott together some 50 or 60 English, Scotch,
and Irish members, including some of the most honoured names in the
house u—(cheers)—and saw the Prime Ministeru. We do not know what the
result is. I myself, from Lord Derby’s tone, felt a good deal
discouraged; but some of my friends, vwho know Edition: current; Page:
[172] more of him, andv who are much better judges than I am, think
there is a great deal of hope. As long as there is a chance of this hope
being gratified, I would not say a word to mar the grace of the
concession. I am willing to give the most hearty thanks to her Majesty’s
government if they change the resolution which they are understood to
have come to wonlyw by a majority, in which some of the most eminent
members of the government did not join. (Hear, hear.) I do not wish to
say anything that could excite any hostile feeling against the
government, since I hope it will appear that they have not deserved it.
But I should like to elicit a little feeling from you. (Cheers.) I
should like to know, first, whether you think that we have any right to
hold Ireland in subjection unless we can make Ireland contented with our
government. (Cries of No, no.) That expression of your sentiment will
resound through Ireland, and win the hearts of her people to you.
(Cheers.) Let me ask you now: Do you think the Irish people are
contented with our government?9 (Cries of No, no.) Is that your fault?
(No, no.) Do you think those men who have been driven desperate by the
continuance of what they think misgovernment—although it is not so
intentionally, if it was once; the reason we govern Ireland badly is
because the ruling classes do not know how to do it better—do you think
that these poor men, who do not understand the English people, and do
not understand that you are determined to do them justice, and do not
know that you are going soon to be strong enough to do it—(cheers)—and
because they do not know this, their patience is worn out, and in most
desperate circumstances they endeavour to get rid of what they think
misgovernment at the risk of their lives—do you think, I say, that those
men are not fit to live for that reason? x(Cries of No.)x It is
necessary to punish them. (Hear, hear.) It is necessary to punish any
unsuccessful revolutionists (Oh, oh); because no man has a right to
endanger the lives of his fellow-creatures, to raise civil war in the
country, unless the event proves that there was such a feeling in the
country at the timey, and that the circumstances were altogether suchy
that he had reasonable prospect of success.10 (Hear, hear.) If people
did not risk anything by making Edition: current; Page: [173] these
attempts we should have them made upon all sorts of absurd grounds by
small minorities. It is necessary, then, to punish these people, but it
is not necessary to hang them. (Cheers.) It is important that the world
should know that you, the people of England, abhor the idea of staining
the soil with the blood of political zoffendersz. (Loud cheers, and a
cry of Hang the Government.) I hope that we shall not have to reproach
any one for this. But if it is done, I hope that you will show that it
is not your doing—that you do not sympathise, that it is not you who
want to hang the poor men who aimed to obtain the liberty of their
country even by the amost mistaken meansa. (Hear, hear.) Political
malcontents are very seldom bad men; they are generally better than the
average. They very often do wrong things; but the man who will risk his
life and all that is dear to him for a public object is generally a
better man than the common—he is an object of pity, and not of hatred.
(Cheers.) If he is not successful, his failure will itself be a terrible
blow to him. b(Some person in the body of the hall here askedb “How
would you punish them?”) I assume that it is unnecessary to punish all.
It is only necessary to punish the leaders, and I would punish them by
imprisonment, but not for life. They should not be treated like the scum
of the earth; and we would always hope that the time would come, and we
would do our utmost to make the time come, when an amnesty would let
them all out of prison. (Cheers.) These things are done even in some of
the most despotic countries of Europe, and I am sure that the people of
England will not bear that their government should be the only one
except those of Spain and Russia, which does such things. (Cheers.) If
the government were so unfortunate as to hang these men, they would have
the sympathy of none but Marshall Narvaez and General Mouravieff.11
c(Cheers.)c I could not help addressing you on this subject. (Cheers.)
Many of us who went up to Lord Derby feel deeply that it will be a most
fatal thing for the honour of this country, for its estimation in the
eyes of all other countries, for its future prosperity, for the future
good feeling between class and class, and, above all, for Edition:
current; Page: [174] the future good feeling between Ireland and
England, which was so precious to them all, if the government should
persevere in the dcalamitousd resolution to which they have come, but
from which many of our friends feel econfident, and I feele considerable
hope, that they will virtuously abstain. (Loud and continued cheering.)

fOn the honourable gentleman resuming his seat the vast audience rose en
masse, and gave three vigorous cheers in his honour.f

[The resolution was passed unanimously, and then Thomas Mason Jones
moved a second one, condemning the government’s “breach of faith” over
compounding. In his speech Jones said, “as an Irishman,” he must thank
“the most illustrious philosopher in Europe—(loud cheers)—for the speech
. . . worthy of even the great reputation of John Stuart ” (Morning
Star). Later in his speech, Jones referred to a conversation in which
 indicated that though he had been opposed to the ballot, he “was so
convinced of the dangerous state of things in Ireland, that he was
willing the ballot should be tried in that part of the kingdom—(great
cheering)—that, if the experiment were to be tried at all, that was the
place to try it” (Morning Star). When Jones finished,  rose again.]

gMr. J.S. : My friend who has just addressed the meeting, and whose
enthusiasm has led him greatly to overrate my merits, has misunderstood
in some degree the communication which took place between him and me on
the subject of the ballot. I have never concealed from you any opinion
which you dislike. (Hear, hear.) I did not do so at my election, and you
won’t expect me to do so now. I am not in favour of the ballot. I think
there are great objections to it, and that we are getting strong enough
to do without it. (Hear, hear.) I was not able to say so much of the
unfortunate Irish. I said, and I say again, if the ballot is to be
tried, try it first in Ireland. (Cheers.)g

[After the unanimous passing of this and another resolution, and thanks
to the Chair, the meeting agreed to send a memorial to the Queen,
praying that she spare the lives of the Fenian convicts. Morley’s
response to the vote of thanks closed the meeting proper, as the “vast
assemblage” of some 3,000 separated. A few of those most involved,
including , then gathered in a smaller room to draw up the memorial
concerning the Fenian prisoners, of which the substantial clause read:
“We, your Majesty’s humble memorialists, beg earnestly to pray your
Majesty to exercise your Royal prerogative of mercy in sparing the lives
of our unhappy countrymen in Ireland now lying under sentence of death
for high treason.” It was sent with a covering letter by Morley to
Gathorne-Hardy, recently appointed Home Secretary.]

Edition: current; Page: [175]


59.: The Reform Bill [5]
 27 MAY, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 1142–3, 1185, 1188. Reported in The Times,
28 May, p. 9, from which the responses are taken. In the renewed
discussion in Committee of Clause 4 of the Reform Bill, Disraeli made an
extended defence of the Government’s intentions, in the course of which
he referred to ’s having attended a meeting (see No. 58) and “if not
[moving] at least [supporting] or sanction[ing] a resolution to the
effect that I, representing Her Majesty’s Government, had committed a
breach of faith with the House of Commons on this matter” (col. 1139).
’s first intervention is in response to that accusation.

i hope the Committee will kindly indulge me for a few minutes. No one,
so far as I am aware, on the occasion to which the right honourable
Gentleman has alluded, charged him with having broken faith with the
House or with the country on the subject of the compound-householder. I
most explictly acquitted him of having done so. If such a charge has
been made I most willingly admit, and justice would compel me to admit,
that he has most clearly and satisfactorily answered it. (Cheers.) I was
well aware that the shaft with which he had transfixed us was taken from
our own quiver. (Hear.) When the Amendment of the honourable Member for
Pontefract (Mr. Childers) was announced,1 I felt, and said, that if it
were carried it would entirely destroy us (hear, hear)—that we should be
obliged to begin again at the beginning and fight the whole battle over
again. If that Amendment had proceeded from this part of the House I
should have opposed it, and I shall oppose it now. I had not in my mind
that my honourable Friend the Member for Newark (Mr. Hodgkinson) had
expressed concurrence in that Motion. I now remember that he did concur
in it. But the Committee know that he withdrew that concurrence by
placing a fresh Amendment of an entirely different character on the
Paper. As the right honourable Gentleman has done me the honour to
attend to what I said in another place, he no doubt is well aware of the
reasons why I think the 3rd and 4th clauses are entirely inadmissible. I
have said this to set myself right with the right honourable Gentleman,
against whom I have always endeavoured to avoid saying anything
personally offensive. On the occasion referred to, I spoke with studied
moderation.

[The Committee moved from Clause 4 to Clause 34, also bearing on the
issue of compound-householders; ’s second intervention, on an
amendment by Ayrton (col. 1183) that would have the effect of making
landlords liable for payments not made by short-term occupiers who had
been rated in order to gain the franchise, came after Gathorne-Hardy had
indicated that the basis of the Government’s Edition: current; Page:
[176] objection to payment of compounded rates through the landlord was
“that men would get on the register without paying the full rate, and
that persons therefore paying unequal rates would be equally entitled to
the franchise” (col. 1185).]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, that in addition to the objection mentioned by
the right honourable Gentleman, the Amendment would place the weekly
tenant of a dwelling-house in a worse position than the weekly tenant of
a lodging who would not have to pay any poor rate.

[Ayrton also moved that where “the dwelling-house or tenement shall be
wholly let out in separate apartments or lodgings, the owner of such
dwelling-house or tenement shall be rated in respect thereof to the poor
rate” (col. 1186); ’s subsequent motion came after some discussion
of the matter.]

Mr. J. Stuart  moved the omission of the words “separate apartments
or” in the Amendment.

[The amendment was withdrawn so that a substitute amendment using the
words “apartments or lodgings not separately rated” could be agreed to.]


60.: Personal Representation
 30 MAY, 1867

Personal Representation. Speech of John Stuart , Esq., M.P.
Delivered in the House of Commons, May 29th [sic], 1867. With an
Appendix Containing Notices of Reports, Discussions, and Publications on
the System in France, Geneva, Germany, Belgium, Denmark, Sweden, the
Australian Colonies, and the United States, 2nd ed. (London: Henderson,
et al., 1867), and PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, col. 1362. Reported in The
Times, 31 May, pp. 7–8, from which variants and the responses are taken;
the report in the St. Stephen’s Chronicle, Vol. IV, pp. 44–7, supports
the readings in The Times, but may derive from a common source. The
first and main part of the speech is given in PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187,
cols. 1343–56. The incomplete listing in ’s bibliography reads
“Speech in the House of Commons on 1867, in moving for the adoption of
Mr. Hare’s system of representation: reprinted in a pamphlet with other
writings on Mr. Hare’s plan entitled ” (MacMinn, p. 97). The copy in
’s library, Somerville College, has no corrections or emendations.
He spoke first.

asir,a the proposal to which I am about to call the attention of the
House, and which I move as an amendment to the redistribution clauses,1
because if it were adopted it would itself constitute a complete system
of redistribution, has been Edition: current; Page: [177] framed for the
purpose of embodying a principle which has not yet been introduced into
our discussions—a principle which is overlooked in the practical
machinery of our constitution, and disregarded in most of the projects
of constitutional reformers, but which I hold, nevertheless, to be most
important to the beneficial working of representative government; and if
while we are making great changes in our system of representation we
omit to engraft this principle upon it, the advantages we obtain by our
changes will be very much lessened, and whatever dangers they may be
thought to threaten us with will be far greater and more real than they
otherwise bneedb be; and this I think I can establish by reasons so
clear and conclusive, that, though I cannot expect to obtain at once the
assent of the House, I do confidently hope to induce many members of it
to take the subject into serious consideration. I cannot, indeed, hold
out as an inducement that the principle I contend for is fitted to be a
weapon of attack or defence for any political party. It is neither
democratic nor aristocratic—neither Tory, Whig, nor Radical; or, let me
rather say, it is all these at once: it is a principle of fair play to
all parties and opinions without distinction: it helps no one party or
section to bear down others, but is for the benefit of whoever is in
danger of being borne down. It is therefore a principle in which all
parties cmightc concur, if they prefer permanent justice to a temporary
victory; and I believe that what chiefly hinders them is that, as the
principle has not yet found its way into the commonplaces of political
controversy, many have never heard of it, and many others have heard
just enough about it to misunderstand it. In bringing this subject
before the House I am bound to prove two things: first, that there is a
serious practical evil requiring remedy; and then, that the remedy I
propose is practicable, and would be efficacious. I will first speak of
the evil. It is a great evil; it is one which exists not only in our
own, but in every other representative constitution; we are all aware of
it; we all feel and acknowledge it in particular cases; it enters into
all our calculations, and bears with a heavy weight upon us all. But as
we have always been used to think of it as incurable, we think of it as
little as we can; and are hardly aware how greatly it affects the whole
course of our affairs, and how prodigious would be the gain to our
policy, to our morality, to our civilization itself, if the evil were
susceptible of Edition: current; Page: [178] a remedy. This House and
the country are now anxiously engaged, and certainly not a day too soon,
in considering what can be done for the unrepresented. We are all
discussing how many non-electors deserve to be represented, and in what
mode to give them representation. But my complaint is that the electors
are not represented. The representation which they seem to have, and
which we have been quarrelling about the extension of, is a most
imperfect and insufficient representation; and this imperfect and
insufficient representation is what we are offering to the new classes
of voters whom we are creating. Just consider. In every Parliament there
is an enormous fraction of the whole body of electors who are without
any direct representation, consisting of the aggregate of the minorities
in all the contested elections, together with we know not what
minorities in those which, from the hopelessness of success, have not
even been contested. All these electors are as completely blotted out
from the constituency, for the duration of that Parliament, as if they
were legally disqualified; most of them, indeed, are blotted out
indefinitely, for in the majority of cases those who are defeated once
are likely to be defeated again. Here, therefore, is a large portion of
those whom the constitution intends to be represented, a portion which
cannot average less than a third, and may approximate to a half, who are
virtually in the position of non-electors. But the local majorities, are
they truly represented? In a certain rough way they are. They have a
member or members who are on the same side with themselves in party
politics; if they are Conservatives, they have a professed Conservative;
if Liberals, a professed Liberal. This is something; it is a great deal,
even; but is it everything? Is it of no consequence to an elector who it
is that sits in Parliament as his representative, if only he does not
sit on the wrong side of the House? Sir, we need more than this. We all
desire not only that there should be a sufficient number of
Conservatives or of Liberals in the House, but that these should, as far
as possible, be the best men of their respective parties; and the
elector, for himself, desires to be represented by the man who has most
of his confidence in all things, and not merely on the single point of
fidelity to a party. Now, this is so entirely unattainable under the
present system, that it seems like a dream even to think of itd. As a
rule, thed only choice offered to the elector is between the two great
parties. There are only as many candidates of each party as there are
seats to be filled; to start any others would divide the party, and in
most cases ensure its defeat. And what determines who these candidates
are to be? Sometimes the mere accident of being first in the field.
Sometimes the fact of having stood and been defeated on some previous
occasion, when the sensible men of the party did not engage in the
contest, because they knew it to be hopeless. In general, half a dozen
local leaders, who may be honest politicians, but who may be jobbing
intriguers, select the candidate: and whether they are of the one kind
or the other, their conduct is much the same—they select the gentleman
who will spend Edition: current; Page: [179] most money (Oh!); or, when
this indispensable qualification is equally balanced, it answers best to
propose somebody who has no opinions but the party ones; for every
opinion which he has of his own, and is not willing to abnegate, will
probably lose him some votes, and give the opposite party a chance. How
many electors are there, I wonder, in the United Kingdom, who are
represented by the person whom, if they had a free choice, they would
have themselves selected to represent them? In many constituencies,
probably not one. eThere might be a single exception.e I am inclined to
think that almost the only electors who are represented exactly as they
would wish to be, are those who were bribed (a laugh); for they really
have got for their fmember the gentlemanf who bribed highest. Sometimes,
perhaps, the successful candidate’s own tenants would have voted for him
in preference to any one else, however wide a choice had been open to
them. But in most cases the selection is the result of a compromise,
even the leaders not proposing the man they would have liked best, but
being obliged to concede something to the prejudices of other members of
the party. Having thus, as I think, made out a sufficient case of evil
requiring remedy, let me at once state the remedy I propose. My
proposal, then, is this: That votes should be received in every
locality, for others than the local candidates. An elector who declines
to vote for any of the three or four persons who offer themselves for
his own locality, should be allowed to bestow his vote on any one who is
a candidate anywhere, whether put up by himself or by others. (Laughter,
and Hear, hear.) If the elector avails himself of this privilege, he
will naturally vote for the person he most prefers—the one person, among
all that are willing to serve, who would represent him best; and if
there are found in the whole kingdom other electors, in the proper
number, who fix their choice on the same person, that person should be
declared duly elected. Some number of electors there must be who may be
considered entitled to one representative: what that number is, depends
on the numbers of the House, compared with the total number of electors
in the country. Suppose that there is one member for every 5,000
registered electors, or one for every 3,000 actual voters: then every
candidate who receives 3,000 votes would be returned to this House, in
whatever parts of the country his voters might happen to live.
(Laughter, and some cries of Hear, hear.) This is the whole of my
proposal, as far as its substance is concerned. To give it effect, some
subsidiary arrangements are necessary, which I shall immediately state.
But I must first notice an objection which presents itself on the
threshold, and has so formidable an appearance that it prevents many
persons from giving any further consideration to the subject. It is
objected, that the plan destroys the local character of the
representation. (Hear, hear.) Every constituency, it is said, is a group
having certain interests and feelings in common, and if you disperse
these groups by allowing the electors to Edition: current; Page: [180]
group themselves in other combinations, those interests and feelings
will be deprived of their representation. Now I fully admit that the
interests and feelings of localities ought to be represented: and I add
that they always will be represented; because those interests and
feelings exist in the minds of the electors; and as the plan I propose
has no effect but to give the freest and fullest play to the individual
elector’s own preferences, his local preferences are certain to exercise
their proper amount of influence. I do not know what better guardian of
a feeling can be wanted than the man who feels it, or how it is possible
for a man to have a vote, and not carry his interests and feelings,
local as well as general, with him to the polling booth. Indeed, it may
be set down as certain that the majority of voters in every locality
will generally prefer to be represented by one of themselves, or one
connected, with the place by some special tie. It is chiefly those who
know themselves to be locally in a minority, and unable to elect a local
representative of their opinions, who would avail themselves of the
liberty of voting on the new principle. As far as the majority were
concerned, the only effect would be that their local leaders would have
a greatly increased motive to find out and bring forward the best local
candidate that could be had, because the electors, having the power of
transferring their votes elsewhere, would demand a candidate whom they
would feel it a credit to vote for. The average quality of the local
representation would consequently be improved, but local interests and
feelings would still be represented, as they cannot possibly fail to be,
as long as every elector resides in a locality. If, however, the House
attaches any weight to this chimerical danger, I would most gladly
accept by way of experiment a limited application of the new principle.
Let every elector have the option of registering himself either as a
local or as a general voter. Let the elections for every county or
borough take place on the local registry, as they do at present. But let
those who choose to register themselves as members of a national
constituency, have representatives allowed to them in proportion to
their number; and let these representatives, and no others, be voted for
on the new principle. I will now state the additional, but very simple
arrangements, required to enable the plan to work. Supposing 3,000
voters to be the number fixed upon as giving a claim to a
representative: it is necessary that no more than this minimum number
should be counted for any candidate; for otherwise a few very eminent or
very popular names might engross nearly all the votes, and no other
person might obtain the required number, or any number that would
justify his return. No more votes, then, being counted for any candidate
than the number necessary for his election, the remainder of those who
voted for him would lose their vote, unless they were allowed to put on
their voting paper a second name, for whom the vote could be used if it
was not wanted by the candidate who stood first. In case this second
candidate also should not need the vote, the voter might add a third, or
any greater number, in the order of his preference. This is absolutely
all that the elector would have to do, more than he does at present; and
I think it must be admitted that this is not a difficult idea to
Edition: current; Page: [181] master, and not beyond the comprehension
of the simplest elector. The only persons on whom anything more
troublesome would devolve are the scrutineers, who would have to sort
the voting papers, and see for which of the names written in it each of
them ought to be counted. A few simple rules would be necessary to guide
the scrutineers in this process. My amendment entrusts the duty of
drawing up those rules to the judgment and experience of the right
honourable gentleman who presides over our deliberations; subjectg, as
in other cases,g to the approbation of the House. (Hear, hear, and a
laugh.) Let me now ask honourable members—is there anything in all this,
either incomprehensible or insuperably difficult of execution! I can
assure the House that I have not concealed any difficulty. I have given
a complete, though a brief, account of what most honourable members must
have heard of, but few, I am afraid, know much about—the system of
personal representation proposed by my eminent friend, Mr. Hare2—a man
distinguished by that union of large and enlightened general principles,
with an organizing intellect and a rare fertility of practical
contrivance, which together constitute a genius for legislation. (Hear,
hear.) People who have merely heard of Mr. Hare’s plan have taken it
into their heads that it is particularly hard to understand and
difficult to execute. But the difficulty is altogether imaginary: to the
elector there is no difficulty at all; to the scrutineers, only that of
performing correctly an almost mechanical operation. Mr. Hare, anxious
to leave nothing vague or uncertain, has taken the trouble to discuss in
his book the whole detail of the mode of sorting the voting papers.
People glance at this, and because they cannot take it all in at a
glance, it seems to them very mysterious. But when was there any act of
Parliament that could be understood at a glance? (Hear, hear, and a
laugh) and how can gentlemen expect to understand the details of a plan,
unless they first possess themselves of its principle? If we were to
read a description, for example, of the mode in which letters are sorted
at the Post-office, would it not seem to us very complicated? Yet, among
so vast a number of letters, how seldom is any mistake made. Is it
beyond the compass of human ability to ascertain that the first and
second names on a voting paper have been already voted for by the
necessary quota, and that the vote must be counted for the third? And
does it transcend the capacity of the agents of the candidates, the
chief registrar, or a committee of this House, to find out whether this
simple operation has been honestly and correctly performed? If these are
not insuperable difficulties, I can assure the House that they will find
there are no others. Many will think that I greatly over-estimate the
importance of securing to every elector a direct representation, because
those who are not represented directly are represented indirectly. If
Conservatives are not represented in the Tower Hamlets, or Liberals in
West Kent, there are plenty of Conservatives and Liberals returned
elsewhere; Edition: current; Page: [182] and those who are defeated may
console themselves by the knowledge that their party is victorious in
many other places. Their hparty, yesh: but is that all we have to look
to? Is representation of parties all we have a right to demand from our
representative system? If that were so, we might as well put up three
flags inscribed with the words, Tory, Whig, and Radical, and let the
electors make their choice among the flags, and when they have voted,
let the leaders of the winning party select the particular persons who
are to represent it. (A laugh.) In this way we should have, I venture to
say, an admirable representation of the three parties: all the seats
which fell to the lot of each party would be filled by its steadiest and
ablest adherents, by those who would not only serve the party best in
the House, but do it most credit with the country. All political
parties, merely as such, would be far better represented than they are
now, when accidents of personal position have so great a share in
determining who shall be the Liberal or who the Conservative member for
each place. Why is it, then, that such a system of representation would
be intolerable to us? Sir, it is because we look beyond parties; because
we care for something besides parties; because we know that the
constitution does not exist for the benefit of parties, but of citizens;
and we do not choose that all the opinions, feelings, and interests of
all the members of the community should be merged in the single
consideration of which party shall predominate. We require a House of
Commons which shall be a fitting representative of all the feelings of
the people, and not merely of their party feelings. We want all the
sincere opinions and public purposes which are shared by a reasonable
number of electors to be fairly represented here; and not only their
opinions, but that they should be able to give effect by their vote to
their confidence in particular men. Then why, because it is a novelty,
refuse to entertain the only mode in which it is possible to obtain this
complete reflection in the House of the convictions and preferences
existing in the constituent bodyi—to make the House, what we are so
often told that it ought to be, the express image of the nationi? By the
plan I propose, every elector would have the option of voting for the
one British subject who best represented his opinions, and to whom he
was most willing to entrust the power of judging for him on subjects on
which his opinions were not yet formed. Sir, I have already made the
remark, that this proposal is not specially liberal, nor specially
conservative, but is, in the highest degree, both liberal and
conservative; and I will substantiate this by showing that it is a
legitimate corollary from the distinctive doctrines of both parties. Let
me first address myself to Conservatives. What is it that persons of
conservative feelings specially deprecate in a plan of parliamentary
reform? It is the danger that some classes in the nation may be swamped
by other classes. What is it that we are warned against, as the chief
among the dangers of democracy? not untruly, as democracy is vulgarly
conceived and practised. It is that the single class of manual labourers
would, by dint of numbers, outvote all other classes, and Edition:
current; Page: [183] monopolize the whole of the legislature. But by the
plan I propose, no such thing could happen; no considerable minority
could possibly be swamped; no interest, no feeling, no opinion which
numbered in the whole country a few thousand adherents, need be without
a representation in due proportion to its numbers. It is true that by
this plan a minority would not be equivalent to a majority; a third of
the electors could not outvote two-thirds, and obtain a majority of
seats; but a third of the electors could always obtain a third of the
seats; and these would probably be filled by men above the average in
the influence which depends on personal qualities, for the voters who
were outnumbered locally would range the whole country for the best
candidate, and would elect him without reference to anything but their
personal confidence in him; the representatives of the minorities would,
therefore, include many men whose opinion would carry weight even with
the opposite party. Then, again, it is always urged by Conservatives,
and is one of the best parts of their creed, that the legislators of a
nation should not all be men of the same stamp—a variety of feelings,
interests, and prepossessions should be found in this House—and it
should contain persons capable of giving information and guidance on
every topic of importance that is likely to arise. This advantage, we
are often assured, has really been enjoyed under our present
institutions, by which almost every separate class or interest which
exists in the country is somehow represented, with one great exception,
which we are now occupied in removing—that of manual labour. And this
advantage many Conservatives think that we are now in danger of losing.
But the plan I propose ensures this variegated character of the
representation in a degree never yet obtained, and guarantees its
preservation under any possible extension of the franchise. Even
universal suffrage, even the handing over of political predominance to
the numerical majority of the whole people, would not then extinguish
minorities. Every dissentient opinion would have the opportunity of
making itself heard, and heard through the very best and most effective
organs it was able to procure. We should not find the rich or the
cultivated classes retiring from politics, as we are so often told they
do in America, because they cannot present themselves to any body of
electors with a chance of being returned. Such of them as were known and
respected out of their immediate neighbourhood would be elected in
considerable numbers, if not by a local majority, yet by a union of
local minorities; and instead of being deterred from offering
themselves, it would be the pride and glory of such men to serve in
Parliament; for what more inspiring position can there be for any man,
than to be selected to fight the uphill battle of unpopular opinions, in
a public arena, against superior numbers? (Cries of Agreed, agreed.)
All, therefore, which the best Conservatives chiefly dread in the
complete ascendancy of democracy would be, if not wholly removed, at
least diminished in a very great degree. These are the recommendations
of the plan when looked at on its conservative side. Let us now look at
it in its democratic aspect. (Agreed, agreed.) I claim for it the
support of all democrats, as being the only true realization of their
political principles. What Edition: current; Page: [184] is the
principle of democracy? Is it not that everybody should be represented,
and that everybody should be represented equally? Am I represented by a
member against whom I have voted, and am ready to vote again? Have all
the voters an equal voice, when nearly half of them have had their
representative chosen for them by the larger half? In the present mode
of taking the suffrages nobody is represented but the majority. But that
is not the meaning of democracy. Honest democracy does not mean the
displacement of one privileged class, and the instalment of another in a
similar privilege because it is a more numerous or a poorer class. That
would be a mere pretence of democratic equality. That is not what the
working classes want. The working classes demand to be represented, not
because they are poor, but because they are human. No working man with
whom I have conversed desires that the richer classes should be
unrepresented, but only that their representation should not exceed what
is due to their numbers; that all classes should have, man for man, an
equal amount of representation. He does not desire that the majority
should be alone represented. He desires that the majority should be
represented by a majority, and the minority by a minority, and jhe only
needs to have it shown to himj how this can be done. But I will go
further. It is not only justice to the minorities that is here
concerned. Unless minorities are counted, the majority which prevails
may be but a sham majority. Suppose that on taking a division in this
House you compelled a large minority to step aside, and counted no votes
but those of the majority; whatever vote you then took would be decided
by the majority of that majority. Does not every one see that this would
often be deciding it by a minority? (Laughter and cries of Agreed,
agreed.) The mere majority of a majority may be a minority of the whole.
Now, what I have been hypothetically supposing to be done in this House,
the present system actually does in the nation. It first excludes the
minorities at all the elections. Not a man of them has any voice at all
in determining the proceedings of Parliament. Well, now, if the members
whom the majorities returned were always unanimous, we should be certain
that the majority in the nation had its way. But if the majorities, and
the members representing them, are ever divided, the power that decides
is but the majority of a majority. Two-fifths of the electors, let us
suppose, have failed to obtain any representation. The representatives
of the other three-fifths are returned to Parliament, and decide an
important question by two to one. Supposing the representatives to
express the mind of their constituents, the question has been decided by
a bare two-fifths of the nation, instead of a majority of it. Thus the
present system is no more just to majorities than to minorities. It
gives no guarantee that it is really the majority that preponderates. A
minority of the nation, if it kbek a majority in the prevailing party,
may outnumber and prevail over a real majority in the nation. Majorities
are never sure of outnumbering minorities, Edition: current; Page: [185]
unless every elector is counted—unless every man’s vote is as effective
as any other man’s in returning a representative. No system but that
which I am submitting to the House effects this, because it is the only
system under which every vote tells, and every constituency is
unanimous. This system, therefore, is equally required by the
Conservative and by the Radical creeds. In practice, its chief operation
would be in favour of the weakest—of those who were most liable to be
outnumbered and oppressed. Under the present suffrage it would operate
in favour of the working classes. Those classes form the majority in
very few of the constituencies, lbut they are a large minority in many,
and if they amount, say to a third of the whole electoral body, this
system would enable them to obtain a third of the representationl. Under
any suffrage approaching to universal, it would operate in favour of the
propertied and of the most educated classes; and though it would not
enable them to outvote the others, it would msecurem to them and to the
interests they represent, a hearing, and a just share in the
representation. I am firmly persuaded, Sir, that all parties in this
House and in the country, if they could but be induced to give their
minds to the consideration of this proposal, would end by being
convinced, not only that it is entirely consistent with their
distinctive principles, but that it affords the only means by which all
that is best in those principles can be practically carried out. It
would be a healing, a reconciling measure; softening all political
transitions; securing that every opinion, instead of conquering or being
conquered by starts and shocks, and passing suddenly from having no
power at all in Parliament to having too much, or the contrary, should
wax or wane in political power in exact proportion to its growth or
decline in the general mind of the country. So perfectly does this
system realize the idea of what a representative government ought to be,
that its perfection stands in its way, and is the great obstacle to its
success. There is a natural prejudice against everything which professes
much; men are unwilling to think that any plan which promises a great
improvement in human affairs has not something quackish about it. I
cannot much wonder at this prejudice, when I remember that no single
number of a daily paper is published whose advertising columns do not
contain a score of panaceas for all human ills; when, in addition to all
the pamphlets which load our tables, every member of this House, I
suppose, daily receives private communications of plans by which the
whole of mankind may at one stroke be made rich and prosperous,
generally, I believe, by means of paper money. But if this age is
fertile in new nonsense, and in new forms of old nonsense, it is an age
in which many great improvements in human affairs have really been made.
It is also an age in which, whether we will or not, we are entering on
new paths; we are surrounded by circumstances wholly without example in
history; and the wonder would be if exigencies so new could be dealt
with in a completely satisfactory manner by the Edition: current; Page:
[186] old means. We should therefore ill discharge our duty if we
obstinately refused to look into new proposals. This, Sir, is not the
mere crotchet of an individual. It has been very few years before the
world, but already, by the mere force of reason, it has made important
converts among the foremost public writers and public men in Germany, in
France, in Switzerland, in Italy, in our Australian colonies, and in the
United States. In one illustrious though small commonwealth, that of
Geneva, a powerful association has been organized and is at work, under
the presidency of one of the most eminent men in the Swiss federation,
agitating for the reform of the constitution on this basis.3 And what in
our own country? Why, Sir, almost every thinking person I know who has
studied this plan, or to whom it has been sufficiently explained, is for
giving it at least a trial. Various modes have been suggested of trying
it on a limited scale. With regard to the practical machinery proposed,
neither I nor the distinguished author of the plan are wedded to its
details, if any better can be devised. (Hear.) If the principle of the
plan were admitted, a committee or a royal commission could be appointed
to consider and report on the best means of providing for the direct
representation of every qualified voter, and we should have a chance of
knowing if the end we have in view could be attained by any better means
than those which we suggest. But without some plan of the kind it is
impossible to have a representative system really adequate to the
exigencies of modern society. In all states of civilization, and in all
representative systems, personal representation would be a great
improvement; but, at present, political power is passing, or is supposed
to be in danger of passing, to the side of the most numerous and poorest
class. Against this class predominance, as against all other class
predominance, the personal representation of every voter, and therefore
the full representation of every minority, is the most valuable of all
protections. Those who are anxious for safeguards against the evils they
expect from democracy should not neglect the safeguard which is to be
found in the principles of democracy itself. It is not only the best
safeguard but the surest and most lasting: because it combats the evils
and dangers of false democracy by means of the true, and because every
democrat who understands his own principles must see and feel its strict
and impartial justice.

[Viscount Cranborne followed , dissenting from the measure as
impracticable, but arguing that it should be given a full hearing, as
the evil  described was a real one. After other speeches, 
concluded the debate.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, he would obey what appeared to be the general
wish of the House, and would not press his Amendment to a division; but
there were many things which he might have said in reply if the temper
of the House had permitted. He must, however, follow his honourable
Friend behind him4 in thanking the Edition: current; Page: [187] noble
Lord the Member for Stamford (Viscount Cranborne) for his able speech,
and for the conviction he had expressed that statesmen must make up
their minds to think upon this subject as the only way of getting over a
difficulty that must be got over.5 He must also express his warm
acknowledgments to the Chancellor of the Exchequer for the manner in
which he had dealt with the question.6

[The amendment was withdrawn.]


61.: The Bankruptcy Acts Repeal Bill
 4 JUNE, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, col. 1572. Reported in The Times, 5 June, p. 7.
 spoke in the debate on going into Committee on “A Bill to Repeal
Enactments Relating to Bankruptcy in England, and to Matters Connected
Therewith,” 30 Victoria (14 Mar., 1867), PP, 1867, I, 377–80.

the laws of this country on the subject of debt have passed, not
suddenly, but by a succession of steps, from one bad extreme to another.
After having continued the old savage treatment of debtors far into an
advanced state of civilization, we have now gradually lapsed into such a
state that the debtor may be guilty of any kind of misconduct, short of
actual fraud, and escape with practical impunity. Last year, for nearly
the whole of the Session, I had a Notice on the Paper for an Instruction
to the Committee, that it have power to remedy this evil by introducing
provisions for the punishment of such debtors as might be shown on
inquiry to have, with culpable temerity, risked and lost property which
belonged to their creditors.1 The Bill of last year2 never reached such
a stage that I could move that Instruction. The present Bill has passed
the stage when a similar Instruction could be proposed. Under these
circumstances I shall give my best support to the Amendments to be
proposed by the honourable and learned Member for Cambridge (Mr.
Selwyn),3 and I shall move other clauses going further in the same
direction.

[The discussion concluded with a deferment of the Committee until 7
June, when Edition: current; Page: [188] it was again put off. 
indicated to Helen Taylor on 10 June that he hoped to speak again on the
matter (CW, Vol. XVI, p. 1281), but the Bill was withdrawn without
discussion on 11 July.]


62.: Petition Concerning the Fenians
 14 JUNE, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 187, cols. 1894–5. Reported in The Times, 15 June, p.
9, from which variants and responses are taken. On 3 May, John Bright
had submitted a petition, signed by Edward Truelove, Richard Congreve,
Frederic Harrison, and eight others, condemning Fenianism because of its
secrecy and premature dedication to violence, but nonetheless asserting
the political nature of the offences, and asking that the sentences
already assigned to prisoners be revised, that they be segregated from
common criminals, that moderation be shown in applying the law in
Ireland, and that Fenian prisoners be treated well before trial, and
judged and sentenced leniently (Petition 8687, Reports from the Select
Committee of the House of Commons on Public Petitions, 1867–68; the
wording is in App. 530, pp. 223–4). The Report now having been printed,
Augustus Henry Archibald Anson (1835–77), M.P. for Lichfield, moved
(cols. 1886–90) that the petition itself be “discharged” and that its
wording in the Appendix be “cancelled,” on the grounds that its aim was
to encourage Fenianism and insult the British army. He referred to
criticisms made in the House by Perronet Thompson in 1858 concerning the
army’s reaction to the Indian Mutiny.

i rise, not for the purpose of discussing the question raised upon the
Motion submitted to us, which I cannot imagine, especially after the
opposition made to it by the Chairman of the Committee on Petitions,1
that the House will think of adopting. I rise, moved by a feeling of
self-respect, to say that if the honourable and gallant Gentleman
thought it his duty to move that the petition be expelled from the
House, he should go further, and move that I be expelled from it, for
there is not a single sentiment in the petitiona, as far as I am aware,a
which I do not adopt. (Oh, oh!) I will not say that I adhere to every
word in it, but to every sentiment in it I most implicitly do, and I
thank my honourable Friend who presented it for having given utterance
for once in this House to a feeling which nearly all bEurope and the
civilized world entertain, respecting certain acts done Edition:
current; Page: [189] in the dependencies of this countryb.2 The
honourable and gallant Gentleman is mistaken in supposing that utterance
to be an attack on his profession. I have been infinitely more disgusted
in reference to the Indian transactions referred to, by the inhuman and
ferocious displays of feeling made by unmilitary persons, persons in
civil life, who were safe at home, and who, it seems to me, were far
more culpable than those who committed excesses under such provocation
as there is no denying was given in the case of India. Even the deeds
there done of inhuman and indiscriminate massacre, the seizing of
persons in all parts of the country and putting them to death without
trial, and then boasting of it in a manner almost disgraceful to
humanity, cas was the case in innumerable instances which were described
at the time,c were by no means confined to the army. I have no doubt
that in many cases the habitual discipline of the army, and their
professional feelings, prevented them from being guilty of such deeds. I
could tell the House of gentlemen who resigned their commissions and
left the army because they could not bear the deeds which they not only
saw done, but were compelled by their orders to do. (Name, name!) I
decline to name them, and by naming them to expose them to attacks (Oh,
and Hear) like those which have been made to-night against a well-known
public man, formerly a Member of this House, for the vindication of whom
I return my sincerest thanks to the honourable Member for Bradford.3
With respect to the sentiments contained in the petition dand its
alleged palliation of the conduct ofd the Fenians, I beg to point out
that it contains a very decided and strong condemnation of their
conduct. All it said was that it was conduct esuch as honourable but
mistaken men might be capable ofe. That cannot be denied. It cannot be
denied that such men as Wolfe Tone,4 Emmett, and Lord Edward Fitzgerald,
however wrongly they may have acted, were the very stuff of which
patriot heroes are made. The errors of the Fenians may be more blameable
than theirs. Do I exculpate their conduct? Certainly not. It was greatly
culpable, because it was contrary to the general interests of society
and of their country. Still, errors of this character are not errors
which evince a vulgar mind—certainly not a mind likely to be guilty of
ordinary crime and vice—rather a mind capable of heroic actions and
lofty virtue. Such acts have been committed by the most Edition:
current; Page: [190] self-devoted and admirable persons. fHow far that
is so in the present instance I am unable to say, because, not knowing
the antecedents of those whose conduct was implicated, I cannot form an
accurate judgment upon the point. I feel, at the same time, sure that
the acts for which they have been made amenable to the law, and which
the good of society demands should be punished with severity, do not
brand them as detestable, but only as pitiable.f (Hear.)

[After further debate, Anson’s motion was lost.]


63.: The Sunday Lectures Bill
 19 JUNE, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 99–103. Reported in The Times, 20 June, p.
8, from which variants and responses are taken. In moving the second
reading of “A Bill to Amend the Act of the 21st Year of George III, c.
49, intitled ‘An Act for Preventing Certain Abuses and Profanations on
the Lord’s Day, called Sunday,’ ” 30 Victoria (2 Apr., 1867), PP, 1867,
VI, 367–70, John Russell, Viscount Amberley (1842–76), M.P. for
Nottingham, pointed out (cols. 89–95) that the Bill affected only
lectures and speeches to which admission was charged; it did not apply
to amusements, or even to performances of sacred music. Immediately
before  spoke, Alexander James Beresford Hope (1820–87), M.P. for
Stoke-upon-Trent, suggested (cols. 97–9) that a Select Committee should
look thoroughly into the whole subject.

there is much good sense and good feeling in the speech of the
honourable Member for Stoke-upon-Trent (Mr. Beresford Hope). I agree
that it is desirable that this question and others should be dealt with
in a much broader way than they usually are by the House. But whose
fault is it that they are not? Not my noble Friend’s.1 If I may be
permitted to say so, it is the fault of the House, which never will look
at any subject except by fractions, and will not consent to legislate
otherwise than bit by bit. If it would, there would be many things
different in our laws and in our discussions. (Hear.) My noble Friend
professes wider views on the subject than correspond with the breadth of
the measure he has proposed. In his Bill he has dealt with a small
portion, a corner of the subject upon which he thinks it hardly possible
that there can be a difference of opinion among reasonable persons. (A
laugh.) He gives the House credit for being capable of stopping where it
likes, and deciding how far it will or will not go. He thinks that
wherever the line Edition: current; Page: [191] ought to be drawn, it
ought not to be drawn where it is now; and that there is something to be
done in the way of promoting useful and instructive amusements, to call
them nothing more, on a Sunday, in place of mere sensualities. I am not
going to say anything, although much might be said, about the value of
the instruction and recreation which these lectures afford. I am going
to put it on the lowest ground, and ask whether you will have these or
the public-house. (Hear, hear.) It is true that the honourable Member
for Chichester (Mr. J.A. Smith) has proposed, and probably will receive
much support in proposing, to take away even this from the working man,
and leave him nothing whatever to do on Sunday but to go to church, if
he should be so disposed.2 But there is no incompatibility between going
to church and going to these lectures also. If you are not able to make
the churches so attractive to the class of persons who are most in need
of moralizing influences as to induce them to go there, you will, if you
induce them not to go to the public-house, be doing some good. I refer
to the question of closing the public-houses on Sunday, because that is
a remedy which probably many gentlemen would propose. They would say,
“You have not to choose between scientific lectures and the
public-house, because you may close the public-house, and shut up the
working people in their homes,” such as those are. There are two ways of
keeping people out of what is considered to be mischief. One is to
exclude them from what is regarded as hurtful indulgence, without giving
them any other. The other is to facilitate their obtaining indulgences,
amusements, recreations, to use no higher term, which if possible may be
beneficial, and which certainly cannot be noxious. The latter plan
appears to me the better, not only for the interests of society, but for
the interests of religion itself. If you prevent any but a strictly
religious employment of the Sunday, the only leisure day which is
possessed by the mass of working men, what happens? You compel mankind,
made as they are of flesh and blood, and needing a great deal which is
not provided for by the church service—you compel them to look to the
church service, and to their religious observances, not merely for
spiritual instruction or spiritual edification, but also for all their
excitement, and even for all their amusement. And this has two
consequences equally serious and equally mischievous, and certainly
equally undesirable in the eyes of arationallya religious people. One is
to make the churches places of display, places of amusement and levity.
The other is to make them places of boundless fanaticism. (Hear.) Both
the love of lighter and the love of serious and grave excitement seek
their gratification in this way, when others are denied them. The
consequence is, that you are very likely to have, under cover of
religious observances, all sorts of worldly feelings and worldly
excitement, or else bigotry and fanaticism raised to their highest
point. Speaking, therefore, in the Edition: current; Page: [192]
interests of religion, it is not desirable that all places but churches
should be closed on the only day of leisure which the mass of the
community enjoy. Then as to the mode in which Sunday is to be employed
bafter a certain portion of it is left open for religious observances,
other employments being allowedb, I would ask any reasonable religious
person whether, if he cannot have all that he would think best, he ought
not to desire to have what is next best—and which he thinks nearest to
religion: science, or sensuality? (Hear, hear.) With regard to the
question of taking money at the doors for admission to these
exhibitions, services, or whatever they are called, I understood my
honourable Friend the Member for Perth (Mr. Kinnaird) c—for whom I
entertain a degree of respect with which nothing I shall say will be in
the slightest degree inconsistent—c to say that those who are anxious to
give interesting instruction to the people may do it if they choose to
defray the expenses themselves; but that it shall not be allowed that
those who seek it shall themselves pay the expenses.3 That may be very
well for once, twice, or thrice, but can it be expected to last? Is it
to be desired that this instruction should be denied to the working
classes unless others are willing to do what they themselves are not
allowed to do—namely, to keep up a constant succession of these
lectures, at the expense of others, and not at the expense of those who
are able and willing to pay for them? Surely that is not what would be
thought just and desirable in any other case. But perhaps my honourable
Friend is of the opinion which seemed to be entertained by the right
honourable Gentleman the Home Secretary (Mr. Gathorne-Hardy) on another
occasion, when, with a degree of irascibility which I have not seen him
exhibit upon any other subject, he spoke of “miserable philosophers” who
are never willing to sacrifice anything for their opinions;4 not perhaps
sufficiently considering that “miserable philosophers” have not always
the means of making great endowments (hear, hear), and that there seems
to be no very strong reason why the promulgation of opinions should be
left exclusively to those who are able to provide such endowments. As to
the evil consequences which my honourable Friend expects to follow if
money is taken at the door on these occasions, which, he appears to
think, would necessarily lead to the licensing of all sorts of
amusements on Sunday, he does not appear to have sufficient confidence
in the legislative capacity of the House, or to believe that it is
capable of defining what shall be permitted and what shall not. I may,
however, observe to my honourable Friend that this Bill actually does
draw a line. My honourable Friend says that he once attended these
lectures, and that the great attraction was the sacred music. But the
Bill of my noble Friend does not include music. He has purposely
excluded it, and therefore, also, the paid singers. With regard to that
Edition: current; Page: [193] invidious expression, “paid singers,”5 are
not the singers at our cathedrals paid? Is there anything necessarily
unedifying in sacred music, because those who even thus humbly minister
to the altar live by the altar? (Hear.) With reference to my honourable
Friend’s fear that if music were allowed dancing must be allowed also,
he cannot be indifferent to, or unaware of, the difference between
sacred and other music. Is it not the distinctive characteristic of
sacred music that its effect upon the mind is at the same time calming
and elevating? and therefore I suppose the best preparation for any
desirable and good form of religious sentiment. I am not aware that
there is any such thing as sacred dancing (a laugh), at least according
to our notions, although there is according to the ideas of other
nations. Therefore there is no ground for the apprehensions of my
honourable Friend. I apprehend that in this matter it is perfectly
possible to draw a line of distinction if we choose to do so; to say
what modes of amusement—if we put it only upon that ground—we consider
to be, if not absolutely edifying, not inconsistent with edification,
and what we think it desirable to put under restraint for one reason or
another. As to these reasons, and the extent to which they would carry
restraint, probably no two persons in this House are agreed. There is
therefore—not that I apprehend there could be any reasonable objection
to passing my noble Friend’s Bill—ground for assenting to the proposal
of the honourable Member for Stoke, and referring the question to a
Select Committee. I concur with him as to the desirability of
considering these questions in the broadest possible way, and deciding
what are the modes of amusement to which there is no objection, and what
are those which, from their more suspicious and more dangerous
character, require restraint. It is probable that if a Select Committee
be appointed, it will extend rather than restrict the scope of my noble
Friend’s Bill, and will find that on no broad principle that can be laid
down will it be necessary to restrict the measure so much as my noble
Friend has done. If the Bill is read a second time I shall be willing,
as I presume from what he said my noble Friend will be, to consent to
its being referred to a Select Committee, which will probably receive a
great deal of valuable evidence—throw some light upon the subject, and I
hope remove some prejudices. (Hear, hear.)

[The Bill was lost (col. 116).]


64.: The Libel Bill
 25 JUNE, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, col. 546. Reported in The Times, 26 June, p. 7.
In Committee on “A Bill to Amend the Law of Libel, and Thereby to Secure
More Effectually the Liberty of the Press,” 30 Victoria (8 Feb., 1867),
PP, 1867, III, 391–4, Colman Michael O’Loghlen Edition: current; Page:
[194] (1819–77), M.P. for County Clare, moved to add a new clause: “No
action or prosecution shall be maintainable for the publication of any
defamatory matter contained in any report, paper, votes, or proceedings
of either House of Parliament, which either House of Parliament shall
have ordered to be published; nor shall any action or prosecution be
maintainable against a printer or publisher for the publication of any
defamatory matter in any periodical or other publication, if such
defamatory matter shall be a true and fair report of the proceedings of
either House of Parliament”

(col. 544).

mr. j. stuart  said, the first part of the clause provided that
there should be no remedy for any defamatory matter contained in any
document ordered by the House to be printed. Remembering the
multifarious sources of the documents which the House ordered to be
printed, he could not help thinking that if there was to be no remedy
against the public, as there could be none against the House, for the
circulation of any defamatory matter, the House could not do less than
appoint some person to look carefully over all documents and see that no
defamatory matter was needlessly introduced.

[Eventually the clause was withdrawn (col. 547).]


65.: The Reform Bill [6]
 27 JUNE, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 635–8. Reported in The Times, 28 June, p.
7, from which the variant and responses are taken. In a further
Committee on the Reform Bill (see No. 50), Disraeli moved a new Clause A
to provide for increased polling places (cols. 616–17). To an amendment
putting the expenses of elections on the local rates, a sub-amendment
was attached, requiring the payment of £50 (boroughs) and £100
(counties) by anyone demanding a poll (col. 627). Joseph Warner Henley
(1793–1884), M.P. for Oxfordshire, spoke before , pointing out that
in county towns a factious candidate might gain nomination by a show of
hands; then the other candidate would have to demand and so be put to
the expense of a poll; at present, each candidate put down a deposit.

the right honourable gentleman who has just addressed the House appears
to me to have raised a difficulty which is, in fact, no difficulty at
all, and which he himself pointed out the means of removing. The obvious
remedy against relieving the sham candidate, who might have the show of
hands, at the cost of the bonâ fide candidate, with a chance of
election, was to require deposits from all. But I cannot help thinking
that a great deal too much is said of the danger of sham candidates. The
expense of the hustings, or the returning officer’s expenses, are not
only a very small part of the expense of elections as they now are; but
I am afraid bear a very small proportion to the expense which it is
impossible to prevent. Though a great amount of expense, which, though
not corrupt, is very noxious, ought to be, and Edition: current; Page:
[195] can be, prevented, it is impossible to prevent, or defray out of a
public fund, such expenses as those of advertisements, printing, public
meetings to address the electors. The candidates of whom all seem so
much afraid, and who have no chance of being elected, cannot present
themselves to the electors without incurring a certain amount of these
expenses, and if they cannot pay these it is obvious nobody need care
for their candidature. The honourable and learned Member for the Tower
Hamlets (Mr. Ayrton) has said that if this sham candidature is kept up,
the counties or the other candidates may be put to expense.1 But I have
no doubt the general opinion would so strongly condemn this, that it
would be hardly possible for anyone who cares for the opinion of the
constituency, and wishes to make himself favourably known to them, to
present himself in this capacity. It may happen, perhaps, or the public
may be led to think, that under this horror of sham candidates there is
concealed a greater fear of real candidates. This is, as was well
observed by the honourable Member for Stoke-upon-Trent (Mr. Beresford
Hope),2 part of a much greater question, that of election expenses
generally, with which, in all its parts, this House must necessarily
have to deal; and I hope it will see the necessity of dealing with it
soon. (Hear, hear.) But this particular expense, though a small part of
the total cost of elections, is a part which it is really in the power
of the House to control. It is a necessary part of the expenditure of
the country, like any other portion of the public charges. If a
foreigner asked how this country provided for that part of its
expenditure which attends the election of its representatives, would he
not be astonished to hear that it was done by a tax on candidates?
(Hear, hear.) Of all sorts of taxation, was there ever such a partial
and unjust specimen as that would be? But it is really a great deal
worse. I can compare it to nothing short of requiring a Judge to pay
large sums towards the cost of the administration of justice. It is true
that you make men pay for commissions in the army, but you do not apply
the price of these commissions towards defraying the expense of the
army. Does this House, in any other case, arrange to defray any part of
the necessary expenses of the country by a special tax on the
individuals who carry on its service? The honourable Member for
Stoke-upon-Trent (Mr. Beresford Hope), though he has fears of the
consequences of the constitutional change we are making, which I by no
means share, has expressed an anxiety in which, I think, we must all
participate—a sense of the duty under which this House and the country
now lie, to provide for educating, in the morality of politics, that
large class who are now for the first time to be admitted to the
electoral suffrage. What sort of a lesson are we giving them—what sort
of instructions do we offer—when we lead them to believe that the great
trust of legislating for this country is a thing to be paid for, that it
is worth while paying for it, and that men can be made to pay for it?
What more natural than that they should Edition: current; Page: [196]
think it might as well be paid for directly to those who confer it? The
noble Lord who spoke earlier in the debate (Lord Hotham)3 seems to
consider that the law of demand and supply should be left to regulate
these matters, so that, in fact, those who are willing to pay money
should have a clear field, and that the representation should be knocked
down to the highest bidder. That is, perhaps, to a certain extent, done
already (a laugh); but the House ought not to extend and perpetuate the
practice. There is in this country a large and growing class of persons
who have suddenly and rapidly acquired wealth, and to whom it is worth
any sacrifice of money to obtain social position. The less they have to
recommend them in any other respect—the less chance they have of
obtaining a place in what is called good society—esteem, either by
qualities useful or ornamental—the more sure they are to resort, if they
can, to the only infallible and ready means of gaining their end, the
obtaining a seat in this House. This is a growing evil which ought to be
guarded against. (Hear.) I hope the Government will deal with this
subject in all its parts, as it is certainly highly needful to do; but
we have now an opportunity of dealing with one part which is entirely in
our control, and which forms an element of the question we are now
discussing. We can deal with that small part of election expenses which
is an unavoidable part of the expense of governing the country, and
which, though the right honourable Gentleman the Member for Oxfordshire
(Mr. Henley) said it would be extremely shabby to throw on the
constituencies,4 I think it would be a monstrous deal more shabby to
throw on the candidates. (Hear, hear, and a laugh.) When a man has no
personal object of his own to gain by obtaining a seat in this House, it
is not for the House to require that he should pay the expense which the
country and the electors incur by his election: if he has any such
object, we ought to do everything in our power, and to throw every
obstacle in his way, to prevent him from obtaining it by money. Above
all, it is our duty to show to the new electors, and that large portion
of the old who, I am sorry to say, still need the lesson, that the
business of election is a thing far removed from aught of buying and
selling; that the business of a Member of this House is a laborious and
onerous task, and when not sought from personal motives, one which it
requires a high sense of public duty to undertake, and that the burthen,
therefore, ought not to be increased by throwing any part of the expense
on the candidate. aIf members, indeed, are not to be paid for
undertaking the business of legislation, they certainly ought not to be
made to pay for leave to govern the country.a (Cheers and laughter.) We
ought, above all things, to show the electors that they are doing what
we and the world consider disgraceful, if they put the candidate to any
expense, and thus tempt him to use his seat for his personal advantage.
(Hear.)

[Both the sub-amendment and the amendment were defeated.].

Edition: current; Page: [197]


66.: Redistribution
 28 JUNE, 1867

Morning Star, 29 June, 1867, p. 6. Headed: “National Reform Union.
Meeting Last Evening.” An identical report is in the Evening Star; The
Times has a full report in the third person; shorter reports appeared in
the Daily News, the Daily Telegraph, and the Morning Post. (Clippings of
the Morning Star and The Times are in the -Taylor Collection.) The
evening meeting, under the auspices of the National Reform Union, was
held in St. James’s Hall, to protest against the government’s
redistribution scheme, on the grounds that it discriminated against the
large boroughs. The Chair was taken by Jacob Bright, and  (“who was
received with prolonged cheering” [Daily News]), was in the platform
party. After Bright spoke, a resolution regretting the government’s
refusal to introduce an Irish Reform Bill in the present session was
moved, seconded, and passed. A second resolution condemning the
government’s redistribution plan was passed, as was one (seconded by
Beales, who also praised ), endorsing continued action by the
National Reform Union. Then, at 11:10 p.m., in response to repeated
calls, the Chair called upon . “The immense audience at once rose en
masse, and hats and handkerchiefs were set waving, and the cheering
lasted for several minutes.”

there is not the smallest need that I should address you this evening,
for you have already heard many excellent speeches, and there is nothing
which I have to say, or that I think it useful to say on this subject on
this occasion which has not already been anticipated by some speaker. I
had hoped, therefore, that you would have excused me; but as you may
wish to hear my view of this question—(cheers)—and as possibly there may
be many of my constituents present to-night who have a right to hear
what my sentiments are, I will atherefore at this late hour verya
briefly explain them. (Hear, hear.) I think that Reformers will only do
their duty if they continue to agitate until they obtain a bill far
better than the present one in the essential point of the redistribution
of seats,1 and, above all, I think no Reformers ought to be satisfied
unless the large towns obtain, not a third member here and there, but a
great number of additional members—(cheers)—and when I speak of the
large towns, I include amongst them the metropolitan districts, which
bare eminently entitled to a large representation—(hear, hear)—and I say
this ought to be the case even from what our opponents admit.b Mr.
Disraeli has, from the beginning, proclaimed and declared with frequent
iteration that the counties must have a larger representation than they
have at present, because if you take the whole numbers of their
population they are more populous than the towns.2 Now, Edition:
current; Page: [198] if this argument is good for the counties it is
good for the great towns; and the great towns are far more populous than
some of the counties. In this metropolis you have over 3,000,000 in
population, and if you allow to the counties 12,000,000,3 which is
exceeding Mr. Disraeli’s calculation, it follows that London ought to
have one-fourth of the amount of representation which the counties
have—(hear, hear)—and at that rate London would be entitled to forty or
fifty members—(cheers)—and the other large towns of the country would
have to have a proportionately large increasec, this increase, of
course, being at the expense of the representation of the small townsc.
But let us look a little more closely into this question of the
counties. Now what is the population of which these 11,000,000 are
composed? First of all there are the landlords, and then there are the
farmers. Well, they do not count 11,000,000. Then there are the small
shopkeepers and professional men dliving in the small unrepresented
townsd, and we do not know how many of these will have votes, but theirs
is a fair claim as far as it goes. But how is the remainder of the
11,000,000 made up? Why, it is made up by counting the agricultural
labourers. (Cheers.) Now, I should like to know whether these gentlemen
will have the face to stand up in the House of Commons or anywhere else
and say that ethe landlords as county memberse represent the
agricultural labourers. (Cheers.) Why, fthose are precisely the only
people that the agricultural labourers ever have any dispute or quarrel
with. But let them look at the subject in another point of view. Thesef
agricultural labourers have not even votes, and this bill is not going
to give them any—(hear, hear)—and they are not to have votes either in
the counties or in the boroughs g; but if they possess no votes the
Conservatives have no right to count that portion of the population as
forming a part of the county constituenciesg. But it may be said that if
they are not represented directly, they are represented indirectly.
Well, sometimes those who are not represented directly are represented
indirectly by those who have the same interest as themselves. But I want
to know, has the agricultural labourer the same interest as the
landlords and the farmers? (Cheers.) It is very well to say that the
interests of all classes of the nation are much the same in the long
run. I am not going to say anything against that, but mankind are much
more governed by their immediate than their ultimate interestsh, and if
I had any immediate interest to be settled I should much prefer that the
man who has to decide the matter should not be chosen from persons who
have opposite interests to my ownh. (Hear, hear.) Edition: current;
Page: [199] Now if there are any persons in the community that the
agricultural labourers would not wish to be represented by, I should say
it is the landlords. (Hear, hear.) Why, the town members represent them
better. (Hear, hear.) We town representatives have no disputes with
them. (Hear, hear.) We are not their masters, and people do not like to
be represented by their masters. (Hear, hear.) We are not their
employers, and we never have any dispute with them about wages as the
farmers have, and moreover we want to educate them, and farmers
generally, I think, do not want to do that. (Cheers.) They think, in the
first place, that education makes the labourers too independent; and, in
the next place, they want them to make them labour a great deal too
early so as to render it impossible for them to remain at school. I do
not say this of the landlords. I am now referring to the farmers. Many
of the landlords are desirous that the agricultural labourers should be
educated, and perhaps things would get on much better if it was not for
that accursed subject—game. (Cheers.) Now, we town representatives never
have any quarrels with the agricultural labourer on that subject. (Hear,
hear.) But such is the state of things and feeling on the subject of
game, which has taken possession of the landed interest, that I cannot
conceive that any agricultural labourer, if he had his choice, would
like to be represented by any man who kept a gamekeeper. (Laughter and
cheers.) I am told by persons who live in the country that it is a fixed
belief with agricultural labourers that a bench of magistrates think
that the word of a gamekeeper is law, and that whenever a gamekeeper
charges a person with an offence against the game laws, that person is
sure to have to go to prison. (Hear, hear.) Now, I do not know whether
this is true or not, but so it is asserted, and it is a great pity that
every now and then something happens which gives a great deal of colour
to this assertion. (Cheers.) Many present may have noticed a recent
case, which is very striking in its features, and we should have known
nothing of it had it not been for a noble-hearted clergyman who brought
the facts before the public.4 A gamekeeper who had had the satisfaction
or accident to make a mistake before in charging a person wrongfully,
made oaths that two persons had been seen by him in the act of poaching.
The father and mother of each of these two supposed delinquents gave
positive evidence that these two young men were in their respective
houses on the night in question. The gamekeeper, however, was believed
by the magistrates, and the two young men were sent to prison. One was
sent for a short period, which he served. While the other was still in
prison, two persons who had really committed the offence came forward
and confessed that they had done so. Now, what would you suppose this
circumstance Edition: current; Page: [200] would have inspired in the
minds of the magistrates? One would have thought at least a doubt
respecting the testimony of the gamekeeper. (Hear, hear.) Not so,
however, because they did not see their way to letting the confined man
out of prison—(cries of Shame)—and he would have remained in prison to
the end of his sentence had it not been for this clergyman who gave
publicity to the affair, and after considerable delay and consideration
the Home Secretary5 let the man out. (Cheers.) iAs to any atonement
being made to the man, such a thing was never to be dreamt of. Nay,
more, after all, the man, though innocent, was held to bail.i Now, I
believe that these things do not often happen, but one such thing in a
year is quite enough to reveal the difference of feeling between a
country gentleman and an agricultural labourer. (Cheers.) And it makes
it not at all probable that agricultural labourers, if they had any
choice, would choose landlords to be their representatives. (Cheers.) I
say, therefore, whatever claims the counties may have for
representation, those claims should not at all events be put forward as
regards the agricultural labourers, who, as I have already said, are
better represented by the town members. (Cheers.) jIt is said that these
labourers have no votes; but that is not strictly correct, for some of
them have votes. I may be asked where. Why, in the towns and, still
more, in those petty sham counties—that is to say, in those places
hardly better than villages which have large landed districts attached
to them. All the agricultural labourers will have votes, but these will
count as town votes, and, therefore, as I have said before, the town
representatives are the more real representatives of the agricultural
labourers than the landlords. Well, it being assumed that the great
towns ought to have more representatives, the question, then, to be
considered is where are those additional members to come from. I would
call attention in respect to this point to those small sham counties of
which I have spoken. They are Cricklade, Aylesbury, and Shoreham. By the
disfranchisement of other boroughs these have had the surrounding
districts added to them, and ought, therefore, to be counted among the
county representatives. By the Reform Bill of 1832 many of these
boroughs were created. A Conservative member of the House of Commons the
other day gave the history of Wenlock, which covered 75 square miles,
while the town was not larger than a village, and yet it returned two
members to Parliament.6 I should like to know where they could find a
better place than this for disfranchisement, which would give them two
members to be Edition: current; Page: [201] disposed of elsewhere. There
are other places of a similar description, such as Thetford, Tavistock,
and Totnes, all of which return two members, the plan generally being
that the patron returns one member, and the people the other member.
Some of these places are to be deprived of one of their members, and the
question is who will be the loser, the patron or the people? (Cheers.)
Where there is no member to be disposed of I fear the patron will be
stronger than the people, but all such ought to be considered county
representations. I will give the Government what credit may be due to
them for giving additional members to the metropolis, and also a member
to the London University; but while they have added largely to the
representation of the counties they will not grant any additional member
to the great towns. (Cheers.)j

[The meeting concluded towards midnight with the customary vote of
thanks to the Chair, during which Harriet Law (whom the Daily News, not
knowing her name, identified as “a lady in a sailor’s hat”), who “had
shortly before taken her seat by the side of Mr. ,” made “a long
oration on the subject of women’s political rights. She called for a
show of hands in favour of Mr. ’s proposition to admit women to the
suffrage, and the meeting, which had half dwindled away, cordially
answered the appeal” (Morning Post).]


67.: William Lloyd Garrison
 29 JUNE, 1867

Proceedings at the Public Breakfast Held in Honour of William Lloyd
Garrison, Esq., of Boston, Massachusetts, in St. James’s Hall, London,
on Saturday, June 29th, 1867. Revised by the Speakers; with an
Introduction by F.W. Chesson, and Opinions of the Press (London:
Tweedie, 1868), pp. 33–5. Reported in full in the Morning Star, and much
compressed in the Daily News; the Daily Telegraph gives only a
one-sentence summary of ’s remarks. Some 300–400 people, including a
large number of women, sat down to breakfast, with John Bright in the
Chair. After letters were read from the American Ambassador and the
Comte de Paris, regretting their inability to attend, Bright gave a
lengthy eulogy of William Lloyd Garrison (1805–79), the prominent
anti-slavery advocate and pacifist. Then George Douglas Campbell
(1823–1900), Duke of Argyll, read an address to Garrison composed by
Goldwin Smith. Argyll was followed by Lord Russell; then  spoke.

mr. chairman, ladies, and gentlemen,—The speakers who have preceded me
have, with an eloquence far beyond anything which I can command, laid
before our honoured guest the homage of admiration and gratitude which
we all feel is due to his heroic life. Instead of idly expatiating upon
things which have been far better said than I could say them, I would
rather endeavour to recall one or two lessons Edition: current; Page:
[202] applicable to ourselves, which may be drawn from his career. A
noble work nobly done always contains in itself, not one, but many
lessons; and in the case of him whose character and deeds we are here to
commemorate, two may be singled out specially deserving to be laid to
heart by all who would wish to leave the world better than they found
it.

The first lesson is,—Aim at something great; aim at things which are
difficult; and there is no great thing which is not difficult. (Hear,
hear.) aDo not pare down your undertaking to what you can hope to see
successful in the next few years, or in the years of your own life.a
Fear not the reproach of Quixotism band impracticability, or to be
pointed at as the knight-errants of an idea. (Hear, hear, and a laugh.)
Afterb you have well weighed what you undertake, if you see your way
clearly, and are convinced that you are right, go forward, even though
you, like Mr. Garrison, do it at the risk of being torn to pieces by the
very men through whose changed hearts your purpose will one day be
accomplished. (Cheers.) cFight on with all your strength against
whatever odds, and with however small ac band of supporters. (Hear,
hear.) If you are right, the time will come when that small band will
swell into a multitude: you will at least lay the foundations of
something memorable, and you may, like Mr. Garrison—though you ought not
to need or expect so great a reward—be spared to see that work completed
which, when you began it, you only hoped it might be given to you to
help forward a few stages on its way. (Cheers.)

The other lesson which it appears to me important to enforce, amongst
the many that may be drawn from our friend’s life, is this: if you aim
at something noble and succeed in it, you will generally find that you
have succeeded not in that alone. A hundred other good and noble things
which you never dreamed of will have been accomplished by the way, and
the more certainly, the sharper and more agonizing has been the struggle
which preceded the victory. The heart and mind of a nation are never
stirred from their foundations without manifold good fruits. In the case
of the great American contest, these fruits have been already great, and
are daily becoming greater. The prejudices which dbeset every form of
societyd—and of which there was a plentiful crop in America—are rapidly
melting away. The chains of prescription have been broken; it is not
only the slave who has been freed1—the mind of America has been
emancipated. (Loud cheers.) The whole intellect of the country has been
set thinking about the fundamental questions of society and government;
and the new problems which have to be solved, and the Edition: current;
Page: [203] new difficulties which have to be encountered, eare calling
forth new activity of thought, and that great nation is savede, probably
for a long time to come, from the most formidable danger of a completely
settled state of society and opinion—intellectual and moral stagnation.
(Hear, hear.) This, then, is an additional item of the debt which
America and mankind owe to Mr. Garrison and his noble associates; and it
is well calculated to deepen our sense of the truth which his whole
career most strikingly illustrates—that though our best directed efforts
may often seem wasted and lost, nothing coming of them that can be
pointed to and distinctly identified as a definite gain to humanity;
though this may happen ninety-nine times in every hundred, the hundredth
time the result may be so great and dazzling that we had never dared to
hope for it, and should have regarded him who had predicted it to us as
sanguine beyond the bounds of mental sanity. So has it been with Mr.
Garrison. (Loud cheers.)

[The address was passed unanimously, and Garrison spoke to great
applause. Other speeches followed, and the meeting concluded with the
customary vote of thanks to the Chair.]


68.: Martial Law
 2 JULY, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 912–14. Reported in The Times, 3 July, p.
7, from which the variants and response are taken. The debate was on a
motion (col. 903), based on a charge by the Lord Chief Justice to the
Grand Jury at the Central Criminal Court on 10 April, 1867, that would
make it clear that martial law could not be invoked in the United
Kingdom.

there appears to be, as far as the discussion has gone on both sides of
the House, a real disposition to consider this question with reference
to the future rather than the past. Certainly it is most desirable that
when we are considering what is essentially a question of legislation,
we should not allow ourselves to be diverted to the consideration of
past transactions any further than they throw light upon questions which
may exist or arise in the future. At the same time it appears to me that
certain considerations of great importance have not yet been touched
upon, and which I think it is particularly necessary should not remain
unstated when we see an obvious desire to explain away and get rid of
the effect of the Charge of the Lord Chief Justice of England.1 I do not
mean to say that what has been stated by Edition: current; Page: [204]
the right honourable Gentleman the Home Secretary in diminution of the
validity, in a legal point of view, of this Charge is unfounded.2 We
know, on the contrary, that it is well founded. We know that the Charge
to the Grand Jury is not law, because it has not undergone the
preliminary processes necessary to make it law. At the same time there
can be no doubt that such a declaration as this Charge contains,
supported by such a catena of authorities afrom the very earliest period
of our historya, and coming from a Judge of such high character and
reputation, so elaborately produced and bearing the marks it does of
most diligent and careful study, is, at all events, an exceedingly
strong corroboration of that view of this subject which some of us have
taken from the beginning, and which I will briefly state. Our opinion
has beenb—and it has been confirmed by this charge—b that the law is
what I shall now venture to state, and that if it has not been so, it
ought to be made so. Our opinion was, that there is not, properly
speaking, as regards non-military persons, such a thing as martial law,
and that it has no existence except for military cpurposesc. Of course,
Parliament can give it existence, because Parliament can make any law,
however inexpedient or unjust. But the Crown, being only one branch of
Legislature, cannot dmake that to be law which is not lawd. We have
thought that, although there was no such thing as martial law, except
for military purposes, there was a law of necessity. There may be a
public necessity in case of rebellion, requiring that certain acts not
justified by the ordinary law of the country should be done; but these
acts should be acts of suppression and not of punishment. Now, a point
which has not been noticed, and to which I attach the highest
importance, is this—that in a case of public necessity, as in any
analogous case of private necessity, those who act upon it, and do under
the supposed necessity that which they would not ordinarily be justified
in doing, should be amenable to the laws of their country for so doing.
As in the case of killing any person in self-defence, so in the case of
putting any person to death in defence of the country, the person who
does it ought to have the onus thrown upon him of satisfying the
ordinary tribunals of the country that this necessity existed. What,
therefore, we say does not exist, and ought not to exist, and which if
it does exist we should do our utmost to put an end to, is, the idea
that any proceeding, such as a declaration of martial law, can or ought
to exempt those who act upon it from amenability to the laws of their
country. We contend that the law of necessity, of which nobody denies
the existence, would justify the Executive in doing these things if no
such thing as martial law had ever been heard of, and that by using the
term martial law you ought not to be able to get rid of all
responsibility. We demand that the officers of the Government of this
country Edition: current; Page: [205] should not be able to escape or
get out of the region and jurisdiction of the law; but, that whatever
they do, if it be against the law, they should be compelled to justify.
They must show the necessity which existed, not to the satisfaction of a
court martial merely, but of the regular tribunals of the country. When
it is said by the right honourable Gentleman the Home Secretary that it
is much better that the officers who intend to assume this power, and
act on this supposed necessity, should declare beforehand their
intention of doing so,3 by all means let them do so; but do not let
them, or any one else, think that by using the term martial law, or by
announcing that they mean to make a military tribunal one of the
instruments by which they will exercise their power of superseding the
law, they will clear themselves from all responsibility. (Hear, hear.)

[The motion was withdrawn (col. 918).]


69.: The Reform Bill [7]
 4 JULY, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 1024, 1026, 1029. Reported in The Times, 5
July, p. 7, from which the response is taken. The variants are taken
from the report in the St. Stephen’s Chronicle, Vol. IV, pp. 426–7. The
discussion in Committee of the Reform Bill (see No. 50) turned to a new
clause: “That no committee of any candidate . . . shall sit, or hold any
meeting, or transact any business . . . in any hotel, tavern,
public-house, or other building licensed . . . for the sale or
consumption of wine, spirits, beer, porter, or other intoxicating
liquors; and if any such candidate shall, by himself or his agents,
cause or permit any breach of this enactment, the Return of such
candidate shall be null and void, and no expenses incurred by such
committee [in these circumstances] . . . shall be recoverable by law
from such committee . . . or from any such candidate . . .” (col. 1019).
 spoke on an amendment by Joseph Henley (cols. 1023–4) to change “of
any candidate” to “appointed by any candidate,” immediately after
Gabriel Goldney (1813–1900), M.P. for Chippenham, had pointed out that
people quite unknown to the candidate could constitute themselves a
committee and call a meeting in a public house.

mr. j. stuart  said, he thought the object which the honourable
Gentleman who had just sat down, as well as that the right honourable
Gentleman the Member for Oxfordshire had in view, was a legitimate one.
He would suggest that if some such word as “sanction” were substituted
for the word “permit,” the clause would be made efficient for its
purpose.

[’s second intervention came after Gathorne-Hardy had commented
(col. Edition: current; Page: [206] 1026) that it was preposterous to
make candidates liable for practices over which they often had no
control.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, he would remind the right honourable Gentleman
that the first part of the clause did not touch the candidate. (Hear,
hear.) He also proposed to insert the word “sanction” instead of
“permit,” as to the second part amaking the election void only if the
expense were sanctioned or permitted by the candidatea.

[Henley’s amendment was successful; it was then moved to insert “or on
behalf of” after “appointed by” (col. 1026), and the Attorney General
suggested “no committee appointed by or with the consent of any
candidate” as a better alternative; ’s third intervention was in
reply.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, that in that case the committee might be
appointed first and sanctioned afterwards. bHe thought that “recognized
by” was much more satisfactory than “with the consent of.”b

[That amendment being lost, another was offered, to insert “acting on
behalf of and with the consent of” (col. 1029), prompting ’s fourth
comment, which was not acted upon.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, he would suggest the addition of the words
“recognized by.”

[Eventually the whole clause was rejected.]


70.: Tancred’s Charity Bill
 4 JULY, 1867

Saint Stephen’s Chronicle, Vol. IV, p. 432. Not in PD. Reported in The
Times, 5 July, p. 8, from which the variant is taken. The debate was on
Shaw Lefevre’s motion to go into Committee on “A Bill [as Amended by the
Select Committee] for Continuing a Scheme of the Charity Commissioners
for the Several Charities Founded by the Settlement and Will of
Christopher Tancred of Whixley in the County of York, Esquire,
Deceased,” 30 & 31 Victoria (25 June, 1867), PP, 1867, VI, 381–4. 
spoke immediately after Lefevre.

mr. j.s.  said this was a question of considerable importance, and
he trusted, therefore, that the noble lord1 would not press the Bill
forward at so late an hour (a Edition: current; Page: [207] quarter to 1
o’clock) aas there were various amendments on the paper, all of them
worthy of discussion. (Hear, hear.)a

[After Montagu replied and Ayrton spoke, the House went into Committee.]


71.: The Reform Bill [8]
 5 JULY, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 1102–7. Reported in The Times, 6 July, p.
8, from which one variant and the responses are taken. The concluding
sentence is taken from the report in the St. Stephen’s Chronicle, Vol.
IV, pp. 442–4. The discussion in Committee of the Reform Bill (see No.
50) turned to a new clause proposed by Robert Lowe (M.P. for Calne): “At
any contested Election for a County or Borough represented by more than
two Members, and having more than one seat vacant, every voter shall be
entitled to a number of votes equal to the number of vacant seats, and
may give all such votes to one candidate or may distribute them among
the candidates as he thinks fit” (col. 1068). John Bright (M.P. for
Birmingham) had argued (cols. 1090–7) that he had always invited the
House “to march along the ancient paths of the Constitution,” while
Lowe’s plan would put an end to contests for representation.

i hope my honourable Friend the Member for Birmingham will forgive me if
the highly Conservative speech which he has delivered, almost the first
which I ever heard him deliver with which I could not sympathize, has
not converted me from the eminently democratic opinions which I have
held for a great number of years. (A laugh.) I am very glad that my
honourable Friend stated so candidly the extremely Conservative vein of
thought and tone of feeling which is the foundation of his political
feelings. It is true that it is almost as opposite a frame of mind from
my own as it is possible to conceive; but, fortunately, in the case of
most of the practical questions that we have to decide we draw nearly
the same conclusions from our so different premises. Nevertheless, I am
extremely glad that my honourable Friend has shown that it is upon the
principle of standing by old things, and resisting new-fangled notions,
that his antipathy to the proposal of my right honourable Friend the
Member for Calne, which I most strongly support, has been derived. It is
the less necessary that I should address the House at any length upon
this question, because on a previous occasion I expressed myself
strongly in favour of the principles upon some of which this Motion
rests,1 and expressed my strong sense of the necessity for a change in
our mode of election, directed in some degree to the same ends as those
pointed out by this almost insignificant makeshift—a makeshift not,
however, without considerable real efficacy, and resting in part upon
the same principles upon which Mr. Hare’s system of personal
representation Edition: current; Page: [208] is founded. There are two
principles which we must mainly regard. In the first place, it appears
to me that any body of persons who are united by any ties, either of
interest or of opinion, should have, or should be able to have, if they
desire it, influence and power in this House proportionate to that which
they exercise out of it. This, of course, excludes the idea of applying
such a system as this to constituencies having only two Members, because
in that case its application would render a minority of one-third equal
to a majority. The other principle upon which I support the
representation of minorities is because I wish—although this may
surprise some honourable Members—that the majority should govern. We
heard a great deal formerly about the tyranny of the majority, but it
appears to me that many honourable Gentlemen on both sides of the House
are now reconciled to that tyranny, and are disposed to defend and
maintain it against us democrats.2 My own opinion is, that any plan for
the representation of minorities must operate in a very great degree to
diminish and counteract the tyranny of majorities. I wish to maintain
the just ascendancy of majorities, but this cannot be done unless
minorities are represented. The majority in this House is got at by the
elimination of two minorities. You first eliminate at the election the
minority out of the House, and then upon a division you eliminate the
minority in the House. Now, it may very well happen that those combined
minorities would greatly out-number the majority which prevails in this
House, and consequently that the majority does not now govern. The true
majority can only be maintained if all minorities are counted; if they
are counted there is only one process of elimination, and only one
minority left out. Perhaps I may be allowed to answer one or two
objections which have been made to the proposal of my right honourable
Friend.3 The right honourable Gentleman the Under Secretary for the
Colonies urged that, according to our constitution, representation
should be by communities, and upon that subject he said several things
with which it is impossible not to agree.4 But it seems to me that this
is one of many remarkable proofs now offering themselves, that
honourable Gentlemen opposite, not content with coming to our opinions,
are now adopting our arguments. For instance, the right honourable
Gentleman insisted upon the greatness of the mistake of supposing that
the country was divided into a majority and a minority, instead of into
majorities and minorities. I have said that myself I should think at
least 500 times. The right honourable Gentleman said one thing that
perfectly amazed me. He said, as we all admit, that it was wrong that
the representative of any community should represent it only in a single
aspect, should represent only one interest—only its Tory or its Liberal
opinions; and he added that, at present, this was not the case, but that
such a state of things would be produced by the adoption of this
proposal. I apprehend that then, even more than Edition: current; Page:
[209] now, each party would desire to be represented, and would feel the
importance of getting itself represented by those men who would be most
acceptable to the general body of the constituency; and therefore on all
other points, except that of being Liberals or Tories, those Members
would represent the constituencies fully as much, if not more, than they
do now. The right honourable Gentleman thinks that the local communities
ought to be represented as units,5 but that is not my opinion. For
example, the right honourable Gentleman would contend that if a Member
were elected by two-thirds of a constituency he ought to sit in that
House as representing the whole. If that were the case they would
evidently pass for what they are not. I have no idea of Members sitting
in this House as the representatives of mere names of places, or bricks
and mortar, or some particular part of the terrestrial globe, in
different localities. What we want is the representation of the
inhabitants of those places. If there should be a place in which
two-thirds of the constituency are Conservative, and one-third Liberal,
it is a falsehood to contend that the Conservative Member represents the
Liberals of that place. On the other hand, if there were three Members
for such a place, two of whom represented the majority, and the third
the minority, there would be a full representation of the constituency,
and certainly a far more accurate representation than if a man returned
by a simple majority assumed to represent the whole constituency.
Another objection made and insisted upon by my honourable Friend below
me, in one of the most eloquent parts of his speech,6 and in the spirit
of which I quite agree, is that the effect of this system will be to put
an end to contests at elections, and to all the instruction they afford,
and all the public spirit and interest in public affairs which they
excite. This appears to me to be an opinion, which only the extreme
dislike that my honourable Friend professes for everything new in
politics prevents him from seeing to be an entire mistake. The fault
which my honourable Friend and others find with the proposed mode of
election is one that is in an eminent degree attributable to the
existing system; because under that system wherever it is known from the
state of the registration aor from previous electionsa that one side is
able to return all the Members, the other side now take little or no
interest in the election, and therefore it will be evident that if those
persons who cannot be represented in their own locality cannot obtain a
representation elsewhere, representation, so far as they are concerned,
will be a perfectly effete institution. What is it that induces people
when they are once beaten at an election to try again? Is it not the
belief that possibly a change has taken place in the opinions of at
least some of the electors, or that, at all events, there has been such
a change in the general feeling of the constituency that there is some
chance of their being returned, and therefore there is a sufficient
motive to induce them to try Edition: current; Page: [210] again? But
that motive never can exist under the present system where there is so
great a discrepancy between the parties as two-thirds and one-third,
because in no case can one-third of the constituency ever hope to
convert itself into a majority. What motive, then, is there for trying?
But under the new system, suppose the minority obtains one Member out of
three, the minority can always try for the second seat, and precisely
the same motive will exist if the parties should be nearly equal.
Indeed, in such a case, the motive would be all the stronger, because
then the majority will try to get all the members. What will be the case
where there are three Members to be returned? The majority of two-thirds
will only have two of the Members, and if any change in opinion takes
place favourable to the minority they will always be in a position to
bid for the third seat; so that I apprehend the healthy excitement of
contest in an election, which follows from the existence of the motives
which will induce persons to embark in the struggle, will be more
certainly guaranteed by the more perfect representation of the
constituency. It has been argued by my honourable Friend below me, and
it has been several times insisted on by the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, that the Executive will be rendered very weak by the adoption
of this principle,7 and I must own that there is some truth and justice
in that argument. But the House cannot fail to perceive that so long as
you give to the minority the same power as is possessed by the majority,
it is perfectly clear that there may be a large majority of the
constituency in favour of the Government, while there may be no majority
in the House. At the present moment we do not care what majority the
Government may have in the country; all that we want is to prevent it
having a large majority in the House. No one is more opposed to such a
state of things than I am; but the practical application is, that we
wish to prevent the Government having a large majority in the House,
with a small majority in the country. That is the case in Australia, as
was very strongly exemplified on the question of Free Trade and
protection, and also in the United States, where there is a moderate
difference in the constituencies between one party, and the other, but a
very much greater difference in the House of Representatives. (Hear,
hear.) When the right honourable Gentleman says that this system will
make a weak Government, my answer is that it is not desirable that a
Government should be a strong one, if it rests on a small majority of
the constituencies; nor is it desirable that a Government should be
lured on and deceived by a great majority in the House; because a very
small change in the constituencies would be sufficient to deprive them
of that majority, and it is not desirable that the policy of the
Government should be tumbled about from one extreme to the other (hear,
hear) when the opinion of the constituency is almost equally divided
between the two parties. I quite agree with my honourable Friend
Edition: current; Page: [211] the Member for Birmingham, that in
revolutionary times it is necessary that a party should be as strong as
possible while the fight lasts, since the sooner the fighting is over
the better.8 But although in such a case there should be a decisive
predominance, such times are exceptional, and circumstances do not apply
which apply in ordinary and peaceful times. They are times for which we
cannot legislate or adapt our ordinary institutions. Under such
circumstances men may be obliged to dispense with all law, and, if
necessary, to have a dictatorship in the hands of one man, but that is
altogether an exceptional case. I am extremely anxious that the feeling
should not get abroad, from the circumstance of the right honourable
Member for Calne having brought forward this proposal, and from its
being so largely supported by Gentlemen on the other side of the House,
that this is essentially a Conservative “move,” and is intended solely
for the purpose of doing away as far as possible with the effect of the
Reform Bill now before us. I have always entertained these opinions,
long before the introduction of this Reform Bill, and although I never
supposed that I should see such a Reform as this adopted in my life, I
have protested and reprobated oppression of this kind, on whichever side
it has been practised. The only reason why it can be said that it is
brought forward as a Conservative measure, and in aid of Conservatives,
is that it really operates in favour of those who are likely to be
weakest; it is those who are in danger of being outnumbered and
subjected to the tyranny of a majority who are protected. I have always
been afraid that the Conservative party would not see the necessity of
these things until they actually saw that it is their interest, and that
they would not see it until the power has passed away to the other side.
Had they taken up the question four or five years ago they might by this
time have made it the general opinion of the country, and have led the
masses of the people to be more just when their time came than they have
been to them. (Hear, hear.) Their eyes are not so soon opened to those
things which appear to be against them as they are to those that are in
their favour; but there are minds on the other side of the House quite
capable of seeing the value and importance of the principle, and of
representing it with such effect that ultimately the principle of the
representation of minorities will be generally adopted. bUpon the
understanding that it is not to be supposed that those opinions with
reference to the proposed system of voting are not peculiarly applicable
to the circumstances of the Reform Bill, no one will more heartily and
cordially welcome the opinions of honourable Gentlemen opposite than I
will.b

[ was a teller for the “Ayes,” who were defeated, 173 to 314.]

Edition: current; Page: [212]


72.: The Case of Fulford and Wellstead
 5 JULY, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 1157–8. Reported in The Times, 6 July, p.
10, from which variants and responses are taken. P.A. Taylor (1819–91),
M.P. for Leicester, moved an address for a copy of the deposition that
had led in the preceding March to the conviction by the Salisbury Bench
of County Magistrates of Henry Fulford and Mark Wellstead for poaching.
(See No. 66, n4, for details.) Taylor implied that their conviction,
based on the evidence of a gamekeeper that was controverted by relatives
and other witnesses, was unjust.  spoke immediately after
Gathorne-Hardy (cols. 1153–7) had attacked Taylor’s views.

mr. j. stuart  said, that since he had the honour of being a Member
of that House he had never heard so unjustifiable an attack made upon
any Member of it (loud cries of Oh!), as that which had been made on his
honourable Friend by so high a functionary as the right honourable
Gentleman. That right honourable Gentleman had not shaken a single word
of the statement which had been made. The right honourable Gentleman had
only misstated what his honourable Friend had said, being too angry to
attend to him. (Oh, oh.) The right honourable Gentleman said the
magistrates believed the evidence given before them to be true;1 but the
whole strength of the case was that the tendency of magistrates was
always to believe the evidence of gamekeepers. (Oh, oh.) Whether that
was so or not, it was the general opinion, and this was an extraordinary
and emphatic corroboration of that opinion. It was not denied that
Pilgrim had made an unfortunate mistake as to identity before, and that
on his evidence this person was found guilty, notwithstanding the other
evidence and that the error was not corrected until evidence had been
produced in addition—namely, the self-crimination of other persons. One
would think it was the imperative duty of the magistrates to sift the
matter to the very bottom, and to take care that the whole should be
perfectly understood, so that they might be sure that they were not
continuing to perpetrate a great injustice. As to appealing to Quarter
Sessions, aour unfortunate labouring classesa in the rural districts
were not likely to appeal from magistrates to magistrates; they were
binfinitelyb too much afraid, and too much cowed to do that (Oh, oh!);
and, besides, they had not the pecuniary means. The only other thing
they had heard, was that one of these magistrates was likely to be
appointed chairman of Quarter Sessions, in which office he would have to
perform some of the most important judicial functions that could devolve
on any person in these dominions, with the least amount of
responsibility. They might be Edition: current; Page: [213] honourable
men; but honourable men were sometimes singularly prejudiced, singularly
unjudicial, and singularly disposed to believe con exceedingly
insufficient evidence the particular acts charged against persons who
had no means of defending themselvesc.

[Gathorne-Hardy replied that there was no formal deposition, as it had
been a summary conviction. Taylor’s motion was then defeated (col.
1162).]


73.: The Reform Bill [9]
 15 JULY, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, col. 1579. Not reported in The Times. The debate
was now on the third reading of the Reform Bill (see No. 50) as amended
in Committee, introduced on 9 July (PP, 1867, V, 547–80). ’s
interjection was prompted by the attack on John Bright by Francis
Wemyss-Charteris-Douglas (1818–1914), Lord Elcho, M.P. for
Haddingtonshire, who had just said, “if the honourable Member were
present . . . ” when  intervened.

he has spoken.1

[The riposte (col. 1579) was that Bright “has rather a habit of speaking
and then leaving the House. . . .”]


74.: Commodore Wiseman and the Turkish Navy [1]
 16 JULY, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 1621, 1622. Reported in The Times, 17
July, p. 6.

mr. j. stuart  said, he would beg to ask the Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs, Whether it is true that Commodore Sir William Wiseman1
has been appointed head of the Naval Council to the Turkish Government,
for the purpose of re-organizing the Turkish navy; if so, whether that
Officer has previously retired from Her Majesty’s service; and, if not,
whether the lending of British Officers to Edition: current; Page: [214]
the Porte for such a purpose, in the very crisis of the Cretan
insurrection,2 is, in the opinion of Her Majesty’s Government,
consistent with their declared principle of non-intervention?3

Lord Stanley: In answer to the Question of the honourable Member I beg
to state that when the sanction of Her Majesty’s Government was given to
a British officer being employed to assist in the re-organization of the
Turkish navy—following a course for which there are various
precedents—it was my belief that long before that appointment could take
effect this Cretan business would have been settled one way or the
other. As that is not the case, I have since that time agreed with my
right honourable Friend at the head of the Admiralty and the Turkish
Government that this appointment should not be cancelled, but suspended
for a time.

Mr. J. Stuart : Am I to understand from the noble Lord’s Answer that
Sir William Wiseman will not proceed to Turkey and will not take any
charge in this business as long as the hostilities continue?

Lord Stanley: At any rate he will not proceed at present. The
appointment has been suspended.


75.: Commodore Wiseman and the Turkish Navy [2]
 22 JULY, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, col. 1873. Reported in The Times, 23 July, p. 8.
 had found unsatisfactory Stanley’s answer to his previous question

(see No. 74, and CW, Vol. XVI, p. 1290).

mr. j. stuart  said, he would beg to ask the Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs, Whether he will undertake that, unless in the event of
a complete cessation of hostilities in Crete, Sir William Wiseman will
not proceed to Turkey or take up his appointment until the House has had
an opportunity of expressing an opinion on the subject?

Lord Stanley said, he had no objection to give the House the intimation
to which the Question of the honourable Gentleman pointed. Indeed, he
thought he had implied as much in the answer he had given on the same
subject a few nights before.

Edition: current; Page: [215]


76.: Meetings in Royal Parks [1]
 22 JULY, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 188, cols. 1890–3. Reported in The Times, 23 July, p.
8, from which the response is taken. In the debate on the second reading
of “A Bill for the Better and More Effectually Securing the Use of
Certain Royal Parks and Gardens for the Enjoyment and Recreation of Her
Majesty’s Subjects,” 30 Victoria (3 May, 1867), PP, 1867, IV, 63–6, 
had seconded (col. 1888) P.A. Taylor’s amendment that would have had the
effect of aborting the Bill.

mr. j. stuart  said, among the many, to me, regrettable things which
were said by my honourable and learned Friend the Member for Oxford (Mr.
Neate),1 there was one with which I entirely agree: that this question
is entirely a political question. It is only as a political question
that I care about it. I see no reason why we should at present discuss
all the purposes for which the Parks should or should not be allowed to
be used. All I am anxious about is that political meetings should be
allowed to be held there. And why do I desire this? Because it has been
for centuries the pride of this country, and one of its most valued
distinctions from the despotically-governed countries of the Continent,
that a man has a right to speak his mind, on politics or on any other
subject, to those who would listen to him, when and where he will.
(Cries of No.) He has not a right to force himself upon anyone; he has
not a right to intrude upon private property; but wheresoever he has a
right to be, there, according to the Constitution of this country, he
has a right to talk politics, to one, to fifty, or to 50,000 persons. I
stand up for the right of doing this in the Parks. I am not going to
discuss this matter as an affair of technical law. We are not here as
lawyers, but as legislators. We are not now considering what is the
interpretation of the existing law; we are considering what the law
ought to be. We are told that the Parks belong to the Crown, but the
Crown means Her Majesty’s Government. Her Majesty’s Government of course
have power over the Parks; they have power over all thoroughfares, all
public places, but they have it for purposes strictly defined. It is
not, I believe, even pretended that the Parks are the property of the
Sovereign in the same manner as Balmoral and Osborne are her property.
They are part of the hereditary property of the Crown, which the
Sovereign at her accession gave up to the nation in exchange for the
Civil List;2 and the right honourable Gentleman would find some
difficulty in showing that the surrender was accompanied with any
condition as to the particular uses to which the Parks should be
applied—any stipulation confining their use to walking and riding, or,
as it is called, recreation. As long as the compact with Her Majesty
exists, so long, I contend, the Parks are public property, to be managed
for public Edition: current; Page: [216] uses at the public expense, and
to be applied to all uses conducive to the public interest. If a
technical right of exclusion has been allowed to be kept up, it is for
police purposes—for the safety of the public property and the
maintenance of the public peace—and not for the restriction of the
freedom of public speaking. On what principle is the House asked to
curtail this inherited freedom of speech, and make it penal for the
people to use that freedom in large numbers, in the only places now left
in the metropolis where large numbers can conveniently be assembled? On
no principle can this be done, except that of the most repressive acts
of the Governments most jealous of public freedom. The French Emperor
says that twenty-one people shall not meet and talk politics in a
drawing-room without his license.3 Her Majesty’s Government only says
that 100,000 people shall not meet for a similar purpose in the Parks
without theirs. This is a wide difference in degree. It is much better
to have our lips sealed in the Parks than in our own houses—better that
free speech should be limited to a few thousands or hundreds than to
tens; but the principle is the same, and if once it is admitted, a
violation has commenced of the traditional liberties of the country, and
the extent to which such violation may afterwards be carried becomes a
mere question of detail. But what is the justification alleged for
introducing arbitrary restrictions by which the holding of a great
open-air meeting in London without the previous consent of the
Government will be made impossible? The excuses which profess to be
founded on public convenience do not deserve an answer, even if they had
not been already answered a hundred times; the fact is, no one believes
them to be serious. There is no decent argument for the interdiction of
political meetings in the Park, which does not proceed on the assumption
that political meetings are not a legitimate purpose to apply a public
place to, and that it is, on the whole, a desirable thing to discourage
them. I wish honourable Gentlemen to be aware what it is they are asked
to vote for; what doctrine respecting the constitutional liberties of
this country they will give their adhesion to if they support the Bill.
The opinion they will pledge themselves to is something like
this—unfortunately the people of this country are so foolish that they
will have the right of holding large political meetings, and it is
impossible to take it from them by law; but that right, though
necessary, is a necessary evil, and it is a point gained to render its
exercise more rare by throwing impediments in its way. If honourable
Gentlemen opposite would be candid, I am persuaded they would confess
that this is a fair statement of what is really in their minds. It is
proved by the arguments they use. They say that these multitudinous
meetings are not held for the purpose of discussion, but for
intimidation. Sir, I believe public meetings, multitudinous or not,
seldom are intended for discussion. That is not their function. They are
a public manifestation of the strength of those who are of a certain
opinion. It is easy to give this a bad Edition: current; Page: [217]
name; but it is one of the recognized springs of our Constitution. Let
us not be intimidated by the word “intimidation.” Will any one say that
the numbers and enthusiasm of those who join in asking anything from
Parliament, are not one of the elements which a Statesman ought to have
before him, and which a wise Statesman will take into consideration in
deciding whether to grant or to refuse the request? We are told that
threatening language is used at these meetings. In a time of excitement
there are always persons who use threatening language. But we can bear a
great deal of that sort of thing, without being the worse for it, in a
country which has inherited from its ancestors the right of political
demonstration. It cannot be borne quite so well by countries which do
not possess this right. Then, the discontent, which cannot exhale itself
in public meetings, bursts forth in insurrections, which, whether
successful or repressed, always leave behind them a long train of
calamitous consequences. But it is said that it is not meant to put down
these public meetings, or to prevent them from being held. No; but you
mean to render them more difficult; you mean to impose conditions on
them, other than that of keeping the public peace. Now, any condition
whatever imposed on political meetings, over and above those by which
every transaction of any of Her Majesty’s subjects is necessarily
bound—and any restriction of place or time imposed on political speech,
which is not imposed on other speech—involves the same vicious and
unconstitutional principle. Sir, I contend that all open spaces
belonging to the public, in which large numbers can congregate without
doing mischief, should be freely open for the purpose of public
meetings, subject to the precautions necessary for the preservation of
the peace. A great meeting cannot possibly be called together in London
without the Government knowing of it beforehand, and having ample
warning to have a sufficient force of police at hand to meet any
exigency, however improbable. I must therefore oppose this Bill to the
utmost.

[The amendment was lost, but the Bill was not enacted.]


77.: Public Education
 29 JULY, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols. 373–4. Reported in The Times, 30 July, p.
6. The variant is taken from the report in the St. Stephen’s Chronicle,
Vol. IV, p. 749. Robert Montagu, in Committee of Supply, when moving the
Education Vote, had surveyed the measures achieved and contemplated,
including those for technical education

(cols. 353–61).

mr. j. stuart  said, he wished to express a hope that the noble Lord
(Lord Robert Montagu) might be able soon to lay before them the Minute
of the Council Edition: current; Page: [218] of Education,1 laying down
some definite rule for carrying into effect the very great—that
inestimable improvement which he had announced in the educational
arrangements. He meant not merely the introduction of technical
education, which was in itself an important addition to our present
arrangements, but above all the adoption of the plan which had been
found so useful in many foreign countries—that of making the advantages
of technical education a reward for the good use of the advantages of
elementary education—holding out an inducement to the pupils of
elementary education to distinguish themselves so as to obtain the
benefits of technical education. He could not conceive anything more
calculated to alleviate a great deficiency in our present system—namely,
the strong inducement to take children away from the schools before
there had been imparted to the pupils all that those schools were
intended to teach. It was true that it was not only the clever and apt
pupils who had to be thought of; but that it ought also to be a great
object to retain those who did not attain such proficiency as would
entitle them to the reward he had referred to. Consequently, the
proposal could not be regarded as one that would remove the whole
difficulty. But it was judicious and well judged, and, he believed, was
likely to be an effectual measure for removing the difficulty in part.
He congratulated the noble Lord aand his departmenta on what would be so
important an improvement.


78.: The Courts-Martial in Jamaica
 1 AUGUST, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols. 598–9. Reported in The Times, 2 August, p.
7.

mr. j. stuart  said, he wished to ask Mr. Attorney General,1 Whether
he has taken into consideration the evidence produced at the trials by
Court-Martial lately held in Jamaica on Ensign Cullen and Staff
Assistant-Surgeon Morris;2 and whether it is his intention to institute
proceedings against those Officers in the ordinary tribunals of this
country? He understood Mr. Morris was now in this country.

Edition: current; Page: [219]
The Attorney General: In answer, Sir, to the Question of the honourable
Member, I may say, that since this Question was put on the Paper, I
have, as far as possible, mastered the details of the evidence and the
proceedings of those courts-martial held in Jamaica, and it is not my
intention to advise Her Majesty’s Government to take any proceedings
against those officers before the ordinary tribunals of this country.


79.: Meeting in the Tea-Room of the House of Commons
 2 AUGUST, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols. 768–9, 769. Reported in The Times, 3
August, p. 7, from which the variant and responses are taken. A series
of questions had been put in the House concerning a meeting in the
Tea-room on 29 July, attended by members of the public. It was reported
that when the Deputy Sergeant-at-Arms had been informed of this
irregularity, he had proceeded to the room, and the meeting terminated.

as one of the members who was present in the Tea-room on the occasion in
question, I desire to express my regret for having unwittingly been
guilty of an irregularity against the forms of this House, an
irregularity of which I was not aware at the time. (Hear, hear.) In
order to set one point right, I desire to say that the conference in
question was not in the nature of a public meeting. It was really a
deputation to consult with certain Members of Parliament, amost of us
were seated,a and nothing in the way of speech-making was done which is
not usually done at deputations. (Cries of Oh!)

Colonel Stuart Knox: I would ask the honourable Member whether it is not
a fact that members of the Reform League at that meeting in the Tea-room
held out a threat that unless honourable Members voted in support of
their views those Members need not put themselves forward again as
candidates for metropolitan constituencies?

Mr. J. Stuart : I heard no such statement from any person present,
whether a member of the Reform League or not.

Edition: current; Page: [220]


80.: England’s Danger through the Suppression of Her Maritime Power
 5 AUGUST, 1867

Views of Mr. John Stuart  on England’s Danger through the
Suppression of Her Maritime Power. Speech Delivered at the House of
Commons, August 5, 1867 (London: Diplomatic Review Office, 1874). This
version is identified as “From the revised copy communicated by Mr. John
Stuart  to the Diplomatic Review of February 5, 1868” (p. 2). In PD,
3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols. 876–84. Reported in The Times, 6 August, p. 7,
from which some variants and responses are taken. The report in the St.
Stephen’s Chronicle, Vol. IV, pp. 796–800, has been used as a check. For
other comments by him on the issues, see CW, Vol. XVI, pp. 1199, and
1315.  was speaking on the motion to go into Committee of Supply.

i rise, sir, to ask the attention of the House to a subject more germane
to the business of a Committee of Supply, than most of those which the
Motion to go into committee gives occasion for bringing before the
House. The immense burthen of our naval and military expenditure would
of itself give ample reason for reconsidering the position in which this
country has been placed by the abandonment of its maritime rights eleven
years ago.1 Of these eleven nearly ten have been years of profound
peace, in which international commerce, which we had always believed to
be our truest guarantee against war, has increased to an extent
previously unexampled; while the doctrines and practice of free trade
have been spreading through the different countries of Europe, and those
protectionist theories which have so often made commerce a provocative
to war instead of a deterrent from it, have lost their hold on all the
leading minds of the Continent. Yet, during this period, we have been
engaged, not as might have been expected, in diminishing, but in
enormously increasing our naval and military establishments, until our
total expenses exceed by about twenty ions a year, not what
economists like Mr. Hume used to maintain that they ought to be,2 but
what they actually have been in the life of the present generation. Why
has this happened? What has been our inducement for maintaining those
“bloated armaments”?3 To protect ourselves against the bloated armaments
of our European neighbours. Other Powers, as much perhaps for internal
as for external purposes, are keeping Edition: current; Page: [221] up
gigantic and ruinous military establishments, the existence of which we
justly feel to be a danger to us. But why is it a danger? What obliges
us, an insular people, to measure our necessities by the wild
extravagances of the military rulers of the Continent?—extravagances
which, let us do as we will, we cannot compete with; for if our wealth
is equal to the effort, the numbers of our population are not. Why,
then, do we find ourselves engaging deeper ain this bmeanb rivalry?
Because we have put away the natural weapon of a maritime nation,
because we have abandoned the right recognised by international law, and
legitimated, as much as the consent of nations can legitimate anything,
of warring against the commerce of our enemies. We have made this
sacrifice, receiving a merely nominal equivalent. We have given up our
main defence; but the other Powers who are parties to the transaction
have not given up theirs; they have divested themselves not of their
special means of warfare, but of ours; they have with a good grace,
consented not to use the weapons in which they are inferior, but to
confine themselves to those in which the advantage is on their side. The
greatest naval Power after ourselves4 has been far too wise to join in
so unequal a compact. Unless by resuming our natural and indispensable
weapon we place ourselves again on an equality with our possible
enemies, we shall be burthened with these enormous establishments and
these onerous budgets for a permanency; and, in spite of it all, we
shall be for ever in danger, for ever in alarm, cowed before any Power,
or combination of Powers, capable of invading any part of our
widely-spread possessions. We shall be condemned to see, what we have
seen, and worse than we have yet seen, great international iniquities
perpetrated before our eyes, and our expressions of deprecation, even of
reprobation, passed over with civil, or scarcely civil contempt—(hear,
hear)—until our most patriotic advisers feel obliged to recommend to us,
as the only rule for our conduct, that which despots prescribe to their
subjects, “Hold your peace. Keep your moral disapprobation within your
own breasts: for as you cannot back it by the only argument which the
wicked and the oppressor can cputc, you only bring yourselves and your
just indignation into contempt.” Thus it will be while we abstain from
that which once made a war with England a formidable thing, even to the
united strength of all Europe. Sir, I venture to call the renunciation
of the right of seizing enemy’s property at sea a national blunder.
Happily it is not an irretrievable one. The Declaration of 1856 is not a
Treaty, dit has never been ratifiedd. The authority on which it was
entered into was but the private letter of a Minister.5 It is not a
permanent engagement between Edition: current; Page: [222] nations, it
is but a joint declaration of present intention; binding us, I admit,
until we finally withdraw from it; for a nation is bound by all things
done in its name, unless by a national act it disowns them. Why did not
the Parliament and people of the country protest at the time? Some of
them did; among the rest several of the most important members of the
present Government.6 eThe bulk of the Liberal party acquiesced silently
or approvingly; and therein, I confess, we showed less knowledge of the
subject, less understanding of the situation, than the Conservative
Leaders.e (Hear, hear.) There is much to be said in excuse for us.
Nearly the whole world shared fin ourf error. The world was fresh from
the recent triumph of free trade, fresh from the great Exhibition of
1851, which was to unite all nations, and inaugurate the universal
gsubstitutiong of commerce for war. The first enthusiastic days of peace
congresses had scarcely passed; the short episode of the Crimean war had
not shaken the belief that great European wars were drawing to a close.
We were mistaken; but the light which led us astray was light from
heaven.7 (Cheers.) We have since had opportunities of learning a sadder
wisdom. We had not then seen wars of conquest and annexation renewed on
a great scale, and fresh wars of the kind continually impending over
Europe; we had not seen the Continental Powers outvying one another in
converting all the flower of their youth into standing armies, ready at
any moment to draw the sword, not only in defence, but in aggression. We
had not seen what is to my mind a still more warning sight. Some twenty
years ago a great French thinker, by way of showing how alien a thing
war is to the modern spirit, remarked that though destruction is
incomparably the easiest of the works to which human ingenuity applies
itself, the science and art of destruction had remained greatly in
arrear of the arts of production, and might almost be said to have been
passed over by the inventive genius of later generations.8 What would
this philosopher see now? He would see inventive genius, with all the
lights of modern science, and all the resources of modern hindustryh,
girding itself to the work of destruction as its principal task, and
bringing forth every year more and more terrific engines for blasting
hosts of human beings into atoms, together with the defences by which
they vainly seek to shelter themselves. While this work is going on all
around us, is there nothing for us to do but to exhaust our invention
and our finances in striving to provide ourselves with engines still
more destructive—engines which other nations will Edition: current;
Page: [223] instantly adopt, when their superiority has been proved,
unless they in the meanwhile contrive for themselves others yet more
murderous? Sir, we have a better resource; to shake off the chains which
we have forged for ourselves, and resume that natural weapon which has
been the main bulwark of our power and safety in past national
emergencies, and without which neither ironclads nor fortified harbours
will suffice for our security in those which may be yet to come. Sir,
great almost beyond calculation as are the British interests depending
on this issue, it is on no narrow grounds of ipurelyi British patriotism
that I now raise it. I should be ashamed to claim anything for my
country which I believed to be a damage and an injury to the common
interests of civilisation and of mankind. I will not even urge, though
the feelings of the élite of Europe would bear me out if I did, that the
safety, and even the power of England, are valuable to the freedom of
the world, and therefore to the greatest and most permanent interests of
every civilised people. No, Sir; my argument shall not have even a tinge
of nationality about it. It is on the broadest cosmopolitan and
humanitarian principles that I rest the case. I maintain it to be for
the general interest of the world, if there is to be fighting, that
every Power should fight with its natural weapons, and with its best
strength, that so there may be the greatest possible division of force,
and no one Power may be able to jdisturbj the world, nor any two or
three Powers to divide it among them. Above all it is for the interests
of the world that the naval Powers should not be weakened, for whatever
is taken from them is given to the great military Powers, and it is from
these alone that the freedom and independence of nations has anything to
fear. Naval power is as essentially defensive as military is aggressive.
It is by armies, not by fleets, that wars of conquest can be carried on;
and naval Powers, both in ancient and in modern times, have ever been
the cradle and the home of liberty. Take away the naval Powers of the
world at this moment, and where would be the main defence of the minor
European States? Two or three military monarchies could, in a few years,
parcel out all Europe, and everything else on this side of the Atlantic,
among them; and after they had done so, would probably desolate the
earth by fighting for a re-division. Happily, the naval Powers exist,
and long may they exist; but short will be the duration of their
existence if they disarm themselves of their most powerful weapon; if
they leave the entire navies of their enemies free to convey troops to
their shores, being no longer required to protect the enemy’s commerce;
if they, who can be invaded, but who cannot successfully invade, abandon
the chief means they possess of doing their enemies substantial damage,
and wearying them of the war. There is another consideration of vital
importance to the subject. Those who approve of the Declaration of Paris
mostly think that we ought to go still further; that private property at
sea (except contraband of war) should be exempt from seizure in all
Edition: current; Page: [224] cases, not only in the ships of neutral
but in those of the belligerent nations. This doctrine was maintained
with ability and earnestness in this House during the last session of
Parliament,9 and it will probably be brought forward again, for there is
great force in the arguments on which it rests. Suppose that we were at
war with any Power which is a party to the Declaration of Paris: if our
cargoes would be safe in neutral bottoms, kbut unsafe in our own,k then,
if the war was of any duration, our whole import and export trade would
pass to the neutral flags—(hear, hear)—most of our merchant shipping
would be thrown out of employment, and would be sold to neutral
countries, as happened to so much of the shipping of the United States
from the pressure of two or three—it might almost be said of a single
cruiser. Our sailors would naturally follow our ships, and it is by no
means certain we should regain them even after the war was over. Where
would then be your naval reserve? Where your means of recruiting the
royal navy? A protracted war on such terms must end in national
disaster. It will thus become an actual necessity for us to take the
second step, and obtain the exemption of all private property at sea
from the contingencies of war. But are we sure that we shall be able to
do so? Our own consent is not all that is required. Will other Powers,
having got us at this disadvantage, consent to relieve us from it? And
if they would, what a spectacle should we then behold? Nations at war
with nations, but their merchants and shipowners at peace; our own
merchants driving a roaring trade with the enemies whose resources we
were endeavouring to cripple, and contributing, perhaps, a great part of
their revenue. Some persons think that this would be a great
improvement, that it would be a gain to humanity if war were confined to
what they call a duel between Governments—(hear, hear)—a strange gain to
humanity if the merchants, manufacturers, and agriculturists of the
world lost nothing by a state of war, and had no pecuniary interest in
preventing it except the increase of their taxes—a motive which never
yet kept a prosperous people out of war—a burthen which such a people is
often but too ready to take upon itself for mere excitement, much more
from the smallest motive of national self-assertion or desire of
aggrandisement. How war is to be humanised by shooting at men’s bodies
instead of taking their property, I confess surprises me. (Hear, hear,
and a laugh.) lThe result of such a system would be that the merchants,
the manufacturers, and even agriculturists would have nothing to lose by
a state of war, and therefore would have no motive to abstain from it
except an increase of taxation, a burden which people were often only
too ready to inflict upon themselves from the smallest motive of
national self-assertion.l The result would Edition: current; Page: [225]
be, that as long as the taxpayers were willing, or could be compelled by
their Governments to pay the cost of the game, nations would go on
massacring one another until the carnage was stopped by sheer
impossibility of getting any more soldiers to enlist, or of enforcing a
conscription. That would be the amount of gain to humanity. Those fine
notions of making war by deputy may go down for a while, so long as a
nation fancies itself safe from invasion; but let an enemy ever touch
our shores, and I think we should regret that we had not, by making war
on his imports and exports, kept him at a distance from our hearths—that
we had not mpreparedm to defend ourselves by our cruisers rather than by
our rifle volunteers. Many who do not like to secede from the
Declaration of Paris are quite aware of its dangersn; but they think
that the evil is irreparably done, and that we cannot withdraw from it,
for fear of embroiling ourselvesn with France and America. Sir, if the
Declaration of Paris has brought us to such a pass that we can neither
stand still nor move, our national independence is as good as gone; our
being yoked to the car of some great military potentate is a mere
question of time. But this oapprehendedo danger from France and America
seems to me to have little reality in it. France, though a great
military, is also a naval Power, and is historically identified almost
as much as ourselves with what is called the Right of Search.10 She has
always asserted it for herself, except when she has waived it during a
particular war by express engagement with some particular country. The
first Napoleon, it is true, while carrying on the war against British
commerce to extremities never before practised or justified, thought it
suited his purpose of the moment to declaim pompously against what he
called our tyranny of the seas.11 pBut the interests of France in this
matter are greatly changed. The immunity of neutral bottoms could be of
service to her, if at all, only if her enemy were England or the United
States, and even then the benefit would not be without alloy; but if the
calamity should occur, of a war between France and any other great
Power, it is more likely that her antagonist qwillq be either Germany or
Russia, and against either of these the right of seizure would be so
important to France, would be so powerful a weapon in her hands, that
she could not dispense with it for herself.p The noble Lord the Foreign
Secretary must think so; for, in the important correspondence which has
gained for him the distinguished honour of averting a European war
(hear, hear), the noble Lord urged upon the Prussian Government the
certain extinction of the maritime commerce of Germany in case of a war
with Edition: current; Page: [226] France, exactly as if the Declaration
of Paris had never existed.12 (Hear.) As for America, she is not even a
party to the Declaration of Paris; and I greatly doubt if she ever will
be. She is herself one of the great Powers of the sea, and in case of
war the destruction of her enemy’s commerce will be her most potent
weapon. Many are misled by vague and inaccurate notions of the American
war of 1812. It is asserted far too positively that the war was provoked
by our stoppage of the neutral navigation. People forget that the United
States had a far more serious quarrel with us through our unjustifiable
pretension to impress American citizens on board American ships, when
they were, or even were falsely said to be, natives of any British
possession—(hear, hear)—a pretension which we did not even renounce at
the peace, but which it is earnestly to be hoped we shall never revive;
if we were wise, we should even come forward unasked and surrender it.
Such a grievance is quite sufficient to account for the war, even had
there been no other subject of quarrel. But there was another equally
independent of the right now under consideration—our paper blockades,
which were a new practice, not authorised, as the Right of Search was so
fully authorised, by the law and practice of nations. I believe it will
be found, by examining the diplomatic correspondence of the time,13 that
our differences with America about the Right of Search were capable of
being made up, and would almost rcertainlyr have been made up, but for
those additional grievances. Before I conclude I am obliged to speak of
a notion which I am afraid is rather common among us, but which I am
almost ashamed to mention—that, dangerous as is the position we should
be placed in by adhering to the Declaration of Paris, it is of no
practical consequence, because if war comes the Declaration is sure to
be treated as waste paper. Sir, I should indeed be humiliated in my
feelings as an Englishman if I thought that these were the maxims by
which my countrymen were content to guide themselves, or on which they
would allow their rulers to act. (Hear, hear.) No, Sir; let us either
disown this obligation or fulfil it. (Cheers.) Let us disclaim it like
honest men in the face of the world, openly and on principle, and not
hypocritically profess one doctrine up to the very moment when an
immediate interest would be promoted by exchanging it for another. If
England should choose that moment for announcing a change of opinion,
she would justify the most prejudiced of her foreign revilers in the
accusation which they are sin the habits of bringing against her of
national selfishness and perfidy. It is not when the emergency has come,
but before it comes, that we have to form our resolution on this most
momentous subject, and not only to form our resolution but to declare
it. And I implore every honourable Edition: current; Page: [227] member,
and especially those who have now or may have hereafter a share in the
direction of public affairs, to consider these things well before they
commit themselves any deeper than they may be already committed, to
persistence in a course to which they are so likely to repent that they
ever, even by their silence, allowed themselves to be committed at all.
(Cheers.)


81.: The Extradition Treaties Act [4]
 6 AUGUST, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols. 983–6, 991. Reported in The Times, 7
August, p. 3, from which the variant and response are taken. During the
debate on going into Committee on “A Bill to Continue Various Expiring
Laws,” 30 & 31 Victoria (26 July, 1867), PP, 1867, II, 733–6, discussion
had turned to the Extradition Treaties Act (see No. 36).  spoke
after Edward William Watkin (1819–1901), M.P. for Stockport, had
asserted (cols. 982–3) the importance to society of malefactors
receiving their proper punishment, even if a few might be given up under
cover of criminal accusations when they really were political
dissidents.

mr. j. stuart  said, that the argument of his honourable Friend (Mr.
Watkin) carried out to its logical conclusion would carry him much
farther than to giving up mere criminals; it would induce the House to
connive at the most tyrannical exercise of power on the part of a
Government. It was very important, no doubt, that malefactors should be
given up, and that peaceably disposed persons should be able to walk
about in security; but he did not think that anybody in that House would
be found to agree in such an argument as that made use of by the
honourable Member for Stockport, which was an argument that had always
been made use of in defence of tyranny. If they restrained tyranny, if
they restricted the abuse of power, if they did anything which had a
tendency to weaken the hands of those who conducted the administration
of the country, it did not follow that they were disposed to throw aside
all the advantages which society derived from the existence of law and
government. That argument, therefore, might be put out of the question.
No doubt it was very important that malefactors should not be able to
fly from one country to another. Other countries as well as this felt
the importance of delivering up ordinary malefactors. But every country
did not think it right to surrender persons who were only charged as
criminals, because they were deemed to be political offenders; and to
make such a concession would stamp any free country with disgrace. Was
the House prepared to entertain the doctrine that we ought to have such
unbounded confidence in every Government with which we had diplomatic
relations that we ought to rely upon the honour of that Government that
it would not demand the extradition of political offenders, instead of
taking proper precautions against the abuse of the treaty by Edition:
current; Page: [228] foreign Governments? The honourable Member had
referred to the circumstances of the Lamirande case.1 Everyone was aware
that the extradition of that person had been obtained by a fraudulent
proceeding, but at the same time everyone was aware that Lamirande was a
scoundrel, and probably the consciousness of that fact went far to
prevent any prolonged discussion upon the subject of the treaty, such as
would have taken place had it been the case of the extradition of a
political offender. The honourable Member for Southwark (Mr. Layard) had
alluded to the difference between the French and English procedure in
criminal cases, stating that here we always presumed a man to be
innocent till he was proved guilty, whereas in France a man was presumed
to be guilty till he had proved himself to be innocent.2 No doubt this
did not necessarily imply a failure of justice in foreign countries;
because the tribunals were bound to act precisely on the same abstract
principles of truth and justice as were presumed to be acted upon by our
Courts of Justice. It was true, however, that in this country the
tribunals considered themselves simply bound to hear the case, and if
justice was defeated the fault was with the parties, the Judge being
impartial; while abroad—in France for instance—the Judge acted to a
certain extent as an officer of police as well as of justice; he thought
it his business to hold an inquisition—not, of course, of the nature of
the Spanish Inquisition—into the case, and felt bound to discover by
whom the offence had been committed. He was as little disposed as any
Member of the House to flatter his countrymen at the expense of other
nations; but in this respect the feelings and opinions of our Courts
were much better than those of most foreign countries, and in his
opinion we ought not to give up any portion of the advantage which we
derived from that difference. With their feelings in this respect, it
was exceedingly natural that the French tribunals, and still more the
subordinates of the French tribunals, should take very much the same
view as the honourable Member for Stockport, and should think that
everything was fair by means of which a person accused of a crime could
be brought before a tribunal. This it was that was so strikingly
illustrated by the case of Lamirande, which placed in a very strong
light indeed the impolicy and injustice of that confidence which his
honourable and learned Friend the Member for Oxford was willing to place
in the Governments and officers of foreign countries.3 It showed that it
would not do for us to abandon the right that we had always exercised,
of examining, before we delivered up an alleged criminal, whether there
was such Edition: current; Page: [229] evidence as appeared to our
tribunals to be sufficient to justify his being placed upon his trial.
When, last year, the noble Lord (Lord Stanley), ayielding to their
arguments and not to their numbers, consented to limit the duration of
this measure tilla the 1st of September,4 the general expectation was
that the interval would be employed in placing the matter upon a more
satisfactory footing, either by means of negotiation, or, as he (Mr.
) should prefer, by laying down some principle which should apply to
all extradition treaties. They left the matter willingly in the hands of
the noble Lord. He hoped that the noble Lord would be able to say that
something of the sort had been done. Unless the noble Lord could make
out some very strong case as to the extreme difficulty of dealing with
this subject, he did not see how he could ask for a longer prolongation
of the statute than that which was granted last year. The demand indeed
reminded him of the story of Hiero and Simonides.5 Hiero asked Simonides
to define the Godhead. Simonides asked for a day; at the expiration of
that time he asked for two, and at the expiration of the two he asked
for four, explaining that the more he considered the subject the more
difficult he found it. The Government first asked them for a year and
now, having had it, for what amounted to two years. An honourable and
learned Friend of his,6 who was not in his place, contemplated proposing
that, instead of prolonging the Act until the end of the Session of
1869, the endurance of the measure should be limited till the 15th July
next, in order that the question might be thoroughly discussed in a full
House. If the noble Lord was not prepared to assent to that Amendment he
hoped that the noble Lord, when he rose to reply, would be able to
assure the House that the time that had elapsed had been usefully
employed, and that some plan had been drawn up, or that negotiations had
been entered into with foreign Governments that would lead to a
satisfactory result being arrived at with reference to this important
question. (Hear, hear.)

[Following , Stanley said, inter alia, that  had mistaken him if
he thought a specific pledge had been given that a general inquiry
should be made following passage of the Extradition Treaties Act; the
Government would not object if someone wanted to move a Committee on the
matter (cols. 986–9). He then reiterated the latter statement.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, he had never intended to say that the noble
Lord had Edition: current; Page: [230] broken any pledge. If the noble
Lord had given any pledge, doubtless he would have kept it. He had only
said that there had been an expectation and a hope in the House that the
question would be discussed.

[Stanley again indicated the Government’s willingness to have a
Committee (col. 991).]


82.: The Metropolitan Government Bill
 7 AUGUST, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols. 1040–1. Not reported in The Times. 
here brings forward “A Bill for the Better Government of the
Metropolis,” 30 & 31 Victoria (6 Aug., 1867), PP, 1867, IV, 215–56.

mr. j. stuart  said, he moved for leave to introduce a Bill for the
better Municipal Government of the Metropolis. The Bill embodied the
remainder of the plan, part of which he had introduced in another Bill
at an earlier period of the Session.1 It could not be expected that the
Bill could pass into law this Session, and his object was simply to have
it printed so that it might be laid before the public with a view to its
being considered next Session. It provided for a central municipal
government, as the other Bill provided local district municipalities.
The Bill borrowed from a variety of sources; from the recommendations of
a Royal Commission some years ago;2 from those of the Committee recently
presided over by his honourable and learned Friend the Member for the
Tower Hamlets (Mr. Ayrton);3 and from the views which had been brought
before the House on various occasions by the honourable and learned
Member for Southwark (Mr. Locke).4 The Bill did not make a tabula rasa5
of the old system, but made use of the existing materials. The Bill
proposed that the present corporation of the City of London should be
enlarged by absorbing the Board of Works. The object of the Bill was to
enlarge the corporation into a municipality for the whole of London,
leaving behind in the City as much power as was necessary for purely
local administration, Edition: current; Page: [231] which under the
other Bill all the other districts of the municipality would also have.
The Lord Mayor, under this Bill, would grow into a Lord Mayor for all
London, and the Common Council would be converted into a Common Council
for all London. That Common Council would consist of the Lord Mayor,
aldermen, and common councilmen, but the aldermen would not be a
separate body, but, with the Common Council, would be elected by the
ratepayers. It was proposed by the Bill that the present aldermen of the
City should retain their offices for life, but that no vacancy amongst
them should be filled up until their number was reduced to six, which
would be double the number of aldermen for other districts of the
Metropolis. There would be two aldermen in the Common Council for each
district, they being those among the successful candidates for the
district councillorships who had obtained the greatest number of votes.
The corporation property would pass into the possession of this larger
municipality. The City, it was right to say, had not given its assent to
this transfer, but from what was known of the state of opinion in the
City, there was ground to hope that there would be no corporate
opposition to it. In consideration of the surrender of the corporation
property, it was proposed to make certain concessions to the City in
return, which he thought would not be considered more than a fair
equivalent. It was proposed that the City should have twice the number
of representatives in the Common Council that its population would
justify. It was further proposed that the Deputy Mayor, who would
represent the Lord Mayor in his absence or fill his place in case of his
dying in office, should always be one of the aldermen of the City. There
were a few other arrangements which would be sufficiently shown by the
Bill itself. The county of the City of London would become the county of
all London, and would have one Commission of Peace, of which all the
aldermen would be members. As a temporary measure it was proposed that
the Board of Works and all the present aldermen should be added to the
Council, Sir John Thwaites6 being appointed Chairman of the standing
Committees at his present salary, provided that he was willing to accept
the office.


83.: The Reform Bill [10]
 8 AUGUST, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 189, col. 1192. Reported in The Times, 9 August, p.
8, from which variants and responses are taken. One variant is taken
from the report in the St. Stephen’s Chronicle, Vol. IV, pp. 843–4. The
discussion is on a new Clause C introduced into the Reform Bill (see No.
50) by the Lords: “Any Voter for a County or Borough may, in Edition:
current; Page: [232] compliance with the Provisions herein-after
contained, give his Vote by a Voting Paper instead of personally.”

it ais scarcely possible that the House will be induced to pass, or that
the Government will attempt to force upon the House, this really
monstrous proposala. (Oh! and laughter.) The vast mass of fraud to which
it would give birth has been shown, but it will produce effects worse
than even that mass of fraud. If the House have the smallest desire to
diminish bribery and intimidation—if they do not wish to increase it to
an enormous extent, they will refuse to assent to this Amendment. If it
passes, every tenant may be taken to the drawing-room of his landlord
and there compelled to sign his voting paper bin accordance with the
party interest of his landlordb. (Oh! and laughter.) Do not we know what
electioneering agents will do? Will they not take the voter before the
magistrate who has the greatest power over him? This will become the
general rule of the country. (Oh! oh!) I do not say that bribery will be
as universal as intimidation. But the voting papers are to be signed
before a magistrate, and, recollect, Mr. Churchward is a magistrate.1
(Oh! oh! and laughter.) When I heard that the Upper House had adopted
this cin principle but not in detail,c2 I did expect something decent
would be done to place checks and restraints on its consequences. I
could not have believed that any serious person pretending to the
character of a politician would have brought forward such a set of
rules, which are apparently constructed to aggravate instead of
diminishing the mischievous operation of the system. (Loud cries of Oh!
and Divide.) I should prefer that no Reform Bill should be passed,
rather than that this monstrous scheme should be carried into effect.
(Oh! and laughter.)

[The Clause was rejected.]

Edition: current; Page: [233]


84.: East India Revenue
 12 AUGUST, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols. 1382–7. Reported in The Times, 13 August,
p. 5, from which variants and responses are taken. In the debate on
going into Committee, Ayrton moved as an amendment resolutions on
conducting business in India

(cols. 1340–55).

mr. j. stuart  said, that as the House, notwithstanding the
deprecation of the Minister for India,1 had drifted into a debate on
general policy, and as the right honourable Gentleman would be expected
next year to bring forward a measure which might effect changes in the
machinery of government, he could not help expressing his fear lest some
of the changes which had been recommended would make the administration
of India worse than it was at present. The use and importance of
Councils had, in particular, been undervalued. No doubt it was a most
important principle of representation that responsibility should rest as
far as possible on one person, and that that person should not be
screened by a Board or Council.2 But he apprehended that this principle
applied only to one department of the Government—the Executive. Now, the
work of Government was twofold; it was executive and deliberative: and
in the Indian Government the deliberative was quite as extensive as the
executive work, and even more important. As was stated by the honourable
Member for Wick, there was no place in the world where so much depended
on the personal qualities of the particular officer who was intrusted
with power in all the important appointments.3 Upon the person who was
at the head of the administration in any one district of India the
prosperity of that district, to a very large extent, depended. But it
did not follow that you had only to choose the best man, and then leave
him to do as he liked. You should not rely solely upon the policy of one
man, and that a man who filled office only for a brief period. Before
any important act was done in India, there should be a full and complete
statement, as far as possible, of the different sides of the question;
the pros and cons should be brought forward by different people, and not
solely by the particular officer concerned. Especially should this be so
in the case of the Governor General. He perfectly agreed in the opinion
that those who were entrusted with the chief power in India should not
in general be persons who had passed their lives there. India ought to
furnish knowledge of detail; but knowledge of principles and general
statesmanship should be found more easily and in greater abundance in
England, and here it should be sought. But when this officer went out
Edition: current; Page: [234] to India, however able he might be, he
rarely knew anything of his business. No doubt an able man would learn
his business quicker than another man; but meanwhile he must be more or
less dependent on the opinion of other people. That opinion, if he had
not a well-chosen and sufficiently numerous Council, must be the opinion
of the executive officers under him. Such opinions were often very
valuable, but those who gave them were under no responsibility for the
advice thus given. Now, if there was one thing more than another to
which the great success of our Indian administration was due—for
notwithstanding many defects it was on the whole a successful
administration—it was to the fact that the Government had, to so large
an extent, been carried on in writing; that no important act had been
done the reasons for which had not been fully stated on paper, so that
those at a distance were able to study them, and to decide upon the
validity of the arguments by which the responsible officers justified
their acts. It was not enough to trust to one despatch from the one
officer who was so responsible; there should be a substantial discussion
in the place itself, so that if different opinions were held on the
subject, all of them should be placed before the functionary who was to
decide in the last resort. It was this necessity which justified not
only the existence of Councils, but of numerous Councils. He did not
agree with his honourable and learned Friend (Mr. Ayrton) that the
Government of Bengal had been a Government of inefficient, superannuated
people.4 He did not wish to say anything of Sir Cecil Beadon,5 whose
conduct had been so much canvassed of late, because he did not know much
of that gentleman; but those who preceded him were, first, Mr. Halliday,
and then Sir J.P. Grant,6 and two more efficient, enlightened
administrators than those gentlemen were, it would be difficult to find
in any service. Like all the great officers in India, these men were
over-worked; and this was the great excuse for their shortcomings. The
Governor of Bengal had never had the benefit of a Council. He (Mr.
Stuart ) thought it was desirable that he should have one. If that
Governor had had the benefit of an efficient Council, perhaps that great
calamity which had lately occurred in a particular district of India
would have been averted.7 One reason the more for a Council in Bengal
would be supplied if it were determined that a member of the Civil
Service should not be at the head of this Government, and that Bengal
should be put on the same footing in this respect as Bombay and Madras.
In that case it would be all the more necessary that the Governor should
have some members of the Civil Service Edition: current; Page: [235] to
assist him. He believed that such a Council would have been created in
Bengal if it had not been for the expense. It was from motives of
economy that a Council had not hitherto been appointed. As the Governor
General and his Council were nearer to the Lieutenant Governor of Bengal
than to the Governments of Bombay and Madras, it was thought that in
Bengal a local Council could be dispensed with. But he was afraid that
this would be found, and had, indeed, been found, a mistake. In
appointing to the great office of Governor General or Viceroy, it might
be said with truth that every Government had, as a general rule, chosen
one of the best of themselves—a man who might aspire to a high or even
to the highest office in this country. In that respect there had been no
failure of duty, though mistakes had now and then been made. But his
experience did not tell him that the same care and conscientiousness had
been shown in England in choosing men to be the Governors of the minor
Presidencies.8 He had known stupid men, careless, frivolous men, idle
men, appointed to both the minor Presidencies (hear)—men so little
fitted for the business of government that if it had not been for their
Councils he did not know how the government of those Presidencies would
have gone on. (Hear, hear.) It seemed to him, therefore, that if instead
of a Lieutenant Governor there was to be a Governor of Bengal and a
Governor of the North-Western Provinces, it was more important than ever
that each of them should have a Council. One word now as to the Council
of India in this country. The difficulty raised by the noble Lord
opposite was real, and required serious consideration.9 On the one hand,
it was of the highest importance to have a Council which should be a
check upon the Secretary of State in matters of expense. On the other
hand, it was true, as the noble Lord said, that the Secretary of State
was in some degree compelled to bear a responsibility which might not be
his own. How this difficulty should be overcome—if it could be
overcome—was a matter well deserving the consideration of the House. But
with regard to the necessity of a Council, and even of a numerous
Council, not only to prevent the waste of the money of India, but also
for the purpose of enlightening the Secretary of State on the general
affairs of India, it appeared to him (Mr. Stuart ) to be clearer
than many honourable Gentlemen seemed to think. He believed that many
persons looked at it as if the question was, whether the Secretary of
State should prevail or the Council, overlooking the fact that the
Council would most probably not be all of one mind. The great advantage
of a Council was that it represented many minds, that it embodied many
of the opinions existing among public men. This was the case in the
Court of Directors of the East India Company. They comprised permanent
settlement men, village settlement men, and Ryotwar men: and again, in
judicial matters, men who were for the regulation system, men who were
for the non-regulation system, and men who were for the Native system.
Indeed, every variety of Indian policy was there represented. There was
no leading variety of Edition: current; Page: [236] Indian policy, the
reasons for and against which were not certain to be stated very
strongly by persons who had studied the subject, and were capable of
urging the best arguments in favour of the views they advocated. It was
surely an advantage to the Secretary of State, who could seldom know
much about India when he took office for the first time, to obtain on
the best authority that various knowledge which the great diversities of
people and civilization rendered necessary. When he (Mr. Stuart )
was concerned, in a subordinate capacity, in the administration of
India, he found that those who were at the centre of government in
England really knew India, as a whole, better than those who were in
India. Gentlemen knew their own Presidencies, and those who were
concerned in the administration of one had more or less of prejudice
against the system which prevailed in another. Those who were resident
in Bengal knew less of Madras and Bombay, and vice versâ, than those who
had access to the records of all the Presidencies and were accustomed to
deliberate upon and discuss them, and to write about them; and so with
regard to each of the Presidencies. He believed that a alarger view of
Indian affairs, less coloured by imperfect information and prejudice,a
would be found in a Council than in any one of the local Governments, or
even in the Governor General, if he were not acting with a Central
Board. He thought that no Secretary of State who was aware of the
imperfection of his own knowledge when he entered office, would wish to
deprive himself of the advantage which he was likely to derive from an
experienced Council. It was, however, another question whether the
members of that Council should hold their office for life. It would be
better, in his opinion, that they should give up office at intervals;
but, nevertheless, he thought that they should be eligible for
re-election; bnot in order that they might habitually be re-elected, but
in order that, by the votes of the other members and the Secretary of
State, the department might still retain the services ofb any member who
was still in the vigour of his intellect and capable of rendering good
service to the country. Those were the observations he was desirous of
making.

[Shortly after ’s speech, the amendment was withdrawn.]


85.: Meetings in Royal Parks [2]
 13 AUGUST, 1867

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 189, cols. 1482–4. Reported in The Times, 14 August,
p. 7, from which the variants and the response are taken. The Bill on
the use of Royal Parks (see No. 76), now recommitted, was to be
considered in Committee. P.A. Taylor moved that the Chairman leave the
chair—i.e., that the Committee not sit

(col. 1453).

Edition: current; Page: [237]
mr. j. stuart , who spoke amid much confusion and cries for a
division, said, he was anxious to state to the House what he and those
who agreed with him claimed, and what they thought the working classes
of London were entitled to, on this subject. They had heard a great deal
about the necessity of legislating for the Parks. Well, he had no
objection to any legislation which could properly partake of the nature
of police. He did not suppose that any of them would have the least
objection to the suppression in the Parks of anything, the toleration of
which in any public place was a questionable matter, such as the gaming
and betting of which they had heard so much. What they stood up for was
that there should be some place open for the purpose of holding great
public meetings. He had no objection to preventing meetings being held
in such of the Parks as were manifestly unfit for that purpose. No one
would think of claiming the right of holding a public meeting in St.
James’ Park, because, in the first place, there was not room for such a
meeting, and, in the second place, it could not be attempted without
adestroying the ornamental character of the placea. (Hear.) The question
at issue concerned none of the parks except Hyde Park, and the reason
why it concerned Hyde Park was that it was the only great open space in
the neighbourhood of London on which it was possible to hold a
multitudinous open-air meeting. He could perfectly understand those
Gentlemen who said that there ought to be no public meeting of that
character at all; but such was not the opinion of the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, and he should be surprised if the right honourable Gentleman
continued to give his support to this Bill, because in his speech on the
second reading of the Bill—a speech that was most moderate in its tone,
although not equally so in substance—he admitted that there were cases
in which it might be desirable that a multitudinous meeting, a meeting
larger than could be contained in any public building, should be held.1
But if such a meeting were to be held, he (Mr. Stuart ) did not know
any place except Hyde Park, in which it could be held with so little
disturbance to the convenience of any class. It was true that the right
honourable Gentleman did tell the working classes of London that they
might meet on Primrose Hill or on Hampstead Heath,2 and he was sure that
this advice must have been accompanied with a twinkle of the right
honourable Gentleman’s eye, which he (Mr. Stuart ) wished he had
been near enough to have seen. He thought that nobody who had ever seen
Hampstead Heath or Primrose Hill would say that they were places in any
way suitable for the holding of public meetings. There was scarcely a
spot of level ground on either of them, and no place could possibly be
less convenient. Did anybody who had seen these public meetings in Hyde
Park think that they had been accompanied with inconvenience to any
class? It might, indeed, be said that inconvenience was caused, not by
the meeting itself, Edition: current; Page: [238] but by the processions
to and from the meeting. That was an argument for those who thought
there ought to be no great public meetings at all; but, unfortunately,
it was an argument which, if applicable to Hyde Park, was quite as
applicable to a meeting held at any of the places where the Chancellor
of the Exchequer had said that they might be held. It seemed to him that
no person who admitted, as the Chancellor of the Exchequer had done,
that there may be certain cases in which it was desirable and right that
great multitudinous meetings should take place, could contend that they
ought to be held in a corner or at a great distance. He did not think it
was in the interest of either order or liberty to choose this time—at
the close of the Session—with only a small number of Members present—for
carrying a measure of which no opportunity had been given for discussion
at a proper period. (Cries for a division.) Assent had been given to a
second reading of the Bill, because many honourable Members on that side
of the House were not unfavourable to the principle of legislating in
some way upon this matter. The Bill had been since much altered, and it
appeared to him an unjustifiable exercise of power to proceed at this
period of the Session with the Bill, in the absence of so many Members.
There were other most important Bills on the Paper, which could not be
passed if the Government persisted in going on with this Bill. One of
these was the Hours of Labour Regulation Bill,3 than which there was no
measure more creditable to the Government, and it was most important
that it should be passed this Sessionb, and another was the Artisans’
and Labourers’ Dwelling Billb;4but if the Government were determined to
press on the Parks Bill,5 the House would not have made one step nearer
to the useful legislation involved in the measure of which he spoke.
(Divide, divide.) cHe hoped the Bill would be withdrawn.c

[The honourable Member resumed his seat amid continued interruption and
cries for a division. These manifestations of impatience were continued
to the end of the debate, which was, consequently, very little heard.]

Edition: current; Page: [239]


February to November 1868


86.: Proportional Representation and Redistribution
 29 FEBRUARY, 1868

Morning Star, 2 March, 1868, p. 2. Headed: “The Redistribution of Seats.
/ Conference at the Reform League Rooms.” Reported also in the Daily
News (in the third person); The Times and the Pall Mall Gazette
summarize ’s remarks in one sentence. The conference, attended by
about fifty people, with Beales in the Chair, was held on Saturday
afternoon in the League’s rooms, Adelphi Terrace. The meeting was
occasioned by a suggestion by Hare (in a letter to the Daily News) that
the League engage in a discussion of his system (see Nos. 4, 60, and
71). Hare opened the discussion, which included several substantial
speeches, as well as shorter comments and “conversational” exchanges.
 was the last to comment.

i only wish, sir, that when I may have the good fortune to address
another assembly1 on this subject I may have the further good fortune of
hearing as intelligent a discussion on it as it has been my pleasure to
listen to this afternoon. Although, judging from the past, I have not
any great expectations on the subject, I cannot but think that if the
question is discussed in that other assembly on as good grounds, and
with as much knowledge of the subject as has been showed to-day, we
shall be very near carrying Mr. Hare’s plan. (Cheers.) I should not have
risen probably on this occasion but for the objections which have just
been made by my friend Mr. Boyd Kinnear.2 Those objections are of a
quality which render it imperative they should be met. The difficulties
which Mr. Kinnear feels are difficulties that require to be faced, and
they have been faced by Mr. Hare. With regard to Mr. Kinnear’s first
objection, there has been much discussion as to the best mode of
procedure in rejecting surplus votes given for a popular candidate, and
several suggestions have been made with the view of securing fairness,
and preventing a possibility of partiality being exercised. If there can
be no better plan suggested, why not draw lots? That would secure
fairness, and ensure a beneficial working of the plan. aMr. Hare himself
has given an extremely long and careful attention to this part of the
subject; so have many others who support the plan. Edition: current;
Page: [240] Several different modes have been suggested, any one of
which will probably suffice to prevent the difficulty being fatal to the
plan. However, if nothing better can be found, fairness will at least be
attained by a resort to the lot, and perhaps some mode may be invented
which will meet the difficulty in a manner that will provide for a
better representation of the general sense of the electors.a I apprehend
that the communication between a member and his constituents, to which
Mr. Kinnear attaches some importance, would take place under Mr. Hare’s
plan in a somewhat different but still as effectual a manner as now. The
majority of the members—the celebrities being the exceptions—would be
returned from particular localities, and so far as regards them the
difficulty would not existb, because if a member goes down to a place
where he knows he has been voted for by a great number of persons, and
holds a public meeting, he has the opportunity of discussion with a
large portion of his constituents, can answer questions, and give
publicity to his sentiments. But if a great number of persons scattered
over the country vote for some candidate, it may be safely concluded
that every one of them feels a special interest in that candidate,
because they have selected him from the whole country, and not because
of his fitness for representing or connexions with any particular
neighbourhood. I, however, fear one of the difficulties will be the
active correspondence that will go on between the candidate and the
electors. (Laughter.) Although not, perhaps, in such a public way as we
are accustomed to, mutual explanations will yet take place in a very
close and perfect mannerb. Or a voter could write to one of the
newspapers and request the member to reply through the same channel, by
which means all the new member’s voters would be put into possession of
his opinions upon particular points. The spirit of modern civilization
is substituting more and more communication by writing for that which
was the only mode of communication in former days—I mean word of
mouth—and by this means a member’s responsibility to his constituents
will be to the full as great as Mr. Boyd Kinnear so justly considers it
desirable it should. (Hear, hear.) With regard to what Mr. Kinnear said
in reference to Mr. Cobden’s plan,3 I don’t think Mr. Hare’s scheme
requires more intelligence in the voter than we may reasonably presume
will be possessed by the large body who are now called to be electors of
this country. Nobody of ordinary intelligence would feel any difficulty
after the first election or two. All that would have to be explained to
him would be that his vote would only be recorded for one person, and
that if the first person on his list did not require the vote it would
be taken by the second, and so on. cIt is therefore Edition: current;
Page: [241] desirable the voter should put down a few more names in
order that somebody else may have the probability of being elected. When
the voter has once seized this idea, which is not at all an obscure one,
there will be no difficulty again.c

Mr. Kinnear: I did not mean intelligence so far as the mere sending in
of the voting paper is concerned, but the intelligence that would be
required to enable a man to make out a considerable list of persons.

Mr. : No doubt in this, as in all systems of election now and
always, whether the systems work well or ill, there must be some
organisation; and wherever there is concert there is a certain amount of
power given to wire-pullers, and I don’t think the power will be greater
under this plan than under any other. There is no doubt that persons
agreeing in any common set of opinions would send out lists of
candidates holding those opinions; but it does not follow that the voter
would blindly and implicitly follow those opinions. He would probably
put down first on his list the names of the people he preferred, and
follow them with the names selected from the list sent out by those with
whom, as a party, he agreed most closely. Inasmuch as everybody agrees
with a great many other people in most things, voters would vote for the
candidate who in a general sense agrees with them, and by this means I
apprehend that the influence of the wire-pullers would be less noxious
than it would in any other way. The benefit of having leaders would be
that they would try to find out good candidates, and it would be their
interest to put on their list not merely the names of men who are the
strongest party men, but those of men who would recommend themselves by
their general character and knowledge of other things, because by this
means they would secure some votes from people not members of their
party. I look upon this as one of the ways in which Mr. Hare’s system
would work most excellently. Some say that by this plan all the “isms,”
all the crotchets of obstinate people, would be represented; and others
say that the electors would implicitly follow the leaders of parties. I
think these two objections might well pair off together. The
suppositions on which the two rest are entirely opposite; but
nevertheless they both deserve consideration, for the reason that,
working against each other, they would produce a better House than we
should otherwise get. Take, for instance, the teetotallers, who are a
type of the sectarian sort of persons—they would be supposed to elect
none but teetotallers; but the contrary would be the case, because, so
anxious would they be to make their own opinions prevail, and knowing
they are not in a majority themselves, they would have the strongest
possible interest in putting on their list not only people who are
teetotallers, but people who are so distinguished in other respects that
they would on these other grounds be voted for by electors who are not
teetotallers. Look how this would operate. The two great parties would,
because they are in an enormous majority in the country, get—as indeed
they would be entitled to—a large proportion of the votes, but they
would have, in order to lay themselves out for votes, to put on their
lists a number of people who, Edition: current; Page: [242] apart from
party, would represent what I may describe as the various “isms.” (Hear,
hear.) dNow, we know very well that only three or four candidates put up
for the representation. Thed candidates are frequently such men as no
reasonable man would care to vote for, but, being compelled to vote
there, or leave it alone, a great number of the electors vote simply for
the Liberal or the Conservative, without reference to anything else, the
candidates being the greatest noodles, who, having offended nobody, are
what is known as respectable men, and, in the majority of cases, possess
plenty of money. (Hear, hear, and laughter.) eUnder Mr. Hare’s plan
things will be different, because people’s interests will be different,
and their object will be to put upon their lists not only the best party
men, but those who best represent ability and virtue all over the
country. Liberals and Conservatives will then be represented by their
best men, instead of, as frequently now, by their silliest, or by men of
mediocre order. (Cheers.) The suggestion of Mr. Morrison,4to introduce
Mr. Hare’s plan on a small scale, such as in counties, or in a large
district in the metropolis, will very likely be adopted some day,
because things are never carried except by successive steps in this
country; and a thing so new as this people will naturally wish to see
tried on a small scale first. At the same time it is necessary to bear
in mind that a trial like that will be by no means a fair trial of the
scheme. Even if London were chosen, the whole merits of the plan would
not be brought out as it is conceived by Mr. Hare, because the quota of
votes of a candidate would be confined to London, instead of being
spread all over the country. Nevertheless, it would be a trial to some
extent of the practicability of the machinery, and as it will be a
difficult thing to beget confidence in it without some such trial, it is
very likely some day it will be attempted, and it will be an exceedingly
good thing if it is.e (Cheers.)

[The conference was then adjourned until the next Saturday at 3 p.m.]


87.: The Alabama Claims
 6 MARCH, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 190, cols. 1190–5. Reported in The Times, 7 March, p.
7, from which the variant and responses are taken. In the debate on
going into Committee, George John Edition: current; Page: [243]
Shaw-Lefevre (1831–1928), M.P. for Reading, moved for “Papers Relative
to the Negotiations with the United States Government for Arbitration of
the Alabama Claims”

(col. 1167).

i think, sir, that no one can have listened to this debate without being
ready to admit that it has elicited statements of a singularly
gratifying and satisfactory nature, and it might have been hoped that we
were approaching to a very great degree of unanimity upon the essentials
of the question, had it not been for the two speeches of the honourable
Gentlemen who have just preceded me, and who have revived points of
International Law in connection with this dispute in a manner that would
almost lead one to suppose they had not read very attentively the
discussions which have previously taken place on the subject.1 I say
this, with the more regret, because no fault can be found with the tone
or feeling of either of those honourable Gentlemen; and in the case of
the honourable Gentleman opposite (Mr. Sandford) an amount of good
feeling towards America has been displayed which may perhaps surprise
some who sit on this side of the House, but which does not surprise me.
It seems to me that, in reviving these questions, those honourable
Gentlemen have ignored the distinction which has been the fundamental
and grand point on which the discussion has turned—I allude to the broad
distinction which writers on International Law recognize between trade
in contraband of war, and the use of a neutral country as a base of
military and naval operations. (Hear, hear.) It is true, and has not
been denied, that a ship-of-war might be exported from England to one of
two belligerents with no more objection or violation of International
Law than there would be in the case of exporting military stores; but in
that case there was this condition—that the ship ought to go direct to
the port of the belligerent for whom she is intended, without any
intermediate hostile operations, and thence might go forth to carry
devastation and destruction among the ships and commerce of the other
belligerent. But what has been done in the case of the Alabama was very
different from this. An emissary was sent by the Confederate States to
make arrangements for the fitting out in this country of a naval
expedition to levy war against the commerce of the North.2 The
honourable and learned Member for Dundalk (Sir George Bowyer) appeared
to think that that would be fair if both parties were allowed to be
equally benefited;3 but practically both parties never can be equally
benefited, for although the liberty may ostensibly be the same to each,
the fact generally is that only one party needs it, and is benefited,
while the other is not benefited. Again, if a neutral country allows its
territory to be made the basis from which a hostile expedition can be
fitted out, it Edition: current; Page: [244] permits this to be done in
a place which the opposite party is not permitted to go to for the
purpose of obstructing the operation. Suppose the Alabama had been
fitted out in a Confederate port, it would have been in the power of the
North, on receiving intelligence of this being the case, to have cut the
vessel out of the harbour, or intercepted its departure, or to have
bombarded and destroyed the dockyard in which it was under construction.
But they could not do that in a neutral country, and consequently such a
country, in permitting such a proceeding, would voluntarily have
committed a breach of neutrality, by giving the benefit of its
protection to a portion of the naval force of one belligerent against
the other. (Hear.) As to the question whether this country can be
required by a foreign country to enforce its own municipal laws, the
honourable Member for Maldon (Mr. Sandford) has gone so far as to attach
blame to the noble Lord the Secretary for Foreign Affairs for allowing
that question to be referred to an arbitrator.4 But I apprehend the
noble Lord has assented to nothing of the kind. The question is not
whether we have permitted a violation of our municipal law—with which
foreign countries have nothing to do; the question is, whether foreign
countries have a right to require of us the fulfilment of our
international duties? It is on the ground of international duty, and on
that ground only, that they can bring any complaint against us. The
question is simply this—are we bound by International Law to prevent
certain things from being done, and being so bound, did we do all we
could to fulfil that duty? It may have been that we were under
obligations to make fresh municipal laws if those in existence were not
sufficient to enable us to fulfil our international duties. Without
going any further into this question of International Law, I
congratulate the House and the country on the fact, now so obvious, that
the point at issue is an extremely small one. But if a very small point
prevents the settlement of a very great question, the smaller that point
the greater the reason for lamentation, and possibly for blame. I do not
think there is much room in the present case for blame in any quarter,
because this discussion, as well as the correspondence—and especially
this discussion—has brought out evidence that the two parties to the
correspondence have not thoroughly understood one another.5 (Hear.) The
noble Lord (Lord Stanley) aas it seems,a has not thoroughly understood
what the United States demanded;6 and, on the other hand, the United
States Government has not thoroughly understood what the noble Lord
refused. I apprehend that the United States have never demanded that the
question whether we were premature in recognizing the belligerent rights
of the Confederates, should be referred to the arbitrator. I do not
think they have ever claimed that, Edition: current; Page: [245] or
possibly could claim it, because they have never maintained that our
recognition, even if premature, was a violation of International Law. I
have seen it admitted again and again in strongly written statements of
American writers, and even, I believe, in the writings of Mr. Seward
himself, that our recognition of belligerent rights was a thing about
the time of which we had by International Law a right to decide for
ourselves.7 It was urged that what we did was unfriendly, precipitate,
and even unprecedented in its precipitation; but I am not aware that it
has ever been contended that by our act, unfriendly, precipitate, and
unprecedented though it might have been, we committed any violation of
International Law for which we owed them reparation. It has been
observed by my honourable Friend the Member for Reading (Mr.
Shaw-Lefevre), in his very able and conclusive speech, and it has also
been repeated in the very valuable remarks of my honourable Friend the
Member for Bradford (Mr. W.E. Forster), that what the Americans claim is
that they should be allowed to use this early recognition as an argument
to convince the arbitrator that the depredations of the Alabama would
probably not have taken place at all, or not to so great an extent, if
it had not been for this unfriendly act on our part.8 They contend that,
inasmuch as they have a right to reparation on different grounds, they
have a right to show that this conduct on our part has made the evil
worse than it would otherwise have been. Whether this would be a good
argument or not I will not say; but if it is a relevant one, they ought
to be allowed to use it; and, if it is not relevant, why should you
stipulate for its exclusion? If you are to stipulate for the exclusion
of every frivolous or irrelevant argument, I fear that you will have a
very long list of such stipulations. Surely anyone who is competent to
arbitrate between two great States is competent to decide also what are
relevant and what are frivolous arguments. I cannot help thinking that
no impartial person would have any difficulty in allowing either side
full liberty to introduce what argument it pleased, and that we might
safely allow him to listen to this or to anything else that might be
urged in aggravation of the claim against us for damages. Would it be
worth while to exclude one fallacious argument when we cannot exclude
all? We must leave some latitude, limited only by the check which the
good sense and forbearance of the disputants on either side would impose
upon them. The United States might stipulate on their part that we
should not use irrelevant arguments, but they have not done so. (Hear,
hear.) This, however, is only a part of the case; and perhaps I should
not have risen if I had not wished to say how cordially I welcome those
hints which have been thrown out by the noble Lord (Lord Stanley), and
the observations which have been made by my honourable Friend (Mr. W.E.
Forster) as to the possibility of our settling this question in some
Edition: current; Page: [246] other way than by arbitration.9 Indeed, I
do not very clearly see what arbitration is specially required for. The
case is this—I believe there are few in this country now, and but for
the last two speakers,10 I might have said I should hope there were none
in this House—whatever might have been the case formerly—who were
disposed to deny that we owed reparation of some sort, or in some
degree, to the United States—it is quite clear that the noble Lord
thinks so—and therefore this is not a case where we want arbitration. If
we owe anything we must pay it, and what we want is some one to say, not
whether we ought to pay, but how much. This would be best decided, not
by an arbitrator, but by a mixed Commission. (Hear, hear.) The principal
duty which this mixed Commission would have to discharge would be to
investigate each particular claim, and to say what might be rejected
altogether, and what had nothing particular to do with the depredations
of the Alabama. It would have in fact to ascertain the real damage which
the commerce of the United States had received from this act of
negligence on our part in letting the Alabama leave our ports. I cannot
but think that there is a great increase of good and friendly feeling on
both sides. The noble Lord admits that the Americans are coming to more
reasonable views, and with the great change of opinion which has taken
place in this country I venture to think that there are now few people
who do not believe that the arbitrator would decide against us, and that
it would be extremely for the interests of the country that he should so
decide. (Hear, hear.) In this state of things if some person—I will not
say my honourable Friend the Member for Birmingham (Mr. Bright), but if
any person not unacceptable to the Americans, were sent to them, and
negotiations re-opened, if those negotiations began with an admission
that we owed them reparation, and that the object was merely to
ascertain what was the amount that was reasonably due from us, I cannot
believe that there would be any serious difficulty in arriving at a
settlement without going beyond the two disputants. I most earnestly
hope that something of this sort was intended in the hint which Mr.
Seward has thrown out.11 It is, besides, not unworthy of consideration,
that the grand point is the settlement of what is to be henceforth the
law of nations; and that question is settled, so far as we are
concerned, the moment we admit that reparation is due from us. If we
admit that we owe reparation for the depredations which the Alabama,
without any bad intention on our part, was enabled to commit, then I
apprehend that a question of International Law which was much disputed,
and which may again be the subject of quarrel, will, so far as this
country and the United States are concerned, be for ever settled.
(Cheers.)

[The motion was withdrawn (col. 1198).]

Edition: current; Page: [247]


88.: The State of Ireland
 12 MARCH, 1868

“Speech on Mr. Maguire’s Motion on the State of Ireland, March 12,
1868,” in Chapters and Speeches on the Irish Land Question (London:
Longmans, et al., 1870), pp. 108–25. In PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 190, cols.
1516–32. Reported in The Times, 13 March, p. 7, from which variants and
responses are taken. Writing to John Elliot Cairnes on 4 December, 1869,
 mentions the impending publication of Chapters and Speeches, and
says that the text is taken from Parliamentary Debates, but that “not
being a written speech,” this one “could not be given so exactly [as No.
21, q.v.], but the newspaper report was carefully corrected for Hansard
by myself, and is tolerably adequate” (CW, Vol. XVII, p. 1668). He
nonetheless made some minor alterations, recorded here in the variant
notes. On 10 March, John Francis Maguire had moved “That this House will
immediately resolve itself into a Committee, with the view of taking
into consideration the condition and circumstances of Ireland” (col.
1314), thus occasioning this debate.

it was with a feeling, I will not say of disappointment—because there
can be no disappointment where there has not previously been hope—but of
regret, that I witnessed the “beggarly account of empty boxes”1 which
the Government has laid before us, instead of an Irish policy. My
dissatisfaction was not so much with what they did, or what they refused
to do, on the subject of the land—although I look upon that question as
outweighing all the rest put together, and I believe that without a
satisfactory dealing with it, nothing can be done which will be at all
effectual. I am afraid the time is far distant when it would be fair to
expect that a Government, and especially a Conservative Government,
should be found in advance of public opinion—which I cannot deny that
the present Government would be, if they were to propose such a measure
on the Irish Land question as I conceive would alone be effectual to
settle it. But what we have a right to expect even from a Conservative
Government, at all events from a Conservative Government which professes
a Liberal policy—even with the qualifying adjunct, “truly Liberal”—is
that they shall be on a level with the opinion of the people: and this
they most assuredly are not, on the subject of the Irish Church. If
there ever was a question on which I might say the whole human race has
made up its mind, it is this. I concur in every word that was said, and
every feeling that was expressed, by my right honourable friend the
Member for Calne (Mr. Lowe) on this subject:2 and I thank him from my
heart for his manly and outspoken declaration in reference to that great
scandal and iniquity, which was so well described by the right
honourable gentleman now at the head of the Government (Mr. Disraeli),
in a speech which, although last year he endeavoured to explain away, I
am not aware Edition: current; Page: [248] that he has ever disavowed.3
It is an institution which could not be submitted to by any country,
except at the point of the sword. Now, on this subject the Government
have not shown themselves altogether inflexible. The noble Lord the
Chief Secretary for Ireland has expressed his willingness in some degree
to entertain the principle of religious equality,4 and I thank him for
it; but, as has been remarked by my honourable friend the Member for
Manchester (Mr. Jacob Bright), he proposed to do it—if at all—by
levelling up instead of levelling down.5 The noble Lord is willing that
every valley ashalla be exalted; but he does not go on to the succeeding
clause, and say that every mountain and hill shall be laid low.6 (Hear,
hear, and laughter.) So long as the national property which is
administered by the Episcopal Church of Ireland is not diverted from its
present purpose, the noble Lord has no objection at all to this
country’s saddling itself with the endowment of another great hierarchy,
which, if effected on the principle of religious equality, would be a
great deal more costly than even that which now exists. (Hear, hear.)
Does the noble Lord really think it possible that the people of England
will submit to this? I may be permitted, as one who, in common with many
of my betters, have been subjected to the charge of being Utopian, to
congratulate the Government on having joined that goodly company. It is,
perhaps, too complimentary to call them Utopians, they ought rather to
be called dys-topians, or cacotopians. What is commonly called Utopian
is something too good to be practicable; but what they appear to favour
is too bad to be practicable. Not only would England and Scotland never
submit to it, but the Roman Catholic clergy of Ireland refuse it. They
will not take your bribe. (Hear, hear.) As in many other things I differ
from the honourable and learned Member for Oxford (Mr. Neate), who moved
the Amendment,7 so my opinion on the subject of Irish remedies is
directly contrary to his. Whereas the honourable and learned Member
thinks that the real obstacle to the peace and prosperity of Ireland is
the proposal of extravagant and impossible remedies, my opinion, on the
contrary, is that the real obstacle is not the proposal of extravagant
and impossible remedies, but the persistent unwillingness of the House
even to look at any remedy which they have pre-judged to be extravagant
and impossible. (Hear, hear.) When a country has been so long in
possession of full power over another, as this country has over Edition:
current; Page: [249] Ireland, and still leaves it in the state of
feeling which now exists in Ireland, there is a strong presumption that
the remedy required must be much stronger and more drastic than any
which has yet been applied. (Hear, hear.) All the presumption is in
favour of the necessity of some great change. Great and obstinate evils
require great remedies. If the House does not think so—if it still has
faith in small remedies, I exhort it to make haste and adopt them. It
has already lost a great deal of time. Counting from 1829, which was the
time when this country first began to govern Ireland, or even to profess
to govern Ireland, for the sake of Ireland,8 thirty-nine years have
elapsed, and during that time, although there may have been some
material progress, as there has been everywhere else, moral progress, in
reconciling Ireland to our Government, and to the Union with us, has not
been made, and does not seem likely soon to be made, unless we change
our policy. Honourable gentlemen prefer to soothe themselves with
statistics, flattering themselves with the idea that Ireland is
improving, and that the evil was greater at some former time than it is
now. My right honourable friend the Member for Calne has told us that we
have no occasion to care for Fenianism, and that it is bnotb of any
consequence.9 I do not suppose my right honourable friend thinks that
the remedies proposed by me or any one else for the benefit of Ireland
are intended to conciliate the Fenians. I know very little of the
Fenians. I do not pretend to know what their opinions are, nor do I
believe my right honourable friend knows them a bit better. (A laugh.)
We do know, however, that they desire what I greatly deprecate—a violent
separation of Ireland from this country; and they desire this with such
bitterness and animosity that there is no chance of conciliating them
cby any of the remedies proposed by himself or othersc. But the peculiar
and growing danger in the state of Ireland is this—that there is nearly
universal discontent, and very general disaffection. Honourable
gentlemen need not flatter themselves that this is an evil which can be
safely disregarded. Ireland has had rebellions before. As a rebellion
this recent one is nothing—it is contemptible. A great deal has been
said about the circumstance that no person of consequence, personally or
socially, has put himself at the head of it. It was not likely that any
one who had anything to lose would do so. Is it within the range of
possibility that an insurrection could be successful in Ireland at this
particular time? (Hear, hear, from the Ministerial benches.) What does
Mitchel himself say of it?10 This is the reason why every one who has
something to lose (and every one who is an occupant of land has
something to lose) will not, until he sees a greater chance of success,
countenance Edition: current; Page: [250] rebellion, or throw any other
difficulty in the way of suppressing it than by sheltering from the
police those who are involved in it. That is not the danger. The danger
is one of which there is the strongest evidence. My own information is
derived from many trustworthy persons, not of extreme opinions, persons
whose idea of remedial measures for Ireland falls far short of mine, but
who are unanimously of opinion that the state of Ireland is more
dangerous at this moment than at any former period, and that the feeling
of the people is one of general discontent and wide disaffection. (Cries
of Name.) Gentlemen who hold land in Ireland do not think so; but they
would be the last persons to find it out. Persons in possession of power
are usually the last to find out what is thought of them by their
inferiors. They dawake from their dream and find it out when they little
expect it. There are two circumstances which make the disaffection more
alarming at this time than at any former period since the rebellion of
1798. One is a circumstance which has never existed before. For the
first time, the discontent in Ireland rests on a background of several
ions of Irish across the Atlantic. This is a fact which is not
likely to diminish. The number of Irish in America is constantly
increasing. Their power to influence the political conduct of the United
States is increasing, and will daily increase; and is there any
probability that the American-Irish will come to hate this country less
than they do at the present moment? The noble Lord the Chief Secretary
for Ireland said truly that many Irish go to our colonies, and that they
remain loyal.11 But why? The Irish who go to those colonies find
everything ethere whiche they seek in vain here. (Hear.) They have the
land; they have no fsectarianf church; they have even a separate
Legislature. All this they have under the British Crown and the British
flag. If you gave all this to Ireland the people would be tranquil
enough there. They will be so with much less than that; but those who go
to America, on the contrary, gassociate England with the deprivation of
their rights, andg will be loyal only to the American Government, while
their feeling towards England is, and must be, directly opposite to that
of the Irish who go to Australia and the other English Colonies. That is
one most serious cause of danger in Ireland. Another is that the
disaffection has become, more than at any former period, one of
nationality. The Irish were taught that feeling by Englishmen. England
has only even professed to treat the Irish people as part of the same
nation with ourselves, since 1800.12 How did we treat them before that
time? I will not go into the subject of the penal laws, hbecause it may
be said that those laws affected the Irish not as Irish but as
Catholicsh.13 I will only mention the Edition: current; Page: [251]
manner in which they were treated merely as Irish. I grant that, for
these things, no man now living has any share of the blame; we are all
ashamed of them; but “the evil that men do lives after them.”14 First of
all, this House declared the importation of Irish cattle a public
nuisance.15 When we refused to receive Irish cattle, the Irish thought
they would slaughter and salt them, to try whether we would receive them
in that shape. But that was not allowed.16 Then they thought that if
they could not send the cattle or the flesh, they might send the hides
in the form of leather. No; that was not allowed either.17 Being thus
denied admission for cattle in any shape, they tried if they imighti be
allowed to do anything with respect to sheep; and they commenced
exporting wool to this country. No; we would not take their wool.18 Then
they began to manufacture it, and tried if we would take the
manufactured article. This was worst of all, and we compelled our
deliverer, William III, of “pious and immortal memory,”19 to promise his
Parliament that he would put down the Irish woollen manufacture.20
(Hear, hear.) This was not, I think, a brotherly course, or at all like
treating Ireland as a part of the same nation. If we had been determined
to impress upon Ireland in the strongest manner that she was regarded as
a totally different and hostile nation, that was exactly the course to
pursue. In fact, Ireland was treated in that thoroughly heathenish
manner in which it was then customary for nations to treat other nations
whom they had conquered jor were afraid ofj—with the feeling that the
dependent nation had no rights which the superior nation was bound to
respect. It is unjust, however, to call that feeling heathenish, since
it belonged only to the worst times of heathenism, before the Stoic
philosophy—before the great, the immortal Marcus Antoninus proclaimed
the kinship of all mankind.21 From the year 1800, these things began to
change; but down to 1829 it may be said that though in some sense we
treated Ireland as a sister, it was as sister Cinderella. Dust and ashes
were good enough for her; purple and fine linen were reserved for her
sisters. (A laugh.) From 1829, however, we ceased to govern Ireland in
that way. From that time there has been no feeling in this country with
respect to Ireland, but a continuance Edition: current; Page: [252] of
the really sisterly feeling which then commenced. Since that time it has
been the sincere desire of all parties in England to govern Ireland for
her good (hear); but we have grievously failed in knowing how to set
about it, and kbeen very slow in learning the lessonk. Let me take a
brief review of the things done for Ireland during that time. They may
be easily counted. First, we made the landlord the tithe-proctor.22 That
was a right thing to do; it prevented a great deal of bloodshed, and an
enormous amount of annoyance and disaffection. I only wish it had been
done before it had become practically impossible to collect the tithes
in the old way. But, after all, this was merely changing the mode of
taking something from the Irish people: it was not taking less. Next, we
gave to Ireland a really unsectarian education.23 Ireland, long before
England, received from us an elementary education which came down to the
lowest grade of the people; and by degrees she also obtained unsectarian
education in the higher branches. This is the most solid, and by far the
greatest benefit we have yet conferred upon Ireland: and this, if the
proposal of the Government is adopted, we are going in a great measure
to give up.24 In your difficulties, this is what you are going to throw
over. You are going, in a great measure, to sacrifice the best thing you
have done for Ireland, to save the bad things. (Hear, hear.) The third
thing did more credit to our kindness and generosity than to our wisdom.
It was the £8,000,000—ultimately amounting to £10,000,000—that we gave
at the time of the Irish famine, for the relief of the destitution in
that country.25 Nobody will say that it was not right to give it; but I
do not think that a people ever laid out £8,000,000 or £10,000,000 to
meet an immediate emergency, in a manner calculated to do so very minute
a quantity of permanent good. We were lavish in the amount that we
expended. We certainly saved many lives—though there were probably a
greater number that we could not save—and for that we are entitled to
all credit. In a case of desperate distress there is in this country no
grudging of money. All parties are united in that respect. But when
circumstances obliged us to lay out this great sum, we had an
opportunity of doing permanent good, by reclaiming the waste lands of
Ireland for the benefit of the people of Ireland; and if we had done
that, we should probably never have heard anything about fixity of
tenure in the shape in which we hear of it now. At that time there was a
sufficient quantity of waste land in Ireland to have enabled us Edition:
current; Page: [253] to establish a large portion of the Irish
population, by their own labour, in the condition of peasant proprietors
of the land which they would themselves have reclaimed. We lost that
opportunity, and we lost it for ever: because since that time fully one
half of all the reclaimable waste land which existed at the time of Sir
Richard Griffith’s survey has been reclaimed;26 that is, it has been got
hold of by the landlords; it has been reclaimed for the landlords,
mainly, or very largely, by the aid of public money lent to them for the
purpose. Therefore, it is no longer possible to produce these great
results in Ireland merely by reclaiming the waste lands. The opportunity
lost never can be regained; and now, therefore, you are asked to do much
larger, and, as it appears to you, much more revolutionary things. There
is only one more thing that we have done which is worth mentioning, and
that is the Encumbered Estates Act.27 The Encumbered Estates Act was a
statesmanlike measure; it was a measure admirably conceived, and
excellent, provided it had been combined with other measures. Even as it
was, it was in many respects a very valuable measure. In the first
place, it effected a very great simplification of title. In the next, it
to a great extent liberated Ireland from the great evil of needy
landlords. But there is another side to the matter. The Act has had
another effect, which was not, I believe, anticipated by anybody, at
least to the extent to which it has been realized. It has shown to
Ireland that there might be a still greater evil than needy
landlords—namely, grasping landlords. Those who have bought estates
under the Act are, I believe, in the great majority of cases, much
harder landlords than their predecessors; and naturally so, because they
had no previous connexion with the localities in which the estates they
have purchased are situated. They were strangers—I do not mean to
Ireland—but to the neighbourhood of their new properties. Many of them
came from the towns. At all events, they had no connexion with the
tenants, and did not feel that the tenants had any moral claim upon
them, beyond the claim—a claim they ought to have recognised—which all
who are dependent on us have upon us. They bought the land as a mere
pecuniary speculation, and have very generally administered it as a mere
speculation. Not unfrequently the first step they took was to raise the
rents to the utmost possible amount, and in many cases they have ejected
tenants because they could not pay those rents. These, then, are the
things that we have done, since we began to do the best we could, the
best we knew how to do, for Ireland; and I do not think they are lwell
calculated to remove from the minds of the Irish people the bitterness
which had been produced by our previous mode of government. If you say
that there was nothing better to be done, you confess your incompetency
to Edition: current; Page: [254] govern Ireland. I maintain that there
is no country under heaven which it is not possible to govern, and to
govern in such a way that it shall be contented. If there was anything
better to be done, and you would not do it, your confession is still
worse. But I do you more justice than you do yourselves. I believe that
if msmallm measures would have sufficed you would have granted them; and
it is because nsmalln measures will not suffice, because you must have
large measures, because you must look at the thing on a much larger
scale than you now do, because you must be willing to take into
consideration what you think extravagant proposals—it is because of
that, and not from any want of good intentions, that you have failed.
The present state of Ireland is, I hope, gradually convincing you, if it
does not do so all at once, that you must do something on a much larger
scale than you have ever acted upon before, whether the particular
things proposed to you are the right things or not. It is under this
conviction that I have thought it my duty not to keep back three-fourths
of what I believe to be the truth in regard to Ireland, for fear of
prejudicing minor measures which the very people who propose them do not
expect to produce any very large results. As to the plan which I have
proposed—and whether honourable gentlemen think that it is right or
wrong, surely they will admit that it is good to have it discussed—as to
that plan, it seems necessary that I should in the first place state
what it is; for it does not appear to have been at all correctly
understood by most of those who have attacked it, and least of all by
the noble Lord the Chief Secretary for Ireland.28 When I listened to his
speech, I did not orecogniseo my own plan. It is evident that the
arduous duties of his important position had not left him time to read
my pamphlet,29 and that he had been compelled to trust to the
representation of some one who had given him a very unfaithful account
of it. The noble Lord seemed to think that my plan was that the State
should buy the land from the present proprietors, and re-sell or re-let
it to the tenants. Now, I have said nothing whatever about buying the
land. I should think it extremely objectionable to make that a part of
the plan. I do not want the rent-charge to be bought up by the tenants,
because that would absorb the capital which I hope to see them employ in
the improvement of the land. There is another mistake which seems to
have been made pretty generally. Those who have objected to my proposal
have always argued as if I was going to force perpetuity of tenure on
unwilling tenants. I propose nothing of the sort. There are at present
in Ireland a very great number of tenants who do not pay a full rent.
The most improving landlords are precisely those who are the most
moderate in their exactions. Now, it is an indispensable part of my plan
that perpetuity should only be granted at a full rent—a fair rent, not
an excessive, but still a full rent; and Edition: current; Page: [255]
probably, therefore, many of these tenants will prefer to remain as they
are. They might not do so if they were never to have another chance of
gaining a perpetuity; but as according to my plan they would retain the
power of claiming a perpetuity at any future time, on a valuation to be
then made, I think it extremely likely that many would wish to go on as
they are. Many landlords, too, might prefer to arrange amicably with
their tenants at something less than a full rent, in order to retain the
present relations with them: and these, I believe, would be the best
landlords, the most improving landlords, those who are on the best terms
with their tenants, and whom it is most important to retain in the
country. Many practical objections have been raised to the plan, to all
of which I believe that I have answers; but there is a preliminary
question that I should like to ask. Does the House really wish that
these difficulties should be met? Because it is very possible that in
the minds of honourable gentlemen the question may be concluded and
closed by pa preliminary objection; such, for instance, asp that it is
an interference with the rights of property. If honourable gentlemen are
determined by this single circumstance—if this is enough to make them
absolutely resist and condemn the plan—it is probable that they would be
rather sorry than glad if it is possible to answer the practical
objections, and show that the plan would work; and in that case I cannot
expect to have a very favourable or very unprejudiced audience when I
attempt to answer them. And then there is another sort of preliminary
objection: that which was made by my right honourable friend the Member
for Calne, in the name of political economy.30 In my right honourable
friend’s mind political economy appears to stand for a qparticularq set
of practical maxims. To him it is not a science, it is not an
exposition, not a theory of the manner in which causes produce effects:
it is a set of practical rules, and these practical rules are
indefeasible. My right honourable friend thinks that a maxim of
political economy if good in England must be good in Ireland. (Hear, and
a laugh.) But that is like saying that because there is but one science
of astronomy, and the same law of gravitation holds for the earth and
the planets, therefore the earth and the planets do not move in
different orbits. So far from being a set of maxims and rules, to be
applied without regard to times, places, and circumstances, the function
of political economy is to enable us to find the rules which ought to
govern any state of circumstances with which we have to
deal—circumstances which are never the same in any two cases. I do not
know in political economy more than I know in any other art ror
sciencer, a single practical rule that must be applicable to all cases;
and I am sure that no one is at all capable of determining what is the
right political economy for any country until he knows its
circumstances. My right honourable friend perhaps thinks that what is
good political economy for England must be Edition: current; Page: [256]
good for India—or perhaps for the savages in the back woods of America.
My right honourable friend has been very plain spoken,31 and I will be
plain spoken too. Political economy has a great many enemies; but its
worst enemies are some of its friends, and I do not know that it has a
more dangerous enemy than my right honourable friend. It is such modes
of argument as he is in the habit of employing that have made political
economy so thoroughly unpopular with a large and not the least
philanthropic portion of the people of England. In my right honourable
friend’s mind, political economy seems to exist as a bar even to the
consideration of anything that is proposed for the benefit of the
economic condition of any people in any but the old ways: as if science
was a thing not to guide our judgment, but to stand in its place—a thing
which scans dispense with the necessity of studying the particular case,
and determining how a given cause will operate under its circumstances.
Political economy has never in my eyes possessed this character.
Political economy in my eyes is a science by means of which we are
enabled to form a judgment as to what each particular case requires; but
it does not supply us with a ready-made judgment upon any case, and
there cannot be a greater enemy to political economy than he who
represents it in that light. (The honourable member was here interrupted
by expressions of impatience from several members.) tI presume that the
House will not be unwilling to allow me to state my answer to the attack
which has been made upon me by the right honourable gentleman. (Hear.) A
good deal has been said about the sacredness of property. Now, this
regard for the sacredness of property is connected witht a feeling which
I respect. (Ironical cheers and laughter.) But the sacredness of
property is not violated by taking away property for the public good, if
full compensation is given; and the interference that I propose is not
more an interference, it is not even so much an interference, with
property, as taking land for public improvements. Then, too, a man’s
right to his property is sacred uunless that property is required for
public purposesu; but is not a man’s right to his person still more
sacred? And yet no man is allowed to dispose of his person—in marriage,
for instance—except in such way as the law provides (great laughter);
nor will it allow him to relieve himself from the contract, except on
very special grounds, to be decided on by a Court of Justice. To those
honourable gentlemen who are fond of applying the term confiscation to
the plan that I propose,32 I will say that I recal them to the English
language. I assure them that it is possible to argue against any
proposition, if need be, and to refute what we think wrong, without
altering the meaning of words, by doing which Edition: current; Page:
[257] people only succeed in imposing upon themselves and others. How
can that be confiscation in which the “fisc” instead of receiving
anything, has only to pay; by which no individual will be the poorer,
but many, I hope, a good deal richer? (Oh!) It may be objectionable, but
that is a matter of argument; it may be undesirable, because the case
may not be deemed strong enough to require it; but let us fight against
opinions from which we differ without extending the war to the English
language. I recommend to honourable gentlemen to be always strictly
conservative of the English tongue. (Oh!) I will now come to arguments
of a more practical kind. (Ironical cheers and laughter.) I will first
mention the strongest argument I have ever heard, either in this House
or elsewhere, against my plan—namely, that if we substitute the
Government in the place of the present proprietors, we shall expose the
Government to great difficulties, and make it still more unpopular than
it has ever yet been.33 I have two answers to make to this objection,
and if honourable gentlemen are not impressed by the one they may
perhaps be convinced by the other. Undoubtedly, if the proposal is not
received by the tenants as a great boon—if they do not think that
perpetuity of tenure on the terms I have suggested is a gift worth
accepting, then I admit that there is nothing to say in favour of my
plan; it would be idle to propose it. If, when we offer to the tenantry
of Ireland that which they desire more than anything else in the world—a
perfect security of tenure—the certainty that they will never have more
to pay than they pay at first—that everything which their industry
produces shall belong to them alone—if they do not think that a boon
worth having, I have nothing more to say. But this is a most improbable
supposition. A similar prediction was made about the serfs of Russia.
Many people said and believed that the emancipated serfs would never
consent to pay rent, especially to the Government, for land which they
had been accustomed to receive gratis when in their servile condition.
That was the general prediction; but we do not hear that the prediction
has been fulfilled. Everything seems to be going on smoothly, and the
serfs, as far as is known, pay their rents regularly. This, then, is one
answer. I have another which is more decisive. If it is thought that it
will not do to make the Government a substitute for the landlord, I
answer that this is an objection affecting only vthe smallestv part of
my plan—an additional provision, not for the benefit of the tenant, but
for the convenience and consolation of the landlords (laughter)—that
they should be allowed to receive their rents from the public Treasury
wor in Consolsw. If, after the rent is converted into a rent-charge, it
be thought that the landlords should, like other rent-chargers, be left
to the ordinary law of the country to collect their dues, by all means
leave them to the ordinary legal remedies. If it be thought injurious to
the public interest to give xthe proposedx consolation to the landlords,
then do not Edition: current; Page: [258] give it. So falls to the
ground a full half of the dissertation of the right honourable Member
for Calne on the fatal consequences of the plan. But I must say that I
do not believe the landlords as a body would wish to exchange their
present condition for that of being mere receivers of dividends from the
State. I observe that those who argue against any plan supposed to be
contrary to the interest of landlords, invariably assume that the
landlords are destitute of every spark of patriotic feeling. I do not
think so. I believe that a large proportion of the landlords would
prefer to retain their yconnexion with the landy; that they would make
private arrangements with their tenants on terms more favourable to them
than my plan would give, and that so Ireland would retain a large
proportion of the best class of landlordsz, while the tenants, knowing
that if they choose they can obtain a perpetual tenure, will feel
themselves in perfect securityz. Another objection made against my plan
is, that many of the holdings are too small.34 But Lord Dufferin states
in his pamphlet that the consolidation of small holdings has ceased—that
the number of separate holdings has not diminished in the last fifteen
years.35 We may conclude from this that the holdings, generally
speaking, are as large as is required by the present state of the
industry and capital of Ireland; because, if that were not so, I cannot
but believe that the movement of consolidation would still be going on.
I perfectly admit that a great many tenants hold smaller holdings than
could be desired. But if the holdings are so small that the tenants
cannot live on them, and, at the same time, pay the amount of rent that
would be required, they will soon fall into arrears; and, if they fall
into arrears, it is a necessary part of my plan that they should be
ejected. (Hear, hear.) This would enable the landlord, if he thought
fit, in every case of eviction, to consolidate farms; and whether he did
so or not, the consequence would be the substitution of a better class
of tenants. It is part of my plan that the landlord, if the holding were
forfeited by non-payment of the rent-charge, should choose the tenant’s
successor, and that the consent of the landlord should be necessary to
any sale of the occupier’s interest. Another objection which has been
urged is, that in Ireland lands held on long leases are always the worst
farmed. Now, these are almost always old leases, granted to middlemen.
These middlemen hold the farms at low rents; but I never heard that they
granted leases at low rents to the sub-tenants; and who on earth would
or could improve under competition rents? What interest has a man in
improving, who has promised a rent he can never pay, and who therefore
knows that, lease or no lease, he may be turned out at any moment? If
the farmers have undertaken to pay a rent equal to double what they make
from the land, is it likely that they will exert themselves to double
the produce, merely for the benefit of the landlord? One of Edition:
current; Page: [259] the most extraordinary circumstances connected with
the attack made on my plan by my right honourable friend the Member for
Calne, is that he went on ascribing all manner of evil effects to
peasant proprietorship,36 and yet from the beginning to the end of his
speech he never made allusion to any of the arguments in its favour. One
would have thought that he had never heard the common and principal
argument, that the sentiment of property, the certainty that athe fruits
of a man’s labour are to be his owna is the most powerful of all
incentives to labour and frugality. (Hear, hear.) This is the universal
experience of every country where peasant proprietorship exists. And
this brings me to the noble Lord the Chief Secretary for Ireland, who
gave three reasons why peasant proprietorship is not desirable.37 These
reasons were, that it does not prevent revolution, that it does not
obviate famine, and that it leads to great indebtedness on the part of
the holders. In regard to the first of these reasons, the case which the
noble Lord appealed to, that of France, is certainly not in his favour;
for in France the revolutions have not been made by the peasant
proprietors, but by the artizans bin the townsb (hear, hear); all that
the peasant proprietors have had to do with them being to put them down.
(Hear, hear.) Whether it was right or wrong—whether it was for good or
evil—to substitute the present Government of France for the Republic, it
was the peasant proprietors who did it. As to the co-existence of great
famines and small properties, the noble Lord was rather unhappy in the
instance he gave of East Prussia, for it so happens that East Prussia is
not a country of peasant proprietors, there being next to no small
properties there. It is the Rhine Provinces of Prussia that are a
country of small proprietors, and the noble Lord did not tell us of any
famine there. With reference to the argument as to the indebtedness of
the small proprietors, I rather think the noble Lord is indebted to me
for one instance he gave—that of the canton of Zurich;38 but in adducing
that instance he omitted to mention the testimony given, by the same
author, to the “superhuman” industry of the peasant proprietors there.39
If we take the instance generally appealed to on this subject, that of
France; M. Léonce de Lavergne stated some ten years ago that the
mortgages on the landed property of France did not on the average exceed
10 per cent of its value, and on the rural property did not exceed 5 per
cent; and he estimated the burthen of interest at 10 per cent of the
income.40 He added that these Edition: current; Page: [260] burthens
were not increasing, but diminishing. It is true that this average is
taken from all the landed properties in France, and not solely from the
small properties; but the large proprietors must be very unlike other
large landed proprietors if their estates are not generally burthened to
at least this extent, so that the average is probably fairly applicable
to the small properties. With regard to the danger of sub-letting, what
cshould a man who has received a perpetuity sub-let it forc? He could
only sub-let at the rent he himself paid, unless he had in the meantime
improved his holding, and if he had done so he would have a good right
to be allowed to realize his improvements, if he pleased, by sub-letting
at an increased rent. dBut if he had not improved the land he would be
no gainer by sub-letting.d It is thought that even if he did not
sub-let, he would subdivide. But to suppose that subdivision would be
general, is to ignore altogether one of the strongest motives that can
operate on the mind. There is nothing like the possession of a property
in the land by the actual cultivator, for inspiring him with industry
and a desire to accumulate. It is not necessary to suppose that this
influence would operate on the whole body of tenant proprietors. If it
acted only on one-half, a great deal would be gained. Let honourable
gentlemen consider what an accumulation of savings there is in the hands
of Irish farmers. I must say that it reflects great credit on the
landlords of Ireland, taken as a body, that the tenants should have been
able to accumulate such almost incredible sums as it is admitted that
they have. Well, what is done with these savings? The farmer carries
them anywhere but to the farm. (Hear, hear.) They are invested in
everything but the improvement of his holding; eand this is a most
striking circumstance,e showing that the very landlords through whose
forbearance these sums have been accumulated, are not trusted by the
tenants; or, if they trust the landlord himself, they do not trust his
heir, whom they do not know, or his creditor who may come into
possession, or the stranger to whom he may be obliged to sell. But under
the small proprietary system, these sums would be brought out and
applied to the farms, and there is enough of them to make all Ireland
blossom like the rose.41 Tenants who had given such proof of forethought
would be more likely to provide for their younger sons by buying more
land than by subdividing their own holdings. Moreover, it must be
remembered that a bridge has now been built to America, over which the
younger sons might cross. According to the testimony of Lord Dufferin,
marriages are already less early in Ireland than they used to be, and
many farmers have become sensible of the disadvantage of subdividing the
small holdings.42 It may be thought that owing to the competition which
exists for land,f those who hold at a full rent Edition: current; Page:
[261] might gsub-let at an increase, heven if they could noth sell their
interest for a large sum of money. But even if this worst result should
happen, the purchaser would, even then, be in as good a condition as the
Ulster tenant would be in, if the tenant right, which he enjoys by a
precarious custom, were secured to him by law: and this tenant right,
even while resting only on custom, has been found to give a considerable
feeling of security, and some encouragement to improvement. Then I am
asked, what my scheme would do for the agricultural labourers of
Ireland?43 It would give to them what is found most valuable in all
countries possessing peasant proprietors—the hope of acquiring landed
property. This hope is what animates the wonderful industry of the
peasantry of Flanders, most of whom have only short leases, but who,
because they may hope, by exertion, to become owners of land, set an
example of industry and thrift to all Europe. (Hear, hear.) My plan is
called an extreme one, but if its principle were accepted, the extent of
its application would be in the hands of the House. Let the House look
at the question in a large way, and admit that rights of property,
subject to just compensation, must give way to the public interest. If
the Commission which I propose44 were appointed, it would soon find out
what iconditions and limitationsi might be applied in practice. I could
myself suggest many jsuchj. I would not undertake that I myself would
support them, but the House might. For instance, if it were thought that
the holdings were too small, the holders of all farms below a certain
extent might receive, not a perpetuity at once, but only the hope of it.
Leases might be given to them, and the claim to a perpetuity might be
made dependent on their, in the meantime, improving the land. Again,
such a change as I propose is less required in the case of grazing than
of arable land: confine it then, if you choose, in the first instance,
to arable land, dealing with the purely grazing farms on some other
plan, such as that of buying up such of them as might advantageously be
converted into arable, and re-selling them in smaller lots. It is not an
essential part of the scheme that every tenant should have an actual
perpetuity, but only that every tenant who actually tills the soil
should have the power of obtaining a perpetuity on an impartial
valuation. I believe that as the plan comes to be more considered, its
difficulties will, in a great measure, disappear, and the House will be
more inclined to view it with favour than at present. (Hear, hear.)

[The debate continued on Maguire’s motion on 13 and 16 March, when it
was withdrawn (col. 1792).]

Edition: current; Page: [262]


89.: Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections [1]
 26 MARCH, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 191, cols. 308–11. Reported in The Times, 27 March,
p. 7, from which variants and responses are taken. In preparation for
the debate on “A Bill for Amending the Laws Relating to Election
Petitions, and Providing More Effectually for the Prevention of Corrupt
Practices at Elections,” 31 Victoria (13 Feb., 1868), PP, 1867–68, II,
267–86,  wrote on 27 January to Edwin Chadwick asking him for a
summary of his recommendations for a bill against electoral corruption.
The debate in which he spoke was on the Bill as amended in Committee
(ibid., pp. 291–307). After the debate, he wrote to William Dougal
Christie to say that he had “broke[n] ground on the subject of the two
or three most important of your [Christie’s] suggestions respecting a
bribery bill”

(CW, Vol. XVII, pp. 1355, 1380).

sir, if the question were solely between the Bill of Her Majesty’s
Government and the Amendment,1 I should have no hesitation in at once
deciding for the Bill. Not that it corresponds or comes up in all
respects to my notion of what such a Bill should be. Nor do I believe
that by any one expedient—and there is only one expedient in this
Bill—we can hope to put down corrupt practices. If the House are in
earnest in their desire to put down corrupt practices at elections—and I
am bound to believe that they are, however little credit they receive
for such earnestness out of doors—I apprehend they will be obliged to
have recourse, not to one, but to several expedients. Nevertheless, I
think favourably of the Bill, because though it does in reality only one
thing, that thing is a vigorous one, and shows an adequate sense of the
emergency. It shows a sense that, in order to put down this great evil,
it is necessary to go out of the common path. The truth is that, however
possible it may be for Committees of this House to be impartial on the
question to whom the seat shall be given—and I do not deny that they are
often impartial in that respect, nor is it hopeless that they might be
always so—nobody out of this House, and I think I may almost add in it,
believes that so long as the jurisdiction remains in this House the
penalties against the giver of the bribe will ever be seriously
enforced. There are several reasons for this, some of which, perhaps,
had better be understood than expressed. (A laugh.) To confine myself to
what may be said with safety; any tribunal that acts only occasionally
as a tribunal, still more any person called for the first time so to
act, as is often the case with Members of Parliament, has naturally a
very strong indisposition to convict: and still more is this the case
when those who have to decide are men of the same class, and the same
general cast of feelings, and subject to the same temptations as the
Edition: current; Page: [263] accused, and men of whom it must be said
that hitherto they have been disposed to consider a scrape of this sort
as much more a misfortune than a crime. (Hear.) I think that there is,
after all, something in the objection to the proposal for giving the
ultimate decision to a Judge not appointed by the House. There is some
reason against their handing over their jurisdiction at once and for
ever to a functionary appointed solely by the Crown (hear); but there is
an easy mode of getting rid of that objection—namely, by making the Act
temporary. (Hear.) I am not sure that it should not be annual—that it
ought not, like the Mutiny Act, to be renewed every year, so that there
should never be any long time during which evil consequences need be
suffered. And although I do not myself think that any evil consequences
are likely to follow, still, as where there is a bare possibility there
is always apprehension, I hope that, if the House adopts the Bill, the
Government will see the propriety of introducing some limitation such as
I have suggested. There is another point on which I wish to say
something. Great objections appear to be felt to turning over these
inquiries to the Judges of the land. Would it not be a suitable way of
meeting these objections if this tribunal were to be only a tribunal of
appeal? Indeed, even if the House should not choose to adopt this
tribunal—if they should keep these matters in the hands of a Committee
of their own Members presided over by a legal assessor—and few, I think,
will now deny that there must at least be a legal assessor—whether the
House adopt this way, or whether they adopt the proposal of the
Government—there are very strong reasons for making the tribunal only a
tribunal of appeal. It is only by inquiry diligently made on the spot,
that the truth in such matters can be discovered. I will make one
suggestion, which will be found in a pamphlet which has attracted a good
deal of attention, and has been read, I know, by Members of the
Government.2 It is written by Mr. W.D. Christie, formerly a Member of
this House, and who I hope may be so again. (Hear.) It is that there
should be a local inquiry by a person of competent legal qualifications
after every Parliamentary election, whether there is a petition or not.
(Laughter, and cries of Oh, oh!) Notwithstanding the dissent with which
this proposition seems to be met, much may be said in its favour; for
the very worst cases are invariably those in which petitions are either
not presented (hear, hear), or, having been presented, are afterwards
withdrawn aby a compromisea, because it is found that an inquiry would
be equally damaging to the case of the petitioner, both parties being
tarred with the same brushb, and, however certain it is that the seat
has been obtained by bribery, the losing party are afraid to prosecute
the petition for fear of the disclosures, which would bring discredit
upon themselvesb. These are such flagrant cases that I am sure it must
be admitted that, unless Edition: current; Page: [264] they are in some
manner provided for, it will be impossible effectually to put down
bribery. The officer whom I suppose to be appointed would proceed after
every election to the spot, and there sit in public to receive any
complaints that may be made. Of course it is a necessary consequence
that this officer should have the power, where the complaints are
frivolous, of throwing the expense on the complainant. And whatever
expenses would not thus be met, should be defrayed by the
locality—should be, in fact, a public charge. There is the more reason
for appointing such an officer, as it is indispensably necessary that
there should be an inquiry, not only into Parliamentary, but into
municipal elections, which are the nurseries of Parliamentary bribery.
(Hear.) Mr. Philip Rose, a Conservative solicitor, well known to many
honourable Members opposite, has expressed an opinion on this subject
which is well entitled to attention. Mr. Rose says, in his evidence
before a Committee of the House of Lords, that in a vast number of
places, illegal practices are carried on at municipal elections by a
regular machinery, which is also made use of at Parliamentary
elections.3 (Hear.) He adds that great pressure is brought to bear upon
Members of Parliament to contribute towards the expenses of municipal
contests (hear), because it is held out to them that £10 spent upon one
of these is better than £100 spent in a Parliamentary contest (hear,
hear); and that it is an axiom among agents—“We were able to return our
municipal candidate, and we shall therefore be able to return our
Parliamentary candidate.”4 After such testimony, coming from such a
quarter, it is plain that, if you really wish to put down bribery and
corruption at Parliamentary elections, you must extend your interference
to municipal elections also. (Cheers.) In addition to the duties which I
have suggested that the Commissioners of Inquiry should perform after
each election, there are a number of other duties which might well be
performed by those functionaries. They would naturally act as election
auditors; and, in places from which no petition proceeds, their
principal business will probably consist in scrutinizing the accounts
which Members are already obliged to render, and which ought to be
required from them with greater accuracy and completeness. Belonging to
the same class from which revising barristers are taken, there will be
an obvious propriety in their acting also in that capacity; and they
might even fulfil the duties of returning officers. (Oh, oh!) Whatever
functionaries of this description may be appointed, no fear need be
entertained that there will be any want of work for them. If you feel
that the control of all these matters ought not to pass out of your own
hands, you might leave the nomination of these functionaries in the
hands of the Speaker; but any difficulty on that score will best be got
rid of by making the legal authority proposed by the Bill of Her
Majesty’s Government the tribunal of appeal.5 These are the suggestions
which I Edition: current; Page: [265] have felt it my duty to offer in
reference to the measure brought forward by the right honourable
Gentleman the Head of the Administration.6 The reasons in support of
them will be found at length in the very able pamphlet to which I have
referred. (Hear, hear.)

[Mitchell’s amendment was defeated (col. 321).]


90.: Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections [2]
 2 APRIL, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 191, col. 702. Reported in The Times, 3 April, p. 5.
Writing the next day to William Dougal Christie, his close ally in this
matter,  said, “Mr. Disraeli’s answer to my question was civil but
in no degree satisfactory”

(CW, Vol. XVI, p. 1383).

mr. j. stuart  said, he would beg to ask the First Lord of the
Treasury, Whether it is his intention to propose any measure, either
separately or as a provision in the Election Petitions and Corrupt
Practices at Elections Bill,1 for the prevention of bribery at Municipal
Elections?

Mr. Disraeli: Sir, the subject to which the Question of the honourable
Member relates is one of very great importance, but I am not prepared to
deal with it in the manner he suggests. I shall make every possible
effort to carry the Bill which refers to Parliamentary Elections before
the dissolution. I think that that is a matter of the greatest moment;
but I do not contemplate mixing it up with the subject referred to by
the honourable Member.


91.: Procedure in the House: Amendments
 21 APRIL, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 191, col. 1030. Reported (in one sentence) in The
Times, 22 April, p. 6.  spoke during an extensive discussion in
Committee of Supply on Ayrton’s motion to amend a resolution of the
House dating from 1858, “That when it has been proposed to omit or
reduce items in a Vote the Question shall be afterwards put upon the
original Vote or upon the reduced Vote, as the case may be, without
amendment,” by replacing the final two Edition: current; Page: [266]
words with “unless an Amendment be moved for a reduction of the whole
Vote”

(col. 1025).

mr. j. stuart  said, that as it appeared likely that this matter
would go back for re-consideration, he might be permitted to suggest a
further point. The Motion of his honourable and learned Friend was on a
very important and very valuable subject, and formed part of the largest
questions. The rules which, in the course of centuries, had been
elaborated in this House for the conduct of the Business had been most
deservedly admired. But difficulties might arise when the House could
only have one Amendment on the same point; because, as soon as one
Amendment had been rejected, it had resolved that the original Motion
should be put unamended. It might be well for the House to examine this
point. According to the rule of the French Chamber, whatever number of
Amendments there might be moved, the question of precedency was decided
in this way:—The Amendment which was farthest from the original Motion
was put first, and if this were lost, the others were put in succession.
Might it not be as well to adopt the plan here?

[The matter was resolved by a Government resolution on 28 April that
provided for a final vote on the original or amended motion (cols.
1464–6).]


92.: Capital Punishment
 21 APRIL, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 191, cols. 1047–55. Reported in The Times, 22 April,
p. 6, from which the variant and responses are taken.  spoke during
second reading of “A Bill to Provide for Carrying out of Capital
Punishment within Prisons,” 31 Victoria (20 Feb., 1868), PP, 1867–68, I,
261–6 (enacted as 31 Victoria, c. 24 [1868]).  (according to The
Times) “rose amid loud cries of ‘Divide!’ ”

it would be a great satisfaction to me if I were able to support this
Motion.1 It is always a matter of regret to me to find myself, on a
public question, opposed to those who are called—sometimes in the way of
honour, and sometimes in what is intended for ridicule—the
philanthropists. (A laugh.) Of all persons who take part in public
affairs, they are those for whom, on the whole, I feel the greatest
amount of respect; for their characteristic is, that they devote their
time, their labour, and much of their money to objects purely public,
with a less admixture of either personal or class selfishness, than any
other class of politicians whatever. On almost all the great questions,
scarcely any politicians are so steadily and almost uniformly to be
found on the side of right; and they seldom err, but by an Edition:
current; Page: [267] exaggerated application of some just and highly
important principle. On the very subject that is now occupying us we all
know what signal service they have rendered. It is through their efforts
that our criminal laws—which within my memory hanged people for stealing
in a dwelling house to the value of 40s.2—laws by virtue of which rows
of human beings might be seen suspended in front of Newgate by those who
ascended or descended Ludgate Hill—have so greatly relaxed their most
revolting and most impolitic ferocity, that aggravated murder is now
practically the only crime which is punished with death by any of our
lawful tribunals; and we are even now deliberating whether the extreme
penalty should be retained in that solitary case. This vast gain, not
only to humanity, but to the ends of penal justice, we owe to the
philanthropists; and if they are mistaken, as I cannot but think they
are, in the present instance, it is only in not perceiving the right
time and place for stopping in a career hitherto so eminently
beneficial. (Hear, hear.) Sir, there is a point at which, I conceive,
that career ought to stop. When there has been brought home to any one,
by conclusive evidence, the greatest crime known to the law; and when
the attendant circumstances suggest no palliation of the guilt, no hope
that the culprit may even yet not be unworthy to live among mankind,
nothing to make it probable that the crime was an exception to his
general character rather than a consequence of it, then I confess it
appears to me that to deprive the criminal of the life of which he has
proved himself to be unworthy—solemnly to blot him out from the
fellowship of mankind and from the catalogue of the living—is the most
appropriate, as it is certainly the most impressive, mode in which
society can attach to so great a crime the penal consequences which for
the security of life it is indispensable to annex to it. I defend this
penalty, when confined to atrocious cases, on the very ground on which
it is commonly attacked—on that of humanity to the criminal; as beyond
comparison the least cruel mode in which it is possible adequately to
deter from the crime. If, in our horror of inflicting death, we
endeavour to devise some punishment for the living criminal which shall
act on the human mind with a deterrent force at all comparable to that
of death, we are driven to inflictions less severe indeed in appearance,
and therefore less efficacious, but far more cruel in reality. Few, I
think, would venture to propose, as a punishment for aggravated murder,
less than imprisonment with hard labour for life; that is the fate to
which a murderer would be consigned by the mercy which shrinks from
putting him to death. But has it been sufficiently considered what sort
of a mercy this is, and what kind of life it leaves to him? If, indeed,
the punishment is not really inflicted—if it becomes the sham which a
few years ago such punishments were rapidly becoming—then, indeed, its
adoption would be almost tantamount to giving up the attempt to repress
murder altogether. But if it really is what it professes to be, Edition:
current; Page: [268] and if it is realized in all its rigour by the
popular imagination, as it very probably would not be, but as it must be
if it is to be efficacious, it will be so shocking that when the memory
of the crime is no longer fresh, there will be almost insuperable
difficulty in executing it. What comparison can there really be, in
point of severity, between consigning a man to the short pang of a rapid
death, and immuring him in a living tomb, there to linger out what may
be a long life in the hardest and most monotonous toil, without any of
its alleviations or rewards—debarred from all pleasant sights and
sounds, and cut off from all earthly hope, except a slight mitigation of
bodily restraint, or a small improvement of diet? Yet even such a lot as
this, because there is no one moment at which the suffering is of
terrifying intensity, and, above all, because it does not contain the
element, so imposing to the imagination, of the unknown, is universally
reputed a milder punishment than death—stands in all codes as a
mitigation of the capital penalty, and is thankfully accepted as such.
For it is characteristic of all punishments which depend on duration for
their efficacy—all, therefore, which are not corporal or pecuniary—that
they are more rigorous than they seem; while it is, on the contrary, one
of the strongest recommendations a punishment can have, that it should
seem more rigorous than it is; for its practical power depends far less
on what it is than on what it seems. There is not, I should think, any
human infliction which makes an impression on the imagination so
entirely out of proportion to its real severity as the punishment of
death. The punishment must be mild indeed which does not add more to the
sum of human misery than is necessarily or directly added by the
execution of a criminal. As my honourable Friend the Member for
Northampton (Mr. Gilpin) has himself remarked, the most that human laws
can do to anyone in the matter of death is to hasten it;3 the man would
have died at any rate; not so very much later, and on the average, I
fear, with a considerably greater amount of bodily suffering. Society is
asked, then, to denude itself of an instrument of punishment which, in
the grave cases to which alone it is suitable, effects its purpose at a
less cost of human suffering than any other; which, while it inspires
more terror, is less cruel in actual fact than any punishment that we
should think of substituting for it. My honourable Friend says that it
does not inspire terror, and that experience proves it to be a failure.4
But the influence of a punishment is not to be estimated by its effect
on hardened criminals. Those whose habitual way of life keeps them, so
to speak, at all times within sight of the gallows, do grow to care less
about it; as, to compare good things with bad, an old soldier is not
much affected by the chance of dying in battle. I can afford to admit
all that is often said about the indifference of professional criminals
to the gallows. Though of that indifference one-third is probably
bravado and another third confidence that they shall have the luck to
escape, it is quite probable that the remaining third is real. Edition:
current; Page: [269] But the efficacy of a punishment which acts
principally through the imagination, is chiefly to be measured by the
impression it makes on those who are still innocent: by the horror with
which it surrounds the first promptings of guilt; the restraining
influence it exercises over the beginning of the thought which, if
indulged, would become a temptation; the check which it exerts over the
gradual declension towards the state—never suddenly attained—in which
crime no longer revolts, and punishment no longer terrifies. (Hear,
hear.) As for what is called the failure of death punishment, who is
able to judge of that? We partly know who those are whom it has not
deterred; but who is there who knows whom it has deterred, or how many
human beings it has saved who would have lived to be murderers if that
awful association had not been thrown round the idea of murder from
their earliest infancy? Let us not forget that the most imposing fact
loses its power over the imagination if it is made too cheap. When a
punishment fit only for the most atrocious crimes is lavished on small
offences until human feeling recoils from it, then, indeed, it ceases to
intimidate, because it ceases to be believed in. The failure of capital
punishment in cases of theft is easily accounted for: the thief did not
believe that it would be inflicted. He had learnt by experience that
jurors would perjure themselves rather than find him guilty; that Judges
would seize any excuse for not sentencing him to death, or for
recommending him to mercy; and that if neither jurors nor Judges were
merciful, there were still hopes from an authority above both. When
things had come to this pass it was high time to give up the vain
attempt. When it is impossible to inflict a punishment, or when its
infliction becomes a public scandal, the idle threat cannot too soon
disappear from the statute book. And in the case of the host of offences
which were formerly capital, I heartily rejoice that it did become
impracticable to execute the law. If the same state of public feeling
comes to exist in the case of murder; if the time comes when jurors
refuse to find a murderer guilty; when Judges will not sentence him to
death, or will recommend him to mercy; or when, if juries and Judges do
not flinch from their duty, Home Secretaries, under pressure of
deputations and memorials, shrink from theirs, and the threat becomes,
as it became in the other cases, a mere brutum fulmen;5 then, indeed, it
may become necessary to do in this case what has been done in those—to
abrogate the penalty. That time may come—my honourable Friend thinks
that it has nearly come.6 I hardly know whether he lamented it or
boasted of it; but he and his Friends are entitled to the boast: for if
it comes it will be their doing, and they will have gained what I cannot
but call a fatal victory, for they will have achieved it by bringing
about, if they will forgive me for saying so, an enervation, an
effeminacy, in the general mind of the country. (Hear, hear.) For what
else than effeminacy is it to be so much more shocked by taking a man’s
life Edition: current; Page: [270] than by depriving him of all that
makes life desirable or valuable? Is death, then, the greatest of all
earthly ills? Usque adeone mori miserum est?7 Is it, indeed, so dreadful
a thing to die? Has it not been from of old one chief part of a manly
education to make us despise death—teaching us to account it, if an evil
at all, by no means high in the list of evils; at all events, as an
inevitable one, and to hold, as it were, our lives in our hands, ready
to be given or risked at any moment, for a sufficiently worthy object? I
am sure that my honourable Friends know all this as well, and have as
much of all these feelings as any of the rest of us; possibly more. But
I cannot think that this is likely to be the effect of their teaching on
the general mind. I cannot think that the cultivating of a peculiar
sensitiveness of conscience on this one point, over and above what
results from the general cultivation of the moral sentiments, is
permanently consistent with assigning in our own minds to the fact of
death no more than the degree of relative importance which belongs to it
among the other incidents of our humanity. The men of old cared too
little about death, and gave their own lives or took those of others
awith equal recklessness. Our danger is of the opposite kind, lest we
should be so much shocked by death, in general and in the abstract, as
to care too much about it in individual cases, both those of other
people and our own, which call for its being riskeda. And I am not
putting things at the worst, for it is proved by the experience of other
countries that horror of the executioner by no means necessarily implies
horror of the assassin. The stronghold, as we all know, of hired
assassination in the eighteenth century was Italy; yet it is said that
in some of the Italian populations the infliction of death by sentence
of law was in the highest degree offensive and revolting to popular
feeling. Much has been said of the sanctity of human life, and the
absurdity of supposing that we can teach respect for life by ourselves
destroying it. But I am surprised at the employment of this argument,
for it is one which might be brought against any punishment whatever. It
is not human life only, not human life as such, that ought to be sacred
to us, but human feelings. The human capacity of suffering is what we
should cause to be respected, not the mere capacity of existing. And we
may imagine somebody asking how we can teach people not to inflict
suffering by ourselves inflicting it? But to this I should answer—all of
us would answer—that to deter by suffering from inflicting suffering is
not only possible, but the very purpose of penal justice. Does fining a
criminal show want of respect for property, or imprisoning him, for
personal freedom? Just as unreasonable is it to think that to take the
life of a man who has taken that of another is to show want of regard
for human life. We show, on the contrary, most emphatically our regard
for it, by the adoption of a rule that he who violates that right in
another forfeits it for himself, and that while no other crime that he
can commit deprives him of his right to live, Edition: current; Page:
[271] this shall. There is one argument against capital punishment, even
in extreme cases, which I cannot deny to have weight—on which my
honourable Friend justly laid great stress, and which never can be
entirely got rid of. It is this—that if by an error of justice an
innocent person is put to death, the mistake can never be corrected; all
compensation, all reparation for the wrong is impossible. This would be
indeed a serious objection if these miserable mistakes—among the most
tragical occurrences in the whole round of human affairs—could not be
made extremely rare. The argument is invincible where the mode of
criminal procedure is dangerous to the innocent, or where the Courts of
Justice are not trusted. And this probably is the reason why the
objection to an irreparable punishment began (as I believe it did)
earlier, and is more intense and more widely diffused, in some parts of
the Continent of Europe than it is here. There are on the Continent
great and enlightened countries, in which the criminal procedure is not
so favourable to innocence, does not afford the same security against
erroneous conviction, as it does among us; countries where the Courts of
Justice seem to think they fail in their duty unless they find somebody
guilty; and in their really laudable desire to hunt guilt from its
hiding-places, expose themselves to a serious danger of condemning the
innocent. If our own procedure and Courts of Justice afforded ground for
similar apprehension, I should be the first to join in withdrawing the
power of inflicting irreparable punishment from such tribunals. But we
all know that the defects of our procedure are the very opposite. Our
rules of evidence are even too favourable to the prisoner: and juries
and Judges carry out the maxim. “It is better that ten guilty should
escape than that one innocent person should suffer,”8 not only to the
letter, but beyond the letter. Judges are most anxious to point out, and
juries to allow for, the barest possibility of the prisoner’s innocence.
No human judgment is infallible: such sad cases as my honourable Friend
cited will sometimes occur;9 but in so grave a case as that of murder,
the accused, in our system, has always the benefit of the merest shadow
of a doubt. And this suggests another consideration very germane to the
question. The very fact that death punishment is more shocking than any
other to the imagination, necessarily renders the Courts of Justice more
scrupulous in requiring the fullest evidence of guilt. Even that which
is the greatest objection to capital punishment, the impossibility of
correcting an error once committed, must make, and does make, juries and
Judges more careful in forming their opinion, and more jealous in their
scrutiny of the evidence. If the substitution or penal servitude for
death in cases of murder should cause any relaxation in this
conscientious scrupulosity, there would be a great evil to set against
the real, but I hope rare, advantage of being able to make reparation to
a condemned person who was afterwards discovered to be Edition: current;
Page: [272] innocent. In order that the possibility of correction may be
kept open wherever the chance of this sad contingency is more than
infinitesimal, it is quite right that the Judge should recommend to the
Crown a commutation of the sentence, not solely when the proof of guilt
is open to the smallest suspicion, but whenever there remains anything
unexplained and mysterious in the case, raising a desire for more light,
or making it likely that further information may at some future time be
obtained. I would also suggest that whenever the sentence is commuted
the grounds of the commutation should, in some authentic form, be made
known to the public. (Hear, hear.) Thus much I willingly concede to my
honourable Friend; but on the question of total abolition I am inclined
to hope that the feeling of the country is not with him (hear, hear),
and that the limitation of death punishment to the cases referred to in
the Bill of last year will be generally considered sufficient.10 The
mania which existed a short time ago for paring down all our punishments
seems to have reached its limits, and not before it was time. (Hear,
hear.) We were in danger of being left without any effectual punishment,
except for small offences. What was formerly our chief secondary
punishment—transportation—before it was abolished,11 had become almost a
reward. Penal servitude, the substitute for it, was becoming, to the
classes who were principally subject to it, almost nominal, so
comfortable did we make our prisons, and so easy had it become to get
quickly out of them. Flogging—a most objectionable punishment in
ordinary cases, but a particularly appropriate one for crimes of
brutality, especially crimes against women (cheers)—we would not hear
of, except, to be sure, in the case of garotters, for whose peculiar
benefit we re-established it in a hurry, immediately after a Member of
Parliament had been garotted.12 (Hear, and laughter.) With this
exception, offences, even of an atrocious kind, against the person, as
my honourable and learned Friend the Member for Oxford (Mr. Neate) well
remarked, not only were, but still are, visited with penalties so
ludicrously inadequate, as to be almost an encouragement to the crime.13
I think, Sir, that in the case of most offences, except those against
property, there is more need of strengthening our punishments than of
weakening them: and that severer sentences, with an apportionment of
them to the different kinds of offences which shall approve itself
better than at present to the moral sentiments of the community, are the
kind of reform of which our penal system now stands in need. I shall
therefore vote against the Amendment.

[The amendment was defeated.]

Edition: current; Page: [273]


93.: The Municipal Corporations (Metropolis) Bill [1]
 5 MAY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 191, cols. 1859–63. Reported in The Times, 6 May, p.
10, from which the variants and responses are taken.  spoke in
moving for leave to introduce both “A Bill for the Creation of a
Corporation of London,” 31 Victoria (7 May, 1868), PP, 1867–68, I,
347–96, and “A Bill to Provide for the Establishment of Municipal
Corporations within the Metropolis,” ibid., III, 515–36.

mr. j. stuart  observed that both were substantially the same as
those which the House permitted him last year to lay on the table.1 The
alterations were extremely slight. He was quite aware that no private
Member could expect to carry through such measures. In order that they
might succeed Government must take them up; but the Government had not
shown any disposition to take up the subject, and in the present year,
considering all the circumstances of the case, he could not blame them.
No Government was likely to embarrass itself with such a subject until
much discussion had taken place, and public opinion had been called
forth to give them a sufficient degree of support. The introduction of
the Bills had already produced considerable effect. This was shown by
the number of petitions, which were almost all in favour of the Bills.2
The opposition to the Bills had chiefly proceeded from persons connected
with the present local administrative bodies, who were not likely to be
wholly unprejudiced on the subject of their own mode of administration.
The passing of the Reform Bill last Session had paved the way for such
legislation.3 One marked feature of the political movement, of which the
passing of the Reform Act was a part, is a demand on the part of the
people, he would not say for more government, but for more
administration. It is not only sanitary measures, properly so called,
but control over the dwellings provided for the working classes,
aarrangement of the streets in such a way as would promote the comfort,
convenience, and health of the community,a and a hundred similar
arrangements, which are now required at the hands of Government; and the
effecting of these things has been again and again prevented by the want
of any sufficient local authority. When much has to be done for society,
it cannot be all done by the central Government, and there was in this
country great jealousy of intrusting too much to that authority. It was
a national principle that a great part of our administration should be
local, and the constitutional mode of giving local government to
different parts of the country, especially to towns, was by means of
Edition: current; Page: [274] municipalities. Now, London had only the
benefit of a municipality in that which was originally the whole of its
extent—the City proper. With that exception the local government of the
metropolis was a parish government. What other town in the kingdom would
be satisfied with a parish administration extending over the greater
portion of its area? (Hear, hear.) The government of London by means of
vestries had endured long enough. To show the magnitude of the questions
which were involved in the local administration of the metropolis, he
might mention that in the year 1840 London was rated upon an annual
value of £6,000,000 sterling. In 1861 the annual value of property had
risen to £12,500,000, and in 1866 to nearly £14,500,000. The expenditure
of the metropolis was growing, and now amounted to nearly £3,000,000 a
year. The Metropolitan Board had during the twelve years of its
existence raised by rates b£2,182,000b, and by loans £5,581,000. The
vestries collectively expended £2,784,000 per annum, while to show the
quantity of legislation required to deal with local questions arising
within the metropolis, Lord Brougham, so long ago as 1837, stated that
the Acts relating to the parish of Marylebone alone, passed since the
year 1795, filled a volume of 480 pages,4 being much greater in size, he
would not say than the Code Napoleon, but certainly than the Code
Civil.5 Parliament had attempted, and did attempt, to provide for this
local legislation; but Parliament could not possibly do it, and it only
continued the attempt because there were no local authorities in whom
Parliament or the country sufficiently confided to turn over to them
this important business. What had occurred with reference to the
Dwellings of Artizans and Labourers Bill, introduced by his honourable
Friend the Member for Finsbury (Mr. M’Cullagh Torrens) was an
illustration of the want of some more satisfactory authorities than at
present existed in the metropolis. As originally introduced, the cduty
it imposed of providing that such of these habitations as were not fit
for human habitations should be removed and others substituted for them
wasc entrusted to the vestries; but the Select Committee would not trust
the vestries, and gave the powers to the Metropolitan Board of Works.6
The Metropolitan Board itself was, however, regarded with great
distrust; and he had received many letters urging him to oppose that
part of the measure which empowered that Board to levy any rates in
addition to those which they were already authorized to raise. If there
were municipalities in the different metropolitan boroughs, with a
general central Edition: current; Page: [275] municipality, there would
be authorities upon whom Parliament could confer the many powers of
local administration and local regulation which at present it was
necessary to provide for by separate Acts. The difference between London
and other cities, arising mainly from the great size of the metropolis,
was, that while for provincial cities a single corporation sufficed, in
London it was necessary to have a double system. There would in London
be too much for a single body to do; and any single body which was so
constituted as to be able to do the work, would be so powerful that it
would excite the jealousy of the other civil authorities of the country.
What was proposed by the Bill which he had been requested to introduce,
but of which he was not the author, although he approved of all its
provisions, was, that there should be for all the Parliamentary boroughs
of which the metropolis was composed, separate municipalities grouped
round the City municipality, which would be the type of all; that these
municipalities should discharge all such duties as did not require that
the whole of London should be taken into consideration at once; and that
in addition there should be a central municipality, which should deal
with those questions in the decision of which the interests and wants of
the whole metropolis were involved. The first of these proposals was
strongly recommended by the Commission which was presided over by the
late Sir George Lewis.7 But there was also a necessity for a general
municipal government of the metropolis, and this necessity was so
strongly felt that, without intending to create a municipality,
Parliament had created one in the Metropolitan Board of Works.8 The
purpose for which that Board had been called into existence—namely, the
Main Drainage—was now nearly completed. But the necessity for a general
government was such that, almost as soon as the Board was created, other
new and important duties began to be intrusted to it. But when
Parliament was creating this body, was it aware that it was establishing
a municipal body for the whole of London? Did it take that large subject
into consideration, and examine whether this was the best way of
providing for the municipal government of a great capital? Certainly
not. The Board was created for a limited and temporary purpose, and it
had gradually become a central municipality, without due consideration
whether it had been constituted in the way best calculated to perform
the duties of such. He did not propose to supersede this body, but to
leave it standing, and also to leave standing the Corporation of the
City of London; but to make such changes in its constitution as would
render it an adequate municipal constitution for the whole metropolis.
The first Bill proposed to give municipal institutions to the different
Parliamentary boroughs in London; and the second, to create a central
body into which the Board of Works would be absorbed: to constitute this
central body in such a way as Parliament might think best, and to define
its duties and powers, Edition: current; Page: [276] marking them off
from those of the municipal bodies. He would conclude with a saying of
Lord Coke—that no good measure of legislation was ever proposed from
which, in the end, some amount of good did not result.9 Though in the
present Session he could not hope to carry the Bills, and though great
modifications might be made in them before they were carried, still he
was doing that from which, according to Lord Coke’s maxim, good must
eventually result. (Hear, hear.) The honourable Gentleman moved for
leave to introduce the first Bill.

[The Government indicated that it would not oppose the introduction of
the Bill. Sir George Bowyer pointed to a major difficulty, the
reconciliation of the powers of the Corporation of the City of London
with those of the Metropolitan Board of Works. He opposed the abolition
of the municipality of the City of London, the Lord Mayor and the
Corporation being “the only representative body” existing that could “do
the public honours on great occasions.”]

dLeave was given.

Mr. , in moving for leave to introduce a Bill for the creation of a
Corporation of London, said that on the second reading he would be
prepared to meet the objections which had been taken to the measure by
the honourable baronet.

Leave was given.d


94.: The Established Church in Ireland
 7 MAY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 191, cols. 1928–9. Reported in The Times, 8 May, p.
7, from which the response is taken. In Committee to discuss the Acts
pertaining to the Established Church in Ireland, the House was
considering a Resolution by Roger Sinclair Aytoun (b. 1823), M.P. for
Kirkcaldy, that would have discontinued the Maynooth Grant and the
Regium Donum if and when the Church was disestablished in Ireland, and
would also have precluded the expenditure of any of the secularized
funds thus obtained from being used for the Roman Catholic religion or
Roman Catholic schools (cols. 1902–5). There being some question in the
mind of the Chairman, John George Dodson (1825–97), about the
jurisdiction of the House over the last matter (col. 1924), an amendment
to delete it was proposed, whereupon Aytoun offered to alter his own
resolution to make the last provision apply to any religious bodies and
any denominational schools. It was ruled that he could not do so, as
there was already an amendment on the floor. The vote referred to by
 was on a motion to let the original wording stand; it failed. Just
before , Charles Newdigate Newdegate (1816–87), M.P. for North
Warwickshire, said that by leaving out half of Aytoun’s resolution, they
reserved a power of spending every shilling obtained by disendowment for
Catholic purposes (col. 1928).

Edition: current; Page: [277]
the honourable member for North Warwickshire (Mr. Newdegate) has stated
that we, who sit on this side of the House, have by the vote we have
just given, declared that we intend to retain the power of bestowing the
whole or part of the property taken from the Irish Church upon the Roman
Catholic body. For myself, and I know for a great portion of those who
surround me, I utterly deny that statement. (Cheers.) I will resist to
the utmost of my power any proposal for giving one farthing of the
property to the Roman Catholic or to any other religious body in any
shape whatever. I had no motive whatever in voting against the Motion of
the honourable Member for Kirkcaldy (Mr. Aytoun), except that it had
been declared by you, Sir, not properly to come within the spirit of the
Reference to the Committee; and also because it had been declared to be
contrary to the Orders of the House—very strangely, I think—for the
honourable Gentleman to alter his Resolution from a form in which I
could not vote for it, to one in which I could have done so.

[Eventually, after further refinement, the amendment to delete the
resolution was accepted.]


95.: Local Charges on Real Property
 12 MAY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 152–4. Reported in The Times, 13 May, p.
7, from which the variant is taken. The debate, in Committee, was on a
resolution by Lopes Massey Lopes (1818–1908), M.P. for Westbury: “That,
inasmuch as the Local Charges on Real Property have of late years much
increased and are annually increasing, it is neither just nor politic
that all these burdens should be levied exclusively from this
description of property”

(col. 145).

mr. j. stuart  said, the honourable Baronet who had introduced the
Motion (Sir Massey Lopes) had rendered a real service to the House and
the country, for no one who had considered the subject could doubt that
it required a much more systematic and deliberate consideration than it
had yet received, not only on account of its great importance and the
amount of taxation it involved, but because its importance was
constantly increasing. In the natural progress of things more and more
duties were continually being imposed on the Government, which duties
would be almost always best performed by the localities, and at the same
time, as the taxation of localities must constantly increase in order to
meet increasing expenses, if there was any injustice in this taxation it
must be an increasing injustice. The honourable Baronet, and those who
took his view, thought that the local taxation was entirely borne by
real property; but he (Mr. Stuart ) conceived that although real
property bore an extra proportion of that taxation, it Edition: current;
Page: [278] by no means bore the whole. The local charges consisted of
two parts, one of which was proportional to the rent of land, and was
therefore equivalent to a tax on land, the other was proportional to the
rent of houses, and equivalent to a house tax. Now, a house tax did not
fall on the owner, but on the occupier, and within moderate bounds was
one of the fairest of all possible taxes, and one of those that came
nearest to a perfectly fair income tax. Indeed, the house rent a person
was able to pay was probably a better measure of what he could afford to
spend, than could be afforded by the mere numerical amount in pounds
sterling of his income. So far as the house tax fell on the ground rent
it was a charge on property; but the ground rent bore only a small
proportion to the whole rent of a house, except in cases of peculiar
eligibility of situation, which favourable situations were a kind of
wealth having a constant tendency to increase without any labour or
outlay on the part of the owner, and therefore a fair subject for some
degree of special taxation. He admitted that in most of the rural
districts the burden was mainly on the rent of land; but he did not
think the grievance so great as had been represented, because the
prescriptive, and what might almost be called the constitutional mode of
levying local taxation was to levy it on rental, and property had
generally been acquired by inheritance or purchase, subject to that
peculiar burden. If the burdens on land had a tendency to increase by
the progress of apopulation, wealth, and civilizationa, so had the
income from land, and income derived from real property was nearly the
only one which increased by the effects of the industry, outlay,
privation, and frugality of other persons than the owners; and inasmuch
as the value of land did constantly increase from generation to
generation, and the income from it increased independently of exertion
or outlay on the part of the owners, this made it fair to regard it as
in some degree a proper subject for increasing taxation. No one could
doubt that the time had come when the whole subject of local taxation
must be more fully considered. If they considered that portion of
taxation which he thought fair in principle—namely, the house tax—they
would find that this had become so heavy in many localities that the
difficulty of increasing it had become a serious obstacle to any new
outlay for general improvements. How it was possible to raise the
additional sums that might be required in a manner less burdensome,
because more equal and just, would have to be more and more seriously
considered, and the different modes by which this could be accomplished
would have to be well meditated. One mode, which had been partially
adopted in this country, deserved consideration as one of the possible
modes—namely, that of placing a certain proportion of some of these
burdens on the general taxation of the country; for when this was done
in the way of a fixed proportion it did not destroy, although it might
weaken, those motives to economical legislation which so strongly
recommended making these expenses local rather than general. There were
great difficulties in adjusting the amounts of Edition: current; Page:
[279] taxation on the various descriptions of property, and these
questions would probably occupy their minds for a long time to come. He
was glad that the honourable Baronet had introduced this subject to the
House, and no doubt it would be seriously considered by the new
Parliament. In the excellent speech of the honourable Member for
Edinburgh (Mr. M’Laren) there was one principle which, if adopted, would
involve an injustice—it was that of taxing terminable incomes, he did
not mean at a lower rate than permanent ones, for that he entirely
approved of, but of taxing them only according to their capitalized
value.1 That would be a great injustice; but this was not the time for
further discussing that principle.

[The motion was withdrawn (col. 161).]


96.: Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections [3]
 21 MAY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 685–6, 691. Reported in The Times, 22 May,
p. 8, from which the variants and response are taken.  was moving an
amendment to Clause 5 of the Bill (see No. 89). He proposed to add “or
of general or extensive prevalence of corrupt practices in an Election”
after the words “to serve in Parliament” in the preamble to the Clause:
“From and after the next Dissolution of Parliament a petition
complaining of an undue Return or undue Election of a Member to serve in
Parliament for a County or Borough may be presented to the Court of
Common Pleas by any one or more of the following persons. . . .” After
some discussion of the general question of corruption, ’s second
speech closed the debate. For William Dougal Christie’s involvement in
’s tactics, see CW, Vol. XVI, pp. 1381, 1397–1400, 1403 (a specific
reference to the fate of this amendment), 1403–4, 1421, and 1425.

mr. j. stuart  said, he had to move an Amendment to the clause,
which was the first of a series of Amendments, of which he had given
Notice.1 The Bill, as it stood, was very incomplete; but, at the same
time, he thought it, in the main, very creditable to the Government; and
therefore he was glad that this Bill was not to be part of the baggage
to be thrown overboard, for the purpose of lightening the ship on its
last voyage. Incomplete as it was, the Bill was a bold attempt to
grapple with an acknowledged political and moral evil; and the
Government had not feared to ask the House to do what it greatly
disliked—to make a sacrifice of its own jurisdiction. He now asked the
Prime Minister to complete his own work—to help Edition: current; Page:
[280] those who were trying to help him, and lend the aid of his
ingenious and contriving mind, and the able legal assistance with which
he was provided, to make this really an efficacious and complete
measure. It was no party measure, and no party were interested in
passing it, except the party of honesty. They desired to diminish the
number of men in this House, who came in, not for the purpose of
maintaining any political opinions whatever, but solely for the purpose,
by a lavish expenditure, of acquiring the social position which attended
a seat in this House, and which, perhaps, was not otherwise to be
attained by them. They were not more attached to one side than to the
other, except that they were generally to be found on the gaining side.
They were the political counterparts of those who were contemptuously
described by Dante as “neither for God nor the enemies of God, but for
themselves only.”2 Unfortunately, it was not possible in this case to
follow the poet’s advice, “Speak not of them, but look and pass on!”3
aThey were men whom the House must endeavour to keep out from among
them. (Hear.)a The Bill proceeded on the theory that the law was to be
put in motion by the defeated candidate alone. This was contrary to the
very idea of criminal lawb, and he wished to supply the deficiencyb.
When the law intended to confer a pardoning power on an individual, it
did not grant a criminal process at all, but only an action for damages.
The immediate object of the present Amendment was the following: the
Bill, if passed, would repeal the 5 & 6 Victoria, c. 102;4 but Section 4
of that Act contained an important provision—namely, that where a
Petition complained of general or extensive bribery, and the Committee
reported that there was reasonable and probable ground for the
allegations, the Committee should have power to order that the costs of
the petitioners should be borne by the public. If the House was in
earnest such a provision was indispensable; and he therefore intended to
propose Amendments, the effect of which would be to restore it in the
present Bill.

Mr. J. Stuart  said, his object was that an inquiry into general
corrupt practices should be instituted with the same promptitude and
before the same tribunal as the inquiry concerning a claim to the seats.
He did not mean, however, as the Solicitor General seemed to infer, that
the sitting Member should be at the expense of eliciting such a general
inquiry.5 That matter was provided for in his subsequent Amendments.

[The amendment was defeated (col. 691).]

Edition: current; Page: [281]


97.: Representation of the People (Scotland) [1]
 28 MAY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 965–6, 979. Reported in The Times, 29 May,
p. 7, from which the responses are taken. The House was in Committee on
“A Bill for the Amendment of the Representation of the People in
Scotland,” 31 Victoria (17 Feb., 1868), PP, 1867–68, IV, 583–616. During
consideration of Clause 9 (as earlier amended), “the City of Glasgow,
until otherwise directed by Parliament, shall comprise the Places
mentioned in Schedule (A.) hereto annexed” (i.e., the city of Glasgow
and the towns of Govan and Partick), giving three members to the
combined constituency, William Graham (1817–85), M.P. for Glasgow, moved
to insert after Glasgow, “shall be divided into three districts, each of
which shall return one Member of Parliament”

(col. 959).

mr. j. stuart  said, the honourable Member for Nottingham (Mr.
Osborne) had called on Gentlemen on that side to support the Motion of
the honourable Member for Glasgow (Mr. Graham), holding out to them the
inducement of getting rid of the principle of the representation of
minorities.1 That was the strongest possible reason why those who were
in favour of the representation of minorities—not as being a
Conservative measure, but as a measure of justice (hear)—should vote
against the present Motion. Nothing could be more unfair than to speak
of the representation of those persons who happen to be in a minority,
whatever might be their political opinions, in any constituency, as
being in any exclusive sense a Conservative principle. On the contrary,
it was not only the most democratic of all principles, but it was the
only true democratic principle of representation, and they could not
have a complete system of representation without it. (Hear, hear, and a
laugh.) Man for man, those who happened to be in a minority had just as
much claim to be represented as the majority.

[The amendment was lost,  voting with the majority. After some
further discussion, a motion was made to replace from after “comprise
the” to the end of the clause with “existing Parliamentary boundaries.”
 spoke on this amendment.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, Glasgow having grown to so great an extent, it
was not unreasonable that its boundaries should be revised and extended,
provided its representation were extended also. He apprehended that its
fair proportion of Members, in reference to its population and wealth,
would be not less than six. (Oh!) The arguments of the Government would
be extremely good then; but as the vast population of Glasgow was
represented by an inadequate number of Members, he could not admit that
in order to admit an additional number of persons to share in that
inadequate representation, a large proportion of them should be deprived
of their county vote, which was really valuable to them.

Edition: current; Page: [282]
[Finally the Chairman, breaking a tie, voted to leave the Clause
unamended, so allowing further discussion on another occasion (col.
981).]


98.: Representation of the People (Scotland) [2]
 8 JUNE, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 1241, 1242, 1243, 1252. Reported in The
Times, 9 June, p. 7, from which the variant is taken. In Committee on
the Reform Bill for Scotland (see No. 97), consideration turned to
Clause O (Clause S in the Bill as amended), into which  moved the
addition of the italicized words: “All the Provisions of an Act passed
in the 24th and 25th Years of the Reign of Her present Majesty,
intituled ‘An Act to provide that Votes at Elections for the
Universities may be recorded by means of Voting Papers,’ except so much
of the said Act as requires that the voting paper shall be personally
delivered by a Member of Council who shall make attestation of his
personal acquaintance with the voter, and his knowledge of the
signature, shall apply to every Election of a Member for the
Universities of Edinburgh and Saint Andrews, and for the Universities of
Glasgow and Aberdeen. . . .” His remarks followed immediately after his
motion.

if the terms of the English Act upon this point were adopted in the
Scotch Reform Bill, half, if not more than half, of those who formed the
University constituency would be disfranchised. There was always a large
number of residents at the English Universities who could authenticate
the signatures to the voting papers; but in the Scotch Universities
undergraduates did not form such intimate acquaintance with each other
as in this country, and in most instances towards the end of the year
they were scattered all over the British Empire. The voters would be
virtually confined to a small number of residents, unless some such
alteration as he proposed were made.

[The Lord Advocate, Edward Strathearn Gordon (1814–79), then M.P. for
Thetford, in replying, said that while he was willing to give up the
requirement of personal acquaintance, he thought voting papers should be
personally delivered and attested by a Member of Council (col. 1241).]

Mr. J. Stuart  asked, whether the delivery of the voting paper by a
Member of Council would not involve a considerable additional expense?

[Several Members pointed to the dangers of fraud if there were no means
of attestation.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, that many operations took place on the same
security—namely, that if persons committed frauds they would be
prosecuted.

[ then withdrew his amendment, and the following words, as suggested
by the Lord Advocate, were inserted in the same place: “except so much
of the said Edition: current; Page: [283] Act as requires that the
person delivering the voting paper shall make attestation of his
personal acquaintance with the voter” (col. 1242), and the Clause was
accepted. After other discussion, attention moved to Schedule A,
concerning the boundaries of the city of Glasgow, and James Fergusson
(1832–1907), M.P. for Ayrshire, asserted that the working people of
Partick and Govan were eager to be annexed to Glasgow (col. 1252); other
speakers denied this assertion.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, that if this argument was correct the suburbs
of Glasgow ought to have a representative to themselves. But because
they did not choose to give to the population of these considerable
places a representative in this House, to which they were justly
entitled, were they to deprive those who were county electors of a vote
which they valued aand be merged in a large constituencya in order to
give to others a vote which would scarcely be of any value?

[Eventually Schedule A was defeated, so that the constituency of Glasgow
was not enlarged to include Partick and Govan.]


99.: Married Women’s Property
 10 JUNE, 1868

Speeches of Mr. Jacob Bright, M.P., Mr. Robert Lowe, M.P., Mr. J.S.
, M.P., and Mr. G. Shaw Lefevre, M.P., in the Debate on the Second
Reading of “The Bill to Amend the Law with Respect to the Property of
Married Women” (Manchester: Ireland, 1868), pp. 9–11. Based on PD, 3rd
ser., Vol. 192, cols. 1370–2. Reported in The Times, 11 June, p. 6, from
which the responses are taken.  presented petitions in favour of the
Bill (31 Victoria [21 Apr., 1868], PP, 1867–68, III, 375–8) on 9 and 10
June. On the day he spoke,  wrote to a correspondent (possibly
Isabella Tod, of Belfast) to say that the Bill had passed its second
reading, “(after an interesting debate of which all the honours were on
our side) by the casting vote of the Speaker, and is to be referred to a
Select Committee”

(CW, Vol. XVI, p. 1413).

aperhaps, sir, thosea who, like myself, bthink that women can never hope
that the laws and customs of society will do them full justice unless
they are admitted to participate in political rights, ought, perhaps, to
wish that the House would rejectb this Bill, because cit is quite
certain thatc its rejection would give a most extraordinary impulse to
the movement, which has lately made so much progress, for giving the
suffrage to women. (Hear, hear.) I wish, however, that my sex Edition:
current; Page: [284] should have the credit of giving up unjust dand
impolitic privileges before they are brought under the influence of
other motives than their own good feelingsd. The debate has produced
many gratifying expressions of opinion—the able and persuasive speech of
my honourable friend the member for Manchester for example, and the
logical and high-principled address of my right honourable friend the
member for Calne.1 (Hear, hear.) The honourable and learned member for
Colchester2 ehas very truly said that his honourable friend the member
for Reading3 is not the author of the Bill, but has adopted it from
others, who, he seems to think, must be persons strongly prejudiced
against the existing institutions of societye. I regret that the learned
gentleman has left the House, as I could have told him who some of those
persons were. I do not think the learned gentleman can have been aware
that among fthe persons whom he was condemningf were those eminent
socialists and revolutionists the present Secretaries of State for
Foreign Affairs and for War.4 The noble lord (Lord Stanley), along with
that eminent judge Sir Lawrence Peel,5 was a member of the committee of
the Social Science Association which drew up the Bill, similar to this,
formerly introduced by Sir Erskine Perry;6 and the right honourable
baronet (Sir J.S. Pakington) took the chair at a public meeting for the
same purpose.7 The learned gentleman is aware that ghe has against him
the right honourable Recorder of London,8 but attributes his absence to
not being hearty in the cause. I wonder the learned gentleman does not
know that the recorder is prevented from being present Edition: current;
Page: [285] by the discharge of his judicial duties. His feelings on the
subject are very strong, and, had he been present, he would probably
have given the House his experience of the manner in which the law
affects the women of the humbler classes. That conscientious and feeling
judge might also have given the Attorney-General9 an insight into the
working of the provisions of the Divorce Act,10 and how unreal and
nominal an amount of protection has been given by that Act to the women
of the humbler class. It does, indeed, allow married women to apply to
the magistrate for protection to their earnings, but only in cases of
desertion. Cases are, however, constantly occurringgh, some within my
own knowledge,h in which the husband just avoids the amount of desertion
which would justify the magistrate in giving protection to the wife. He
stays away for a sufficient time to enable her to accumulate a small
sum, and then he lives with her just long enough to squander it. As,
however, the Attorney-General has expressed a willingness to extend and
improve the operation of that Act,11 I trust that he will himself
introduce a Bill on the subject. (Hear, hear.) There has been, indeed,
on the part of the Legislature a wonderful overlooking of the need of
some similar protection. Even in cases where the words “to her separate
use”12 are introduced by the Court of Chancery for the wife’s
protection, the sole effect of the words is that the trustees cannot pay
the income of the settled property except upon the wife’s receipt. That
is a perfect protection if the wife be living away from her husband, but
if she be living with him the money immediately becomes the husband’s
income, and he has a right to take it from her the moment she receives
it. (Hear, hear.) iA large portion of the inhabitants of this country
are now in the anomalous position of having imposed on them, without
their having done anything to deserve it, what we inflict as a penalty
on the worst criminals. Like felons they are incapable of holding
property. And the class of women who are in that position are married
women, whom we profess a desire to surround with marks of honour and
dignity.i jMany people seem to think it impossible that two persons can
live together in harmonyj unless one of them has absolute power over the
other. This kmay have been the case in savage times, but we are advanced
beyond the savage state; and I believe it is not found that civilized
men or women cannot live with their brothers or with their sisters
except on such terms, or that business cannot be successfully carried on
unless one partner has the Edition: current; Page: [286] absolute
mastery over the other. The family offers a type and a school of the
relation of superiors and inferiors, exemplified in parents and
children; it should also offer a type and a school of the relation of
equality, exemplified in husband and wife. I am not insensible to the
evils which husbands suffer from bad and unprincipled wivesk. Happily,
the levilsl of slavery m(and I do not use the word in an invidious
sense)m extend to the slave-master as well as to the slave. But if we
were endeavouring to invent a mode of giving to the wife the strongest
possible motive to strain to the utmost her claims nagainst the property
of her husband, what step more effectual for this object could be taken
than to enact that she should have no rights of her own, and should be
entirely dependent upon what she can extract from the husband?n It is
only by doing justice to women that we can hope to give them any moral
feeling against encroaching on the rights of others. oIt is by remedying
the injustice that married women now suffer that real harmony is to be
introduced into the married state.o pWould the honourable Member for
Colchester accept for himself exclusion from all rights of property, on
condition that some one else should pay his debts, and make atonement
for his wrongs?p The Attorney-General adverted to what is certainly the
weakest part of the Bill when he pointed out that, if the rights of
husband and wife are to be equal, their obligations ought also to be
equal, and if the Bill should go into committee it will be necessary to
alter the clauses so as to establish an obligation equally on both
parties.13 The Bill will no doubt require a great deal of consideration
in committee, not so much with a view to the omission of some clauses as
to the addition of others. No doubt it is true that many other
qalterations of the law will be necessary; for when the law is founded
on a bad principle much re-adjustment is necessitated by the adoption of
a good one. But if it should please the House to refer the Bill to a
Select Committee, there are honourable and learned Gentlemen on both
sides of the House quiteq capable of proposing such radditions as wouldr
make the Bill work smoothly. (Hear.)

[The division on second reading was tied, and the Speaker voted “Aye” to
allow further discussion (cols. 1376–8).]

Edition: current; Page: [287]


100.: Registration of Publication
 12 JUNE, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, col. 1514. Reported in The Times, 13 June, p. 7,
from which the variant and response are taken. During the debate on
going into Committee, attention was called to the law requiring
newspapers to give a deposit as security against blasphemous and
seditious libels. It was pointed out by Thomas Milner Gibson (1806–84),
M.P. for Ashton-under-Lyne (cols. 1512–14) that the fault lay not with
the officials of the Board of Inland Revenue, but with the laws
themselves.

mr. j. stuart  said, he was glad the right honourable Gentleman had
endeavoured to impress upon the Government the propriety of putting an
end to all the difficulties to which reference had been made, by
repealing the Acts in question, which inflicted a punishment upon the
whole body of the Press because some of its members might possibly be
guilty of a violation of the law.1 What would be said if every physician
were bound to give security that he would not poison his patients?
(Hear, hear, and a laugh.) Surely it was sufficient to punish him if he
did poison thema, without placing restrictions like those complained of
upon the innocenta. His purpose in rising was to express a hope that if
the Government could not bring in a measure of the kind proposed this
Session, they would at least suspend all prosecutions under these Acts,
which were generally condemned by public opinion, which it had been
found impossible to enforce impartially, and which, therefore, operated
most unjustly upon those who were prosecuted under them; often by
individuals without the concurrence of the Attorney General and of the
Board of Inland Revenue.


101.: Representation of the People (Ireland)
 15 JUNE, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, col. 1592. Reported in The Times, 16 June, p. 7,
from which the responses are taken.  spoke in Committee on “A Bill
to Amend the Representation of the People in Ireland,” 31 Victoria (19
Mar., 1868), PP, 1867–68, IV, 549–64. Under consideration was Clause 18:
“It shall not be lawful for any Candidate, or any One on his Behalf, at
any Election for any City, Town, or Borough, to pay any Money on account
of Edition: current; Page: [288] the Conveyance of any Voter to the
Poll, either to the Voter himself or to any other Person; and if any
such Candidate, or any Person on his Behalf, shall pay any Money on
account of the Conveyance of any Voter to the Poll, such Payment shall
be deemed to be an illegal Payment within the Meaning of ‘The Corrupt
Practices Prevention Act, 1854.’ ” An amendment was proposed to exempt
Carrickfergus, Cork, Drogheda, Galway, Kilkenny, Limerick, and
Waterford, on the ground that these towns included rural districts where
homes were far from the polling places.  spoke after some discussion
of whether people would walk five miles to vote.

mr. j. stuart  said, he thought that if the House was in earnest on
this subject of Parliamentary Reform in Ireland there ought to be no
hesitation in dealing with the question now before the Committee. (Hear,
hear.) If they decided upon granting the suffrage to the Irish people,
they ought to give all possible facilities for the exercise of the
voting power. Those facilities ought not, however, to be provided at the
expense of the candidates, but of the public; and even if carriages were
necessary for the conveyance of voters to the poll, these also ought to
be provided at the public cost. (Hear, hear.) Additional polling places
were provided in the English Reform Bill,1 and if, being necessary in
Ireland, they were not provided by the Legislature, what would the Irish
Reform Bill be worth after all? There were numbers of places in England
much larger than those in Ireland for which exemptions were now sought,
and, in his opinion, exceptions ought only to be made in extreme cases.

[After Drogheda, Kilkenny, and Waterford had been deleted from the
amendment, it was accepted.]


102.: The Government of India Bill [1]
 15 JUNE, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, col. 1599. Reported in The Times, 16 June, p. 7,
from which the variant is taken.  spoke during the second reading of
“A Bill to Amend in Certain Respects the Act for the Better Government
of India,” 31 Victoria (23 Apr., 1868), PP, 1867–68, II, 479–82,
following Ayrton, who suggested that twelve years was too long a term
for members of the Council

(col. 1598).

mr. j. stuart  said, he agreed with his honourable Friend in
thinking that seven years was a sufficiently long period for the tenure
of office in the case of members of the Council; but he would suggest
that there should be a power of re-appointment, because, while it was
desirable to bring in those whose Edition: current; Page: [289]
information was fresh, it would often be a great disadvantage to the
Council to lose the services of some particular Member. aThat condition
might be satisfied by providing that, insteada of two members being
obliged to retire every year, one of the two might be eligible for
re-appointment.

[After further brief debate, the second reading was agreed.]


103.: Lodger Registration
 15 JUNE, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 1611–12. Reported in The Times, 16 June,
p. 8.  spoke during the second reading of “A Bill to Amend the Law
of Registration so far as Relates to the Year 1868, and for Other
Purposes Relating Thereto,” 31 Victoria (11 June, 1868), PP, 1867–68,
IV, 395–406. Reference had been made to the disabilities of lodgers who
were not served notice of objections to their registration.

mr. j. stuart  said, he thought the point relating to lodgers a very
serious one. Unless the lodger franchise was to be merely nominal, the
law ought to require that notices should be served upon them when their
right to vote was objected to; for otherwise, though the greater portion
of them would be poor men, they would have to attend the Court from the
very beginning of the revision to the end, in order to know whether they
were objected to or not. Knowing this, very few of them would register
at all. The obstacles in the way of the lodger were much greater than in
the way of any other class, for instead of being put on the register by
the overseers he had to make his own claim, and to repeat it every year.
He ought not, then, to be liable to unknown objections at an unknown
time.

[After other objections had been raised, the Bill was given second
reading.]


104.: Public Schools [1]
 16 JUNE, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 1650, 1655. Reported in The Times, 17
June, p. 9, from which the responses are taken.  spoke in Committee
on the recommitted “Bill [as Amended in Committee and by the Select
Committee] to Make Further Provision for the Good Government and
Extension of Certain Public Schools in England,” 31 Victoria (22 May,
1868), PP, 1867–68, IV, 317–36. His first intervention concerned Clause
2, which, inter Edition: current; Page: [290] alia, defined “school” as
including, “in the Case of Eton and Winchester, Eton College and
Winchester College.” On 31 March,  had written to Chadwick to say
that, though he could not write or open a debate on the issue, he would
probably speak on it

(CW, Vol. XVI, p. 1381).

mr. j. stuart  said, he understood that the Fellows of Eton College
had very little to do with the school, except to usurp to themselves the
greater portion of the endowments. (Hear, hear.) He thought that the
Head master rather than the Provost should be the head of the governing
body. (Loud cheers.)

[The Clause was accepted.]

[To Clause 3, which defined the existing “Governing Body,” with
particular mention of various public schools, Henry Du Pré Labouchere
(1831–1912) had moved (col. 1654) to include the Head Masters in such
bodies.]

Mr. J. Stuart  hoped the right honourable Gentleman who had charge
of the Bill1 would take into serious consideration the Amendment of his
honourable Friend the Member for Middlesex (Mr. Labouchere). The object
which they all had in view was to improve the schools. The Provost and
Head master had the most to do in the management of the schools, and as
the good government of those institutions was what should be steadily
aimed at, that object could not be better promoted than by including the
Provost and Head master in the governing body.

[Labouchere withdrew his amendment after assurance that the matter would
be attended to.]


105.: The Municipal Corporations (Metropolis) Bill [2]
 17 JUNE, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 1730–5. Reported in The Times, 18 June, p.
6, from which the variants and responses are taken.  was moving the
second reading of one of the Bills he had introduced on 5 May (see No.
93). As he indicates, he had been prevented from proceeding with the
other, establishing a Corporation of London.

the house is aware that this Bill is only one of two which have some
claim to be considered as one, inasmuch as they are parts of a combined
plan for the local government of the metropolis. The most important of
them, as the House is also aware, I have been unexpectedly prevented
from proceeding with. It has been Edition: current; Page: [291] decided
to be a violation of the Standing Orders.1 It appears to me a subject
well worthy the consideration of the House under what circumstances this
difficulty has arisen, and that I should have been unable to propose to
the House a plan for the general municipal government of the metropolis
because due notice has not been given to the Corporation of the City of
London. The Bill is not of private, but of public interest; the
Corporation is solely interested in it by reason of the property it
holds for public purposes; the City of London is perfectly aware of all
that is proposed, and has made no complaint of not having received
notice. The promoters of the measure do not expect to make money by it,
but may have a great deal to spend in carrying out its objects; and it
appears to me worthy of consideration whether the forms required by the
Standing Orders were ever intended for such a case as this, and whether
the promoters of the Bill ought to be required to spend several hundreds
of pounds out of their own pockets to give formal notice to the
Corporation. Since the House did me the honour of permitting me to
introduce the former measure,2 a great change has taken place in the
situation of this country as respects its institutions. aThe great
measure of last Session has been passed,3 and our Constitution has been
materially altered in a democratic direction. This new state of things
imposes new duties; it requires the House, on the one hand, to do more
than it was previously obliged to do; and, on the other, to consider the
inconveniences, whether great or small, that may be created by the new
direction in which we are proceeding, and to guard against them as far
as possible.a It is well understood what is the special danger of
democratic institutions: it is the absence of skilled administration;
and I strongly recommend to the consideration of the honourable Member
for Whitehaven (Mr. Bentinck), who I believe intends to move the
rejection of the Bill,4 that the great political problem of the future,
not only for this country, but for all others, is to obtain the
combination of democratic institutions with skilled administration. It
is extremely desirable that this House without either idle regret for
the past or vain confidence in the future should apply itself to find
out how these two things may best be united. I am anxious to impress on
the House the importance of reviewing our institutions in Edition:
current; Page: [292] this particular point of view, and to induce the
friends of democracy to appreciate the advantages of skilled
administration, and the admirers of skilled administration to appreciate
the merits of democratic institutions. As regards the general principle
on which municipal institutions should be founded, the established
practice with us is that all the ratepayers should have a voice in the
expenditure. In the democratic direction, nothing further than this can
be desired. But in the matter of skilled administration there is much to
be altered. All the defects of democratic institutions are great in
proportion as the area is small; and if you wish to work them well, I do
not know any rule more important than that you should never have a
popular representative assembly on a small area, for if you do, it will
be impossible to have skilled administration. There will be much less
choice of persons; a much smaller number, and those less competent for
the task, will be willing to undertake the conduct of public affairs.
And here I must direct attention to a principle of great importance. The
value of a popular administrative body—I might say of any popular
body—is measured by the value of the permanent officers. When a popular
body knows what it is fit for and what it is unfit for, it will more and
more understand that it is not its business to administer, but that it
is its business to see that the administration is done by proper
persons, and to keep them to their duties. I hope it will be more and
more felt that the duty of this House is to put the right persons on
that Bench opposite, and when there to keep them to their work. Even in
legislative business it is the chief duty—it is most consistent with the
capacity of a popular assembly to see that the business is transacted by
the most competent persons; confining its own direct intervention to the
enforcement of real discussion and publicity of the reasons offered pro
and con; the offering of suggestions to those who do the work, and the
imposition of a check upon them if they are disposed to do anything
wrong. People will more value the importance of this principle the
longer they have experience of it. This principle, when applied to local
popular administration, shows itself in a very strong light indeed. A
popular assembly that has only a little work to do in a little area,
tries to do it itself, and to transact public business by making
speeches—the most ineffective way in which public business can be done.
In proportion as the local body approaches to the position of a great
assembly like the present—though at a great distance—and has to
represent a large area, and has a great deal of various work to do, in
that proportion it will feel that its business is not to do the work
itself; its business is to set the right people to do it, and to use for
the purpose of controlling them all the lights which the collision of
opinion amongst their own members may produce, but not to take the work
out of the hands of the administrators. The adoption of that principle
absolutely requires that the popular democratic representative bodies,
such as those by which our local administration is carried on, should
not be on the small scale of a local board, but should be on a larger
scale—as large a scale as is consistent with unity of interest in the
body whose affairs they have to administer. Edition: current; Page:
[293] The local business of the metropolis is now divided, in kind,
amongst a variety of administrative bodies, and is likewise divided, in
a most minute manner, geographically. The various parishes carry on
their business by means of vestries and local boards, and there are
duties besides, that do not belong to the vestries, which are of the
most multifarious description possible. There are 37 districts for the
registration of births, 56 for the purposes of the Building Act, 19
divisions for police purposes, 30 County Court districts, and 15 Militia
districts.5 There should be for the administration of all this business
a consolidation of those very small districts. Among the advantages to
be derived from consolidation would be greater efficiency and economy.
Nothing can surprise me more than to find any petition presented against
this Bill on the ground that its effects will be to raise the rates;
that is not only impossible, but it must have the contrary effect,
because in proportion as the present divisions approach the size they
would all reach when combined under the plan I propose, economy has been
effected. Compare the two districts, for example, of Marylebone and
Westminster, which are about equal in population. Marylebone is all one
parish under one local government, and is an approximation to the system
I would establish, and its administrative expenses amount to £8,000 a
year. Westminster is divided amongst five boards, and the five boards
cost £20,000 a year. Probably not more than a third of the number of
officers employed in Westminster is employed in Marylebone. In fact, the
more an area is divided into independent districts, the more paid
officers there must be, and the less skilled they will be. The small
districts cannot afford to pay for the greatest skill, and the smallness
of the districts prevents the officers from acquiring it. Add to this
the expense now arising from quarrels and litigation, which, of course,
would not exist if these boards were fused into one. I find that no less
than 4,000 persons are engaged, in some capacity or other, in the local
government of the metropolis. I cannot help asking, would any person now
think of establishing the present system of administration in the
metropolis if it did not already exist? Would it exist at all except for
the accidental growing up of arrangements that have never been reviewed?
In a great metropolis, who cares about his parish, except for its
church? and, as we are going to get rid of church rates, the parish will
have no common interest at all in future. If we are to have a body that
can do the work well, the first condition must be unlimited
publicity—publicity which must not be theoretic, but real. It is not
only that the people should have a right to know what is done; but that
they should really and actually know what is being done. You must get
them to give their attention to it; and that is not accomplished on the
present system, because the area of administration being on so small a
scale, the public Edition: current; Page: [294] does not take sufficient
interest in the subject to inquire into what is being done. bNo one
troubles himself either to be a candidate for a seat in the vestry or to
read the debates. But, while the ratepayers will not look after their
own interests, the power of those who take a part in parish affairs from
private and interested motives is increased, because they have an
opportunity of promoting their ends by unseen modes.b Except in a large
parish, no light is thrown on what is going on. I am far from
undervaluing what the local institutions, imperfect as they are, have
done; but they are doing much less every day, as the conditions on which
they were established become less adapted to existing circumstances. It
is very generally believed that it is an extremely frequent thing for
persons who sit in vestries of the metropolis to be landlords of small
tenements utterly unfit for human habitations (hear, hear), men whose
interest—I do not say they always yield to that interest—is not to
promote those sanitary arrangements for the improvement of the dwelling
places of the great mass of the community which it should be our object
to promote. (Hear.) In the Bill of my honourable Friend the Member for
Finsbury (Mr. M’Cullagh Torrens)—the Labourers’ and Artizans’ Dwellings
Bill—it was desired to give greater powers in dealing with that class of
property,6 but no authority could be found that was deemed fit to
exercise those powers. cThe Bill proposed to give powers to the
vestries, but this was struck out in Committee, on the ground that they
were not bodies of sufficient importance, and that they could not be
trusted. But when the Metropolitan Board of Works was substituted7 and
the Bill came on for discussion in the House, objection was taken to the
Metropolitan Board as not being a sufficiently representative and
popular bodyc;8 and I have received repeated applications to oppose the
Bill on that ground. It may be said that, acting on the principles I
have enunciated, I ought to have proposed one municipal government for
the whole metropolis. There is a good deal to be said for such a course.
But on the other hand, it might shock settled ideas to propose at once
Edition: current; Page: [295] to entrust the whole local government of
so vast an area, with about 3,000,000 of inhabitants, to one local body.
The business to be intrusted to their management would, moreover, be too
great, and it would give them the control of too large an amount of
revenue; and it would have been useless to attempt to obtain the consent
of the House to such a measure. Probably it is better to have local
municipal bodies for the different Parliamentary boroughs, and that the
central Board should not be troubled with any business but such as is
common to the whole metropolis. The Parliamentary boroughs offer a
medium between the contemptibly small size of an ordinary parish and the
inordinate size of the whole metropolis; and in them there has grown up,
from the circumstance of their being Parliamentary boroughs, a certain
feeling of local connection amongst the whole of the inhabitants. This
feeling exists in a very great degree in the old Parliamentary
districts, the City of London, Westminster, and Southwark; and some
amount of it has grown up even in those which were created by the Act of
1832.9 I therefore propose by the Bill which I ask you to read a second
time, to create municipalities for the Parliamentary districts, which
shall exercise the powers of the municipalities under the Municipal
Corporations Act.10 and also those of the vestries and local boards of
the metropolis, except so far as Parliament shall otherwise dispose. It
may be said that the Metropolitan Board of Works meets the idea of a
central Board. The Metropolitan Board is a clumsy creation, arising from
the felt want of some body to represent the whole metropolis. It was at
first called into existence to dexecute the great work of main drainaged
which is now nearly completed, and its existence would in consequence
have soon expired, but that Parliament in the meantime found out the
necessity of some such central body, and threw upon it a great variety
of duties, which originally were not contemplatede, down even to the
naming of the streetse. It never was intended that the Board should be a
municipality for the whole of London; and I cannot conceive that that
body can continue to discharge those duties without its construction
being at least greatly modified. (Hear, hear.) I could not expect that
this Bill would pass at this period of the Session, even if the
Government were to adopt it; but I think it is right to remind the House
of this question, and to prepare the public mind for a more mature
consideration of it. On these grounds I beg to move that the Bill be now
read a second time. (Hear, hear.)

[After some debate the matter was adjourned until 30 June when, after
more discussion, the Bill was lost.]

Edition: current; Page: [296]


106.: The Government of India Bill [2]
 22 JUNE, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 1876–7. Reported in The Times, 23 June, p.
7, from which the variants and responses are taken. For the Bill, see
No. 102. In the debate on going into Committee, Lord William Montagu Hay
(1826–1911), M.P. for Taunton, had opened the discussion of the Bill’s
main provision, that Council membership should be for twelve years
rather than life, by suggesting that Council’s power of overruling the
Secretary of State on matters of expenditure should be curtailed. He
suggested that expenses should be submitted to Parliament in the
estimates.

(Cols. 1870–6.)

mr. j. stuart  said, he agreed with the noble Lord that it was most
important that India should be governed in India, and that there was a
great tendency in the change of circumstances which had rendered
communication with India so much easier to lead to over-interference on
the part of the Home Government.1 But, after all, they could not
altogether abdicate their control, though the best way in which that
control could be exercised would be to send out men to represent us who
could be relied upon to perform their duty well. (Hear, hear.) Since
there must be a controlling power here, the question was between placing
it in the Secretary of State alone or in the Secretary of State and the
Council. On that point he did not think the noble Lord had said anything
which tended to show that it was better to place that control in the
Secretary of State alone rather than in the Secretary of State and a
Council which had an effective power. The noble Lord had admitted the
absolute necessity of the Secretary of State being assisted by persons
who had acquired a knowledge of Indiaa, and who should hold a more
responsible position than that of being a mere consultative bodya.2
About that there could be no difference of opinion between the noble
Lord and himself. But if the Council did not possess some substantive
power, if they were made a consultative body only, they never would have
that degree of weight which they ought to possess; they would be ba mere
superfluous wheel in the machineryb. If they had only the power of
giving their opinions they would never be so powerful with the Secretary
of State as his own subordinates in Office. (Hear, hear.) If the House
did not think that the Council as at present constituted was the best
controlling body, they could try to improve it; and various modes of
doing so had been suggested, some of which he thought were improvements.
Perhaps it would be an improvement if a portion of them were allowed to
sit in that House. He confessed he was surprised, however, when the
noble Lord said that if the present powers of the Council were Edition:
current; Page: [297] continued he would be against its Members being
admitted to seats in that House; but if their powers were taken away
then he thought it would be of advantage that they should have seats.3
Now, such an expression of opinion appeared to him at variance with the
whole course of the noble Lord’s argument, because he had contended that
the Council were irresponsible, and that the Secretary of State was the
only one who had any responsibility.4 But what responsibility had the
Secretary of State? It was that he could be called to account in that
House, and if he did not succeed in defending his measures he could be
turned out of Office. But the same thing would happen to the Council.
They could be turned out (No) after a period of trial, because the
proposal of this Bill was to make the duration of Office as a matter of
course shorter. But of all the surprising things in the speech of the
noble Lord that which had surprised him most was that the noble Lord
should have brought forward the tendency of this country to throw all
expenditure, when any excuse could be found, on the people of India, as
a reason for asking the consent of England, not India, when such
expenditure was in question.5 (Hear.) If there was one thing which might
be held absolutely certain, it was that the majority of a body
constituted like the Council would in such matters be on the side of
India. The Court of Directors had always been so, and many a battle to
his knowledge had been fought by them with the Board of Control, in
order to prevent such expenditure from being thrown upon India; and they
often succeeded, but, he was sorry to say, still oftener failed. Now, if
the power of sanctioning expenditure were taken away from the Council,
which represented India, and given to that House, which did not
represent India; and which seldom troubled itself about India at all,
but which did care about England and its burthens, and if the noble Lord
believed that the House would be actuated in such matters by a generous
and chivalrous spirit and would take the burden from India to throw it
upon their own constituents, he must say that the noble Lord had a far
higher opinion of the virtue of that House than his (Mr. Stuart ’s)
experience had taught him to have of that or perhaps any other public
body in similar circumstances. (Hear.)

[The House went into Committee on the Bill.]


107.: Public Schools [2]
 23 JUNE, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 1928–9, 1931–2. Reported (first part) in
The Times, 24 June, p. 6. For the Bill, see No. 104.  spoke in
Committee on Clause 6, concerning the power Edition: current; Page:
[298] of the governing bodies to make statutes under certain
restrictions. James Lowther (1840–1904), M.P. for York, had proposed an
amendment to leave out the section: “With respect to the privileges and
number of boys who, under any Statute or Benefaction, may be entitled to
any rights to education or maintenance”

(col. 1926).

mr. j. stuart  earnestly hoped that the Committee would not adopt
the Amendment proposed by the honourable Member for York. One of the
most scandalous abuses connected with endowed schools was that the
endowments intended for the education of children of parents who could
not afford to pay for their education, had been in fact confiscated for
the benefit of those who could afford to pay for it. Whether this was a
case of the kind he did not know; but it appeared that the choristers
and the sons of the tenants of the Dean and Chapter had some rights by
virtue of the old endowment. The clause did not define their rights, or
state whether such rights existed; it merely gave the governing body the
power to consider whether such rights existed, and to take measures with
respect to them. The subject had attracted the attention of the working
classes themselves. To his own knowledge there had been formed in the
North of England an association of the working classes to obtain a
restoration of their rights—he would not say in Westminster School
particularly—but in endowed schools generally. Unless means were taken
to deal with this question by a measure of wider extent, the feeling
amongst the working classes would grow much stronger, and the House
might expect to hear a great deal more of it. It was not merely that
there were rights, but the rights were known by the persons for whose
benefit they were created. The House would do well to give to the
authorities who were to make the new statutes the power of considering
this matter amongst others.

[The amendment was defeated (col. 1930). ’s second intervention was
on Clause 6 as a whole.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, he wished to impress upon the right honourable
Member for the University of Cambridge (Mr. Walpole), who had charge of
the Bill, the importance of the suggestion that had been made by the
honourable Member for North Devon (Mr. Acland).1 The schools whose case
they were considering differed from schools generally, in that they were
schools intended for the purpose of imparting the highest class of
education; and no one supposed that this either ought to, or need be
given to the whole of the children of the working or lower middle
classes. But, on the other hand, the élite of those classes had a right
to claim that that sort of education should be afforded to them. To
those who are most proficient in the lower grades of education, the next
highest ought to be opened at the expense of the magnificent endowments
for educational purposes in this country. As this was a matter of great
importance, requiring to be carefully considered, not so much by the
House as by the body the House was about to Edition: current; Page:
[299] create, he hoped the Committee would not predetermine that no part
of those great endowments should be appropriated to the purpose of
providing the higher kinds of education for such persons as those to
which he had referred.

[Acland’s suggestion, not being an amendment, was not voted on; the
Clause was accepted (col. 1932).]


108.: The Sea-Fisheries (Ireland) Bill
 24 JUNE, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 2021–2. Reported in The Times, 25 June, p.
6, from which the responses are taken.  spoke during the second
reading of “A Bill to Amend the Laws Relative to the Coast and Deep Sea
Fisheries of Ireland,” 31 Victoria (30 Apr., 1868), PP, 1867–68, V,
205–20, following Shaw-Lefevre

(col. 2021).

mr. j. stuart  said, the main objection of his honourable Friend who
had just sat down to the granting of loans to the Irish fishermen was
that if this were done for Ireland it should be done for Scotland and
England. His answer was that Ireland was a more backward country than
either Scotland or England. Government might very properly undertake to
do things for a country which was industrially backward, which no one
could expect from them in the case of a country which was in a more
advanced and prosperous condition. (Hear, hear.) This consideration was
of all the more weight when it was remembered that the industrial
backwardness of Ireland was, in a great measure, attributable to the
past legislation of this country. For a long period English legislators,
without distinction of party, employed themselves in crushing this and
most other branches of Irish enterprize. It was therefore incumbent on
us, now that we were wiser and able to look upon our past conduct with
shame, to legislate in an opposite direction, and even to risk if
necessary the loss of small sums of money to advance that industry which
we had formerly endeavoured to retard. (Hear, hear.)

[The Bill was given a second reading.]


109.: Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections [4]
 25 JUNE, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 192, cols. 2180–1. Reported in The Times, 26 June, p.
9, from which the response is taken. For the Bill, see No. 89. 
spoke in Committee on Clause 5: “From and after the next Dissolution of
Parliament a Petition complaining of an undue Return or Edition:
current; Page: [300] undue Election of a Member to serve in Parliament
for a County or Borough may be presented to the Court of Common Pleas by
any One or more” of certain designated people. Edward Henry John
Crauford (1816–87), M.P. for Ayr, had moved an amendment to replace
“Court of Common Pleas” by “House of Commons”

(col. 2173).

mr. j. stuart  said, that, in the course of the rather severe
criticisms which had been made upon the Bill, it seemed to have been
forgotten that, whatever might be its defects, it provided one of the
most important remedies for bribery and corruption—a local
investigation. (Hear, hear.) His own opinion was that the worst plan
which involved such an investigation would be better than the best plan
without it. But if there were a local investigation the jurisdiction
must be altered; and the question was whether a tribunal should be
constituted composed of one of the Judges of the land as proposed in the
Government plan, or of a Judge sitting with a jury as suggested by the
right honourable Gentleman the Member for Kilmarnock (Mr. Bouverie)?1
However that might be he was anxious to impress on the House that any
such tribunal would be only fit to be a tribunal of appeal, and that it
would be necessary to have besides a tribunal of investigation. The best
plan, therefore, to adopt, seemed to him that of which he had given
Notice, and which he had drawn up with the assistance of Mr. Serjeant
Pulling,2 providing that the Revising Barrister, an officer conversant
with elections, and having a considerable acquaintance with the
locality, should be the person to hold the investigation in the first
instance. The investigation should take place before the return of the
writ, and there should be a scrutiny. They must endeavour to put an end
to excessive expenditure; and he thought the expense of the preliminary
investigation should be borne by the public, either out of the borough
rate or be charged on the Consolidated Fund. If the Amendment were
pressed to a division he should vote for the provision in the Bill as
against the Amendment.

[The amendment failed (col. 2189).]


110.: The Municipal Corporations (Metropolis) Bill [3]
 30 JUNE, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, col. 419. Reported in The Times, 1 July, p. 8.
For the Bill, see No. 93.  opened the adjourned debate on the second
reading.

mr. j. stuart  appealed to the Secretary of State for India, by whom
the adjournment Edition: current; Page: [301] of the debate had been
moved on the former occasion,1 to proceed with his argument.

Sir Stafford Northcote said, that at that late hour he did not feel
justified in launching the House upon a fresh discussion.

Mr. J. Stuart  then briefly replied to some of the arguments
advanced in the course of the debate a few days since upon this Bill,2
expressing his regret that the measure, instead of being met with a
direct negative by a private Member,3 had not been left for the
consideration of the Government.

[The Bill was put off for three months, i.e., abandoned.]


111.: Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections [5]
 6 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 734–5, 742, 744, 746. Reported in The
Times, 7 July, p. 7, from which the responses are taken. For the Bill,
see No. 89.  spoke in Committee again on Clause 5 (see No. 109),
following a proposal by Bouverie (cols. 722–8) that jurisdiction be
given to tribunals of Members of Parliament presided over by Judges from
the Superior Courts. Writing to W.D. Christie on 7 July,  says:
“When you read the Bribery debate of last night, do not suppose that I
have abandoned, even temporarily, the advocacy of our plan of a
jurisdiction. I told the House (though this is not reported) that I
should bring that forward before Clause 10 is disposed of: and it will
come on at the beginning of the next discussion.”

(CW, Vol. XVI, p. 1421.)

mr. j. stuart  said, he thought it was desirable that the discussion
should not be complicated by a reference to all the various plans which
had been suggested; and he should therefore address himself to the
Amendment of his right honourable Friend the Member for Kilmarnock (Mr.
Bouverie) as compared with the provisions of the Bill. His right
honourable Friend contended that Committees of the House, as at present
constituted, gave their decisions in Election cases with great
impartiality, and he was not prepared to deny that such was the fact as
far as the decision with respect to the seat and the existence of
corrupt practices was concerned. Did a Committee of that House, however,
he should like to know, ever find a Member guilty of bribery? (Cries of
Yes.) Not once in fifty years. But if Edition: current; Page: [302] it
were proved that a candidate had deposited a large sum at his bankers,
that he made no inquiry as to how it was expended, and that his
recognized agents had laid out portions of it in bribing, would not any
tribunal, except one composed of Members of the same class as himself,
and who were liable to the same temptations, find him guilty of some
kind of corruption? (Hear, hear.) What he desired to see was a tribunal
which would consider bribery which was tolerated by a candidate as if it
had been committed by him, and that would not be done, he believed, so
long as the decision rested with the House itself. The Amendment of his
right honourable Friend would be an improvement on the existing state of
things, but it failed in the essential condition of providing a local
inquiry, and one that could be pursued when Parliament was not sitting.
By means of a local inquiry the commission of offences could be much
more easily detected than if the investigation were conducted at a
distance. If local inquiry was of no advantage, what was the use of the
Judges going circuit? The cases were precisely analogous. Although he
thought that the plan of the Government possessed a great advantage over
that of his right honourable Friend, yet he was far from being disposed
to place implicit confidence in the Judges. He could not forget that
they had been politicians, and that they were sometimes thought to be
politicians still. There was reason to believe that a recent charge in
the Court of Queen’s Bench would cost the Government several votes on
the present Bill, though it would not cost them his.1 If, however, the
Bill were passed as it stood, it would not be in the power of the
House—as they had been reminded at an earlier stage of the debate by the
right honourable Member for Oxfordshire (Mr. Henley)2—after trying the
experiment, to discontinue it without the consent of the other branch of
the Legislature. Now, he thought it very important that the House should
be able to put a stop to the experiment without any consent but its own,
and he should therefore suggest that the operation of the Act be limited
to two years. Under ordinary circumstances he should say five years, but
having regard to the experience which they would at once have of the
working of the Act, he thought two years sufficient. In the meantime we
should have a most important General Election, and there would, in all
probability, be a sufficient number of Election Petitions to give an
ample trial of the experiment. (Hear, hear.)

Edition: current; Page: [303]
[The Clause was agreed, and discussion turned to Clause 6, dealing with
regulations as to presentation of petitions. Karslake, the Attorney
General, announced that he would introduce a clause (col. 741) which
would meet all the objections made.]

Mr. J. Stuart  stated that as his three Amendments on this clause
had been virtually disposed of, he did not propose to move them.3

[Clause 6 was agreed (col. 744). In the discussion of Clause 7, dealing
with the manner in which a recognizance might be objected to, 
proposed an amendment to add,] “And the respondent making any such
objection shall be required to serve notice of it, precisely describing
the ground of it, on the Petitioner, or on all the Petitioners, if more
than one, within the said prescribed time, not exceeding five days.”

They ought not to discourage, but rather to facilitate the presentation
of Petitions, and petitioners ought to have such warning of any
objection taken to their sureties as would enable them, if any mistakes
had been made, to rectify them.

[The Attorney General said, the present practice in that matter worked
very well, and he thought the use of the word precisely in the Amendment
would not add much to its efficacy, while it might raise numerous
questions in regard to every one of the notices served.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, he had no objection to omit from his Amendment
the words “precisely describing the ground of it,” but he thought that
notice of objection ought to be given.

[George Denman (1819–96), the chief commentator on ’s amendment,
remarked on the number of vexatious petitioners who preyed on honest
candidates (col. 745).]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, he was fully aware of the evil to which his
honourable and learned Friend the Member for Tiverton (Mr. Denman)
referred. He believed that there were nearly as many dishonest Petitions
as there were corrupt elections. But the remedy for this evil must be
taught independently, and not by rendering bonâ fide Petitions expensive
and difficult.

[The amendment was lost, and the Clause agreed (col. 746).]

Edition: current; Page: [304]


112.: Public Schools [3]
 7 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, col. 823. Reported in The Times, 8 July, p. 7,
from which the variants are taken. For the Bill, see No. 104.  spoke
in Committee on a Clause introduced by Lowe: “That all boys educated at
the seven Schools mentioned in this Act shall be examined once a year,
by one of the Inspectors of the Committee of Council on Education, in
reading, writing from dictation, arithmetic, including vulgar fractions,
practice, and the rule of three, geography, English grammar and history,
and the results of such examination and the Report of the examining
Inspectors shall be laid before Parliament” (col. 819). Some speakers
objected that outside examinations involved a degradation of the schools
and some that government should not interfere; one suggested an entrance
examination.

mr. j. stuart  said, the remedy which was now proposed was that the
scholars should be examined, not in athose higher branches of learning
whicha the schools professed to teach, but in what every boy should know
before he went. To examine them in what any boy should know at a
National School might be an extremely good joke bagainst the schools;
but he hoped no one would vote for it seriouslyb. The examination should
be in those subjects the cultivation of which was the purpose of the
schools. But he quite agreed that the examination provided by the clause
might be applied as an entrance examination.

[Finally the Clause was withdrawn.]


113.: Supply—Post Office
 7 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, col. 833. Reported in The Times, 8 July, p. 7.
In Committee of Supply, considering the Post Office estimates, McLaren
had suggested that the Post Office could easily carry such printed
materials as election circulars for 1/2d. instead of 1d.

(cols. 832–3).

mr. j. stuart  said, that with reference to the matter so ably
advocated by his honourable Friend, he could not help suggesting to the
Chancellor of the Exchequer that it would be very proper to carry bonâ
fide election circulars through Edition: current; Page: [305] the Post
Office free.1 If that were done it might come to pass that candidates
would address their constituents much more by circulars than by
speeches. Election expenses were increased much more than honourable
Gentlemen were aware by the charges for the delivery of election
circulars.


114.: The Government of India Bill [3]
 8 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 859–60, 861–2. Reported in The Times, 9
July, p. 6, from which the variant and responses are taken. For the
Bill, see No. 102.  spoke in Committee on Clause 2, which provided
yearly salaries for future Members of the India Council of £1500, but
ruled out retiring pensions for them. An amendment had been offered that
would have had the effect of treating continuing Members in the same
way, and the debate turned on the issue of whether those appointed under
the India Act of 1858 had legitimately expected a choice between
continuing for life or retiring after ten years with a pension. Ayrton
argued that Parliament had the right to reconsider the arrangements of
the Act of 1858; it was better, he asserted, that such Members should
serve another ten years at £1500 than to fix no limit at all, and in any
case most of them already had a pension from their Indian service

(col. 859).

mr. j. stuart  said, that his honourable and learned Friend the
Member for the Tower Hamlets (Mr. Ayrton) had forgotten one
matter—namely, that the pensions from India were bought, being derived
from stoppages from pay. He (Mr. Stuart ) quite agreed that an ample
salary rendered a retiring pension unnecessary. But there would be a
hardship if, when the expectation of pensions had been held out to the
existing Councillors, they were deprived of pensions in the end. If an
increase of salary were to be given instead, that increase should range
over a fresh series of ten years. But the reason which induced the House
to limit the service of future Councillors should prevent it from
continuing the old for another ten years. He, therefore, recommended the
Committee to agree to give the old members an opportunity of serving for
another five years at the increased salary, or else to grant them a
pension at the end of the ten years.

[After a short discussion, Stafford Northcote said that ’s
suggestion could best be dealt with in a new clause, which he would
consider carefully; he recommended that the amendment be withdrawn (col.
860).]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, he would be happy to bring up a new clause.

[The amendment was withdrawn, and another offered to reduce the salary
to £1200.]

Edition: current; Page: [306]
Mr. J. Stuart  said, that if it was not for the Council the
Government of India would be left wholly to the Secretary of State—who
before his appointment was agenerallya ignorant of Indian affairs—and to
such irresponsible persons as he might choose to consult, who if he had
a pre-conceived opinion would be likely to share it. The Secretary of
State would be left with no regular assistance but that of the
subordinates in his office. Of the latter, having himself been included
in the number, he entertained, generally speaking, a very high opinion;
but he did not think Parliament and the country would approve of handing
over the government of India entirely to them. It was absolutely
necessary that there should be associated with them some men of
standing, of professional knowledge, and practical acquaintance with
India, whose names and character were known to the public. (Hear, hear.)
It was also necessary that such salaries should be given them as would
induce them to continue in their offices. Although yielding to no one in
his desire for economy, he did not think that retrenchment was judicious
when it took the form of stinting the remuneration for the best and most
difficult work. (Hear, hear.) It was possible they might get very much
the same class of men for £1,200 as for £1,500; but, in the absence of a
pension, he did not think the latter amount excessive.

[The Bill was withdrawn on 27 July because there was insufficient time
for its discussion (col. 1871).]


115.: Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections [6]
 10 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1015–16, 1020. Reported in The Times, 11
July, p. 6. For the Bill, see No. 89.  spoke in Committee first on
Clause 14, dealing with the trial of election petitions.

mr. j. stuart  said, he had intended, before the clause was finally
agreed to, to make some observations in vindication of a plan which was
embodied in three pages of Amendments that stood on the Notice Paper in
his name.1 As the Committee had, however, already virtually decided
against his plan, he would not now press his Amendments.

Edition: current; Page: [307]
[’s second intervention came during the discussion of Clause 17,
dealing with the judge’s report as to corrupt practices.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, that as he had an important Amendment to
propose,2 and there was not time for the discussion, he would beg to
move that the Committee report Progress.


116.: Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections [7]
 14 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1166–8, 1169, 1176–7, 1177, 1178. Reported
in The Times, 15 July, pp. 6–7. For the Bill, see No. 89.  spoke in
Committee on discussion of Clause 17

(see No. 115).

the addition which I propose to this clause is one of great importance,
since it raises the question of providing better security against
corrupt practices in municipal, as well as Parliamentary elections. No
one is likely to deny that bribery in municipal elections deserves
repression as much, and is as unfit to be tolerated or indulged, as
bribery in Parliamentary elections; and the special reason why it should
be dealt with in this Bill is that, as we are told by all who know
anything about the matter, municipal bribery is the great school of
Parliamentary bribery. Honourable Members of this House have on a former
occasion testified to this fact from their personal knowledge, and I
shall quote only two authorities for it. One is that eminent
Conservative solicitor, Mr. Philip Rose, formerly as intimately known to
honourable Gentlemen opposite as his partner, Mr. Spofforth, now is.1
Mr. Rose, before the Select Committee of this House on Corrupt
Practices, in 1860, expressed himself in these words—

My strong opinion is, that all the efforts which are now being made to
check bribery at Parliamentary elections will fail, for this reason,
that you do not attempt to strike at the root of the offence. The real
nursery for the evil is the municipal contests; and those oft-recurring
contests have led to the establishment of what I might almost term an
organized system of corruption in the municipal boroughs throughout the
kingdom, which provides a machinery ready made to hand, available when
the Parliamentary contest arrives.2

Edition: current; Page: [308]
My next authority is the Committee itself, before whom this evidence was
given, and who reported—

That it has been proved to the satisfaction of your Committee, that an
intimate connection exists between bribery at municipal and
Parliamentary elections, and it is expedient that the provisions as to
punishments and forfeitures for the offences of bribery at each such
election should be assimilated as far as possible.3

Notwithstanding this recommendation of the Select Committee, which I
hope that the next House of Commons will see the propriety of adopting
in its integrity, I have not ventured to propose that the present Bill
should provide a machinery for the investigation and punishment of
corrupt practices at municipal elections. But I do propose, by the
present Amendment, and by an additional clause which will follow in due
course,4 that when the machinery which the Bill does provide for the
investigation of corrupt practices at Parliamentary elections is
actually set in motion, the inquiry may extend to municipal as well as
to Parliamentary corruption. If the House adopt my Amendment, the
Special Commission, which is already empowered to inquire into
Parliamentary elections previous to that which caused the issue of the
Commission, will have the power conferred on it of inquiring, to exactly
the same extent, into previous municipal elections. By the additional
clause, the Judge who tries an Election Petition, may take evidence to
prove that an elector who voted at the Parliamentary election had been
guilty of corrupt practices at any municipal election within two years
previous, for the purpose, of course, of showing that his vote was
corruptly influenced at the Parliamentary election. The period of two
years is selected with reference to the term fixed by the 56th clause of
the Municipal Corporations Act;5 and I confidently claim, both for the
Amendment and for the new clause, the support of all honourable Members
who really desire to lay the axe at the root of electoral corruption.
The honourable Member moved to add at the end of the clause the
following words—

And it shall be competent for any such Commission to inquire into
corrupt practices at previous municipal Elections within the county or
borough as fully as into corrupt practices at previous Parliamentary
Elections.

[John George Dodson, Chairman of the Committee of Ways and Means,
expressed opinion that the amendment, because it dealt with municipal
elections, was not sufficiently relevant to be considered (col. 1168).]

Mr. J. Stuart  observed that he had so altered his Amendment as to
obviate the difficulty started by the Chairman. He proposed it should
run thus—

And it shall be competent for any such Commission to inquire how far
corrupt practices at Edition: current; Page: [309] any previous
municipal Election may have conduced to corrupt practices at the
Parliamentary Election.

[Even in this form, the Chairman said, the amendment went beyond the
proper limits of the Bill, and suggested that, at the Report stage, 
bring up a clause to that effect (col. 1169).]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, he would avail himself of that suggestion.

[The amendment was withdrawn.]

[’s third intervention came at the beginning of discussion of Clause
43, which was designed to throw costs of a petition fully on the
petitioner or petitioners.]

Mr. J. Stuart  proposed, in page 14, line 11, to insert after “on
the whole successful” the words—

And in the case of any such Petition where any corrupt practice is
charged to have taken place, and where the court or judge has decided
that any corrupt practice has been proved, the court or judge shall have
power to order any portion or the whole of the costs, charges, and
expenses to be defrayed by any party or parties who may have been proved
guilty of corrupt practices, or by the county or borough, in the same
manner as expenses incurred in the registration of voters for the county
or borough, regard being had to the importance of securing the best
efforts of the county or borough for repression of corrupt practices.

In the case of any Petition complaining of general or extensive
prevalence of corrupt practices, if the court or judge shall be of
opinion that there was reasonable and probable ground for its
allegations, the petitioner or petitioners shall be relieved of all
costs, charges, and expenses incurred in and about the inquiry, and it
shall be in the power of the court or judge to distribute the said
costs, charges, and expenses in such proportions as it or he may think
fit between parties who shall have been found guilty of corrupt
practices, or who shall have caused expense by vexatious conduct,
unfounded allegations, or unfounded objections, and the county or
borough, as the case may be, the expenses charged on the county or
borough to be defrayed in the same manner as expenses incurred in the
registration of voters for the county or borough.

The principle of this Amendment is that to bring to light, and prosecute
to conviction, acts of bribery, or other corruption at elections, is a
public service; and that, being a public service, those who are
judicially decided to have performed that service ought not to be
required to pay the expenses of it from their private purse. It is
enough that they take upon themselves the risk of failing to establish
the charge, which, we all know, may easily, and does frequently, happen
when it is perfectly notorious that the charge is true. But when it has
been proved true, and is judicially declared to be so proved, I maintain
that the Petitioners have a clear moral right to be indemnified for the
expense. Their first claim, no doubt, is upon the parties who, through
their instrumentality, have been found guilty; but the Judge may not
always think fit to inflict even upon proved corruption, so heavy a
penalty as the entire expenses of the Petition; and it will often happen
that the parties have not the means of paying it. I propose, therefore,
that the Judge should Edition: current; Page: [310] have the power of
apportioning the expense in whatever manner he deems most just, between
the persons convicted of corrupt practices, and the county or borough.

[After some objections, Karslake, the Attorney General, asserted that
the amendment would allow anyone to assert that a bribe had been
offered, without the person accused having a chance of defence (col.
1177).]

Mr. J. Stuart  asked, whether since Judges could be trusted to
decide cases of political importance, the Attorney General believed they
could not be trusted to exercise proper caution in awarding costs?

[The amendment was defeated, and the clause agreed.]

[ proposed his last amendment to Clause 45, dealing with punishment
of candidates found guilty of bribery: their election would be declared
void, and they would be ineligible for reelection for seven years.]

Mr. J. Stuart  moved, in page 14, line 35, to leave out the word
“bribery,” in order to insert the words “corrupt practice” in its stead.
“Corrupt practice” were the words used generally throughout the Bill as
a description of the offence with which the measure dealt. His object
was to extend the operation of the clause to persons guilty of treating
or of intimidation.

[It was argued that the amendment would place too heavy a punishment on
mere treating or intimidation, and the amendment was lost (col. 1178).]


117.: The Fenian Prisoners [1]
 16 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1282–3. Reported in The Times, 17 July, p.
7.

mr. j. stuart  said, he wished to ask the Chief Secretary for
Ireland,1 If Her Majesty’s Government will take into favourable
consideration the question whether the time is arrived when the very
heavy sentences passed on Warren and Costello, the only two persons of
the crew of the Jackmell who have not been released, may be remitted or
mitigated?2

Edition: current; Page: [311]
The Earl of Mayo, in reply, said, he was glad the honourable Member put
the Question, because considerable misapprehension seemed to exist upon
the subject. The two prisoners referred to were convicted for coming to
Ireland in an armed vessel, and cruizing along the coast in order to
raise an armed insurrection against the Queen. The only evidence given
against them of their proceedings in the United States of America—was
that they were members of the Fenian Brotherhood previous to the 5th of
March, 1867, the date of overt acts connected with the rising in which
their brother conspirators were engaged. That evidence was necessary to
connect them with the Fenian society, and in accordance with the terms
of the Treason Felony Act that brought them within the jurisdiction of
this country, so that in reality their case did not differ in any
considerable degree from those of the great mass of the Fenian prisoners
tried and convicted in Ireland. He was afraid the time was hardly yet
come when it would be possible to enter into anything like a general
consideration of the sentences passed upon the Fenian prisoners with a
view either to a commutation or a remission of their sentences, and,
therefore, he did not see any exception in the case of these two
prisoners.


118.: Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections [8]
 17 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1370, 1373, 1381. Reported in The Times,
18 July, p. 7. For the Bill, see No. 89.  spoke in Committee first
on Clause 46, which voided election of anyone found guilty of employing
corrupt agents. Amberley moved an amendment to add the penalty of
disqualification from election for three years (col. 1370). ’s
comment was prompted by an objection that an innocent might unwittingly
fall into the hands of a corrupt agent.

mr. j. stuart  said, the Amendment would only apply to a candidate
who knowingly employed a corrupt agent.

[The amendment was defeated, and the clause agreed (col. 1373).]

[’s second intervention came during discussion of Clause 47,
providing that people, other than the candidate, found guilty of bribery
should lose their votes.]

Mr. J. Stuart  moved, in page 15, line 16, after “voting at any,”
insert Edition: current; Page: [312] “Parliamentary and municipal,” the
object being to extend penalties to bribery at municipal Elections.

[Brett, the Solicitor General, argued that at this time in the session,
and in this Bill, they should confine themselves to Parliamentary
elections (col. 1373).]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, that his proposition was simply that a person
convicted of bribery at a Parliamentary Election should be disqualified
from voting at future municipal as well as Parliamentary Elections.

[Disraeli objected that municipal elections would have to be considered
later;  withdrew his amendment, and the clause was agreed (col.
1373).]

[’s third intervention followed the introduction of a new Clause by
the Solicitor General, providing for Commissions of Inquiry into corrupt
practices (col. 1380).]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, he wished to express his acknowledgments to the
Government for the great improvement which had been effected in the
Bill.


119.: Poor Relief [1]
 17 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1424–5. Reported in The Times, 18 July, p.
8, from which the response is taken.  spoke in Committee on “A Bill
to Make Further Amendments in the Laws for the Relief of the Poor,” 31
Victoria (23 June, 1868), PP, 1867–68, IV, 167–78. The discussion was of
Clause 3, which allowed the Poor Law Board to appoint officers if the
Guardians failed to do so.

mr. j. stuart  said, that the grand principle of improvement in Poor
Law administration was not to strengthen the power of the guardians but
of the Poor Law Board. (Hear.) The guardians frequently refused to
perform their obvious local duties, to the injury of the sick, the poor,
and the lunatics, and to the oppression of the medical profession, which
performed the most important duties to these suffering and unprotected
persons. In all these matters the central authority was more to be
depended upon than the local Boards. He preferred the Amendment of his
honourable Friend (Mr. P.A. Taylor),1 but, as the Committee had
negatived it, he should give his strong support to the clause.

Edition: current; Page: [313]


120.: Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections [9]
 18 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1449, 1451, 1456. Reported in The Times,
20 July, p. 6, from which the variants and response are taken. For the
Bill, see No. 89 The discussion in Committee was on an additional Clause
proposed by Fawcett, which provided that the expenses of returning
officers be paid out of the rates, and required a deposit on behalf of
every candidate of £100, such monies, in the case of candidates
receiving less than 10% of the votes received by the least successful of
the successful candidates, to be used to help defray expenses (cols.
1443–4). After some discussion, including the assertion that candidates’
paying of returning officers was not a corrupt practice, the case was
raised of Members who, having accepted office, had to stand for
re-election: Should the rates cover their expenses?

ais it fair or reasonable to take advantage of a technical difficulty in
order to leave a question of this sort undecided until after the next
election? If in a purely legal point of view it does not belong to the
subject of corrupt practices, yet it belongs to a system of measures of
which that relating to corrupt practices is the completion. Unless it be
agreed to, the system will be left incomplete, and the Reform Act will,
in some important respects, actually deteriorate the representation, for
its practical effect will be to bring us nearer to a plutocracy than we
ever have been before.a I would most earnestly appeal to the honourable
Member for Suffolk (Mr. Corrance), who has made so excellent a speech in
favour of the proposition,1 to put for the present in abeyance his
objections to any additional burthen on the local rates—objections in
which, as I have stated on a former occasion,2 I in part agree, and
which will certainly, with the whole subject of the incidence of rates,
come under the early consideration of the new Parliament. I beg him to
trust the fairness and sense of justice of the future House of Commons,
and not to resist a provision required for the beneficial working of our
political institutions, because it involves a very small, and probably
temporary, addition to the local expenditure. (Hear, hear.)

[There was still objection to the requirement that £100 be deposited.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, the House would be glad to learn that anyone
could be Edition: current; Page: [314] nominated and elected who was not
in possession of £100, but whose friends were willing to put down £100
for him.

[Discussion continued on the question of the deposit, and that proviso
was removed from the Clause, which was then approved. Then the debate
turned to a further Clause that candidates be required to subscribe to a
declaration of honesty. It was objected that such declarations would not
prevent lying.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, it was no great compliment to the House to
represent that it consisted of persons whom a declaration upon honour
would not bind. He himself thought a declaration on honour would bind
the Members of the House, provided it was imposed with a serious
intention of doing so. It had been too much the fashion to regard these
declarations as mere forms; but they were so only when the engagement
which they made was one which opinion did not really desire to enforce.
The object should be to impress upon Members that the House was really
in earnest and meant the declaration to be a sincere one. That object
was sought to be obtained by the penalty of £500, and he thought this
would be a means of enforcing the declaration.

[After further discussion,]

bMr.  said that many of the amendments undisposed of were of
considerable importance. Four of them were at least as important as
those which had been discussed already. He doubted whether it would not
be better to go on with the discussion than postpone it till the fag end
of the evening.b

[After Disraeli said that he would bring the Bill on as the first order
of the day on Wednesday, the Clause was negatived.]


121.: Imprisonment for Costs on a Dismissed Charge [1]
 21 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1553–4. Reported in The Times, 22 July, p.
6. See No. 131 for a further question on the case.

mr. j. stuart  said, he would beg to ask the Secretary of State for
the Home Department, If his attention has been called to the case of Mr.
William Castle, of Melton Mowbray, recently sentenced by a bench of
magistrates to fourteen days’ imprisonment with hard labour, for
non-payment of twelve shillings imposed on him as costs on account of a
dismissed charge, he being sixty-three years old, and, as he states,
unable to pay that sum; and whether Her Majesty’s Government will
Edition: current; Page: [315] adopt any measure to prevent imprisonment,
imposed in lieu of a pecuniary payment, from being accompanied by the
penal infliction of hard labour?

Mr. Gathorne-Hardy replied, that he had not heard of this case till it
was mentioned by the honourable Gentleman yesterday;1 but he had taken
steps to obtain information. When he was fully informed on the subject
he would state his impression as to whether there was any necessity for
further legislation.


122.: The Fenian Prisoners [2]
 21 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1556–7. Reported in The Times, 22 July, p.
6, from which the variants are taken. See No. 117. John Vance (d. 1875),
then M.P. for Armagh, asked  “Whether it is true, as reported in the
Irishman newspaper, 14th July 1868, that he wrote a letter to Mr. Nevin,
dated the 2nd July, in which he objected to ask a Question concerning
the convicts Warren and Costello, because he ‘thought that asking the
Question publicly could do the prisoners no good, and would only enable
the Government to claim and obtain credit for clemency’ ” (The Times).
 had written a letter on 2 July, 1868, to George Francis Train
(1829–1904), a U.S. merchant and author, who was in the U.K. working on
behalf of the imprisoned Fenians (CW, Vol. XVII, p. 2015). The letter,
which contains the passage quoted by Vance, was published in “George
Francis Train’s Levees,” The Irishman, 18 July, 1868, p. 37. “Mr. Nevin”
was a fictitious character invented by Train.

i believe, Sir, I am under no obligation to answer the honourable
Member’s Question, but I have not the smallest objection to do so. I
have not seen the article in the Irishman, nor have I ever corresponded
on any subject with that paper; nor, so far as I am aware, with Mr.
Nevin. But I did write a letter to a friend of the two prisoners in
question, which contained some words bearing some resemblance to those
here quoted. Having been asked by a friend of the prisoners to put a
Question concerning them, I thought it right before doing so to lay the
case before the friends of the prisoners, in order that they might
consider whether, from the point of view of the prisoners themselves, it
was desirable or not that this Question should be aaskeda. What words I
used I cannot exactly remember; but the statement quoted conveys in two
important particulars an extremely inaccurate notion of my sentiments.
In the first place, it represents me as having been unwilling to ask the
Question. I never was in the smallest degree unwilling, and, as the
House is aware, I did ask the Question. Secondly, it represents me as
unwilling that the Government should claim or obtain any credit bfor
clemencyb. I desire extremely Edition: current; Page: [316] that the
Government should both claim and obtain credit for everything
meritorious that they have done.


123.: Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections [10]
 22 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1623, 1639, 1640–1, 1643, 1646, 1647–8,
1650. Reported in The Times, 23 July, p. 4. For the Bill, see No. 89.
Consideration was being given to the Bill as amended, with indignation
being expressed at the Government’s now introducing new amendments and
wishing to reconsider the Clause Fawcett had successfully moved on 18
July

(see No. 120).

mr. j. stuart  said, the Solicitor General had misunderstood what it
was the Opposition considered unfair conduct on the part of the
Government.1 No one dreamt of imputing unfairness to the Government in
proposing to re-consider the decision of Saturday last;2 but what was
complained of was that so short a Notice should have been given of their
intention to rescind that decision. It was utterly impossible, when it
became known long after post hour, to communicate with absent Members in
time for them to attend in their places. He thought, after the indignant
display of virtue on the part of the right honourable Gentleman at the
Head of the Government, when the question of his honourable Friend the
Member for Bradford (Mr. W.E. Forster) was asked on Monday,3 they had a
right to complain of the unfairness of the Notice given by the
Government.

[After several amendments and new clauses were considered,  brought
in his first motion.]

Mr. J. Stuart  moved the following clause:

At the trial of an Election Petition under this Act the judge shall have
power to receive evidence of corrupt practices which any elector who
shall have voted at the Parliamentary Election to which the Petition
refers may have committed at any Municipal Election within the same
county or borough within two years before the presentation of the
Petition, with the object of proving that the voter was corruptly
influenced in voting at the said Parliamentary Edition: current; Page:
[317] Election; and any special Commission appointed to inquire into the
existence of corrupt practices shall have power to inquire into corrupt
practices at Municipal Elections to the same extent and in the same
manner as into corrupt practices at Parliamentary Elections.

As he had expressed his sentiments on the subject of the clause on a
former occasion he would not again trouble the House with any
observations upon it.4

[The Solicitor General objected, as he and others had to ’s earlier
amendments involving municipal elections (see Nos. 116 and 118), that
they were a separate matter. The Clause was rejected.]

[ then introduced his second motion.]

Mr. J. Stuart : Sir, I rise to move a clause declaring illegal the
employment of paid canvassers, or paid agents other than the one
appointed under the Corrupt Practices Prevention Act.5 The clause is
directed against the greatest of all the sources of undue expense at
elections, especially in counties and large towns. It is well-known that
when a candidate presents himself to a large constituency, determined to
carry all before him by dint of money, a great part of his outlay
consists in hiring canvassers, and they are hired by hundreds, very
often without any real intention that they should canvass, and many of
them never do canvass. Up to last year, under pretence of payment for
canvassing, any number of electors might, without any breach of law, be
paid for their votes. A clause, however, in the Reform Act, which the
country is indebted to an honourable Member near me for proposing, and
to the Government for accepting, has struck a blow at this mode of
bribery, by enacting that no one in the actual pay of a candidate shall
be allowed to vote.6 Hereafter, therefore, a man can no longer be paid
in this manner for his own vote. But he can still be paid for the vote
of his father, or his brother, or his wife’s father or brother; and,
besides, there is such a thing as collective bribery—bribery of a whole
constituency, by spending money freely in the place. Every petty
tradesman in the town is virtually bribed by a man who flings money
about lavishly on all sides, most of which comes back almost immediately
to be spent at their shops. All expenditure by which electors profit is
a kind of bribery; and, though it may not be feasible to put a stop to
all forms of it, still, if there be a form which answers no useful
purpose whatever—unless confining the representation to ionaires be
a useful purpose—this at least ought surely to be put a stop to. Now,
what useful purpose, at this time of day, is promoted by personal
canvassing? A seat in this House ought no more to be obtained by private
solicitation than by money payment. The use of canvassing, when there
was a use, Edition: current; Page: [318] was to make the candidate and
his pretensions known to the constituency; but this is now done by
addressing them in a body, through the Press or at public meetings. It
is from the candidate’s public addresses, or from the newspapers, that
the electors even now learn all that they ever do learn about the
candidate; they do not want canvassers to tell them. If there is to be
canvassing, it ought to be done by volunteers. Everybody who has any
business to be a candidate has a sufficient number of zealous supporters
to do all the canvassing that can be needful. Acquaintances may talk to
acquaintances, and neighbours to neighbours, and win them over by
persuasion and moral influence; but what moral influence has a man who
is paid for his persuasiveness? And what would the electors lose if they
could only be talked to by somebody who believes what he says, and cares
enough about it to say it gratis?

[The Solicitor General replied that there was nothing corrupt about
employing ordinary paid canvassers. After some expressions of agreement
with , the Clause was lost (col. 1643).]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, it would be useless, after the division which
had just been taken, for him to move the next clause of which he had
given Notice, which was a supplement to the one just rejected.7

[Ayrton moved a new Clause to allow the Speaker to appoint attorneys for
the House of Commons (cols. 1644–5).]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, that the only fault which he found with the
Amendment of his honourable and learned Friend the Member for the Tower
Hamlets (Mr. Ayrton) was, that it did not go far enough. His (Mr. Stuart
’s) opinion was, that if they desired to put an end to corrupt
practices they must provide a public prosecutor, and not rely upon the
private interest of candidates and their supporters for proceeding
against suspected individuals. They would never get rid of corrupt
practices, unless they made it the duty of some particular person to
inquire, not into compromises only, but into all matters connected with
corrupt practices, and to institute prosecutions where evidences of
corruption were found to exist. The proposed clause, however, was a good
one as far as it went, and he should therefore give it his support. He
hoped the Government would accept the clause.

[Ayrton’s Clause was rejected.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, he rose to move the following clause:

(Provision for expenses of trials and inquiries.)

The expenses of all trials or inquiries held under the present Act,
except such expenses as are hereinbefore provided for, and except such
part as the court or judge shall impose by way of penalty upon either
the Petitioner or the Respondent, shall be defrayed in the case of
Edition: current; Page: [319] any county from the county rate, and in
the case of any borough, out of the monies, and in the manner and
proportions mentioned in the Act of the sixth year of the reign of
Victoria, chapter eighteen, section fifty-five, with respect to the
expenses of carrying into effect the provisions of that Act; and the
account of such expenses shall be made, allowed, and paid in the manner
provided in the said Act, unless the court or judge shall certify that
there is reason to believe that corrupt practices do not generally or
extensively prevail in the constituency, in which case the said expenses
shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund.

He desired to carry into effect what he considered was a true and sound
principle—namely, to throw the expenses of all inquiries into corrupt
practices upon the community who were implicated. He left to the
tribunal to determine what portion of these expenses should in any case
be laid, to the relief of the ratepayers, upon the persons who had been
proved to be guilty of corrupt practices, or upon those who were shown
to have brought frivolous and improper accusations.

[The Attorney General objected, saying that costs should fall on the
defeated party. The Clause was lost.]

[After some further discussion, it was moved that the forthcoming
municipal elections be postponed for a month, to prevent bribery during
them from affecting the imminent parliamentary elections. It was argued
that the motion would upset the extensive arrangements already made for
the municipal elections, although it was admitted that municipal
corruption sometimes affected parliamentary elections.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, he could conceive nothing more stultifying than
for the House, after having passed stringent measures for putting down
corruption at Parliamentary Elections, to allow perfect freedom of
corruption in the case of municipal Elections. There could be no greater
facility given to bribery at the Parliamentary Elections than to have
the municipal Elections taking place just before them.

[The motion was lost (col. 1650).]


124.: The Westminster Election of 1868 [1]
 22 JULY, 1868

Morning Star, 23 July, 1868, p. 3. Headed: “The Members for Westminster
and Their Constituents. / Meeting in St. James’s Hall Last Night.” In a
letter to Edwin Chadwick of 28 July,  says: “The correct and
complete report of my speech at St. James’s Hall is that of the Star”
(CW, Vol. XVI, p. 1426). Reprinted in Addresses of the Hon. R.W.
Grosvenor and J.S. , Esq., Delivered at a Public Meeting of Their
Constituents, Held at St. James’s Hall, on the 22nd July, 1868 (London:
Grosvenor and  Committee, Sept., Edition: current; Page: [320]
1868), pp. 5–8. The full report in the Daily Telegraph (also in the
first person) is so close in wording to that in the Morning Star as to
suggest a common source; that in the Daily News is less full, and The
Times merely summarizes ’s speech. At the evening meeting the Chair
was taken by Brewer; a large number of non-electors, including many
women, attended. Brewer introduced the Members, and (as usual) Grosvenor
spoke first, summarizing the history of the parliament from 1865. 
“was received with the most enthusiastic applause, the whole meeting
rising and joining in prolonged cheers”

(Daily Telegraph).

ladies and gentlemen, my honourable colleague in his able address has
given you a very interesting review of the past, and no man was better
entitled to do so, for during the three years in which he has been your
representative his conduct has been in complete conformity with the
opinions and sentiments which you have heard from his lips. (Cheers.)
aWe have been fellow-soldiers in one cause, and although we may perhaps
represent, in some degree, different shades of the great Liberal party,
and although some electors might, if there were a question between us,
like my honourable colleague best, and some perhaps would prefer to be
represented by me, I hope there is no one calling himself a Liberal who
would not prefer either of us to a Tory. b(Loud applause and laughter.)b
I hope my friends, to whom alone I have a right to speak a few words,
will consider the two Liberal candidates as one man.a (Cheers.) Ladies
and gentlemen, as I have observed, my honourable colleague has dealt
chiefly with the past, I will deal chiefly with the future. (Hear,
hear.) We are assembled here under new circumstances. A great change has
been made in our representative institutions, and the constituencies
greatly enlarged in mere numbers, and still more improved by including
in them portions of the community hitherto almost unrepresented, are now
about to be asked what use they are going to make of their new power. Do
they mean that the great addition which has been made to the strength of
the popular element in our institutions shall bring forth fruit? Are
they determined that the great alteration in the structure of our
Government shall be attended with a corresponding improvement in its
administration? The masses of the community have obtained, what they
never had before, an influential voice in the conduct of the Legislature
and of the executive. Is it their purpose that their interests, moral
and material, shall be more and better attended to by the Legislature
and the executive than has hitherto been the case? It depends on
themselves. If they are indifferent to their own interests, they may be
certain that other people will be indifferent too; but, if not—if they
mean that the Government under which we are hereafter to live, shall be
a good Government for the whole people, willing and able to cope with
those great social difficulties which are pressing in upon us, and which
we have got to conquer, or else they will conquer us—then it is time for
them to bestir themselves, and as the first step in bestirring
themselves, it is time for them to Edition: current; Page: [321] bethink
themselves, and see how they can best use their electoral suffrage to
bring this about. (Applause.) The nation has now to a considerable
extent a new task before it, and one which demands different qualities
in those who have it to perform. There are two kinds of improvements:
one kind which, to enable them to be accomplished, only requires that
the nation shall make up their mind that it shall be done. Nothing is
wanted but the will; where there is the will there is no difficulty
about the way. When once the nation had decided that the corn laws ought
not to exist, it had only to say to the Parliament, “repeal them.”
Anybody could do it. When it was once determined that it had to be done
it only required a few lines of an Act of Parliament.1 In the same
manner the Irish Church, when the nation has determined, as I believe it
has determined—(loud applause)—that it will no longer commit the great
injustice of endowing with national property the Church of a small
minority, and when it has also recognised that, in getting rid of this
old iniquity, respect ought to be paid to life interests, it has only to
make known its determination. The thing can be done almost as easily as
said. (Laughter.) But the statesmanship of the country has much more to
do nowadays than merely to abolish bad institutions. It has to make good
laws for a state of society which never existed in the world before. We
have to deal with a richer, a more struggling, and a more overcrowded
society than our ancestors could have formed any conception of. A vast
manufacturing and commercial industry has built itself up—no, not built
itself, for there has been no building capacity, no constructive talent
or foresight in the whole affair; neither can I say it has grown up, for
growth supposes an internal principle of organisation and order, and
there has been nothing of the kind—I can only say a vast manufacturing
and commercial industry has thrown itself up—(loud laughter and
applause)—by great energies, of which accident has almost alone
determined the application; and from the necessities of the case, a
hundred evils have sprung up along with it, which philanthropists are
toiling after, with some, but with very imperfect, success. Now those
evils are not of the kind respecting which the nation can say to its
rulers “Do this,” and they do it.2 There are now many things to be done
which demand long and patient thought—more thought than the public of
any rank or class are able to bestow. What the public have to do is to
find men capable of doing these things—(applause)—and to send them to
Parliament. (Loud cheers.) For instance, let us take the question which
is in every one’s mind at present—the proper relations between capital
and labour. (Applause.) As I said, this question is in everybody’s
thoughts; yet how far has the public mind advanced on the subject? It
has got thus far: that the old relation between workmen and employers is
out of joint; that probably good laws would help to make things
straight; but that there are many things which laws had better not
attempt, as the result would probably be a break-down and a miscarriage.
This, Edition: current; Page: [322] then, is not a case in which the
people can tell Parliament what to do; it has got to be found out what
to do; and the business of the public is to send men to Parliament who
can find it out. cNext, let me speak of our pauperism and our system of
poor relief. We know the vices of the system, we know that vast sums are
levied, and that those who most deserve and most need public charity are
badly relieved. We know that the nursing of the sick, the care of the
aged and helpless, the education of the young, are often, we do not know
how often, a cruel mockery. (Loud cheers.) But what is the cause of
this? Because these things are not so organised that the persons
concerned are compelled to do their duty. And we shall never cure the
evil by merely crying out when some very flagrant case is found out and
published. What is wanted is to put into the important positions men of
organising minds, who know how to make people do their duty, and who
know how to give due and adequate relief to destitution without
encouraging those to claim it who can do without it. Then, as to the
state of our town populations. The poorer quarters of our great cities
are nests of disease and vice for want of proper sanitary arrangements,
and from the bad construction and wretched overcrowding of the dwellings
of the poor. (Applause.) How are these things to be remedied? For I do
not suppose any of you think that it is to be done by rebuilding these
quarters out of the taxes, and inviting the poor to come and live in
them rent free. (Laughter.) It is a matter for thought and study, and
one which will tax to the utmost the highest legislative and
administrative ability. Next, as to education. We are all determined
that a good education the people shall have, cost what it may. (Loud
applause.) About that I think we are all agreed, and if it could be done
by mere good will, we should not have long to wait. But look at the
schools we already have. Those for the higher and middle classes, still
more than the elementary schools. There are enough of them, and they
have funds enough, to give a good education to the whole nation, yet all
classes, from the highest to the lowest, are wretchedly ill-taught.
(Hear, hear.) Why is this? Because the teachers are unfit for their
work, or, at all events, do not do it. (Applause.) And why do they not?
Because those whose duty it was to appoint good schoolmasters appointed
bad ones; because those whose duty it was to look after the teaching
left it to take care of itself; and because parents did not take the
trouble to ascertain whether their children were taught anything or
nothing. Well, then, how are good schoolmasters to be obtained? And how
are they to be kept to their duty? Unless we place national education in
the hands of men who can do both these things, the end will be that we
shall spend a great deal more money, and be no better taught than we are
at present. Now turn to the great subject of administrative reform—how
to obtain the most effective government at the smallest cost. We might
have our persons and property far better protected than at present,
paying much less for protection, but paying to competent persons for
good service what is now jobbed away or wasted. We might have a
defensive force Edition: current; Page: [323] much more effective than
at present, for a fraction of what our army and navy cost us; but can it
be had by merely willing it? No; it requires men with planning heads,
organising and contriving minds, who, with a large theoretical and
practical knowledge of the particular subjects, have also the art of
governing men, and of managing bodies of men. Unless the nation find out
and lift into the posts of favour and command men of this quality, our
military and naval systems will remain failures for national purposes,
and successes only for those who profit by them. In every branch of our
government the great want is of capable men; and in order that the most
capable men may be in office, it is necessary that the House of Commons,
which decides who shall be in office, should be rich in capable men.
(Hear, hear.) The people of England have an opportunity such as they
have not had since the days of the Commonwealth. The present leader of
the popular party sincerely desires to do for the people in these and on
many other subjects the best that can be done—(great cheering)—if they
will only put it in his power. But if the electors want this done, they
must not think it enough to send men to Parliament who will support Mr.
Gladstone; they must send men who can help Mr. Gladstone. (Loud
applause.) One man cannot suffice for everything; whatever Mr. Gladstone
can do by himself is incomparably well done; but what has now to be
performed requires many eminent men, instead of one. A vote for a member
of Parliament is always a grave moral responsibility. When one has a
voice in deciding whether the well-being of this empire, and all the
great things thereon dependent, shall be entrusted to a man who is fit
or to a man who is unfit, nothing can excuse the elector who, for
purposes of his own, or from indifference to the public good, votes for
the wrong man and against the right. (Applause.) But on this occasion
there is a peculiar obligation on the electors to search the country for
the very best men that can be found, for the course of history for a
whole generation may depend on it. I am not advising them to discard
their present members when these have served them faithfully and
intelligently, but there are many members who retire; many seats may be
gained from Tories; and there is a considerable number of new
constituencies. dI hope we shall re-elect all our Liberal members who
are good for anything; but I hope we shall reinforce them by others who
will carry with them into the House of Commons some better furniture
than money-bags and pledges. (Loud cheers.) I hope the electors will be
wiser than to elect men of whom they have no opinion; whom they dare not
trust to examine and think for themselves, and whom they therefore send
to the House with tied hands, under promise to do exactly as they are
bid. For my part, I am not ashamed to say that both in public and in
private affairs I desire to be represented by somebody who can tell me
what ought to be done instead of my telling him, for I well know that I
shall never be able to instruct him in half the things which he will
have to decide; so that, unless I choose somebody who can inquire and
judge for himself, my affairs will be Edition: current; Page: [324]
ill-managed. The electors are responsible to posterity; they are
responsible to the unrepresented; they are responsible to the
innumerable inhabitants of England’s foreign dependencies, and they are
responsible to their own consciences for sending to the next Parliament
thoughtful men, and men with talents for government; and unless they
rise to the height of this duty, the great benefits which we are
entitled to expect from the reform in our institutions will be reaped
much more slowly, and for a long time more imperfectly, than we would
willingly hope. (Mr.  resumed his seat amidst loud and continued
cheering.)

An Elector wished to know what the honourable members thought about the
question of equalization of poor rates in the metropolis. [Grosvenor
said to cheers that he was in favour of equalization of rates.]

Mr.  thought that every community was entitled to one administration
of the poor laws. (Cheers.)

In answer to another Elector,

Mr.  said ehe would induce guardians to perform their duties both by
reorganisation and by means of a controlling authority. The principles
of a good poor law are to give relief to unavoidable destitution in such
a manner that those who can support themselves shall have no chance of
obtaining, and no motive for claiming, ite. (Cheers.) He might be
compelled to accept a division of the metropolis with reference to the
administration of the poor law, but he thought the rates should be the
same throughout the whole of the metropolis because its inhabitants
suffered from each other’s sickness and poverty. (Cheers.)

Mr. Webber wished to know what steps the honourable members had taken to
reduce our enormous national expenditure.

Captain Grosvenor said that, with the view of reducing that expenditure,
he would endeavour to place Mr. Gladstone on the Treasury Bench.
(Cheers.)

Mr.  said his honourable colleague had given exactly the answer
which he himself should have given.

In answer to another Elector, [Grosvenor said he favoured opening
museums on Sunday, but would not pledge himself; unquestionably he was
not in favour of opening places of amusement on Sundays.]

Mr.  said he should be willing, without hesitation, to vote for the
opening of any place of instructive amusement. As to theatres and
similar places they might, he believed, be made places of instructive
amusement, but he believed they were very seldom such. Whether they were
or not, the opening of them in the present state of the public mind
would shock the feelings of many good peoplef, and he advised those who
wish to open such places as those referred to on Sunday, to limit
themselves to the more useful kind (hear, hear)f.

Edition: current; Page: [325]
In answer to another Elector, [Grosvenor said that probably some of the
funds taken from the Church in Ireland would be applied to all the
religions professed in Ireland.]

Mr.  gsaid while there was agreement between himself and his
honourable colleague on the great principle of religious equality, there
was some difference between them in its application. He opposed the
application of any of the property of the Irish Church to the support of
any clergy or any sectarian denominationg. (Cheers, and cries of Bravo.)

[Probyn moved, Beal seconding, approbation of the Members, and full
support of them jointly, sinking “all minor differences.” An amendment
was moved by B.B. Sapwell, to “expressions of disapprobation,” that the
unsatisfactory views expressed by the Members disqualified them as
representatives for Westminster. “The speaker went on to make some
remarks in support of his amendment, but the storm of groans, hisses,
and other discordant sounds was so great that what he said was
inaudible.” But “on the interposition of Mr. , Mr. Mason Jones, and
the chairman” (Daily Telegraph), he was allowed to complete his remarks,
and Ross rose to second the amendment, bringing on another round of
disturbance; the amendment was defeated. Harriet Law then spoke, to loud
cheers, in favour of the motion and of suffrage for women. The motion
being passed (the Chair having ruled against the proposal of a “lady
near the platform” that the names of the Members be put separately), the
customary vote of thanks to the Chair was moved; and then Fawcett
arrived; in seconding the motion, he described ’s “assiduous
attention to his duties, and remarked that his defeat—which he could not
believe possible—would be an injury to the House of Commons, a loss to
the Liberal party, and a blow from which the great cause of democracy
throughout the world would not recover for years” (Daily Telegraph). The
vote of thanks was carried, and the meeting ended.]


125.: Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections [11]
 23 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1676, 1678, 1685, 1691. Reported in The
Times, 24 July, p. 6. For the Bill, see No. 89. The debate was on a new
Clause: “Whenever any person or persons shall have been reported by the
Judges to have been guilty of corrupt practices, the Attorney General
shall institute against such persons or person such proceedings as the
law will allow”

(col. 1676).

Edition: current; Page: [326]
mr. j. stuart  thought it very important that some official person
should be charged with the duty of considering whether a prosecution was
necessary or not.

[The Clause was negatived.]

[Then Lowther moved to amend Clause 43 (see No. 116) to make repeated
corruption a misdemeanour. This modification the Attorney General
thought too harsh: an agent who had already been punished for
corruption, if he got another appointment within seven years, would be
liable to two years’ imprisonment.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, he hoped the House would divide, as the country
would like to see the names of the honourable Members who thought it was
too severe a course to punish an agent or canvasser who, having been
guilty of corrupt practices in one election, procured similar employment
in a subsequent election.

[The amendment was lost.]

[The debate then returned to Clause 53 (Fawcett’s clause; see No. 120).
Various amendments were moved concerning a deposit to be used for
election costs if the candidate failed to poll certain percentages of
the vote: Wentworth Blackett Beaumont (1829–1907), M.P. for
Northumberland, proposed that the percentage should be one-fifth of the
votes cast, the failed candidate being liable for his share of the
costs, and after some discussion added that the proposer and seconder of
such a candidate should be liable for that share (cols. 1681–2). George
Leeman (1809–82), M.P. for York, proposed an amendment retaining the
one-fifth provision, but calling for a deposit of £100 in boroughs and
£200 in counties.]

Mr. J. Stuart  thought the object which the honourable Member for
York had in view would be sufficiently attained by the proposal of the
honourable Member for Northumberland.

[Leeman withdrew his amendment, and then the proposal of Beaumont was
defeated. The Government continued to try to subvert Fawcett’s Clause
53; the Solicitor General moved to leave it out (cols. 1687–8), saying
in defence of his motion that the obscure and intricate machinery of
rating would make the Clause impracticable.]

Mr. J. Stuart : If the Government were aware of the profound feeling
of satisfaction that went forth through the country on learning that the
Amendment of the honourable Member for Brighton was carried, they would,
instead of imposing any technical objection in the way of the passing of
the clause, introduce a Bill, if necessary, for the purpose of giving it
effect, and pass it through both Houses, as they could easily do, within
a week. The representative of an extensive constituency remarked to me
that the adoption of the clause marked the commencement of a purer era,
and would bring forward more eligible candidates.

[In the event, Clause 53 was struck out of the Bill.]

Edition: current; Page: [327]


126.: Election Petitions and Corrupt Practices at Elections [12]
 24 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1729–30. Reported in The Times, 25 July,
p. 7, from which the response is taken. For the Bill, see No. 89. As the
third reading began, Fawcett moved an amendment to recommit the Bill to
consider the question of providing for election officers’ expenses out
of the rates (col. 1716).  spoke after Clare Sewell Read
(1826–1905), then M.P. for Norfolk East (col. 1729). Writing to W.D.
Christie on 27 July, 1868,  says: “You will have seen that after
many days and nights of hard fighting, all our efforts to improve the
Bribery Bill have been defeated, even Fawcett’s clause being at last
negatived. Good however has been done by the discussion, and a
foundation laid for future success, as even the Saturday Review
acknowledges. The Bill has, as you see, been extended to Scotland and
Ireland. But its good effects, as it stands at present, will not be very
great.” (CW, Vol. XVI, p. 1425.) For a later reference to the matter,
see his letter to C.W. Dilke on 14 February, 1872

(CW, Vol. XVII, pp. 1871–2).

the honourable gentleman who has just sat down seems to think that
unexpensiveness and purity of election is a matter which affects the
electors only, and that the non-electors have no interest in the
matter—a view in which I confess I do not share. I do not propose to
revive the question of how far the Government has treated us fairly in
regard to this matter. We must accept the statement of the First
Minister of the Crown that at the time when he replied to the question
of the honourable Member for Bradford (Mr. W.E. Forster) the Government
had no intention of opposing this clause.1 But when the right honourable
Gentleman proceeds to give a history—the correctness of which is
countersigned by the right honourable Member for Oxfordshire (Mr.
Henley)2—of what has passed, and says that the House have rejected as
ineffectual all propositions to reconcile the scheme of the honourable
Member for Brighton (Mr. Fawcett)3 with the desirableness of giving
security against vexatious contests, I cannot assent to the correctness
of his statement. There was not one of the proposals made which would
not, in the opinion of the supporters of the clause, have proved
perfectly effectual. The objections did not turn on the efficacy of the
proposals, but on which of them was most likely to pass the House. They
were overthrown by the action of the Government, but the right
honourable Gentleman has not shown that there would be any difficulty in
working them. The course pursued fully illustrates the old proverb “None
so deaf as those who won’t hear.” Does anyone think that if the right
honourable Gentleman applied his mind to the subject every difficulty
would not quickly vanish? We have an apt illustration of the
mountain-like magnitude Edition: current; Page: [328] that molehill
objections may assume, in the argument of one honourable Gentleman—that
if a little more money than enough is taken from the county rate for the
purpose of paying election expenses it will be impossible to know what
to do with the balance.4 We have heard of lions in the path,5 but
difficulties such as these are snails or earwigs in the path, and not
lions. Were the Government aware of the feeling of satisfaction that
went through the country along with the news that the clause of the
honourable Member for Brighton was carried, they would, I think, instead
of throwing technical difficulties in the way of its adoption, rather
bring it in in the form of a separate Bill than lose the chance of its
passing. I hope, therefore, that the Motion to re-commit the Bill will
be carried. (Divide, divide!)

[Fawcett’s amendment was lost, and the Bill received its third reading
(col. 1732).]


127.: Smoking in Railway Carriages [1]
 24 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, col. 1736. Reported in The Times, 25 July, p. 7.
In Committee on “A Bill Intituled An Act to Amend the Law Relating to
Railways,” 31 Victoria (28 May, 1868), PP, 1867–68, IV, 513–30, the
discussion was on a motion to insert after Clause 17 the following
clause: “And all Railway Companies shall, from and after the passing of
this Act, in every passenger train, provide smoking compartments for
each class of passengers” (col. 1735). It being objected that some
trains having so few carriages, or even only one, such a policy was
impracticable,  made his first intervention.

mr. j. stuart  suggested that the provision should be made to apply
only to trains of a certain length. The abuse of smoking had become so
great, and the violation of the companies’ by-laws so frequent, that the
smoking in trains had become a positive nuisance. Scarcely a railway
carriage could be entered in which smoking was not going on, or which
was not tainted with stale tobacco.

[It was remarked that the issue should be settled by public opinion.]

Mr. J. Stuart  said, public opinion in this instance was swayed by a
majority of smokers. It was a case of oppression by a majority of a
minority.

Edition: current; Page: [329]


128.: The Westminster Election of 1868 [2]
 24 JULY, 1868

Daily Telegraph, 25 July, 1868, p. 5. Headed: “Election Intelligence. /
Westminster.” The report of ’s speech in the Daily News agrees so
closely with that in the Daily Telegraph as to suggest that they were
taken from a single report, or that  supplied copy to both papers.
The Times has only a brief summary of the proceedings; its account,
however, provides an introductory topic linking ’s speech to the
conclusion of Grosvenor’s, and gives more of the substance of the
question period than does the Daily Telegraph. The Morning Star gives
only Gladstone’s letter. This election speech, like No. 124, was
delivered while Parliament was still in session.  and Grosvenor
addressed their constituents in an evening public meeting, chaired by
Dr. Brewer, in the Pimlico Rooms, Warwick Street. Brewer opened the
proceedings by reading a letter from Gladstone which lightly touched on
the undesirability of W.H. Smith’s representing Westminster, and then
briefly praised Grosvenor before saying: “Of Mr. , who has obtained
a world-wide fame, it would almost be impertinent in me to speak the
language of eulogy. Yet I will venture on two assertions, both having
exclusive reference to his Parliamentary career. Firm in the maintenance
of his own opinions, Mr.  has ever exhibited the largest indulgence
for those of others; and with this liberal tolerance of differences he
has shown, in the most remarkable manner, how to reconcile on the one
hand a thorough independence, and on the other an enlightened sense of
the value and power of that kind of union which is designated by the
name of political party. More than this, Mr.  has set us all a rare
example of forgiving temper, of forgetfulness of self, of absolute
devotion to public duty; and I do not hesitate to express my deliberate
opinion that his presence in the House of Commons has materially helped
to raise and sustain its moral tone.” Grosvenor as usual spoke before
, alluding to Smith’s candidature (and thereby provoking an
interruption that led, against ’s and the Chair’s wishes, to an
ejection), and reviewing the Government’s record. He closed with an
attack on the Metropolitan Cattle Market measure, and then , who
“met with an enthusiastic reception,” rose.

amr.  then addressed the meeting. He spoke in strong terms against
the Metropolitan Cattle Markets Bill, which he said would have his most
strenuous opposition.a1 He said that during the last two or three weeks
he and his colleague had been engaged several days in each week, and
latterly two or three days in succession, in endeavouring to prevent the
electors of Westminster and throughout the country being given over into
the hands of ionaires, and they had failed. (A Voice: More’s the
pity.) He said, more was the shame. (Hear, hear.) When the present
Government introduced the Bribery Bill,2 he really was in hopes that
there was something like an intention to suppress, if possible, the bad
practices prevailing at our elections. The Government took one rather
bold step—they Edition: current; Page: [330] asked the House of Commons,
tenacious as that assembly was of its privileges, to give up the power
of judging as to the extent to which corruption might have prevailed at
elections. That power had hitherto been in the hands of the committees
of the House of Commons, and the Government asked Parliament to transfer
it to the judges of the land. They thought, and he thought, those judges
were not so likely to sympathise with the offenders as the very class
from which the offenders were drawn, and who were therefore placed in
the same circumstances of temptation as themselves; and besides the
change of tribunal, the Government proposed to increase the penalties
upon the offenders. This gave him hopes. He thought there was coming
from the Tories something substantial for the prevention of corruption.
The meeting were not to think him credulous. It was very possible for
Tories to be sincere in what might favour their cause at elections.
(Laughter.) In the terrible struggle which had been going on for some
weeks, almost from day to day, to endeavour to introduce into the bill
precautions against corruption at elections, and to prevent that
improper expense which made it impossible for any but rich men to gain a
seat in Parliament, no persons stood more consistently by those who
promoted the effort, and more honourably, than ten or a dozen
Tories—high-minded honourable men, who would not owe a seat in
Parliament to corruption. (Cheers.) That very day he had listened to a
speech which had done his heart good—he meant the speech of Mr.
Corrance, the Tory member for Suffolk.3 Mr. Corrance complained of the
great increase of rates, and the disproportionate degree in which, in
his opinion, those rates would fall upon landed property; but
notwithstanding, when he was told that purity of election,
inexpensiveness of election, would be secured by so much as even a
farthing or half a farthing increase of rates, he scorned the
circumstance, and said that he and all the best agriculturists would
much rather pay higher rates, if by that they could obtain better and
more capable members of Parliament. (Cheers.) This was said in the
language and tone which was irresistibly and unmistakeably
characteristic of an honest man. He could name several other Tories who,
not only by their votes, but by motions and speeches did what they
could. But it was all in vain. After the Ministers had carried their own
original proposition for a change of jurisdiction, not one single
improvement would they allow to be made in the bill. One after another,
Liberal and honest Tory members moved resolution after resolution, and
amendment after amendment, and pressed these to a division, every one of
which had for its object to make elections purer and cheaper. But not
one of them would the Government suffer to be carried. Many Liberal
members had gone into the country, to which they generally rushed at
this period of the session—and he was sorry to say it was the period at
which all tricks were perpetrated—(hear, hear)—and by this combination
of causes those who promoted improvement had been defeated. As far as
concerned the present Government, electors were now delivered into the
Edition: current; Page: [331] hands of ionaires. Two instances he
would mention as peculiarly remarkable in this way. He then referred to
the result of Professor Fawcett’s amendment and that of Mr. Schreiber.4
Continuing, he said he gave credit to the Government for a slight
preference for honesty when they introduced the bill, but he had no
doubt bthatb Mr. Spofforth, who managed the elections for the Tory
party, who knew all that was going on everywhere, and in every
constituency in the Tory camp as well as any man living—he had no doubt
this individual told his friends in the Cabinet they must not, at this
election at least, put these practices at an end; if they acted too
rigidly it was very much to be feared some of their members would not
get in. (Laughter.)

The honourable gentleman resumed his seat amid loud applause, excusing
himself for not further detaining the meeting by his anxiety to be
present at the division on the Foreign Cattle Markets Bill. Both he and
Captain Grosvenor were catechised as usual. cIn reply to an Elector, he
said that he had been in favour of the ballot, but was not in favour of
it now. He thought that it rested with the electors themselves, who, if
they were to band together after the manner of trades unions, might
check electoral bribery and intimidation.c

dAnother Elector asked what the opinions of the members for Westminster
were as to the reform of the House of Lords, and whether Bishops would
not be better turned out. [Grosvenor said he had not thought about the
matter, but such a change was not imminent.]

Mr. , in reply, said that he had his opinions on the matter, and
they could be obtained by any elector for 18d. in the form of a book.5
He thought that the better House of Commons they got the better Bishops
they would have.d

eAs to the game laws, Grosvenor expressed himself in favour of some
equitable arrangement between landlord and tenant; and Mr.  said
that he should like the game to belong to him who fed it.6

Edition: current; Page: [332]
An Elector having put a question as to the duration of Parliaments, the
Honourable Mr. Grosvenor said that the average duration of Parliaments
at present was three, four, and five years, and he thought that quite
short enough.

Mr.  said that that was also his opinion.

In reply to another Elector, Mr.  expressed himself favourable to
the Abyssinian war. It had been treated as a necessary evil, and carried
out with every sentiment of honour and of justice.7

A resolution was then passed, pledging the meeting to support the two
speakers in the forthcoming contest; and a vote of thanks to the
chairman brought the proceedings to a close.e


129.: The Metropolitan Foreign Cattle Market
 25 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, col. 1780. Reported in The Times, 27 July, p. 6,
from which the variant is taken. The Government had announced the
previous night that it was withdrawing the Bill (for which, see No.
128), so on the order for Committee on its re-commitment, Montagu moved
that the order be discharged (col. 1775). Nonetheless Members, including
, offered opinions on the measure.

mr. j. stuart  wished only to make one suggestion, which he was sure
the noble Lord (Lord Robert Montagu) would take in good part—that if he
drew up a new Bill, its provisions should be confined anot to cattle
from infected countries, which should be entirely excluded, buta to
cattle from suspected countries. If this were done there would very soon
be no suspected countries. The two principal countries suspected were
Holland and Prussia, both of which had a very valuable trade with us in
their own cattle; and if they found that this trade was stopped because
they allowed cattle from infected countries to pass through them, they
would soon see the expediency of ceasing to do so. The proposed new
market would then be superfluous, or could be made supplementary to the
present market.

Edition: current; Page: [333]


130.: Smoking in Railway Carriages [2]
 25 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1789–90. Reported in The Times, 27 July,
p. 6. On consideration of the Regulation of Railways Bill (see No. 127),
 spoke during the discussion of a proposed Clause: “And all Railway
Companies shall, from and after the passing of this Act, in every
passenger train where there are more carriages than one of each class,
provide smoking compartments for each class of passengers”

(col. 1787).

mr. j. stuart  thought that the permission sought to be given to
smokers travelling by railways, by the proposal before the House, was
right and proper; and, for the reasons which had been already urged by
honourable Members who had preceded him, he thought that the permission
was especially desirous in the case of passengers going long journeys;
but he thought that smoking compartments should be in connection with
the hindermost carriages.

[The Clause in slightly amended form was accepted, and the Bill was
approved.]


131.: Imprisonment for Costs on a Dismissed Charge [2]
 27 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, col. 1826. Not reported in The Times. See No.
121.

mr. j. stuart  said, he would beg to ask the Secretary of State for
the Home Department, Whether he is now in possession of any information
respecting the circumstances under which Mr. Castle, of Melton Mowbray,
was sentenced to imprisonment and hard labour for non-payment of costs?

Mr. Gathorne-Hardy: Sir, I have received some information on the
subject, from which it appears that Mr. Castle had taken proceedings
against a man for using threatening and abusive language. The summons
was dismissed, and Mr. Castle was ordered to pay the costs, or to be
imprisoned with hard labour. I may mention that the Act, commonly known
as Jervis’s Act,1 gives the magistrate discretionary power to impose
imprisonment with or without hard labour. Mr. Castle, it further
appears, has been several times imprisoned for non-payment of costs, or
things of that sort. On this occasion, however, somebody, to prevent his
going to prison, came forward and paid the costs for him, and therefore
he was not Edition: current; Page: [334] imprisoned at all, nor was he
put to the slightest inconvenience, though he protested loudly against
the interference of his friends, and professed himself very desirous of
undergoing imprisonment.


132.: Poor Relief [2]
 27 JULY, 1868

PD, 3rd ser., Vol. 193, cols. 1885–6. Reported in The Times, 28 July, p.
6, from which the variant is taken. In Committee on the Poor Relief Bill
(see No. 119), discussion was on a Clause proposed by John Harvey Lewis
to the effect that lands and buildings acquired and used under the Poor
Law Acts be exempted from increased assessment

(col. 1885).

mr. j. stuart  said, he had given Notice of a clause of similar
effect, though not going so far as that proposed by the honourable
Member for Marylebone (Mr. Harvey Lewis). No injustice would be done to
any locality by the adoption of the clause of which he had given
notice.1 Its principle was that asylums, hospitals, and other buildings,
and all land used or occupied therewith for the purposes of the
Metropolis Poor Act, 1867,2 should be assessed for rates upon the annual
value of the site, and any buildings on it at the time of the purchase.

[The Clause was negatived (col. 1886).]

aMr.  next moved a clause regulating assessment on asylums, etc.,
used for the purposes of the Metropolis Poor Act, 1867.

[The Clause was negatived without a division, and after two more clauses
were negatived,] Mr.  again brought up the proposal which had been
negatived in an altered form, which he contended made a new clause of
it, but it was negatived without a discussion.a


133.: The Westminster Election of 1868 [3]
 2 NOVEMBER, 1868

Daily Telegraph, 3 November, 1868, p. 2. Headed: “Election Movements. /
Westminster.” Reported in slightly less full form in The Times and the
Morning Star (both in the third Edition: current; Page: [335] person);
the report of ’s remarks in the Daily News is shorter. In a letter
to Edwin Chadwick on 7 November,  says, “the papers have given only
the most trumpery reports of any of my speeches except the first [on 2
November], which was comparatively commonplace; and of that, the only
good report that I saw was in the Telegraph. All have been immensely
successful.” (CW, Vol. XVI, p. 1481.) The meeting of  and Grosvenor
with their constituents was held at 8 p.m. in the Regent Music Hall,
Regent Street, Vauxhall Bridge Road, with Dr. Lankester in the chair.
The large room was densely crowded, many women being in attendance.
Lankester, in introducing the Members, reminded the audience that he had
presided over the meeting when  had first addressed the electors in
1865 (5 July; see No. 6). Grosvenor again spoke first.  rose “amid
the loud cheers of the audience.”

electors of westminster—I need hardly now add non-electors, for I
believe and hope that by far the greater part of those whom I have now
the honour to address, if they were not electors formerly, are so now.
If they are not electors now, they will be as soon as the obstacles
thrown in the way shall have been removed as far as possible, as I trust
they will be, by the new Parliament. I therefore need not say electors
and non-electors—but I will say old electors and new electors of
Westminster—the question, the issue, which is presented to you at this
general election I take to be as simple an issue as ever came before an
electoral body. You have not got to decide between one Liberal and
another, or between one school or one shade of Liberalism and another.
There are constituencies that have this choice to make, and I can
conceive that when they have this choice to make there may be
difficulties and grounds for much discussion and difference of opinion;
and I hope that the constituencies that may find themselves in this
position will come to some clear decision and understanding before it
comes to the day of pollinga, and thereby destroy all hope of Tory
candidates being returned at the head of the polla—(hear, hear)—and I
speak this disinterestedly. The example which has just now been set in
the great new borough of Chelsea—that example is well worthy of
imitation by Liberals of all shades. I deeply regret that Mr.
Odger—(cheers)—has been under the necessity—as a man of honour, and as a
man who preferred his cause to himself, Liberalism and the good of his
country to his personal feelings or vanity, or even his own opinions—to
retire from the candidature for the representation of Chelsea.1 I
applaud Mr. Odger. I highly appreciate his conduct, and I deeply regret
that he is the candidate who has had to retire. (Interruption.) I hope
that those who supported him in his candidature will support the Liberal
causeb, and that they will be united, Liberals of all shades of opinion,
in the grand and paramount object of keeping out a Toryb. In this city
you Edition: current; Page: [336] have no such choice to make. It is not
between Liberal and Liberal, or even between professed Liberal and
professed Liberal. It is between Liberals and Tories, or rather a Tory.
aI am not aware that the gentleman who has presented himself—as he did
before—to oppose your present members claims your suffrages on any other
grounds than that of being a Tory.c2 I am not aware that he gives you
any other reason to support him, excepting that he will support a Tory
Ministry. The question before you is the simplest possible. It is
whether you, who have got a Reform Bill, will have as the fruits of that
Reform Bill a Tory Administration? (No, no.) Will you have a popular and
Liberal representative system and a Tory Government? (No, no.) It would
be peculiarly out of place if you were to have any hesitation on this
subject. (Interruption.)

The Chairman hoped that the meeting would keep quiet, as they would then
be able to hear Mr. .

It would be peculiarly out of place if any Liberal—more especially any
advanced Liberal—were to have any hesitation on this subject, when the
Liberal party has such a chief as I venture to say it has not had for
centuries. (Cheers.) I do not believe that any one here will contradict
me when I say that the one statesman in this country who, perhaps, more
than any other within living memory has the confidence of the people, is
Mr. Gladstone—(loud cheers)—who has the confidence of the mass of the
people. The public believe that he is one who plans measures for the
public good, who invites public support, who does not wait until there
is a cry raised outside, not merely for something, but for the precise
measure he brings forward; but he employs his own mind, his time, and
thought to devise measures for the public good, and endeavours to put in
practice the means of successfully carrying them. (Cheers.) With such a
man at the head of the Liberal party, dwho is, in my opinion, the only
possible chief of the Liberal party at the present day,d I think any
Liberal, of any shade whatever, would prove himself to be false to his
principles if he were—I won’t say to vote for a Tory against persons who
would support Mr. Gladstone, but if he failed to vote for those who
would support Mr. Gladstone. When the choice is between persons who
would support Mr. Gladstone and those who would vote against him, the
choice, as I say, is extremely simple. (Cheers.) There are some persons,
whose Liberalism is not insincere, ewho flatter themselves with what
appears to me an extremely false and misapplied notion,e who fancy it is
not of much importance who is Minister, and who think there is perhaps
some advantage in having the Tories in place, because Edition: current;
Page: [337] when they are in place you can force them to pass Liberal
measures, which, if they were out of place, they would oppose. (Oh.)
According to this you are to give them place and office in order that
you may make them the instruments of carrying things against their
convictions. Now, I do not mean to say anything about the morality of
this. Your own minds will say whether it is a good thing to hold out
inducements to make people, in the greatest of matters, act against
their convictions? (Hear, hear.) I won’t enter into this at all, but
what I will say is this—you have no occasion to do it. If you return a
sufficient majority to the House of Commons you are sure to carry any
measure which you deliberately say you ought to have. (Cheers.) We are
told you can carry measures through the House of Commons, but that the
Tories are masters of the House of Lords, and that if you turn out the
Tories they won’t let Mr. Gladstone’s measures pass through the House of
Lords. (A cry,—Do away with them, then.) We will see what this comes to.
This would be making the House of Lords determine who should form the
Government of this country. (Hear, hear.) That was a power which the
House of Lords never had before, and which they never claimed. The House
of Lords has the power to prevent the passing of laws, or rather, I
should say, of delaying them for some years. (A laugh.) The power of
refusing to pass laws has gone by, or you would never have had the
Reform Bill. (Hear, hear.) Of all the great measures which have made
this country so improved as it is from what it was in Tory times, there
is not one which the House of Lords has not resisted as long as it
could. If they had succeeded, you would neither have had Parliamentary
Reform nor measures so comparatively unimportant as the abolition of
church rates3 or the admission of Jews to equal power with other
people.4 Great or small, the House of Lords has shown its desire to
prevent good legislation. In order to bribe them to get laws passed a
little sooner than you could by a strong administration of your own, you
are to give them the power of framing those bills and drawing them up.
You know that their drawing up would be as far from your wishes as the
Reform Bill brought in by the present Government was like the Reform
Bill that passed the House. (Hear, hear.) You are asked to give them the
power of framing bills in order that effect may be given to your
political purposes. You are to give them a power of enjoying a
government which was not their right even under the old constitution
before the constitution was reformed. The House of Lords never claimed
the power to say what should be the Government. Now you are to give the
Lords power to cover the bench with Tory justices. They have covered
half the bench with Tories during the two years they have been in power
already. You are to give them power to cover the bench of bishops with
Tories. You are to give them the power to appoint governors and
viceroys. They are not so bad as to make all Tories, for they have done
something better than that; their power in that direction Edition:
current; Page: [338] is limited, but unlimited is the evil of holding
out a prospect to ambitious people throughout the country to induce them
to become Tories in order to gratify their ambition. The wavering man,
the active lawyer, the active and rising clergyman, and the military
man, or the civil servant of the Crown, who would like to have a
governorship—all these are things to tempt a Tory Government to remain
in power. But if these principles were acted upon, personal interest
would be so placed against public duty that you could only rely on those
few who would prefer their duty to their interest. I do not think we can
do without people who used, during the time of Oliver Cromwell, to be
called self-seekers.5 It would not do to put them against us. There are
always enemies enough to good. Let us suppose that you really would get
better measures from the Tories than you could by displacing them for
Mr. Gladstone and the Liberal party. I am far from thinking it is so;
but supposing it is, how do you get them? It will be by compulsion.
Their business will be to get into Parliament people who will not compel
them. Your business is to get in people who will. If we want to get in a
Tory Government for the purpose of extracting Radical measures from
them, as has been sometimes done before now—(cheers)—the way to do it is
to put in as many men as you can who won’t let them stay there unless
they do pass these measures. (Cheers.) So that, whether you expect to
get good measures from a Liberal Government or a Tory Government, your
course must be to send Liberal men to Parliament. The more supporters
you send to Mr. Gladstone the better measures he will give. Mr. Disraeli
will give better measures the more opponents you send. I do not think
that the gentleman started in the Tory interest in this great city is
likely to compel Mr. Disraeli to grant Liberal measures. It is possible
that he might be willing to follow him. (Laughter.) That is not what we
want. That is not what Mr. Disraeli wants. He wants people who will be
Tories with him; or, if he turns Radical, will be Radical with him.
(Laughter.) If you want him to turn Liberal you must send Liberals
there. (Hear, hear.) I do not like to charge anybody with, or to suspect
anybody of insincerity. Suppose the Tories, from Mr. Disraeli through
the Cabinet down to those who voted with him on Reform, are perfectly
sincere, and that they are glad they passed it—I do not think this true
of them all—(laughter)—I am not sure it is true of any—(laughter)—but
suppose it is—suppose they really rejoiced in the Reform Bill, and
thought it would be a good thing. If they thought it would be a good
thing—why, it must be because they thought it would bring forth fruits
for them. Now what sort of fruits must it produce for them to be pleased
at? (Laughter.) I like to believe what people say whenever I can. I
think there is no time when we can more believe what a man says of
himself than when it is to his Edition: current; Page: [339] own
disadvantage; and when Mr. Disraeli says he is a Tory I believe him.
(Laughter.) If Mr. Disraeli be a Tory and supports Tories, and they
think the Reform Bill an excellent measure, what must be the
consequence? They must expect the consequence to be Tory measures and
Tory administration. If they do think so I do not think you would thank
them for it. (Laughter.) If they are sincere they must think that you,
who are new electors below ten pounds, are Tories at heart; but, unless
you are so, I hope you will show them the contrary. (Hear, hear.) That
is one thing they may say; or they may think you are not Tories, but
that you are more subject than other electors to intimidation—that you
can be forced to vote against your convictions. Well, I hope you will
show them you won’t do that. I dare say there are some who are good
enough to think you are more bribeable than others. I am quite certain
you will fling that imputation in their faces, at all events. (Hear,
hear.) Did they give you a Reform Bill because they were afraid of Hyde
Park meetings, or did they believe it to be a good measure? If they
thought so, they must think the new electors would vote for them, and
that the new electors want Tory measures and a Government more Tory than
it is. The people who think that, think that you are bribeable, or can
be forced into voting against your consciences. Europe and America have
their eyes on this country at this moment. They want to see whether the
masses of this country who have received the franchise are worthy of it
or not. They want to see whether the working classes of this country,
who have never before had any participation in the franchise, have got
opinions of their own, and will insist upon having such men as they
believe will exercise their minds upon such legislation as will give
them a full share of the social advantages which they think, and to a
great degree reasonably, that they have not yet had. (Cheers.) I do not
think that is what the Tories mean. It is a simple question you have to
decide. You have to decide whether your interests are better served by
the Liberals than by the Tories. If by the Liberals, then vote for the
Liberals. If you can get a better Liberal than I am, I will give way to
him at once. (Hear, hear.) Only I think it is not fair to ask you to
dismiss me for a Tory. I do not think he will serve you better. I have
nothing further to say, except that I shall be happy to answer any
question and to listen to any gentleman who has any remarks to make or
any objections to offer, or suggestions for the future. Such meetings as
these are the proper occasions for putting questions to representatives
or candidates, and for asking them to explain anything that requires
explanation. I shall be happy to listen to any objections, and to answer
to the best of my ability.

[The Chair announced a question about the candidates’ willingness to
admit local decisions in parishes and townships to prohibit by a 2/3
majority the sale of intoxicating liquors.]

The Honourable Mr. Grosvenor: The only answer I can give is this, that
if 999 people out of 1,000 were to combine to prevent the other unit
from doing the thing which he had a perfect right to do, they should
have no assistance from me. (Loud cheers.)

Edition: current; Page: [340]
Mr. : My colleague has expressly stated my views. (Cheers.) I will
not weaken his words, but will simply give my adhesion. (Cheers.)

[Mr. Anderson, a City Missionary, expressed great regret at these
answers, and asked, amidst much interruption, whether the Members would
vote for the Permissive Bill.6]

Mr. Grosvenor said that the gentleman who had put the question had
stated that the poor man ought to have the same law as the rich man. He
would ask how that was to be, if the rich man could enter his place of
refreshment and amusement, if need be, at any time on the Sunday, and
yet the poor man was not to have any similar privilege. (Cheers.)

Mr.  thought it might be said further, that one effect of closing
these places on Sundays would be to increase houses for
“tippling”—(hear, hear)—and intoxication would be much less under
control than it was at present.7

An Elector: It is reported that Mr.  is opposed to the equalisation
of rates.

Mr. : I am in favour of the equalisation of poor-rates in one town
or city, however large, but not for the nation.

[A question was asked about the funds of the Irish Church; Grosvenor
indicated no answer was as yet possible.]

Mr. : Without being able to say with precision exactly the way in
which the funds should be distributed, I think there are certain facts
which must be observed.8 They must be used for Irish purposes. They are
Irish. They come from Irish land and Irish produce. They must not be
given for the endowment, wholly or partially, of any religious body
whatever—(cheers)—nor to any exclusive denominational system of
education; but that they shall be applied to the more pressing social
needs of Ireland—by preference, perhaps, to unsectarian and
undenominational education.

In answer to other questions,

fAs regarded the ballot he () desired to say that he was as much
against it as ever—(hear, hear)—because he considered that what was a
trust for the public ought to be exercised in the eye of the public, and
if the working classes would only stand by one another as in the case of
trades unions, he felt they would be able to prevent their being
compelled to vote against their consciences. (Cheers.)f

Edition: current; Page: [341]
Respecting the bill for giving legal security to the funds of trades’
unions,9 [Grosvenor said while some protection should be given, he could
not pledge himself to the details of any present measure.]

Mr.  could not pretend that he had examined the provisions of the
bill drawn up on behalf of trades’ unions, but he was perfectly clear
about two things—that it ought not to be in the power of any one to rob
them, and, as long as people were members, they should be liable for
their subscriptions.

[Lyulph Stanley moved approval of the two Members, attacking Smith,
referring to rumours that had “passed in Mr. ’s absence,” and
declaring his own adherence to ’s position concerning Governor Eyre.
Mr. B. White referred favourably to ’s correspondence with Bouverie.
“Some people said that this correspondence would cost Mr.  hundreds
of votes, and even his seat. (Loud cries of No, no.) He was sure that,
so far from this being the case, the constituency would rally round Mr.
, and support him the more.” The resolution was passed unanimously,
and Grosvenor and  moved thanks to the Chair, and the meeting
concluded.]


134.: The Westminster Election of 1868 [4]
 4 NOVEMBER, 1868

Morning Star, 5 November, 1868, p. 2. Headed: “Election Intelligence.
Westminster.” The report in the Daily Telegraph, though shorter,
contains some details not in the Morning Star. The brief account in the
Daily News contains no additional matter. In a letter to John Plummer on
5 November,  commented that he had said “a good deal at the meeting
yesterday” about “the expense of elections and the difficulty of getting
working men’s candidates into Parliament,” but “it was not reported” in
the newspapers (LL, CW, Vol. XVI, p. 1479; cf. ibid., p. 1484).  and
Grosvenor again addressed their constituents in an evening public
meeting, chaired by J.F. Pratt, in Caldwell’s Assembly Rooms, Dean
Street, Soho, where in “the gallery and front seats were a good many
ladies.” Grosvenor, speaking first, alluded to his record and attacked
that of the Government, saying it would be necessary to reform the
Reform Bill in the next Parliament. Mentioning that he favoured the
ballot, he referred to ’s dissent on this issue, the only point of
discord between them, and said (to applause) that the electors should
not turn from  on this one point. After dealing with other questions
of the day, Grosvenor concluded, and  rose, and was “accorded a
reception of quite a remarkable character. All present stood up and for
some time waved their hats and handkerchiefs, and cheered with much
genuine enthusiasm.”

Edition: current; Page: [342]
mr.  remarked that it was now three years since the electors of
Westminster were last called upon to select their representatives in the
House of Commons. He was one of those in whom they reposed their
confidence on that occasion, and he came now before them to seek for
their verdict as to the manner in which he had discharged that trust;
and, if they approved of his conduct, to ask for a renewal of their
confidence. (Cheers.) But they had something more important to do than
to express their judgment on the merits or demerits of any one
individual. They had important public issues to effect. An expression of
opinion by a large and important place like the city of Westminster
exercised a good deal of influence, and it therefore depended upon them,
to a great extent, as to how other districts would vote and decide. They
had to decide, to some extent, whether the new Parliament should be
under a Liberal or a Tory Administration. (Cries of Liberal, and
cheers.) That was to say, whether the important work that remained to be
done was to be accomplished by persons whose hearts were in the
work—(hear, hear)—or whether it was to be continued to be entrusted to
persons who would do it only by compulsion. (Hear, hear.) He did not
mean to say that the Tories were opposed to all sorts of
improvement—indeed, in the present day no political body of men could
exist for any length of time that would be entirely opposed to
improvement; but he thought he was justified in saying that the Tories
were not in general distinguished by having the spirit of improvement
exceedingly strong in them. (Laughter.) He therefore thought that they
would not be satisfied to entrust the important work that remained to be
accomplished in the hands of people who would not perform it unless they
were driven to it. (Hear, hear, Hyde Park, and cheers.) He had heard a
good deal about intimidation. (Hear, hear.) Carrying on the business of
the country by intimidating the Government was a thing he was not fond
of. That was the strange system by which legislation on the Reform
question had been accomplished. aThe adhesion of the Tories to change
was only to be got by persuading them that it was more dangerous to
refuse than to make improvements. (Hear, hear.) These were not the
qualities of the rulers of the country; and he did not think the
electors would entrust improvements to those who had to be frightened
into making them. (Loud cheers.) He was no more favourable to government
by intimidation than to voting by intimidation; but he thought, like
Burke, that such acts of pressure were the occasional medicine of the
Constitution, and ought not to be its daily bread. (Hear, hear.)a1 Such
a system was troublesome and expensive, and was, besides, not creditable
to the country. (Hear, hear.) On the whole, he thought it was much
better to put the work into the hands of those who did not want to be
whipped into doing it. (Hear, hear.) Mr.  then proceeded to touch
upon the proceedings in Parliament during the past session, particularly
the efforts that were made to reduce election expenses, Edition:
current; Page: [343] and to take them out of the public purse of the
district in which the election takes place instead of out of the purses
of the candidates. It had been said that this would be shabby. He asked
would it be shabby to defray the election expenses of such a man as Mr.
Odger—(cheers)—who had come forward for Chelsea, and had conducted his
candidature with an amount of straightforwardness and honour that might
well be emulated by some of his betters; or the election expenses of Mr.
Edmond Beales—(great cheering)—who had been mulcted some thousands of
pounds on account of openly expressing his views on political affairs?2
(Hear, hear, and cheers.) On the contrary, he thought it would be shabby
to ask these gentlemen to defray the cost of their election. (Hear,
hear.) bIn support of his opinion, Mr.  referred to the action of
the Tory party on Professor Fawcett’s proposal3 to throw the expenses of
the returning officers at elections on the public, and Mr. Schreiber’s
motion to postpone the municipal elections till after the Parliamentary
elections, which were made during last session.4b As for bribery at
elections, the attempt made to do away with that disgraceful practice he
attached little importance to. He believed that before they could
successfully put an end to bribery at parliamentary elections they must
first of all check effectually bribery at municipal elections. He fully
agreed with the evidence given on this point by the solicitor of the
late Governor Eyre.5 (Hisses, cries of Hang him, and general commotion.)
That evidence was, in effect, that the corruption at municipal elections
was the school and nursery of the bribery at parliamentary elections.
(Hear, hear, and cheers.) It happened that municipal elections occurred
this year immediately before the parliamentary elections, so that the
opportunities and inducements for corruption became much enhanced. An
endeavour was made to have the municipal elections this year postponed
until after the general election; but notwithstanding what had been
stated by the Tory authority to whom he had alluded, the postponement
would not be granted. What object the Government had in opposing the
postponement of the municipal elections he would leave to his hearers to
judge. He would not undertake to say that the majority of the Tory party
thought it would be serviceable to them to have a little corruption this
one time more—(a laugh)—but they at all events opposed the separation of
the two elections. (Shame.) Whatever the motives of the Tories were, he
thought the carrying out of the Reform Bill and those other great
questions in which they were all alike interested, ought not to be left
in such hands. (We don’t mean it, and Hear, hear.) After repeating some
matters in connection with his conduct in Edition: current; Page: [344]
Parliament, which have been already published, Mr.  went on to say
that he was ready and desirous to answer any questions which they wished
to have answered. cHe said that, being anxious to give opportunity for
the asking of questions, he would not allude to other subjects, except
that of which Captain Grosvenor had spoken. He regretted to find himself
conscientiously opposed to many of the Liberal party, though not in
principle, upon the ballot question. He abominated intimidation even
more than bribery. Of two bad things, he disliked less the inducing
people to do wrong by doing good for them than compelling them to do
wrong by taking something from them. (Laughter and cheers.) He would not
sacrifice permanent principles to temporary advantage; and the ballot
would give a temporary advantage, because the cause of democracy was
growing too strong to tolerate intimidation much longer—if all men would
stand by each other as the members of the trades’ unions did—while it
was a permanent principle that a public duty should be performed in
public. (Cheers.) He stood by his opinions. (Loud cheers.) If he was
wrong, he would be beaten in the end; so they could afford to let him
have his way. (Laughter and cheers.)c

An Elector wished to know the candidates’ opinions on the Permissive
Bill.6

Captain Grosvenor: I am against the Permissive Bill. (Cheers.)

Mr. : I am against allowing the majority in any place to make laws
regulating the tastes and morality of the minority. (Cheers.)

[Following the question period after ’s speech, a resolution of
support for the Members was spoken to by Fawcett, who also received
enthusiastic applause; he described  as “that great statesman, that
good man, that illustrious thinker, and that eminent philosopher.” The
meeting ended with “Cheers for Gladstone and the two sitting members for
Westminster and Professor Fawcett,” the proceedings being “throughout of
a remarkably earnest and enthusiastic character.”]


135.: The Westminster Election of 1868 [5]
 6 NOVEMBER, 1868

Morning Star, 7 November, 1868, p. 2. Headed: “Election Intelligence. /
Westminster.” Reported also in summary in the Daily Telegraph; the Daily
News has only a one-sentence comment. In a letter to Chadwick of 7
November,  says: “I had already addressed one of my meetings on
election expenses [see No. 134], and in compliance with your suggestion
I Edition: current; Page: [345] did so again last evening” (CW, Vol.
XVI, p. 1481), but, as he goes on to complain, the newspapers were not
reporting his remarks in full. He repeats the complaint in a letter to
Chadwick on 10 November, saying: “The newspapers have not reported what
I said about election expenses and I have no note of it” (ibid., p.
1484). The public meeting of the electors of St. George’s Without and
Knightsbridge was held in the evening in the Pimlico Rooms, Warwick
Street, Mr. West in the Chair. Most of the “leading inhabitants of
Pimlico” were on the platform. Grosvenor spoke first; being interrupted
by the Chair with the warning that pickpockets were about, he commented
that he did not see the connection between pickpockets and the Irish
Church.  was greeted with enthusiastic cheers.

mr.  impressed on the electors the fact that they had something more
important to decide than the merits of their representatives. As a part
of the electoral body of the United Kingdom, they had to decide whether
they would be governed by a Conservative Administration or not.
a“Conservative” was an extremely pleasant term; and it would be time for
a Conservative Government when there was nothing else to be done.
(Laughter and cheers.) When everybody was perfectly happy and
comfortable, there would be a state of things worth conserving; but the
world was not just yet happy enough for anybody to be conservative in
it. (Loud laughter.) If they wanted it made better they had better trust
to earnest Liberals. (Cheers.) It would be unjust to say all Tories were
the enemies of improvement; but it was so uncommonly difficult to make
them perceive that there was anything to improve, or that anything could
be safely improved. (Laughter.) When an improvement was made, and
evidently successful, they very often would accept it and be glad of it;
but, on the whole, they were not people who could be expected to do much
in that way of their own accord. (Hear, hear.)a bThis had been, and was
likely to continue to be, the character of the Tory party, because if
any man arose amongst them possessed by the spirit of improvement, he
was sure to become a Liberal and to throw off the Tory party, as Mr.
Gladstone had done; or the Tory party would throw him off, as they did
with Sir Robert Peel. (Cheers.) Thereforeb there could be no surprise
that the residuum of that party should not be depended upon for making
great improvements—(hear, hear)—and there could also be no surprise that
the remaining members of that party should require a great deal of
educating. (Laughter.) The Tory party had now got a very able man to
lead them who would make us believe that he had educated the party to
which he was supposed to be attached. cMr. Disraeli had professed to
educate his party,1 as the Irishman did his pig when he tied a string to
its hind leg, and took it into Limerickc backwards. The Irishman was
asked the Edition: current; Page: [346] meaning of his getting his pig
to walk backwards, and replied in what is known in Ireland as a “pig’s
whisper:” “Hush! The pig must not suspect where I’m taking it to;
walking this way it does not see where I’m taking it to; the pig thinks
it’s going home; I couldn’t get it into Limerick otherwise.” (Laughter.)
Mr. Disraeli had also taken his party into Limerick. There was, however,
this difference between the Irishman and his pig, and Mr. Disraeli and
his party. The Irishman made his pig go forward by making it fancy it
was going backward, but Mr. Disraeli made his party believe they were
going backward when they were really going forward. (Laughter.) But this
was a thing that could happen only once. Mr. Disraeli could not make his
party go into Limerick a second time in a similar way. (Hear, hear, and
laughter.) But he (Mr. ) did not believe that Mr. Disraeli was
entitled to the credit which that gentleman took to himself of educating
his party. Besides, he believed that even Mr. Disraeli himself had
undergone a process of education. (Laughter.) dHe believed that Mr.
Edmond Beales—(cheers)—had had much more to do with the educating of the
Tory party than Mr. Disraeli, and he believed also that the same popular
gentleman had a hand in educating Mr. Disraeli himself.d But he (Mr.
) did not think that this educating of the leaders of the great
parties was a thing that could answer in the long run. (Hear, hear.)
eBut driving one’s leader was uphill work, and the country had better
send men to Parliament to support the most earnest Minister of the day
in doing these things. (Cheers.) To get rid of the ratepaying clauses of
the Reform Act, to secure purity and freedom of election, to remove the
real and heavy grievances of Ireland, to secure a fair and equal
management of charities for the welfare of the poor, and to accomplish
similar needed reforms, Mr. Gladstone and a Liberal Government must be
substituted for Mr. Disraeli and a Tory Government. (Loud cheers.)e

[Grosvenor answered questions about the Prince of Wales’s allowance,
primogeniture, working-class representation, and payment of members.]

Mr. , replying to questions, thought that £60,000 a year ought to be
enough for the Prince of Wales2—(Hear, hear, and cheers)—but he thought
the question might be left in the hands of Mr. Gladstone. He should vote
for the abolition of the law of primogeniture.3 (Cheers.) He thought it
was of great Edition: current; Page: [347] importance that working men,
who could be considered good representative men, should be in
Parliament. (Cheers.) He was not in favour of paying members of
Parliament. He would vote against the three-cornered constituencies.4 He
did not think, however, that those constituencies would injure the
Liberal cause at the forthcoming elections. On the contrary, he believed
that the Liberals would gain in the counties, and in Liverpool. It was a
question to him whether they would lose anywhere by the introduction of
that principle.

[A resolution supporting Grosvenor and  was moved, seconded, and
passed with three dissenting votes, and the meeting concluded.]


136.: The Westminster Election of 1868 [6]
 9 NOVEMBER, 1868

Morning Star, 10 November, 1868, p. 3. Headed: “Election Intelligence. /
Westminster.” A summary report also appeared in the Daily Telegraph. The
evening meeting of the electors of St. Margaret’s was held in the Regent
Music Hall, Regent Street, Vauxhall Bridge Road, Serjeant Tozer in the
Chair. The meeting was well attended, with the stage boxes being “filled
with ladies.” Grosvenor, speaking first, was enthusiastically received.
He referred to his difference of opinion with  over the ballot,
saying that every time he heard  express his views he was “horribly
afraid” that  might be right, but having read W.H. Smith and being
reminded of how Tory employers treated their employees, he would stick
with his views. , “on rising to address the meeting, was greeted
with several rounds of enthusiastic cheering.”

he said that he was present, like his honourable colleague, for the
purpose of giving an account of his political opinions; but it would be
more agreeable to himself if, before addressing them, any person present
who might have reason to find fault with him or his conduct as the
representative of Westminster would get up and give his reasons for
doing so. (Cheers.) He thought that persons who entertained unfavourable
opinions respecting him should not content themselves with merely
calling out something in the body of a large meeting like this, and in
such a way that nobody could understand them. (Hear, hear.) If anybody
present had anything to say against him he therefore hoped that they
would get up at once like men and Englishmen, and tell what was the
cause of complaint. aA man, attired in a white smock, at the back of the
gallery, here called out, in a stentorian Edition: current; Page: [348]
voice, that he was a working man and a Constitutional man, and came
forward to ask the candidates why they had not done as much as the
“Constitutional candidate,” Mr. Smith?

This question elicited loud groans from the meeting and considerable
uproar. The Chairman in vain tried to obtain a hearing, but in a few
minutes the “Constitution man” disappeared, and silence was restored.a

Mr.  went on to say that his friends would render him a great
service if they would allow any person who wished to question him to do
so. He had heard that plenty of things had already been said against
him, and many more things which he dared say he had never heard.
(Laughter.) It was of importance that he should fully know all that his
opponents had to say of him. He had been told, for instance, that Mr.
Smith’s committee had put forth numerous placards with reference to him
(Mr. ), but he had not seen them—not from any disregard of them, but
because he did not reside in Westminster, and therefore they had not met
his eye. Whatever those persons desired to say against him, he wished
they would say it at a meeting like this. (Hear, hear.) bIt was very
little use talking with those who agreed with one; he liked to talk to
those who differed from him, in order that he might hear them, and say
what he could in reply. And so strongly did he feel this, that it would
give him the greatest pleasure if the Westminster Conservatives would
call a meeting of their own—they might pack it by tickets if they liked,
so long as they admitted reporters—and although he went without a single
friend, he was ready to go among them, and tob answer every question
they might choose to bring forward—(great cheering)—and he trusted that
such an opportunity would be afforded him; but he felt that here, where
he had so many friends, no proper opportunity was given his opponents to
criticise his conduct, and he was anxious that they should have fair
play. (Enthusiastic cheers.) He would be better able to speak if
gentlemen would point out to him any particular points upon which they
desired information. (Hear, hear.) If there were any gentlemen present
who desired to at once put to him any questions respecting his political
conduct or his political opinions, he begged they would now at once come
forward.

cThe honourable gentleman resumed his seat, but, as no one attempted to
address the meeting, the Chairman, after a pause, requested him to
continue his speech.c

The honourable gentleman then proceeded to state his opinions on the
leading topics of the day, the substance of which have been several
times before the public within the past eight or ten days. He
particularly dwelt upon the questions of Edition: current; Page: [349]
education and taxation. With regard to the former he reiterated the
statement he made on previous occasions, to the effect that there
existed enormous funds which were intended originally for the promotion
of popular education, and which, if properly applied, were sufficient,
in the opinion of those knowing most of the matter, to go very near
giving education to every one in the community who needed it. (Cheers.)
It was not advisable that the education should be given absolutely
gratuitously to all. Those who could afford to pay for it ought to be
obliged to pay for it; but education should be provided for all. (Hear,
hear.) This need not at all interfere with individual action or
Government assistance. Individual action might be made available to
supply the religious education desired by the several denominations, and
the secular education could be left until the other general means would
be available. And it was not merely elementary education that could be
given by means of these funds, but deducation of a higher and less
immediately necessary characterd. (Hear, hear.) He thought they would
admit that they had had quite enough of the present mode of giving
public assistance for education. The system seemed to be to give to
those who had got some assistance already and were becoming well to do,
and to withhold from those who had nothing in the way of assistance, and
were therefore in a state of helplessness. (Hear, hear.) But now that
persons of position were beginning to take the matter into
consideration, he had hopes that some more satisfactory system would
soon be established in England. He believed that they were nearer the
improved state of things which he desired than they were aware of. It,
he believed, only remained for the people to back up Mr. Gladstone.
(Cheers.) If they did so, he believed that before many years were over
their heads they would see the beginning of a new and much better system
of education in this country. (Cheers.) Respecting the questions
affecting the inhabitants of London, in his opinion the whole of the
metropolis ought to be one union for the purpose of rating, particularly
for the purpose of rating for the relief of the poor. eThis would remedy
the injustice to the poor under the present arrangement, which naturally
arose from the tendency of the rich to live in parts of the town
entirely distinct from those occupied by the poor. With one management
for the metropolis in respect to rating, something effectual might be
done with regard to the extreme poverty in the East-end.e He should like
to see something done for the poor of the East-end of London, similar to
what was done for Lancashire during the cotton famine.1 fIn this way
useful public works would be executed, and the country would not lose a
valuable part of its population by emigration.f (Hear, hear, and
cheers.) He also thought that the metropolis should be governed by
municipalities such as were Edition: current; Page: [350] sketched in
the bill which he introduced into Parliament last session,2 and which,
if returned, he would again bring in next session. He hoped the new
Parliament would give his propositions on that head a more favourable
consideration than the one just dying out. (Cheers.) After again
expressing his desire to be questioned on any point on which there was a
difference of opinion, Mr.  resumed his seat amid much cheering.

The candidates were asked no questions.

[It was moved that the meeting approve the Members, and pledge continued
support. A working man supported the resolution, talking of the
“schoolmaster of the House of Commons,” who was at the moment indulging
in the “characteristic twaddle” he had uttered at the Mansion House;3
the motion was passed and the meeting concluded.]


137.: Fawcett for Brighton
 10 NOVEMBER, 1868

Brighton Guardian, 11 November, 1868, p. 8. Headed: “Great Meeting of
Liberals,—Last Night.” The Brighton Examiner, a weekly, also covered the
meeting at length on 17 November, while The Times gave a shorter report,
including only ’s speech in abbreviated form, on 13 November. James
White (1809–83) and Henry Fawcett, the two sitting Liberal members for
Brighton, met their constituents in an evening public meeting at the
Corn Exchange, Brighton. In opening the meeting the Chair called special
attention to ’s presence. White spoke first, followed by Fawcett,
and then  was called upon.

he said that some advanced Liberals who live in other parts of the
kingdom and who either have no contested election of their own or are
not completely absorbed in it, so as to prevent them from looking round
and watching with the deepest interest the prospects of the general
election at this crisis of our history, had been startled from their
propriety by hearing that there is an opposition made here to the
re-election of his friend, Professor Fawcett. (Hear, hear.) Not by the
Tories only. It is nothing new for the Tories to court defeat; they are
now courting it in several hundred constituencies throughout the
country; and the electors of Brighton might have been safely left to
deal with them at this juncture. But what had astonished the advanced
Liberals of whom he spoke was that the opposition to Mr. Fawcett’s
re-election was made by a gentleman of the very same political opinions,
speaking in a general way, and who can only recommend himself by the
same opinions to the electors who had hitherto preferred, and it was to
be hoped would still prefer, Edition: current; Page: [351] Mr. Fawcett.1
(Cheers.) If there was any member of the late Parliament who should not
have been opposed by any man who calls himself an advanced Liberal it is
Mr. Fawcett. (Cheers.) They were accustomed in the House of Commons to
consider Mr. Fawcett as about the most rising man on the whole Liberal
side of the house. Entering the house under disadvantages which to many
men would have been insuperable,2—and which must have been so to any one
of less courage, consistency, and energy than Mr. Fawcett possessed,—he
had succeeded not only in gaining the ear of the House, whether of his
political friends or of his political opponents, but he had established
a position in the House such as had rarely been acquired by a young man
in so short a space of time after his election. (Loud cheers.) Mr.
Fawcett had been found on all occasions ready not only to give his vote
and his attendance, but also his speech in support of any cause which
needed his help. He had also had the gift of not pressing himself
forward when he was not wanted. (Cheers.) Mr. Fawcett had to overcome
difficulties of a moral kind, greater than any physical one,—the
difficulty of the moral atmosphere of the House of Commons. (Applause.)
Many a young man enters that House with all good intention, but, when
there, comes under the influence of that atmosphere which, stifling to
the moral feeling as an atmosphere is stifling to the physical senses,
takes all the fealty out of a man. He comes among a number of persons of
Lord Palmerston’s school of Liberalism, who have no particular
intentions. What little intention they do have is good, but the only
thing that affrights them is whether people should do it. Whenever
anything is proposed they are always afraid that it will make mischief;
or disturb the party; or prevent things from going on smoothly; or make
somebody or other vote against them; or, perhaps, make the Liberals go
out, or, perhaps, prevent them from coming in. (Laughter.) Mr. Fawcett
had been as much exposed to their influence as anybody else. He (Mr.
) knew there had been people going round Mr. Fawcett and saying “For
God’s sake don’t do this;” or, “For heaven’s sake don’t do that. You
will offend this man and that, and you won’t do any good.” There never
is any good to be done in the opinion of those men. (Laughter and
cheers.) Mr. Fawcett had been assailed in that way, but he just told
them in all boldness that he thought it right and therefore must do it.
That would not be a safe course to take if a man was wrong-headed or
obstinate; but he (Mr. ) had watched Mr. Fawcett from his first
entrance into Parliament (which exactly coincided with his own); he had
watched Mr. Fawcett with the deep interest inspired by a knowledge of
him and with the great hope he entertained of him, he had watched Mr.
Fawcett with the anxiety he felt for a young man in his position, and he
had deliberately formed the opinion that Mr. Fawcett’s parliamentary
conduct had been as much distinguished by judgment as Edition: current;
Page: [352] by courage. (Loud cheers.) When Mr. Fawcett speaks it is
always on something he has studied and which he understands; and when he
does, what he has done oftener than any man of his standing in
Parliament,—when he has come forward and taken up a question for
himself, he has not only done so as well but better than most other
people. (Loud cheers.) He touched upon three instances,—the reform of
the Universities;3 the cost of elections;4 thirdly, the subject on which
Mr. Fawcett has distinguished himself as much as any member of
Parliament, and that he had made his own during the greater part of his
parliamentary life, the condition, the lamentable, deplorable
condition—a condition which cries out to the whole people of England for
remedy,—the condition of the agricultural labourer.5 (Cheers.) These
were some of the reasons which make all lovers of improvement who have
attended to what Mr. Fawcett has done, anxious that he should be
re-elected. And it was very natural that those friends of improvement,
when they found such a man going to be opposed, should wonder very much
and should be desirous of knowing the reason for such opposition. He
(Mr. ) tried to find out by reading all the accounts he could get of
what was said; but he had entirely failed to find any other reason than
that a gentleman who lives in this place, and who is very much respected
by his fellow-townsmen, and who once represented Brighton (Voices: Never
any more), would like to represent it again.6 Well, that is a legitimate
object of ambition when a man can show he deserves it; but unfortunately
it was only to be gratified in this instance by turning out one of the
honourable members who now sit for the Borough. He (Mr. ) had not
yet mentioned his worthy and honourable friend the senior member for the
Borough, for the opposition had not been expressly directed against him,
and he was almost tempted, after what we read in Scripture,7 to condole
with his friend Mr. White, for nobody speaks any harm of that honourable
gentleman. (Cheers and laughter.) He supposed the fact was Mr. White was
thought to be so deeply rooted in the affections of the people of
Brighton that it is no use attempting to dislodge him. (Cheers.) But Mr.
Fawcett, being a more recent acquaintance, not residing amongst us,—they
say that is very invidious,—they think they have a chance of Edition:
current; Page: [353] decreasing the good opinion formed of Mr. Fawcett;
but that good opinion having been formed would be found much harder to
snake than some people imagine. (Cheers.) With respect to the gentleman
who is endeavouring, at the expense of Mr. Fawcett, to regain the seat
he once held for Brighton, he (Mr. ) was tempted to ask, “If he
wishes you to elect him in preference to Mr. Fawcett, what does he offer
you as his inducement to do so?” (Cheers.) During the time that
gentleman served Brighton in parliament he conducted himself as a good
and faithful Radical; but what did he do during that time for the
advancement of the Radical cause, or any other great cause, that could
be compared with what Mr. Fawcett, although a young man, had already
done during the three years,—for it was no longer,—he had represented
this borough in Parliament? (Loud cheers.) If it was said that Lord
Palmerston’s parliament was not a good place for such exertions, or that
the time was not favourable,—granting this candidate such
allowance,—what did he say for the future? (Cheers.) What good things
did the gentleman opposing Mr. Fawcett say he would do that would not be
equally well done by Mr. Fawcett if re-elected? (Cheers.) Indeed, he
could not yet find out that Mr. Fawcett had been attacked for anything
which was not amongst his merits, and he could prove that if he went
through the list of them. He would not say anything of the Tories who
would split with that gentleman; though he thought they would not give
him a vote because they thought him a surer, a better, a more determined
Radical than Mr. Fawcett (cheers); but he might give one piece of advice
to Liberal electors. If there is any Liberal candidate that the Tories
split their votes with, don’t let the Liberals split their votes with
him, and if there is any Liberal candidate that the Tories are
particularly anxious to get out of the way, that is the man for the
Liberals and let them vote for him. Mr.  then most elaborately and
at great length defended Mr. Fawcett from the charges made against him
by his opponents. Mr. Coningham was reported to have blamed Mr. Fawcett
because he desired that persons who took a bribe for their votes should
be severely punished. Was the condemnation of that sentiment Radicalism,
Liberalism, public morality, or even common honesty? (Cheers.) He
thought the William Coningham he once knew could never have said so. It
must be a misreport. One of Mr. Coningham’s supporters said Mr. Fawcett
never came here to confer a favour; only to ask one. As to asking for
favours that was simple nonsense. What Mr. Fawcett asked was to do the
work of this constituency—to devote days of study and nights of
expression for the interest of this borough; to expose himself to all
sorts of obloquy; and to do so with nothing whatever to gain by it. As
to conferring favours—what favours was he to confer? He (Mr. ) did
not think this constituency wanted favours from their representatives.
(Cheers.) The gentleman could hardly mean bribes. Did he mean that it
was a shame Mr. Fawcett did not job for them; or did he mean that he
should hold out that very slight inducement of subscribing to the local
charities? Mr. Fawcett was opposed, too, because he was the friend of
co-operation. He (Mr. ) did not believe the tradesmen of Brighton
would Edition: current; Page: [354] refuse to vote for Mr. Fawcett on
that ground, for co-operation was simply a movement that would greatly
benefit the working classes without injuring the tradesmen, or, if at
all, in a very slight degree. Besides, even if it did injure the
tradesmen a little they must be told what the working men had often been
told in relation to the introduction of machinery, that they must suffer
a little for a time in order to further the general well-being in the
end. If a shopkeeper supplies goods as pure, as unadulterated, as
honestly measured, and of as good quality as the co-operative stores,
his custom would not be injured; and if he could not do that, did he
deserve to keep his custom? (Hear, hear.) Then there was the lucrative
custom of the rich which they were always sure to have. In fact,
shopkeepers need not suffer much from the most extended and rapid
advance of the co-operative principle. (Cheers.) Another thing Mr.
Fawcett was opposed for was because he had said that the necessary
expenses of elections, which should in fairness be borne by the
constituencies, ought to be placed on the constituencies. His clause to
carry out that opinion8 was supported by Mr. Gladstone9 and all the best
Liberals in the house. That would, if carried out, give the
constituencies a greater choice of candidates, and would prevent the
representation being monopolised by rich men, who often went into
Parliament with the hope of getting back their money with great
interest. What did they think of those capable of selling their
birthright for such a miserable mess of pottage as these expenses would
amount to?10 He hoped the electors of Brighton would fling it back in
their faces. (Cheers.) Another one of Mr. Fawcett’s alleged demerits,—in
his (Mr. ’s) eyes they were great merits,—was that he had voted for
compulsory education.11 He would just ask those who condemned him for
that if they thought that any man had a right to exclude his own
children from the benefit of the education they could get. That was all
compulsory education amounted to,—the making parents recognise the duty
incumbent upon them to educate their children. If parents could not
exclude their children from the advantages of education, then the state
had the right to compel all parents to allow their children to be
educated. Even parents would not lose anything in the long run. Their
children would work better while at work, and in future years they would
be able to take advantage of their position and improve themselves and
help their parents all the more. (Cheers.) He had now gone through all
the allegations made against Mr. Fawcett which were worthy of being
Edition: current; Page: [355] touched upon, and he thought he had shown
that the so-called demerits were really conspicuous merits. He supposed
that, as Mr. Fawcett was opposed for doing those things, the candidate
who opposed him would not do them, but would strive to do exactly the
opposite. The candidate would, therefore, be against co-operation; he
would be for expensive elections; and he would be against compulsory
education. He (Mr. ) wanted the electors to realise what they were
doing, and, as one means of their doing so, he would suppose that these
things were put on a placard. How would Coningham like to see these
things,—“Coningham and Jobbery!” “Coningham and Expensive Elections!”
“Coningham and Ignorance!”—for that would be the result if nobody wanted
compulsory education. “Coningham and No Co-operation!” or perhaps as one
of the very greatest and surest effects of co-operation would be to do
away with the system of credit and substitute a system of paying ready
money, he would put it “Coningham and Tick!” (Great laughter.) If Mr.
Coningham would like a placard so drawn up well and good. In any case,
he thought he might now commend Mr. Coningham to the consideration of
the Tories and leave him in the hands of the Liberal Electors. (Mr. 
sat down amid vehement and continued cheering.)

[The usual motion of support of the candidates was made, questions were
put and answered, a special motion of thanks to  was passed, and the
meeting concluded with thanks to the Chair.]


138.: The Westminster Election of 1868 [7]
 11 NOVEMBER, 1868

Daily Telegraph, 12 November, 1868, p. 2. Headed: “Election Movements. /
Westminster.” Also reported in the Morning Star, and the Daily News. The
evening meeting of the electors of St. Martin’s-in-the-Fields and St.
Mary-le-Strand was held in the Polygraphic Hall, King William Street,
James Beal in the Chair (the Morning Star says the Rev. D. Bailey
chaired). Grosvenor spoke first.  was greeted with “immense
cheering” (Morning Star) by the large audience.

mr.  began, amid some cheering, by saying it was very gratifying to
see what is going on in the country just now when the Reform Bill has
been given to the people. While Mr. Disraeli held out the Reform Bill in
his hand to them, they would persist in saying, “Thank you, Mr.
Gladstone!” (Laughter.) All his talking could not alter their opinion.
Had the Tories said that the bill which Mr. Gladstone brought in1 did
not go far enough, and that no invidious distinctions should be made,
what a pleasant time the Commons would have had, what a happy family
they would have been! (Laughter.) They would have carried the Amendment
Bill, Edition: current; Page: [356] would have saved a vast deal of
time, a good many broken palings, and perhaps a few broken heads.
(Laughter and cheers.) Perhaps Mr. Disraeli might say he had not then
educated his party.2 He did not think Mr. Disraeli intended to educate
his party at that time, but he could not help thinking that Mr. Disraeli
and Lord Derby, being religious men, as shown by their wish to preserve
the Irish Church, intended to carry out a text of Scripture, but had
forgotten what it was. (A laugh.) Christ said, if a man wants you to go
with him a mile, go with him twain.3 Lord Derby and Mr. Disraeli
evidently thought that in order to get their party to go with them a
mile one way, they must take them two miles in another. aNo man or body
of men who desired to stand well with the people of England could
succeed by saying one thing and meaning another, the very suspicion of
anything of the kind being enough to destroy such persons in popular
estimation (hear, hear).a They had in Mr. Gladstone a statesman whose
yea is yea and whose nay is nayb. (Cheers.) When he made up his mind he
followed it out and therefore the people reposed a confidence in him
which they could not do in a man whose policy, feelings, and intentions
were not as they should be in order to be popular with what was called
the multitude, namely, transparent as the day. (Cheers.)b If they wanted
to know the truth about a man they should hear what his enemies said of
him. They could not say he was an hypocrite. They said he was
precipitate and rash in divulging his opinions. He (Mr. ) denied
that Mr. Gladstone spoke his mind too freely or without due
consideration. It was Mr. Gladstone who, in Lord Palmerston’s
Government, spoke out, and said that Reform had been promised and must
be given.4 cWhen he (Mr. ) read that in a foreign country he
predicted that Mr. Gladstone would be the best abused man in England by
a certain class.c And had not that been so? (Yes.) Did they believe one
word of the aspersions cast on him? (No.) The move the Liberal party was
making related to no grievance to England, but to the injury done to
Ireland by the maintenance of the Irish Church.5 Englishmen knew that to
be a source of irritation to a people with whom they wish to be in close
friendship, therefore they wished to get rid of it. They could not make
the English Church an Irish Church. If the English Church wanted a
branch there, let them endow it from their own funds, without taking
anything of the lands or Edition: current; Page: [357] tithes of
Ireland. (Hear, hear.) He related many instances of the severity
practised under English rule in Ireland for centuries, remarking that
the Irish Church is the one relic left of the system which treated the
Irish as a conquered and alien people. dHe entered at some length on the
question of the tenure of land in Irelandd, recommending the
establishment of a tenant right similar to that which has worked so well
under the 30 years’ lease system in some parts of India. If this
security, not to be turned out, were given to the Irishman, he would
know that any improvement he might make would be for the benefit of
himself and his family, and that he was safe in his possession so long
as he paid his rent. That, however, was a question which was much more
likely to be properly dealt with by a Liberal than by a Tory Government,
inasmuch as the latter would be entirely bound up in the landlordse; and
he hoped that in the approaching election they would send the Liberal
party to power, and that that party would approach these questions in a
sincere spirite. If the Irish Church were abolished, and the land
question were settled on some such basis as he had sketched, the
Irishman would give his hand to the Englishman, and the two nations
would be as they had never yet been before—an united people. (Cheers.)

fAn elector in the body of the room said he had heard it stated that Mr.
 had been guilty of forging an order for some theatre. (Laughter.)
He wanted to give Mr.  an opportunity of denying it.

Mr. : I am much obliged to the gentleman for giving this new
instance of what length the Tories will go to, which justifies what I
have said in another place, that they stick at nothing. I need hardly
say I never heard one word of this charge before, and if it ever
happened to anybody there must be some mistake about the name.

Another elector asked if the honourable candidates were in favour of
closing the public houses on Sunday. [Grosvenor would not pledge himself
to the view that the public houses should be closed altogether.]

Mr. : It would not be just, while the rich are able to get access to
wine and other intoxicating drinks on Sundays at their clubs, to pass a
law that would make it impossible for the poor to obtain refreshment of
a similar character on that day.f

gAnother elector asked whether the candidates were in favour of
retaining the law by which the goods of the lodger might be seized for
the debts of the landlord.6

Edition: current; Page: [358]
Captain Grosvenor was against the law; as was Mr. , who criticised
the present law as an abominable one.

Another elector asked respecting bankruptcy and imprisonment for debt.

Mr.  said he did not think there should be any punishment—which
imprisonment was—for debtors who were blameless. But there should be
punishment for debtors who were not blameless.g Mr. , in answer to
another question, said that no law could be too strong to enforce the
education of the community.

In reply to questions, Captain Grosvenor declined to say anything as to
the disunion of Church and State.

Mr.  believed all connection between Church and State to be an
injury to both; but as the State was more liberal than the Church, and
might exercise an influence on clergymen, he thought the question might
be allowed to sleep for a time.

A middle-aged man in the meeting asked the honourable candidates if they
were against the separation of married couples in workhouses. The
querist seemed to be so likely to have a direct interest in the matter,
that the audience laughed loudly at his question.

Captain Grosvenor: I am very much against married couples going into
workhouses at all. (Great laughter arose at the pointed application of
this reply to the able-bodied man who had introduced the subject.) I do
not see what they should marry for if they go to a workhouse; but if
unfortunate circumstances reduce them to poverty, they will have become
so sick of one another that in the workhouse they will be very glad to
be separated. (Hisses. That will not do, Grosvenor!)

Mr. : Then see if this will do. I think that for old people and for
infirm people the workhouse should be made a place of comfort (hear,
hear), but I think that for young people and for able-bodied people the
workhouse should be a place of discomfort. (Cheers.) They ought not to
be able to enjoy all the advantages of self-support while receiving
support from others. I would separate married people if young and
able-bodied; but I would not separate them if old. (Hear, hear.)

[The customary vote of confidence in the candidates was moved, seconded,
and carried unanimously amid great cheering, and a vote of thanks to the
Chair concluded the meeting.]


139.: The Westminster Election of 1868 [8]
 13 NOVEMBER, 1868

Daily Telegraph, 14 November, 1868, p. 4. Headed: “The General Election.
/ Westminster.” Also reported fully in the Daily News; ’s speech
appeared in less full form Edition: current; Page: [359] on 16 November
in The Times and the Morning Star. The Friday evening meeting of 
and Grosvenor with the electors was held in St. James’s Hall. The huge
room was overflowing long before the hour of the meeting. Thomas Hughes,
who had intended to take the Chair, was detained by the contest in his
own constituency, Frome, and Serjeant Parry was elected to his place.
Grosvenor spoke first, quoting a version of ’s remark in No. 138:
“the people, while accepting a household bill from Mr. Disraeli, seemed
to say mechanically ‘Thank you, Mr. Gladstone.’ (Cheers and laughter.)”
’s “reception was enthusiastic, the audience rising en masse . . .
waving hats and handkerchiefs for several minutes” (Daily Telegraph),
and “cheering at the top of their voices”

(Daily News).

silence having been with some difficulty restored, the honourable
gentleman said every person he was addressing must be aware of the issue
which was going to be decided by the constituencies of the country. What
they had to decide was whether the Reform Bill should have any
consequences. Every one who voted to return a Tory must mean that the
Reform Bill should have no consequences. (Hear, hear.) If the Tories had
intended that the people should have the consequences of Reform, they
would not have opposed Reform as long as possible, and then only have
granted it on compulsion—the compulsion being that they would not have
been allowed to remain in office if they had not. The very best thing
that could be said in their excuse—no one believing in the sudden
conversion of a whole party—was that they thought, as they saw that the
poison would be sure to be administered to the patient whether they did
it or not, they might as well administer it in a double dose, and so
preserve for a short time longer the advantage of being the patient’s
physician. (Cheers.) As sensible men they would not entrust particular
work to people who disliked it, and who would rather it should miscarry
than succeed. They were told that the Conservatives were the fittest
people to be Reformers, because they would hold the people back when
they were going too fast. Though horses did, now and then, need to be
held back, it was not usual to choose those to be harnessed which were
the best hands at pulling back. (Hear, hear.) When people wished to be
held back they applied a drag, and that was what the Tories were good
for. (Cheers.) Their place was not in harness, but to be a drag on the
wheel, or to hang on behind and pull back the carriage when it was going
down hill. (Hear, hear.) If that was their proper function it was now
known that it was not a function that they would perform unless they
were out of office; for when they were in office they were ready and
eager to gallop down hill twice as fast as the others. The Tories were
too fond of the old era to be fit to inaugurate the new. A different
kind of Parliament and a different kind of Government were wanted from
what the country had been used to heretofore. They did not want either a
Tory Government or a Palmerstonian Government. It had often been said
that Lord Palmerston had demoralised the House of Commons. He did not
think Lord Palmerston was responsible for the demoralisation, if it was
to be so called, into which the House of Commons had fallen, but he had
proved an extremely suitable leader for the House of Commons which had
fallen into that state; for, instead of Edition: current; Page: [360]
meeting earnestness with earnestness, Lord Palmerston knew how, with
serene good humour, to laugh and joke earnestness away. Men often failed
to fulfil the hopes of those who returned them; but sufficient allowance
was not made for the atmosphere they entered and the company they found
themselves in in the House of Commons. They found themselves amongst
hundreds of gentlemen who did not belong to the classes who suffered by
the evils which at present afflicted society. (Hear, hear.) They were
comfortable, and did not like to have their comfort interfered with;
accordingly they very much disliked those who disturbed them, by
meddling with great questions; because such questions were difficult,
and required a great deal of thinking, which was very troublesome to men
who did not always feel confident that they should think to much
purpose, and who did not know whom they could trust to think for them.
aComfortable people did not much like those who would not let a sleeping
dog lie. (Laughter and cheers.) He had observed throughout life that
when a man has made up his mind not to do any good, he soon persuaded
himself that there was no good to be done.a If a young man came into
Parliament with high hopes, and really wished to do something, he was
btold, “For God’s sake don’t meddle with this or that, the party would
not be so safe in office, or would not get into office so soon;” and
what was worse, if anyone raised new questions and voted on them, they
were sure to offend some of their constituents. In the old Palmerstonian
days there had grown up a general feeling in favour of letting thingsb
alone. To that system of letting things alone there was one remarkable
exception in Mr. Gladstone—(loud cheers)—who, in his department, over
which he alone had control, constantly busied himself to do something
good for the nation, which the nation had not the wit to ask him for.
(Cheers.) Nobody had forced Mr. Gladstone to give the Post-office
Savings’ Banks and Life Assurance,1 to take off taxes year after year by
means of retrenchment, or to repeal the paper duties.2 (Hear, hear.) Mr.
Gladstone, however, had done something more, for in 1864 he had broken
out of harness, and disturbed the sleep of many in the House of Commons
by proclaiming that Reform had been promised, and that Reform must be
granted.3 He cagain had raised the question of the Irish Church in 1864
or ’65,4 and again practically last year,5c so suddenly, as the Tories
said, Edition: current; Page: [361] though Ireland had only been waiting
for it for three centuries. (Cheers.) These were the sort of things
which made some people call Mr. Gladstone an unsafe Minister; but he
called upon the electors to support Mr. Gladstone for the very reason
for which he was called unsafe. They wanted a Minister who would do
things merely because they were right, and who would not mind risking a
few votes for his party, if by that risk he could do right and effect a
great object. (Cheers.) He hoped from the elections that were about to
commence there would go forth a sound which would proclaim in thunder to
the whole world that the Palmerstonian period was at an end. (Cheers.)
Mr. Gladstone, and those who were sent to his support, would have to
apply their minds in the next Parliament to great questions. But first
they would have to begin with clean hands, by removing from themselves
the reproach of oppression. For seven hundred years, up to a very late
period, we had been tyrannising over Ireland. We repented it now, even
the Tories repented it; but repentance was not worth much without
atonement and reparation—(cheers)—and until that atonement and
reparation were made the memory of the past would not be extinguished.
The Irish required some tangible proof that we felt very differently
from our predecessors, and they had a right to expect not only that we
should remove that miserable last vestige of our past tyranny which
still existed in the shape of a foreign and intrusive Church
Establishment, but that for a generation at least Ireland should be the
spoilt child of this country. Means also must be found to put an end to
the miserable relations now existing in that country between the owners
and the cultivators of the land. dThey must put an end to a system of
tenure the like of which had not existed in England since the people
were serfs. (Cheers.) They would have to consider the same things by and
bye with respect to the tenure of land in England. (Hear, hear.) He did
not wish to conceal the difficulties of the question. eIt was not very
easy to find landlords in the House of Commons without prejudice; but
the land question must be put into the hands of people who would not,
because there was a seeming resemblance between the systems of the two
countries, refuse to apply to Ireland remedies which might appear too
strong for England.e With respect to education, all admitted that it was
necessary, except a few who said that they hated this question of
education, because there would soon be no labourers or servants. Better
say that they would soon have no more slaves, because a man who was not
Edition: current; Page: [362] educated must necessarily be a slave.
Education was opposed by what was termed the church party as long as
they could. When the Bell and Lancaster system was first started,6 that
party cried down the movement for teaching the people to read; but when
they found that the people would be taught in schools in which, though
the Bible was read, the church catechism was not, they founded what was
termed the national schools. He admitted that the Tories did now make
great sacrifices to promote education, both by giving and begging money
for it; but the church party always confounded the interest of the
establishment with that of religion, and were not fit to have the
control of education. fHe then alluded, with caustic sarcasm, to the
conduct of the Duke of Beaufort regarding the support of schools on his
Grace’s property.7f Clergymen were deplorably ignorant. Kings, great
noblemen, great ladies, and clergymen were generally profoundly ignorant
of men and the world; and 200 years ago Lord Clarendon said that
clergymen understood the least and took the worst views of human affairs
of all men who could read and write.8 (Cheers.) He did not mean that
there were not numerous admirable exceptions among the clergy, but he
felt bound to say that they were not fit to be trusted with education,
especially at the present time, when all the bigotry and prejudice had
come to the front. (Hear, hear.) They had a vast population and wealth,
but with them terrible poverty and enormous taxes. They had a right to
expect that government should try to alleviate that poverty. First of
all, the health of great cities, towns, and dwellings should be
considered. There was no objection on the part of the Tories to make
improvements of this kind, but it wanted bolder men to form large plans
to benefit the peopled—men who would have bold, well-considered plans,
and carry them partially into operation at every opportunity, and into
complete operation as soon as possible. (Cheers.) With regard to the two
tremendous subjects of crime and pauperism, any Parliament and
Government that was fit to exist in this country would place before
itself no less grand an object than gtheir extinction. He did not
suppose they would succeed; but Christ had said, Edition: current; Page:
[363] “Be ye perfect as your Father is perfect.”9 Christ did not suppose
that we could be perfect, but His words implied that we should endeavour
to attain that perfection which humanity was capable of. Education would
do something, and improvements of all sorts would effect moreg. hThese
great evils should be grappled with by the great minds of the
country—minds accustomed to look on public affairs in a comprehensive
light. Mr. Gladstone was eminently distinguished for his broad and
enlightened views. That gentleman was inspired by a spirit that would
not brook the existence of an evil if he found that he had the power to
redress it. Let Mr. Gladstone obtain the support of the country, and a
Government animated by his sentiments would inaugurate a policy which
would redound to the prosperity of the nation.h Mr. Gladstone was the
one statesman in his recollection whom he could follow as a leader, and
he believed he was the leader for the English people. (Loud cheers.)

On the conclusion of the honourable gentleman’s speech he was greeted
with a second most flattering demonstration of respect and admiration.

After a few questions had been put and replied to by the candidates,
[Fawcett moved a vote of confidence and support, which was carried
unanimously; the “proceedings, which were protracted to an unusually
late hour” (The Times), concluded with a vote of thanks to the Chair.]


140.: W.E. Gladstone [2]
 14 NOVEMBER, 1868

Daily Telegraph, 16 November, 1868, p. 3. Headed: “The General Election.
/ Greenwich.” Abbreviated versions of the same report appeared in The
Times and the Daily News. The Saturday evening meeting of the electors
of Deptford was held in the hall of the Mechanics’ Institute, High
Street, the purpose being to hear ’s speech. A letter was read from
Alderman David Salomons (1797–1873), the sitting Liberal M.P. for the
borough, now running with Gladstone, in favour of his candidature. The
densely crowded meeting greeted  with loud cheers.

after a few prefatory remarks, he observed, in reference to Mr.
Gladstone not taking an active part in the contest in that borough, that
he had heard there were Edition: current; Page: [364] some few among the
electors who thought that gentleman should have given his assent to
become their representative if elected; but although he was not
surprised that they should regret the loss of those splendid specimens
of oratory which they would have heard from Mr. Gladstone had he been
present among them, yet they knew how impossible it was that Mr.
Gladstone should have taken any other than a passive part, seeing the
immense importance of the contest then taking place in South-West
Lancashire, where, had Mr. Gladstone shown any sign of taking part in
the contest for Greenwich, his enemies in Lancashire would at once have
put the falsehood forward that he despaired of success in that division
of their county; for no falsehood was too false to be taken up and
spread by his enemies. (Hear, hear.) That was the reason why the
electors of Greenwich had not the pleasure of receiving from Mr.
Gladstone an expression of his adhesion in their borough contest.
(Hear.) But Mr. Gladstone was entitled not only to the warmest support
from the constituency of Greenwich, but to the warmest support of all
Liberal constituencies. (Loud cheers.) He was entitled to that support
on many grounds. (Hear, hear.) It was not necessary that he should
dilate on that occasion at length upon all the claims that Mr. Gladstone
had to the support of every Liberal constituency—(cheers)—and therefore
he would pass a few only in review. (Hear, hear.) The first claim he had
was, that he was the only possible leader of the Liberal party. (Loud
cheers.) They all knew how difficult it was, and it had often been found
most difficult, to induce the Liberal and the Radical party to act
together. (Hear, hear.) They had had experience at times of how one
class would not trust those who were trusted by other classes; but there
was no such state of things when they had seriously determined that
their cause should be led by Mr. Gladstone, who was more popular with,
and had more the confidence of, the middle and working classes of the
country, than any other statesman. (Loud cheers.) They had in Mr.
Gladstone a statesman whom they all trusted. (Cheers.) He would be a
Minister who knew his business well, and would do it for the good of the
country, without being forced to do it. (Cheers.) Mr. Gladstone
possessed the friendly connection and co-operation of the old Liberal
party; and even those who were lukewarm accepted him as the best man—not
that there was no rival to him, but because they knew that, however much
Mr. Gladstone wished to do, he would not consent to do anything unjust
to any class. (Hear, hear.) No class wished for injustice. (Hear, hear.)
He (Mr. ) did not think the Tories wished for anything unjust,
knowingly. (Hear, hear.) But they had in Mr. Gladstone a leader in whom
they could all confide. (Cheers.) These were not all the points upon
which Mr. Gladstone ought to receive their support. Mr. Gladstone was
the only statesman within their own time who knew properly the duties of
leader of a party; and he was distinguished by that characteristic, that
he did not stand still and wait to be summoned by the loud voice of
people out of doors, by the thundering demands of the people for some
measures of public good. (Hear, hear.) Mr. Edition: current; Page: [365]
Gladstone asought fora, arduously and continuously, things which had not
been thought of before. (Hear, hear.) When Chancellor of the Exchequer,
so soon as it was seen anything was wanting, he was not for leaving
things alone, but he was a singular exception to all others, and there
was scarcely a year during which he did not bring some plan forward,
from his own knowledge and ability, and important for the benefit of the
poor and labouring classes. (Cheers.) It was not from compulsion that
Mr. Gladstone introduced the Post Office Savings Bank Bill.1 (Hear.) It
was not from compulsion that he introduced, also, the Post Office Life
Insurance system2—(hear, hear)—and it was not from compulsion that he
succeeded in making reductions in the expenditure of the country, by
means of which to pay off some portion of their National Debt. (Cheers.)
Neither was it from compulsion that Mr. Gladstone took the duty off
paper,3 thus securing the spread of knowledge among the people. (Loud
cheers.) Mr. Gladstone was not content with making those improvements in
departments only, but he sought improvement in Parliamentary Government.
(Cheers.) He (Mr. ) would venture to say that there was no other
member in Lord Palmerston’s Government but Mr. Gladstone who would have
dared to have got up and raised the signal for Parliamentary Reform.
(Cheers.) No one knew that he was going to do it; and although he would
not vote against a measure of Reform as then proposed, he gave warning
that Parliamentary Reform had been solemnly promised, and the people
expected that promise to be kept.4 (Loud cheers.) That was the beginning
of the Reform which they now had. (Hear, hear.) It was Mr. Gladstone who
had given them the power they now possessed, and not Mr. Disraeli—(loud
cheers)—for the moment Mr. Gladstone was in power he kept to his word,
and tried to do it; but the Tories opposed, and, in succeeding to power,
had kept office for two years by granting that, and more than they had
before denied to the people. (Hear, and cheers.) That which he had named
did not make Mr. Gladstone popular with the Palmerston party. (Hear.) It
was a sort of thing which made them say, “Gladstone is not a safe
man”—(laughter)—that was, a man who would not give himself the trouble
of doing anything—(hear, hear)—or a man who would leave questions alone.
An unsafe man was a Minister in whom it was high treason to bring
forward good measures, or who threw out ideas for good measures.
(Cheers.) He hoped that in the future, with Mr. Gladstone, they would
not be without such a man. (Hear.) It was Mr. Gladstone who had brought
forward the great Irish Church question, when he reminded the House it
was a question which would have to be Edition: current; Page: [366]
taken up, for it could not be permitted to wait much
longer5—(cheers)—and as soon as the question of Reform was settled he
took the question up of the Irish Church,6 and in which they were now
called upon to support him. (Loud cheers.) If they did not support him,
what would be the consequences? (Hear, hear.) To act wisely would be to
give reparation to Ireland for the many wrong laws which had existed for
many centuries; for until a recent period they had not treated Ireland
like a sister, but more like a slave—(cheers)—and even worse than many
slaves; for there were such things as petted slaves, but Ireland had
been trampled on. (Hear, hear.) Having referred to the tenure of land in
Ireland, where no man was safe from being turned out of possession at
the end of six months without compensation, Mr.  said it was a
difficult question, what exact system of legislation was required to
meet it; but Mr. Gladstone was the man who had the mind to solve it, and
he was the man to do it. (Hear, hear.) If they did not answer the appeal
made to them at the coming elections, and place the right man in the
right place, the opportunity for reconciliation with Ireland would be
lost. (Hear, hear.) If they did not choose this opportunity to be lost,
they would return Mr. Gladstone with a triumphant majority. (Loud
cheers.) But there was still a great deal more depending upon what they
might do. There was a vast deal to be done, not only in England, but
Ireland also. (Hear.) They had to turn over an entire life of half a
century, and to undo what former Governments had done. (Hear.) In a
country where there existed so much wealth with so much poverty, there
were difficulties to be got over by the help of brain, energy, and
earnestness—(hear)—and if they wanted either brain, energy, or
earnestness, they would not lay their claim for them on those who had
opposed them. (Hear, hear.) There were also the questions of national
education, and capital, and labour, which required the same brain,
energy, and earnestness; and it was for the constituencies to say whom
they would have for their leader. (Cries of Gladstone!) It was very much
to be hoped that Mr. Gladstone would be returned for South-West
Lancashire, and that he would not need to take his seat for Greenwich.
(Hear, hear.) But he might require the seat. If he did not need it, they
would have done honour to themselves and bgivenb valuable support,
showing to other great constituencies that they had given their adhesion
in supporting the most illustrious Liberal representative they could
select. (Cheers.) If Mr. Gladstone should not succeed, and should
require their suffrages—and it was said that Lord Derby had consented to
spend £20,000 to prevent his election—(Shame)—but if only £10,000, or
£5,000, he (Mr. ) believed they would agree with him that the money
might be more wisely spent—(hear, hear)—if, as he had said, Mr.
Gladstone should require their Edition: current; Page: [367] suffrages,
it would be a joy of triumph to the constituency that they had provided
a harbour of refuge for him, to enable him to take his seat at the
assembling of the new Parliament, as the head of the Liberal party.
(Cheers.) In conclusion, Mr.  called on all the Liberal electors in
the borough to be early at the poll on Tuesday morning, and to split
their votes by voting for Salomons and Gladstone, resuming his seat amid
considerable applause.

[A motion was unanimously accepted pledging support to Salomons and
Gladstone, and the meeting concluded.]


141.: The Westminster Election of 1868 [9]
 16 NOVEMBER, 1868

Daily Telegraph, 17 November, 1868, p. 2. Headed: “The General Election.
/ Nominations. / Westminster.” Reports (in the third person) appeared in
the Morning Star, the Daily News, and The Times. The nomination of
candidates took place at noon on the hustings in front of Nelson’s
Column, Trafalgar Square (the location also being referred to as Charing
Cross). The “arrangements were an immense improvement over the old
regime of dirt and disturbance at Covent Garden Market, where a
candidate and his friends seldom escaped without making acquaintance
with the flavour of decaying turnips and cabbagestalks” (Morning Star).
Smith arrived first, and then Grosvenor and , with a large group of
supporters, who had walked in procession from their committee rooms.
After the proclamation and the writ had been read, Erskine Perry,
seconded by N.N. Seymour, proposed Grosvenor.  was nominated by
Malleson, who said in part: “Three years ago you did yourself the honour
to solicit Mr.  to leave his study, where he had already acquired a
world-wide reputation—(cheers)—and, what he values more, a world-wide
usefulness—to represent you in the House of Commons, and there with
wonderful rapidity he achieved an astonishing success. (Cheers.) As an
argumentative debater he is second to none in the House of Commons; and,
more than that, the people respect and admire him for his pure courage,
his straightforwardness, his simplicity, and his intense devotion to the
popular cause. (Cheers.) It may be said of him that he has a double
title—that he is not only one of the greatest, but one of the best-loved
of living Englishmen. (Cheers, and counter cries of Oh.) He has been
assailed on the occasion of this election with abuse, insult, and
calumny of every kind; but the gentlemen who have thus assailed him do
not dare to accept the challenge to be present at one of their public
meetings, and there defend himself. (Hear, hear; and a voice, What about
Bradlaugh?)” Beal, who seconded the nomination, summed “up ’s
qualifications by saying that the rancorous hatred of that honourable
gentleman’s opponents was the best guarantee of the value of his
services. (Cheers.)” Up to this point the speeches had been quite well
heard, but when Smith’s supporters began to speak, “there was a surging
movement . . . by the rougher element immediately beneath the hustings”
which produced “reaction and uproar, and the clamour thus initiated
continued without abatement till the end of the proceedings, and little
more than a few stray expressions could be caught here and there from
the different speakers” (The Times). George Cubitt, “in the midst of a
deafening uproar,” proposed W.H. Smith, interjecting the Edition:
current; Page: [368] comment that while the Tories had no complaint to
make of Grosvenor, “they did complain that Mr.  had indulged in
abuse, and had charged the Tories with sticking at nothing. Mr. ,”
he continued, “had been asked to retract, and had declined to do so; and
he . . . now asked him to do so that day, or when he went to his
retirement at Avignon he would regret it.” Tavener er (who also
could barely be heard) seconded Smith’s nomination, and then Grosvenor
addressed the crowd. Next  rose, to be greeted with “a tumult of
applause” and “considerable hooting”

(Daily News).

gentlemen—This is not the time or the place for many words, and, if it
were, you could not possibly hear them; so I will only say this, you and
the people of this country generally have got to decide something more
important than the particular merit or demerit of candidates that
present themselves for your suffrages. You have got to decide whether
this country shall have a Tory Government or a Gladstone Government.
(Cheers, cries of Gladstone, and interruption.) aIf the new electors who
have supported Reform care nothing about the rights that have been
acquired, and desire things should go on after the Reform Act exactly as
they went on before it, they will do quite right to vote for the Tory
candidate; but if the old electors are as much attached to Reform as
ever—if the new electors desire that their newly-acquired rights should
be exercised to the best advantage—and if both new and old electors wish
the Reform Bill to bring forth abundant fruits, then they will, I have
no doubt, vote for the two Liberal candidates. (Cheers.)a

[The noise constantly increased, and Smith, like , could not be
heard easily. On the show of hands, the High Bailiff declared the
election to have fallen on  and Smith, though the Morning Star
thought the vote had clearly gone to  and Grosvenor; a poll was
demanded on behalf of Grosvenor, which was announced to begin at 8 a.m.
and continue until 4 p.m. on the 17th, with the result to be declared at
2 p.m. on the 18th. The meeting (which had lasted less than an hour)
ended after “some confusion about the customary vote of thanks to the
returning officer. A message was sent to Mr.  on the part of Mr.
Smith, offering to second the vote if he would propose it, but no move
to that effect being made, Mr. Smith himself proposed the motion, and in
the absence of a Liberal seconder this duty was discharged by the Hon.
R. Grimston [Smith’s agent]” (The Times). “Upon leaving the hustings Mr.
 with his friends returned to the Liberal committee-room in
Cockspur-street, and presenting himself upon the balcony bowed his
acknowledgments to his supporters” (The Times).]

Edition: current; Page: [369]


142.: The Westminster Election of 1868 [10]
 18 NOVEMBER, 1868

Daily Telegraph, 19 November, 1868, p. 8. Headed: “The General Election.
/ Declarations. / Westminster.” Similar reports (also in the first
person) appeared in the Morning Star and the Daily News; The Times had a
third-person report. Though the declaration of the poll was scheduled
for 2 p.m., the number of voters and the consequent difficulty of making
up the lists delayed the High Bailiff until 4 p.m. When he appeared on
the hustings, the front was occupied by “a number of roughs of the worst
type” who, annoyed at the delay, “held high carnival,” with the result
that “any decently-clad individual wearing a chimney-pot hat had good
reason to remember his imprudence.” “The principal speaker in the crowd
was a little boy whose age could not have been more than ten or twelve
years”—The Times guesses fourteen—“whose platform was the shoulders of a
young man. This youthful political orator expatiated very intelligently
upon all the prominent questions of the day, gave the Liberal party full
credit for all they had done and intend doing, criticised the Tories
rather severely, even going as far as to wish to see the distinguished
educator of that party well hung; accused the successful Tory candidate
for Westminster of all sorts of bribery and corruption, and prophesied
that gentleman’s speedy rejection from the seat for Westminster.”
(Morning Star.)  and Grosvenor, with their supporters, had arrived
before 2 o’clock, to enthusiastic cheers. After waiting an hour,
however, , “who was indisposed,” rose, whereupon “the little fellow
on the man’s shoulders called for ‘Cheers for Mr. ,’ a cry which was
readily responded to; and, addressing Mr. , said, ‘Don’t mind, Mr.
, we’ll pop you in for Greenwich.’

(Great cheering.)”

gentlemen—So much unexpected delay having occurred, and as I have a bad
cold, I will take the opportunity of saying at once the few words I have
to say. To be defeated in a contested election is so common an
occurrence that there is no reason why any sensible man should be much
moved by it—and least of all is that any reason in my case, who, as you
know, did not seek the honour which you conferred on me; but, on the
contrary, the acceptance was and has been throughout a sacrifice to me.
(Hear, hear.) Whatever regret I feel, therefore, at the result of
yesterday’s election is solely on public grounds. (Cheers.) I regret the
loss of a vote to Mr. Gladstone and the Liberal party. (Great cheering.)
I regret that Westminster, which was so long at the head of the Liberal
interest, should have had the unenviable distinction of being the only
metropolitan constituency which has at this election sent a Tory to the
House of Commons by the vote of the majority. (Hisses.) And I am sorry
for one reason more. I think it was an encouragement to young men
ambitious of parliamentary distinction—it was a good lesson to them when
they found that a great constituency like this was willing to be
represented by a man who always told you plainly when he differed in
opinion from you—who told you that he differed on a few important
points, though he agreed on more, and that he should maintain his
opinion by his vote, and Edition: current; Page: [370] who never, for
the sake of preserving his seat, ever said or did anything which he
would not have thought it his duty to if he had not been your
representative. (Cheers.) It only remains for me to make my warmest
acknowledgments to those who have laboured on my behalf, awhich I do
most heartily,a and to the electors who have not only given me their
support, but an amount of bsupport, favour, and countenanceb very far
above my deserts. (Cries of No, and cheers.)