Not knowing which of you to write to, and being thus placed in the
situation of the ass, I am wiser than he, and instead of starving I
seize both the bundles of hay,2 and write to you both. Your journal has
been received, & read with great interest, but we have been grieved to
hear of Mr Grote’s indisposition, and surprised to learn that you have
had so much rain. Last week was with us one of the finest weeks we have
had this summer, and the harvest-work which has been done surpasses all
belief. This week is equally fine, and corn will be excessively
cheap—especially as I hear the harvest is as far advanced in Scotland as
here.—I suppose you will be more interested by hearing all that has
passed in the Utilitarian world since your departure, than by anything
else that I can say.—In the first place, then, last Monday week my
father and I dined with Hume, where we met Anthony Hammond, and on the
whole we are very much satisfied with that personage.3 Without being
much of a philosopher, or possessing very clear or definite notions on
law and legislation in general, he carries his ideas of reform to a
Edition: current; Page: [2] very great extent. He has already
consolidated the whole of the Criminal Law, which it is intended to
bring into Parlt either as one bill or a series of bills so as to
supersede all the present system:4 he means next to go to work upon the
civil law, & consolidate that too: but this consolidation he himself
declares to be only preparatory to a complete codification of the whole
law, common & statute: on the subject of which he has very rational
ideas; and he says it would destroy the whole of the system of pleading
as at present constituted, and would leave nothing to the discretion of
the judge, of the evils of which he has a very strong impression. Hume
expressed on the same occasion some most admirable opinions on the
subject of charity, which he declared that he had recently adopted, &
tho’ they seemed new to Hammond, he came into them tolerably well.—In
the next place, William Whitmore has brought his cousin the member to
call upon my father at the India House.5 As I was conversing all the
time he staid, with Wm W. in a separate part of the room, I heard very
little of what passed between my father & the other Whitmore; but my
father says that he fully understands the question of the corn laws,
which was the only subject on which they conversed: that he understands
not only the general principle, but its practical bearings: & he
declares himself fully resolved, if the ministers do not anticipate him,
to bring forward a motion & force a discussion every session until he
succeeds in carrying the question. As there will be an elaborate article
in the Edin. Rev. by M‘Culloch to prepare the way before him, it will be
of great importance that we should have an article in the Westminster
Review which may bear a comparison with it: for this purpose we are
anxious to ascertain, first, whether Whitmore can, and secondly, whether
he will, write one.6 William W. whom we employed to get us a copy of
Whitmore’s Edition: current; Page: [3] pamphlet, as a sort of test of
his capability, wormed out of Prescott7 our ulterior designs, & has
taken them up with the utmost eagerness.—I dined at Wimbledon with Mr
Tooke8 on Friday last, having gone from the India House to his counting
house, & thence with him to his carriage at a quarter before five: from
which time till near eleven, we were engaged almost without intermission
in discussing the exclusion of Irish labourers.9 In the course of the
dispute he was driven, among other things, to deny the principle of
population. I could perceive considerable annoyance on his part at the
escape of Eyton from the paternal apron string: Two or three times he
put him down with considerable harshness, & was continually making
indirect hits against the dogmatism, & want of candour, of some of his
opponents; by which some, he meant Eyton: who took as well the indirect
as the direct reproofs, with the most infidel charity & resignation. I
contrived, towards the close of the evening to take a turn with Eyton in
the garden, and we had some very profitable conversation: he is eager to
do whatever good he can, & to qualify himself for doing more.—The
Austins are now domiciled at your quondam lodging on Brockham Green: and
we regularly walk with Austin on the Sunday when we go down.10 I am in
considerable doubt whether the review of Preuves will ever make its
appearance, tho’ I am informed by Mrs Austin that he works at it
Edition: current; Page: [4] during a portion of every day.11 I wish he
could complete any thing, no matter what: as a given quantity of
reputation, plus a given number of pounds sterling, would probably
supply as great a stimulus, as his mental constitution is capable of
receiving.—Charles Austin12 has been laid up, but is now, I believe, at
Norwich, whence he goes to Southampton, & returns not till October.
Bingham is absent: Graham not yet returned: Ellis fast bound in his new
office, so that the Utilitarian community stagnates.13 Our society waxes
thin, & but for the approaching batch, I should say it verged fast to
decay. Patten has withdrawn: Secretan has tendered his resignation; his
brother having been appointed manager to the marine department of the
Alliance, the conduct of the business falls wholly upon him, & he says
it leaves him no time for attendance on the society, nor yet upon our
Pol. Ec. Conversations.14 If he leaves us it is all over with him. En
revanche, I can give the most favorable bulletin of Harfield & of Edw.
Ellis.15 The former produced at the last meeting of the society an essay
on population, which obtained universal, and, considering it as a first
attempt, well-deserved applause; in it he kept the promise he had made,
of writ-ing sar-cas-ti-cal-ly, and some of the sar-casm was exceedingly
good. He complained however that we all laughed at his or-tho-e-py,
Edition: current; Page: [5] (vulgarly called pronunciation): and in
truth we had good reason: Doane16 complimented him upon having written a
ighly-able, a excellent, a admirable, and in some parts, a ironical
essay. Edward Ellis is studying political economy with so much ardour
and application, as leaves no fear of his ultimate success in that and
in every other branch of useful knowledge which he attempts.—Next, as to
our occupations: My father is about to open his battery upon the
Quarterly Review: I am still upon Brodie: Ellis is upon the Elements of
Pol. Ec.17 Of the occupations of any one else among our friends, I am in
ignorance, except as to Arfield,18 who is reading I do not know how many
books, & writing, or about to write, I do not know how many essays.—A
critique on the first number of the W.R. has appeared in the North
American Review: They quote largely from the first article, which they
applaud greatly, as well as Bingham’s two articles on America (tho’ they
say he knows very little about America—as how can he? or any one here:—&
that his stateme[nts] are some of them no longer true, & others never
were true).19 They also m[ake] an ingenious attempt to shew, that the
Whigs & Tories are two [aristo]cratic parties, & that the Edinburgh Rev.
only supports the aristocracy [of] the Whigs, instead of that of the
Tories.20 But farther this deponent saith no[t.] You have seen, or will
see, the attack on the 3d No. & particularly on poor Ellis, in the last
Blackwood.21 I have not seen it yet, but am to see it tomorrow. Malthus,
it Edition: current; Page: [6] seems, has been puffing himself again in
the Quarterly—tho’ I have not seen the article, it propounds what no
other mortal would think of propounding, his Measure of Value.22 Not
more certainly is our friend Satan known by his cloven foot, than the
Rev. T.R. Malthus by this unfortunate hobby.—If any thing was wanting to
ensure the success of the W.R. the badness of the Edin. R. would do it.
Only contrast the last Edin. with the last Westmr. That miserable stuff
of M‘Culloch about primogeniture must be answered23—& will, I trust,
with the grace of my lord the devil, with whose school, I have no doubt,
we are already classed by the enlightened Southey,—or, if not now, shall
be so classed, as soon as the article makes its appearance on his book
of the Church.24 When that time arrives, I shall expect to see our
names, or at any rate, that of the review, introduced into his next
dissertation de omni scibili,25 with the addition of a few gentle
epithets of disapprobation, as ruffian, miscreant, incendiary, & so
forth; or who knows? atheist, perhaps: since, as Ellis says, those who
are infidels in tithes, are necessarily infidels in all the other
doctrines of religion. The Courier has already expressed some
inclination to see “a well-seasoned mess of impiety from Carlile, dished
up by the Morning Chronicle.”26 By the way, Black is doing Edition:
current; Page: [7] admirable service—particularly with respect to the
unpaid magistracy; who, I think, must smart under his lash: he is the
greatest enemy they have.27 Prescott is, as usual, “writing an Essay for
the society.” Doane is, as far as I know, doing nothing; & Place is
doing every thing.28 With all our wishes for your welfare, & speedy
return, I remain &c

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April, 1825

John Bowring

Bowring, John

8.2.


TO JOHN BOWRING1

[
April, 1825

]

Dear Sir

I leave you the article on Pleadings, cut down to a moderate
compass—there will be more of it afterwards for another number if you
approve of it.2—I think it will do much good, & may excite
controversy—Grimgribber3 has never been attacked in a periodical
publication with any thing like the same severity—or if at all, only in
general terms. This is specific, & the lawyers will understand its drift
better.

Yours truly

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [8]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday 11 June, 1825

Croydon

John Bowring

Bowring, John

8.3.


TO JOHN BOWRING1

Croydon

Monday evening
 [
11 June, 1825

]

Dear Sir

I send you the article on the Game Laws,2 which I hope is not too
long—there is more scratching in it than there usually is in my articles
and there will be a great deal of small print—If anything must be left
out, I think it should be some of the extracts, however of this you will
judge for yourself—I also send a little poem which was written by a
niece of Mr Mushet of the Mint,3 and given by him to me for you. All I
have to ask is that if it cannot be praised it may not be noticed at
all.

Eyton Tooke has finished his review of Lord John Russell4—I suppose he
will send it to you immediately, if he has not sent it already—

Please to send my proofs to Ellis at the Indemnity Office—He comes to
Croydon every day—

I should like to suspend a review of Brown’s works and particularly of
his Lectures upon this Life of his which has just appeared, by the Rev.
Mr Welch.5 You have not had any metaphysical articles yet—It will help
to give that variety to the work which has been wanting hitherto—I have
heard it suggested that you should have some philological
articles—Perhaps James Gilchrist6 (not Borthwick) would write one—I know
of no one else who could do it.

Yours very truly

J.S. Mill

John Bowring Esq.

Edition: current; Page: [9]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

2d March 1830

London

Jean Baptiste Say

Say, Jean Baptiste

29.1.


TO JEAN BAPTISTE SAY1

London

2d March 1830

My Dear Sir,

You will, I am sure, readily believe with how much regret & sympathy all
your friends here have learned the great affliction which you have
recently sustained.2 None of them can possibly have so much reason to
know and appreciate the greatness of your loss as I have, who had so
much experience of Madame Say’s excellence, and have received so much
kindness from her. I beg that you will assure the remainder of your
family of the part which I take in their grief. My father also is most
anxious to assure you how deeply he sympathizes with you and how greatly
he esteemed and respected Madame Say. He would have written to you
himself long before this if he had not known that I was about to write.

I have myself suffered a most grievous and unexpected loss, by the death
of my poor friend Eyton Tooke, who was well-known to you as one of the
most excellent and promising of all his contemporaries, and who would
have been a blessing to his country and to his kind.3 The loss of such a
man will be felt in a thousand ways by persons who never knew him nor
were aware what things were to be expected from him if he had lived to
pursue the career of self-improvement and philanthropic exertion which
he had entered upon; and how admirable a moral influence he would have
exercised on all with whom he came in contact, by the unrivalled purity
and rectitude of his purposes, combined with the largest and most
comprehensive liberality and philanthropy. To his immediate friends, and
associates in his labour and plans, the loss is irreparable and to me
especially.

Poor Mr. Tooke, the father, although he has in some degree recovered
from the first shock, is quite incapable of writing to you either on his
own loss or on yours, and he has entrusted to me the duty of sending to
you the enclosed paragraphs, extracted from the newspapers of the time,
respecting the particulars of the fatal event.4

I owe you a long debt of gratitude for your kindness in sending me
successively the six volumes of your work,5 which I have read with the
greatest pleasure and instruction, and which I think is likely to be
read by more persons, and with more Edition: current; Page: [10]
advantage, than any other treatise on the subject which is now extant.
You will hardly be surprised that I should not quite concur in the whole
of your strictures on those whom you call the “économistes politiques
abstraits”;6 though I am forced to admit that they have frequently
occupied public attention, to the great detriment of the science, with
discussions of mere nomenclature and classification, of no consequence
except as to the manner of expressing or of teaching the principles of
the science; and that they have occasionally generalized too far, by not
taking into account a number of the modifying circumstances, which are
of importance in the various questions composing the details of the
science. I have myself derived several most important corrections of my
speculative views from your work, and from the reflections which it
suggested. I am happy to find that there is much less in your
principles, than I thought there was, which is positively at variance
with the rigidly scientific economists of this country. I believe that
their principles when duly modified, constitute a deeper and more
searching analysis of the phenomena of wealth than yours, but that they
are not materially different in their practical result. I should wish to
see the science taught in both ways; in one for the public, in the other
for students: though I sometimes lament to see that the two sorts of
teachers scarcely understand the scope or appreciate the whole merit of
each other. But the rising generation of political economists in this
country are not only capable of unity, but do actually unite both, and
you will find when their speculations come before the public, that they
have benefitted as fully by your writings as by those of Ricardo, and
partake in nothing of the forms or of the spirit of a sect or school.

I consider myself to be discharging a duty towards my friend Eyton
Tooke, who would have been so distinguished in this very department of
science, in telling you how highly he thought of your work. In one of
the last conversations I had with him, he spoke to me of it with great
admiration and expressed himself almost enthusiastically on the fine
spirit of general benevolence, and devotion to the cause of social
improvement in all its branches, which runs through the work, and which
distinguishes your writings in so honorable a manner from too many of
our English economists.

Believe me,
 Most sincerely yours

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [11]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday 19 June, 1830

John Bowring

Bowring, John

31.1.


TO JOHN BOWRING1

Saturday
 [
19 June, 1830

]

My dear Sir

I am canvassing very earnestly for the following candidates for the
Atheneum, several of whom you probably intend to vote for, and if you
would do as much for the remainder, you would greatly oblige me.

Mr Charles Austin

John Sterling

Coulson

John Fonblanque

Charles Buller M.P.

Charles Romilly

A. Hayward

James Booth

Wm Ogle Carr2

I can strongly certify the fitness of all except the last, who is
strongly recommended by Mr George Bentham.3

Yours very truly

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [12]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday 5 July, 1831

Sarah Austin

Austin, Sarah

40.1.


TO SARAH AUSTIN1

Tuesday
 [
5 July, 1831

]

My dear Mütterlein

I set off so soon that I cannot count upon being able to call upon you
before I go, which I should have preferred rather than to write, even
without any of the additional temptations that you held out to me in
your note. I am going to spend a month on and about the lakes of
Cumberland & Westmoreland,2 & shall probably see a good deal of
Wordsworth, who when he was last in town, very kindly asked me to his
house3—but this invitation I cannot now accept, as I shall have a
companion—my friend Grant, whom I am very glad that you have at last
seen.4 His extreme modesty—for it is not exactly bashfulness—never would
let him call upon you before.

Another excellent friend of mine, Crawley,5 who frequently walks home
with Mr. Austin from the lecture,6 would, I am certain, be much pleased
by making your acquaintance—though I suppose he was afraid of intruding
upon you by coming to the proper side of your door, i.e. the inside. I
have taken upon myself to say that you will be glad to see him—& I think
I might also have safely promised that you would like him.

I look forward with great pleasure to cultivating a further acquaintance
with Mr. Empson under your auspices.7 I know not to what I can be
indebted for so very favorable an opinion as that which you mention,
except to your mütterlich Edition: current; Page: [13] kindness, which
makes you see every thing about me in far brighter colours than those of
reality.

I am very happy to hear that Mr. Austin is better. I hope Lucy is quite
recovered from all ailments.8

Yours most affectionately

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

9th May 1832

Examiner’s Office

William Cabell

Cabell, William

49.01.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Examiner’s Office

9th May 1832

My dear Sir

The Bengal Political Draft No 237 having passed the Court before the
additional matter arrived from India, we did not think it worth while to
keep back the Draft, thinking that it would give less trouble to prepare
another Draft which might follow the former almost immediately. It might
perhaps be expedient, with reference to Mr Murchison’s explanations,2 to
make one or two slight alterations in the strictures on his conduct but
I think they should be only verbal.

If, however, you should be of a different opinion there are several
courses which might be taken.

The entire Draft might be kept back but I can see no advantage in this.

Or the Draft might be passed with the omission of the additional
paragraphs which were inserted subsequently to its return from P.C.

Or paras 426, 427 of the letter dated 26th August, with the collection
No 194 corresponding to these paras containing Mr Murchison’s
explanations might be added to the Kedah Collection now at the Board &
the Draft might be modified by the Board with reference to those
particular paras, the remainder of the newly arrived matter respecting
Kedah & Nanning being reserved for a future Despatch.

Or lastly, the Board might modify the Draft with reference to the whole
of the recent arrivals; but as this would introduce new matter of
considerable interest and Edition: current; Page: [14] importance, it
would, I think, be more convenient that it should be taken in the
regular course of correspondence.

When you have decided which of these alternatives to adopt, we will act
accordingly.

At any rate we were thinking of making application to the Board, for
leave to make public the Secret letter of 2d December 1831.

Believe me
 Most truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

mid-June 1832

I.H.

Sarah Austin

Austin, Sarah

52.1.


TO SARAH AUSTIN1

Thursday

I.H.

[
mid-June 1832

?]

Dear Mütterlein

I know you will never suspect me of being indifferent to your company,
therefore I will not scruple to tell you that I had rather not come on
Friday: there will be too many without me, and one only goes to see
people in a crowd when one does not care to see them otherwise, or when
one does not venture to refuse—at least that is the case with me.

The attendance at the lectures is rather slack, certainly, but it is
chiefly from unlucky accidents. Roebuck has been ill.2—Crawley, who has
the greatest admiration for the lectures & attended regularly last year,
has for the last three or four months been dangerously ill of the only
serious illness he ever had, & is not even now recovered. Romilly has
been overwhelmed with duties insomuch that he is at this moment failing
of one very imperative one, his engagement with Cochrane (no blame to
him, however).3 Graham, ever since his appointment as Edition: current;
Page: [15] official assignee, has had all his time taken up. Strutt has
been always at the House of Commons,4 Chadwick, latterly, has been
engrossed by Mr. Bentham’s affairs;5 & so on.

I think there may be a class of some ten or a dozen next year among
persons whom I myself know, or know of.

Your question “what can Pelham do here” shews little knowledge of the
said Pelham.6 I should not at all wonder if he became a frequenter of
yours. There is much good in Bulwer.

Give my love to Lucy—I trust it is not her birthday7 which I am refusing
to celebrate.

Ihre Sohn

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday 14 July, 1832

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

53.1.


TO HENRY COLE1

Saturday
 [
14 July, 1832

]

Dear Cole

I have got the tickets for Don Juan on Monday, and “request the pleasure
of your company.”2 If I do not see you in the interval, we will meet at
the Arcade door a little before seven.

Edition: current; Page: [16]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wednesday 18 July, 1832

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

54.1.


TO HENRY COLE1

Wednesday
 [
18 July, 1832

]

Dear Cole

I have taken places by the Red River Southampton coach, which leaves the
Bolt in Tun at halfpast 8, and the Gloucester Coffee House at nine.
Perhaps it might be as well, as we are to meet G. & R. at Lymington to
send some additional linen &c. &c. thither in their parcel or box or
what not; but of this each must judge for himself, & G. & R. must act as
a court of appeal from both tribunals.

Mit Heil und Gluck

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

30 September, [1832]

Polvellen—Looe

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

58.1.


TO HENRY COLE1

Polvellen—Looe

30 September, [1832]

My dear Cole

I inclose the letter to Paris which I said I would request you to
despatch for me. For the postage thereof as far as Dover you will
consider yourself as the creditor of,

Yours faithfully

J.S.M.

The Music-buyers of Devonport are by this time aware of the name &
reputation of Marinelli.2

Edition: current; Page: [17]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday 15 March, 1833

India House

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

70.1.


TO HENRY COLE1

India House

Friday
 [
15 March, 1833

]

Dear Cole

If you are disengaged on Monday evening next, my mother and sisters will
hope to have the pleasure of seeing you.2 You will meet the Fonblanques
and two or three other people3—come early, by which I mean come soon
after seven if you can, or as early as you are able.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

4th June 1833

Examiner’s Office

William Cabell

Cabell, William

76.1.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Examiner’s Office

4th June 1833

My dear Sir,

My father has received from Mr Lawford the accompanying note on the
power of Govt to detain a civil servant in India against his will.2 It
appears they cannot do it except by application to the Supreme Court;
and it is perhaps more than we could be warranted in affirming
positively here that they were wrong in not making such an application
in Mr Ricketts’ case because there is some doubt whether the presumption
they could have established against him were such as the Court would
have proceeded upon, & because he could probably have quitted India
before process could have issued.3

As the P.C. is with you, perhaps the requisite alteration in the wording
could be most conveniently made at the Board.

Would it not be highly advisable that the Government of India should
have the Edition: current; Page: [18] power given it of detaining its
servants in India until their accounts with Government are settled? By
their covenants they are bound to remain—but it seems that the Govt
cannot compel them to do so.

Believe me
 yours faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

2 Aug., 1833

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

82.1.


TO HENRY COLE1

[
2 Aug., 1833

?]

Dear Cole

I am at your service this evening for anything—Fonblanque, Mrs.
Kingston,2 or what not—only it is not the best of all times for
Fonblanque.

I shall call here as soon as I have had my dinner somewhere.

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

10th September 1833

India House

Jerôme Adolphe Blanqui

Blanqui, Jerôme Adolphe

85.1.


TO JERÔME ADOLPHE BLANQUI1

India House

10th September 1833

My dear Sir

I avail myself of your permission to answer your questions in my own
language.

All the chairs of Political Economy which exist in England are of very
recent foundation. The professorship at the London University you are
probably aware of: the lectures however were so ill attended that for
the last session or two none have been delivered.2 There is also a
professorship at the rival institution in Edition: current; Page: [19]
London, called King’s College.3 At Oxford a chair was founded a few
years ago by and at the expense of an individual, a wealthy banker of
London, Mr Henry Drummond. This chair has been filled successively by Mr
Senior, and Dr Whately, the present Archbishop of Dublin; and you are
doubtless acquainted with the excellent lectures which those
distinguished persons have in each successive year, published,
pursuantly to one of the provisions of the act of endowment.4 What
effect the lectures produced upon those who heard them delivered, I know
not; but when published they have added greatly to the reputation of
their authors and have conduced to the diffusion of a taste for the
science.5

Mr Pryme, a private individual, what is called in this country a
provincial barrister, (now member of parliament for the town of
Cambridge) for some years delivered lectures on political economy at
that town, on his own private authority, without any connexion with the
University: some years however after the establishment of the Oxford
Professorship, the University of Cambridge followed the example, by
recognizing Mr Pryme’s lectures and giving him the title of Professor of
Political Economy at the University.6 Whether any emoluments from the
University are annexed to the Professorship, I know not.

I am not aware of any other chairs of Political Economy in England. I am
informed that one has recently been established in the University of
Dublin through the influence of the Archbishop.7 There is no such chair
at any of the Scotch universities, but courses of political economy have
been occasionally Edition: current; Page: [20] though rarely delivered
by the Professors of Moral Philosophy at Edinburgh.8 Some years ago
(during Lord Liverpool’s ministry) a number of distinguished persons at
Edinburgh presented a memorial to the King (who is the head of the
Scottish universities though not of the English) requesting that he
would authorize the establishment of a chair of Political Economy; but
their request was refused.9

The views taken of the science in the lectures delivered from these
several chairs, are of course determined by the particular opinions of
the Professors; who differ, as in the present state of the science may
be expected, on a great number of important points, but the tendency of
all their doctrines is in favour of liberty of commerce.

I had nearly forgotten to mention that there is a chair of Political
Economy at the College of Haileybury, for the education of the Civil
Servants of the East India Company. This chair has for many years been
filled by Mr Malthus.10

In answer to your question, “quelles doctrines sont aujourdhui en
faveur” I hardly know what to say. The subject is so little studied
scientifically that there can scarcely be said to be any “doctrines of
political economy” in favour among any class; but in commercial &
financial legislation the Tories are generally for keeping up the old
institutions, the Whigs and Radicals generally for the removal of
restrictions, whether imposed by monopolies, duties on importation, or
indirect taxation involving an inconvenient interference with processes
of manufacture.

There are no periodical papers which pay any special attention to
political economy. Mr MacCulloch occasionally writes articles in the
Edinburgh & Foreign Quarterly Reviews;11 and Colonel Perronet Thompson,
the proprietor of the Edition: current; Page: [21] Westminster Review,
frequently writes on questions connected with the science:12 he has
taken more pains than most men in the study of it as a science. In
Tait’s Edinburgh Magazine there are frequently good articles by a
scientific political economist.13

The University of London has I believe got over its pecuniary
difficulties, rather by reducing its expenses than by increasing its
number of pupils. But the lectures on the moral & political sciences are
so ill attended that several of the professors have ceased to lecture:
particularly the professors of Jurisprudence and Political Economy.14
The lectures best attended are those on English law and the medical
sciences,15 because those kinds of knowledge may be turned into
money—which is a consideration nearer to the heart of most English
fathers than the desire to make their sons wise or accomplished men.

I should be most happy to communicate any other information in my power,
which you may desire to possess on these or other points.

Believe me, My dear Sir
 Most sincerely yours

J.S. Mill

I forgot to ask you the other day, whether a successor is yet appointed
to our friend M. Say, and to enquire concerning another valued friend of
my father’s and mine, whom you are doubtless well acquainted with—M.
Comte.16

Edition: current; Page: [22]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

20 January 1834

India House

Fortunato Prandi

Prandi, Fortunato

96.1.


TO FORTUNATO PRANDI1

India House

20 January 1834

My dear Prandi

Would you so far oblige me as to take charge of the accompanying letter
& two packets? There is nothing sealed, & you have unlimited license to
untie.

Shall you be long absent? & will you not let me see something of you
when you return? we never meet.

yours ever

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

5th Feb. 1834

Examiner’s Office

William Cabell

Cabell, William

96.2.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Examiner’s Office

5th Feb. 1834

My dear Sir

We have no clue to trace the project of Mr Elphinstone2 respecting
lapsed Jageers,3 except that which is afforded by paras 18 & 19 of
Political Letter from Bombay of 2d March 1822, which state that a scheme
of the kind you mention was once contemplated but afterwards abandoned.

We have vainly attempted by means of this indication to discover any
Minute or Dispatch in which the proposition was made.

Believe me
 Yours very truly

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [23]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

14th February 1834

India House

Effingham Wilson

Wilson, Effingham

98.1.


TO EFFINGHAM WILSON1

India House

14th February 1834

My dear Sir

The accompanying MS. on education has been sent to me with a request
that I would offer it to you for publication.2 I hear the highest
character of it from a friend of mine whom I think fully competent to
judge of the merits of such a work—& I should have liked much to read it
before putting it into your hands—but as I have no time just at present,
I send the MS.3 There is in addition to what I now send, a mass of very
valuable and erudite notes, which with the present MS. would make a good
sized 8vo volume.

The author would be glad of an early answer if possible.

Ever yours

J.S. Mill

E. Wilson Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

29th March 1834

India House

Horace Hayman Wilson

Wilson, Horace Hayman

101.1.


TO HORACE HAYMAN WILSON1

India House

29th March 1834

Sir,

I have had the honor of receiving and laying before Mr. Loch2 your
letter of the 6th Ultimo; and I am desired to express to you his
acknowledgments for the Edition: current; Page: [24] readiness with
which you have consented to afford your valuable aid in the selection of
a competent person for the office of Head Master in the Anglo Indian
College,3 and which was no more than he expected from your zeal for the
interests of Native Education in general, and of that Institution in
particular. I have also to express his obligations to you for your
remarks on the nature of the office, and on the qualifications which it
requires; and, above all, for your public spirited offer to give
preparatory instruction in the native languages to any gentleman whom
the Court may nominate to it. Such instruction, and the continued
communication with yourself which it would involve, are advantages of
the value of which, to any person who may be selected for the duties in
question, Mr. Loch is deeply sensible.

Your observations on the expediency of attaching a higher salary to the
office than that now appropriated to it from the Education Fund, have
been perused by Mr. Loch with every attention. But while he feels the
force of your reasons, and the weight due to your opinion, he would not
consider himself justified in proposing to the Court the adoption of the
measure which you recommend, until trial shall have been made of the
possibility of procuring a competent person on the terms originally
proposed. He will therefore feel greatly indebted to you if you will
endeavour to obtain a person qualified for the office, and willing to
undertake it on the present conditions. Should this be found
impracticable, it will no doubt be advisable for the Court to take into
consideration the expediency of increasing the Salary.

I have the honor to be, Sir
 Your most obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

9 June 1834

Ex. Off.

William Cabell

Cabell, William

103.1.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Ex. Off.

9 June 1834

My dear Sir

I have the pleasure of returning to you the papers on Mr Masson,2 to
stand as a fourth volume in the Colln in the manner you propose.

Edition: current; Page: [25]
On the subject of the Board’s alteration in the reply to Bengal Pol P.C.
1308,3 (concerning the Boondela chiefs & jageerdars) as the Chairman4
has not adopted the passage which you have inserted, I may take this
opportunity of mentioning why. No 49 in the classified list annexed to
the H. of C. Report,5 viz the Nana of Calpee, is the chief of Jaloun, he
is no longer called Nana of Calpee because Calpee has been ceded to the
British Govt. No 52 is probably Kishore Sing of Punnah. The others who
are referred to in the Board’s insertion (most of whom appear to be of
the Chobey family) are entirely insignificant. The Chairman has often
seen them when he was in Bundlecund and says they are petty Jageerdars
of no sort of consequence, and their engagements are not treaties but
are constituted by Sunnuds on our part, & acknowledgments of allegiance
on theirs.

You will find that we have made several additions to this PC since it
returned to us. We find that it saves much time & trouble to continue
the subjects up to the latest advices.

Believe me, Dear Sir
 yours faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1st July [1834]

India House

John Bowring

Bowring, John

105.1.


TO JOHN BOWRING1

India House

1st July [1834]

My dear Sir

Would you oblige me by letting me know by 2d post as soon as your second
Report is procurable,2 as my friend Mr Nichol of Montrose has written to
me to send him a copy as early as possible.

You have been in communication with Mr Nichol recently & are aware of
the Edition: current; Page: [26] purpose for which he is anxious to see
your report as soon as may be,3 & therefore you will, I know, excuse my
troubling you with my present request—

Believe me
 Yours ever

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

2 August, 1834

John Arthur Roebuck

Roebuck, John Arthur

107.1.


TO JOHN ARTHUR ROEBUCK1

[
2 August, 1834

]

. . . I have not yet seen Falconer2 not that I have thought of any
better person nor so good. But I have been rather dilatory though all
this week I have been intending to call & at last have written to him to
come to me. Apropos I have seen a composition which I understand to be
his, lately, which I did not think showed much editorial talent, a
project of a programme for a Finsbury Electoral Committee.3 The ideas
were all good but it was very clumsily drawn up, and was not good
English . . . .

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

26th August 1834

India House

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

108.1.


TO HENRY COLE1

India House

26th August 1834

Dear Cole

I am sorry to say that I shall not be able to join you at Chepstowe or
anywhere else, as my father has not yet returned, & I do not like during
his absence to be away for more than a day or two—& for several other
reasons. I should have enjoyed exceedingly the Wye and meeting with
you—however it cannot be helped.

Edition: current; Page: [27]
I am very glad that Cornwall has fulfilled your expectations. I think
you would have admired Falmouth as much as I did, if I had not praised
it so much beforehand—& you had perhaps seen, as I had not, the parts
about St. Blazey, and Tregony, & also Fowey harbour.2

Grant is still in the vale of Festinniog (or ffestinniog, is it?) but
has had, it seems, quantities of rain. We have not had any here, for
more than a fortnight, until the last three days. If you have been as
lucky you have had the finest weather possible in the finest places.

Did you see anything of Buller while you were at Looe?

Ever yours truly.

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

13 September, 1834

Adolphe Narcisse Thibaudeau

Thibaudeau, Adolphe Narcisse

110.1.


TO ADOLPHE NARCISSE THIBAUDEAU1

[
13 September, 1834

]

Mon cher Thibaudeau

Vous voyez par la lettre de Wilson, quelles sont les conditions
pécuniaires de la correspondance du Globe, et quel en est le genre de
correspondance qu’il faut à ces messieurs.2 Je ne sais si cela vous
convient; tout ce que je sais, c’est que vous êtes l’homme en France le
plus propre à une correspondance quelconque entre les deux pays, dans un
journal quelconque, soit français, soit anglais.

Dans le cas où cela ne vous convînt pas, je voudrais bien que cela pût
convenir à Dussard.3 Je sais combien il serait au-dessous de vous pour
une pareille tâche; mais il en a besoin et il vaudrait mieux que les
correspondans actuels des journaux anglais.

Edition: current; Page: [28]
Je ne veux plus bore you par rapport à la Niobé;4 j’ai donné cette
commission à un voyageur anglais.

Carrel s’occupe à apprendre l’anglais;5 les Buller l’ont invité à leur
faire visite en Cornwall, je l’ai conseillé d’accepter, s’il doit rester
encore quelque temps en angleterre. Il n’y a presque personne à Londres
qui parle français.

Donnez-moi de vos nouvelles quand vous en aurez le temps et croyez que
je suis toujours

votre dévoué

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

7th March 1835

Exam. Off.

William Cabell

Cabell, William

125.1.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Exam. Off.

7th March 1835

My dear Sir,

We have discovered an agreement with Scindia respecting the Contingent,2
posterior to that which you allude to. I send you a copy of it, together
with copies of paragraphs which will refer you to subsequent reductions
in the strength of the Contingent,3 by the act of the British Government
alone. Should you wish the paragraphs from India to be copied also, I
shall have great pleasure in ordering it to be done.

Believe me
 yours very truly

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [29]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

11th March 1835

Ex. Off.

William Cabell

Cabell, William

126.1.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Ex. Off.

11th March 1835

My dear Sir,

The grounds, on which in PC 1411, the distinction is made between the
British Levy & the remainder of Scindia’s Contingent, are solely those
which appear in the Collection. Of their sufficiency or otherwise you
can judge. I do not distinctly recollect them.

The Ajmere Engagement2 shall be looked at.

Believe me, My dear Sir
 Yours very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

4 July 1835

E.I. House

Henry Scott Alves

Alves, Henry Scott

139.1.


TO HENRY SCOTT ALVES1

E.I. House

4 July 1835

Political Department

Mr J.S. Mill presents compliments to Mr Alves, and by desire of the
Chairman & Deputy Chairman,2 transmits in duplicate Draft of a proposed
reply to various paras. of the Political Letters from Bengal, dated the
13 March, 10 July, & 13 November 1834, relative to the North Eastern &
Eastern Frontiers.3

15 collections, in 1327 pages, accompany the Draft.

H.S. Alves, Esq &c &c &c

Edition: current; Page: [30]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

5th January 1836

India House

Horace Hayman Wilson

Wilson, Horace Hayman

159.1.


TO HORACE HAYMAN WILSON1

India House

5th January 1836

My dear Sir

Some months ago, by the desire of the then Chairman,2 I had the honour
of placing myself in communication with you with a view to obtain your
valuable aid in procuring a person qualified to superintend the Anglo
Indian College & to be the principal teacher in that Institution, and
you kindly consented to look out for a fit person. The Managers of the
Institution have since withdrawn their application, stating that they
have now no doubt of being able to select a competent person in India
and I am consequently directed by the Revenue & Judicial Committee to
apprise you that any further continuance of your endeavours to procure a
person in this country will be unnecessary.

Having thus fulfilled my instructions, permit me in my individual
capacity to say how much pleasure I have derived from your letter in
this month’s Asiatic Journal.3 The Government of India in their recent
conduct have gone directly in the teeth of the instructions they have
received from this country—as well as violated the most obvious rules of
policy & common prudence.

Believe me, My dear Sir
 Very truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

8th Feby 1836

India House

Sarah Austin

Austin, Sarah

163.1.


TO SARAH AUSTIN1

India House

8th Feby 1836

My dear Mütterlein

Thanks for letting me know when there was an opportunity of writing. How
are you? & how “is” Mr Austin? I wish much to know—as for me I am much
the same Edition: current; Page: [31] as when I last wrote neither
better nor worse—& I do not find that I get better—however the medical
men think it is a very trifling ailment.2 While it lasts, however, it
cripples me for many things. My father also is in statu quo or nearly
so—& will not get rid of the remains of his complaint till the warm
weather.3 My brother James goes to Deal tonight to join his ship in the
Downs.4 News of any other sort I have none as to anybody in whom you
take interest. Nor is there anything doing by anybody—except indeed in
India—where Cameron is going on very satisfactorily & there is a
prospect of his being able to do some good.5 I send you a copy of the
review.6 Now that Von Raumer is done (which by the bye I have asked
Buller to review) could not you do something for it?7

You have heard I suppose from Bickersteth all the circumstances
attending his appointment8—which is worth all other things put together
that the Whigs have done—though they ought to have done it long before.

Henry Taylor is printing a little book on Statesmanship in which I have
no doubt there will be good things, & I should think some weak ones.9

I hardly ever go out now—so you will not wonder that I have so little to
tell.

Yours affectionately

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [32]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

6 August, 1836

Paris

J.B. Alexandre Paulin

Paulin, J.B. Alexandre

177.01.


TO J.B. ALEXANDRE PAULIN1

Paris

samedi

[
6 August, 1836

]

Mon cher Monsieur Paulin

En passant par Paris trop vîte pour aller voir mes amis, je vous écris à
la hâte un petit mot de réponse à votre lettre. L’Histoire Parlementaire
aura bientôt un article dans le London Review, article fait par un de
mes amis qui a beaucoup étudié la Révolution française et qui fait très
grand cas de cet ouvrage.2 L’espace seul a manqué à l’Examiner pour en
rendre compte il y a déjà longtemps. J’ai pris des démarches pour qu’il
soit parlé dans quelques journaux anglais de votre traduction de
l’excellent ouvrage de Ritter, et je ferai de mon mieux pour les autres
ouvrages, notamment pour celui de M. Fauriel.3

Comme la revue n’a pas d’abonnés en france il serait inutile qu’elle
persiste à faire les frais d’une agence parisienne. Si donc vous voulez
bien écrire à M. Falconer en vous servant de mon nom et l’indiquer ce
qui nous reste à payer, nous terminerons à la fin du mois courant
l’arrangement que nous avons fait ensemble il y a quelque temps.

Quel funeste evenement, mon cher M. Paulin, que la mort de Carrel—la
france perd en lui le plus grand de ses hommes politiques et la cause
populaire son plus noble défenseur.4 J’ai peu joui de l’avantage immense
de son intimité—malgré Edition: current; Page: [33] cela j’ai senti sa
perte comme celle d’un père.5

tout à vous

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 1837

India House

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

201.2.


TO HENRY COLE1

India House

Thursday
 [
April 1837

?]

My dear Cole—

Under the circumstances you mention I should wish to have the longer
passage omitted entirely. The shorter one may stand as it is, except
that instead of “indispensable to insure confidence abroad” I would
rather say “the most effectual means of insuring” etc.2

Yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

5th August 1837

Examiner’s Office

William Cabell

Cabell, William

212.1.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Examiner’s Office

5th August 1837

My dear Sir

In the PC herewith forwarded on the subject of Baroda affairs, you will
find that orders are given for the removal of Mr Williams from the
Office of the Commissioner & Resident.2 Similar Orders were inserted by
the Board in the P.C. recently returned on the subject of Myhee
Caunta—but the Chairman did not think that so good an occasion as the
present one & consequently the P.C. has been laid before the Committee
recently as it originally stood. It seems more just & less embarrassing
in its consequences to remove Mr Williams for general unfitness as
Edition: current; Page: [34] proved by the general state of affairs at
the Court to which he is accredited, than for specific instances of
misconduct of which his superiors (the Bombay Government of the time)
must share the blame & which the home authorities when they first
animadverted on them, did not deem worthy of so serious a punishment,
for you will observe that the misconduct of Mr Williams in regard to the
Myhee Caunta was as fully known to the Court when they sent out their
last dispatch on that subject as it is now.

The Board have also inserted in the PC on the Myhee Caunta, an order for
the removal of Mr Erskine from Kattywar.3 This seems very severe
treatment for an error of judgment which in him was comparatively
venial. He had never since he was in India been under any proper
superintendance; his superior was Mr Williams, who, as well as the
Government to whom they naturally looked for instructions, for years
countenanced & approved all he did. If this does not render an error of
judgment excusable, would it not at least be hard to ruin the entire
prospects of a young man for errors committed under such circumstances.

I trouble you with this to explain the reason why the alterations have
not been adopted.

Believe me
 ever truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

8 November 1837

Ex. Off.

William Cabell

Cabell, William

220.01.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Ex. Off.

8 November 1837

My dear Sir

With reference to Political Draft No 487, in which the Board have
inserted a paragraph they inserted before in the PC, relating to the
inexpediency of including a multiplicity of subjects in the same
letter—the Court I dare say will not make any remonstrance—but the
reason why the paragraph was struck out, was, that the substance of it
was embodied in an additional paragraph to a previous P.C. & thereby
reached India earlier than it would have done if left in the P.C. in
which the Board originally inserted it. With reference to the subject
generally it seems to me very important that any instructions given to
the Govt of India to matters in their separate letters, they should be
warned at the same time not to discontinue the Edition: current; Page:
[35] practice of sending quarterly General letters embracing all
subjects not already reported on separately. The necessity of this
appears from the conduct of the Bombay Government which ever since it
has written none but separate letters has made a practice of having a
great part of its proceedings unreported for years together & obliging
us occasionally to take up subjects from the Consultations alone. The
natural tendency of the system of separate letters seems to be to
leaving subjects unnoticed until either some grave event happens, or a
considerable quantity of matters has accumulated or the attention of
Govt or the Court is drawn to the fact that there has been no report for
a long time & the only check to this tendency seems to be making
obligatory on somebody to look through a whole quarter’s or half year’s
proceedings & report everything of any moment.

If you should agree in these views you will no doubt use your influence
with the Board in support of them. As it is, we are writing as often &
as vigorously to Bombay to demand General letters, as to Bengal to do
what looks very like demanding their discontinuance or at least might
admit of that interpretation.

Believe me. My dear Sir
 Most truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wednesday December 1837

I.H.

John Robertson

Robertson, John

227.01.


TO JOHN ROBERTSON1

I.H.

Wednesday
 [
December 1837

]

Dear Robertson

I send you a letter from Col. Napier for your consideration. If you
think what he proposes will do, I am quite willing to acquiesce.2

I left at Reynell,3 the whole of “Caricatures” except the one page
herewith enclosed, which I have omitted because (while it makes no gap)
I cannot at present see what is the merit you ascribe to Gilray’s idea
or in what you consider it to Edition: current; Page: [36] resemble &
surpass Hogarth’s.4 Of course reinsertion in the proof is practicable if
desirable.

I send Adams’ article: he has done all we desired & inserted a splendid
joke about Anthracite in p. 31.5 It will do very well now, only I am not
certain about pp. 4 to 7. If you think they do not come in well, put
them in somewhere as a note, or omit part of them or the whole, just as
you like.

I would come to you tonight—but must work at Palmyra6—I will come as
soon as I can.

faithfully yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

21 Dec 1837

Ex. Off.

William Cabell

Cabell, William

228.1.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Ex. Off.

21 Dec 1837

My dear Sir

The paragraphs respecting Col. Alves2 were omitted in the Draft to which
you allude, because the Committee considered that the only reason for
releasing the other Madras officers from the retrenchment,3 was its
being retrospective & that if an officer had been retrenched without
hardship of a refund, and in obedience to Edition: current; Page: [37]
the regulations of the service he had no claim to the restoration of the
money. If the money were repaid to Col. Alves, the Committee thought
that the Bengal officers would ask for it & on the whole it appeared to
them that if Col. Alves thought himself aggrieved he would memorialize
the Govt or the Court & the question might then be decided with a
knowledge of the sentiments of the Govt.

These, as far as I could collect from the discussions in Committee, were
the reasons which led to striking out the paragraph respecting Col.
Alves.

Believe me, My dear Sir
 most truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

6 Jany 1838

Ex. Off.

William Cabell

Cabell, William

229.02.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Ex. Off.

6 Jany 1838

My dear Sir

From a PC herewith forwarded on the Affairs of Oude, you will perceive
that the death of the King of that country2 has not, in the opinion of
the Chairs,3 obviated the necessity of taking into consideration the
great principles of general policy laid down in the Resolutions of Govt
which contemplated the removal of that prince from the throne.

It was to these general principles only, that any allusion was intended
in the Hyderabad P.C. & the Chairman, with reference to the nature of
the paragraphs now submitted, does not see any necessity for the
remodelling of the concluding part of the Hyderabad paragraphs. If the
President4 after reading the Oude P.C. should continue of his former
opinion I should be much obliged to you if you would suggest to me the
sort of modification which would best meet the President’s views. In the
mean time the Hyderabad paragraphs will be kept in abeyance.

Believe me
 Ever truly yours

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [38]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

3d Feby 1838

India House

William Cabell

Cabell, William

233.1.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

India House

3d Feby 1838

My dear Sir

With reference to your note of the 31st ulto, I have caused search to be
made for any documents respecting the amount of crime in the Guicowar’s
territory,2 but none can be found, nor do I well understand how any such
can exist. The great amount of crime in our own territories the authors
of which find refuge in the Guicowar’s, will appear from the Collection
to the P.C. in the affairs of the Guicowar, herewith sent.

I am also directed by the Chairman3 to call your attention to the
observations respecting Mr Williams,4 (to a similar effect with those
inserted by the Board in Draft 50) which are contained in the present
P.C. 2095 & which were reserved for it instead of being put into Draft
50, because when the original P.C. was divided & the portions of it
which related to the general government separated from those which
touched upon special points, the remarks on Mr Williams’ conduct seemed
to belong rather to the former division. This is still the view
entertained by the Chairs, & they are on that account, desirous that the
insertion in Draft 50 may be withdrawn, for which an application will
probably be made in the regular form.

Believe me
 ever truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday March 1838

Kensington

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

237.1.


TO HENRY COLE1

Kensington

Tuesday evg.
 [
March 1838

?]

Dear Cole

I am obliged to send this article back to you; I never had so
unmanageable a one in my life.2 Not only is it often quite impossible
for me to make out what you mean, Edition: current; Page: [39] but there
is not one sentence in the whole article in its proper place. I wish you
would rewrite it or rearrange it, on the principle of proving only one
thing at a time & not jumping from one point to another & back again
several times in a page. The article is utterly unmanageable by me—it
can only be disentangled by the hand that entangled it—but the material
is all excellent.

Ever yours

J.S. Mill

You must lose no time if it is to be in this number.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1 March 1838

India House

William Cabell

Cabell, William

237.2.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

India House

1 March 1838

My dear Sir

With reference to your note of yesterday’s date which has just been
handed to me by Mr Peacock;2 I have to state that Draft No 70,
respecting the family of Wittul Rao3 formed (with a slight exception) a
part of P.C. 2002 on the affairs of Baroda which was returned by the
Board (so far as that portion of it was concerned) unaltered.

Believe me my dear Sir
 ever truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

26th March 1838

India House

William Cabell

Cabell, William

239.2.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

India House

26th March 1838

My dear Sir

With reference to the alteration in PC 2072 (Affairs of Kattywar) just
returned; I Edition: current; Page: [40] do not clearly understand in
what manner the Joonaghur chief is to continue his responsibility for
the Babrias, when he is specifically interdicted from interfering with
them. It strikes me that a clearer statement of the Board’s intentions
would be desirable2 & would facilitate the passing of the Draft through
the Court.

Ever yours truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

18 April 1838

Ex. Off.

William Cabell

Cabell, William

239.3.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Ex. Off.

18 April 1838

My dear Sir

With reference to Mr Gordon’s letter of this day’s date respecting
Colonel Gowan,2 & the desirableness of requiring from the Indian Govt
their reasons for the appointment you may perhaps not be aware what
those reasons may very naturally be presumed to be, viz. that Col. Gowan
is a connexion by marriage of Mr Ross in whose gift as Lieutenant
Governor of Agra3 the appointment was.

Believe me
 Ever truly yours

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [41]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

8 June 1838

Ex. Off.

William Cabell

Cabell, William

241.1.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Ex. Off.

8 June 1838

Private

My dear Sir

Can you give me any idea whether P.C. 2133, sent to the Board on the
19th March, is likely to be soon returned? It reviews the proceedings of
the Agra Lieutenant-Governor2 from April to June 1836, & as several
subsequent Agra P.C.s have been returned, which being full of references
to P.C. 2133 are kept waiting by it, I would venture to suggest that in
case any point or points should require prolonged consideration or are
likely to give rise to correspondence, the paras relating to them might
perhaps be detached & made into a separate P.C. & the rest proceeded
with. I wish the same course had been adopted in this office respecting
Draft 3, one point of which (that relating to the tomb of the Persian
ambassador)3 is still under discussion between the Board and the Court,
during which time all the other parts of the Draft (some of which have
been referred to in subsequent dispatches being signed & sent off) are
detained in this country.

Believe me, My dear Sir
 Yours most truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

3d November 1838

India House

James Stephen

Stephen, James

248.2.


TO JAMES STEPHEN1

India House

3d November 1838

My dear Sir

The enclosed paper has been given to me by some of my Italian friends in
this Edition: current; Page: [42] country, who knew of no better means
of forwarding it to its destination.2 It appears to be intended as a
sort of Memorial to the Colonial Department & is, as you will see,
signed by the party in whose name it is made out & who is a Sicilian
refugee at Malta—but it has been very long on its way hither, & the
friends of the party are in complete ignorance whether his case has been
decided or not. I know nothing whatever personally of the man, but I am
informed, that his removal from Malta would be ruinous to his
circumstances, & that his conduct while there has never incurred the
slightest censure from the authorities.

With many apologies for adopting this mode of communication which I do
from not knowing the proper one,

believe me
 yours faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

24 Novr 1838

Examiner’s Office

Robert Gordon

Gordon, Robert

249.1.


TO ROBERT GORDON1

Examiner’s Office

24 Novr 1838

Mr Mill presents his compliments to Mr Gordon,2 & although unable to
refer him at once to any authority, he believes Mr Gordon will find that
the provision in question of the Canon Law (which it need not be
observed is founded on the Roman Catholic religion) was the occasion of
the famous Nolumus leges Angliae mutari.3 The barons, in that instance,
were resisting the attempt to introduce into English law the legitimatio
per subsequens matrimonium of the Canon Law. Edition: current; Page:
[43] Wherever the municipal laws of the nations of Europe are of Roman
origin, Mr Mill believes that this rule will be found to prevail—& he
would instance Scotland & France.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

18th March 1839

Rome

John Aitken Carlyle

Carlyle, John Aitken

253.1.


TO JOHN AITKEN CARLYLE1

Rome

18th March 1839

My dear Sir

I received your two letters both together today, not from any negligence
of mine in asking for them, but from the carelessness of the Post office
people in telling me there was nothing for me. Many thanks for the
trouble you have taken. The packet containing the first part of the
report2 is not worth paying 12½ piastres for, or one piastre, as I have
already seen the whole document here in a newspaper, & can have as many
copies of it as I like in England, where alone they can be of any use,
therefore pray do not trouble yourself any further about the packet. I
will give the 17 carlini3 to Sterling or to somebody else who may be
going to Naples, as there appears to be some fear that Dr Calvert’s4
health may prevent Sterling from going there—he will at any rate not
stay more than ten days, as he will set out if at all about the 1st of
April & return about the 15th with a brother of his who is bringing home
a sick wife from Corfu.5 Your messages shall be given to him. I believe
he knows Severn—Wolff6 I have not heard him speak about.

The two other parts of the Report reached me duly. I am really concerned
that you have had so much more trouble about a matter of such small
consequence, than I expected, or than I should ever have dreamed of
imposing upon you.

Edition: current; Page: [44]
One of the letters which you forwarded tells me what you probably have
heard from your brother direct, that the whole edition of his History is
sold, except a few copies.7 He was well & in spirits.

I have attended to your advice about riding, but have not found it
possible to ride so much or so often as I intended, on account of a pain
in my side which invariably comes on after I have ridden a very short
time. I do not find myself at all better, or getting better, & have
renounced the hope of any considerable benefit from this journey or
climate. I still adhere to my macaroni diet which I find as pleasant &
as least as wholesome as any other.

Pray command my services to the utmost for anything you may wish done
here or in the way to England. I have for sundry reasons given up all
thought of Sicily.

Excuse this trumpery affair of a letter which I write only to thank you
for your kindness & believe me

ever yours truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1 July, 1839

Horace Grant

Grant, Horace

259.1.


TO HORACE GRANT1

[
1 July, 1839

?]

Dear Grant

I am here—so please send me my papers by bearer.

yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

30th July 1839

India House

Edward Scott

Scott, Edward

260.1.


TO EDWARD SCOTT1

India House

30th July 1839

My dear Sir

Your very kind letter increases my mistification at what has happened.

Edition: current; Page: [45]
I was aware that you valued the book highly as a gift from a friend, &
as not easy to be replaced; but I was quite unaware that it was (or that
as a Prospectus of an unpublished work it was likely to be) in such
request or of such value in the market, as could make it an object with
any one to become possessed of it by dishonest means.2

I have no clue whatever to trace it by, but if you would have the
kindness to give me the exact title, I will set my bookseller to look
out for it. I fear there is little chance of success since whoever got
possession of it most probably desired to keep it rather than to sell
it—or if to sell it, intended to sell it immediately, having some
customer in view.

yours ever truly

J.S. Mill

With regard to the Saumaise papers your directions shall be attended to.
Perhaps if you have time you would write a letter to the Trustees of the
Museum for me to send with the papers—which would increase their value
both to the institution & to posterity.3

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

10th October 1839

India House

John Mitchell Kemble

Kemble, John Mitchell

265.1.


TO JOHN MITCHELL KEMBLE1

India House

10th October 1839

My dear Sir

Perhaps a former slight acquaintance with you, which I always look back
to with pleasure, may be a sufficient excuse for my troubling you with
this note on a subject in which you also are interested though not so
directly as myself. I have been for some time engaged in carrying on a
review, from which various reasons now conspire to make me desirous of
disconnecting myself. Though its circulation is steady, it is not
sufficient to cover the expenses; & the deficit would be still greater
unless I were to continue devoting an amount of my own time & exertion
to the review which is not convenient to a person who has other
pursuits, & is not justified by any amount of good likely to be produced
in the existing state of the public mind by a person of my particular
cast of opinions & general mental qualifications, at least through the
channel of a periodical work. Now your review Edition: current; Page:
[46] has the same difficulties to struggle against, & if there are any
two reviews which more particularly stand in each other’s way it is the
British & Foreign & the London & Westminster. The proprietor of the
British & Foreign2 has shewn an honorable perseverance in carrying on a
review which cannot hitherto have been prosperous as a mere pecuniary
speculation, in which quality I should be very glad to imitate him if I
had his resources & his consequent means of obtaining the best help.

Now therefore what I should wish to know is, whether it is probable that
he would be willing to become a purchaser of the L. & W. & I prefer
asking your opinion on the matter in this way, because if you think that
he certainly or almost certainly would not, I should proceed no farther
in the business. I am aware of no one to whom the acquisition of the
review would be so advantageous, no one else indeed to whom in a
pecuniary sense there would be much likelihood of its being at all
advantageous, unless possibly to some bookseller as an instrument of
puffing & to such I should not chuse to be the means of consigning it.
Some one might perhaps be found who would undertake it from higher
motives & whose circumstances would enable him to be indifferent to the
very moderate pecuniary loss at present incurred. But I should very
willingly see it united to your review, since the only individualizing
character which it has possessed in all its avatars & which therefore it
ought not to part with, & live, is that of an organ of radicalism, & the
article on the State of the Nation, in your last number but one, rather
surpasses in point of radicalism, than falls short of, my limits.3

Believe me, My dear Sir
 Yours most truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday 12 November, 1839

I.H.

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

268.1.


TO HENRY COLE1

I.H.

Tuesday
 [
12 November, 1839

?]

Dear Cole

I have seen Robertson once since he saw you.2 We separated with a half
Edition: current; Page: [47] intention of calling on you when he comes
again to town this week. He seemed to me to be neither for nor against
the plan, but to await my decision. Now my decision, if I consider
myself only, will be, whatever becomes of the review, to withdraw myself
from it. I have not yet received any answer from Beaumont, but I cannot
be much longer without it: if I do not come to terms with him, I will
make up my mind once for all. I should like best, in that case, that
your schemes should proceed, with some other person than myself as the
proprietor.

ever yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday 5 Dec., 1839

18 K.[ensington] S.[quare]

Nassau William Senior

Senior, Nassau William

268.2.


TO NASSAU WILLIAM SENIOR1

18 K.[ensington] S.[quare]

Thursday
 [before
5 Dec., 1839

]

My dear Senior

As I see a question of mine stands first for the P.E. Club I think it
right to let you know beforehand that I shall not be there this time. I
hope to be at the February meeting, & the subsequent ones to the end of
the season.

Perhaps Merivale, or you, who stand next, will bring on your questions.2

ever yours

J.S. Mill

N.W. Senior Esq.

Edition: current; Page: [48]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday January 1840

I.H.

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

270.01.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

I.H.

Monday
 [
January 1840

]

My dear Carlyle

Let us have Milnes’ article at all events to see & judge of, since it is
written. I dare say it will suit the review very well.2

I have read “Chartism” with renewed pleasure but only found out one new
passage.3

ever faithfully yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

29th Jany 1840

Ex. Off.

William Cabell

Cabell, William

270.03.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Ex. Off.

29th Jany 1840

My dear Sir

According to your request I send the Secret Letter of 7th November with
its enclosures, as a supplement to the Joudpore Collection. I do not
think that the information contained in these papers, is likely to
occasion any alteration in the PC though it may require the addition of
a sentence or two, chiefly respecting the restoration of the Joudpore
share of Sambur.2

ever truly yours

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [49]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

February 1840

270.4.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

[
February 1840

?]

. . . sum you mention—the more especially as circumstances at present
render me unable to make any arrangements with respect to any number of
the review but the forthcoming one. I hope I may rely upon having, for
the present number, . . . prefer

Yours truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

14 Feb. 1840

Ex. Off.

William Cabell

Cabell, William

271.1.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Ex. Off.

14 Feb. 1840

My dear Sir

The additional matter in para 7 of Draft 61 was inserted in the
Political Committee on the proposition of a Director & I presume he
cannot have adverted to the passages in the Collection, to which you
have now been so obliging as to refer me. (If I had remembered their
existence I would have pointed them out to him.) His object was to
discourage the Government from embarrassing themselves with the domestic
disputes of stipendiaries.

Ever truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

27 February, 1840

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

277.1.


TO HENRY COLE1

20 minutes before 6
 [
27 February, 1840

?]

Dear Cole

Pray come or send your answer to the printer’s,2 where I shall be for
some time. Edition: current; Page: [50] If you do not, I shall return
here. I am pressing because there must be an announcement in the present
number which must be printed tonight.3

I have had an offer from the other quarter I alluded to in my note4—& if
you are willing to carry it on our agreement must be conditional on the
very probable event of my refusing that.

Ever yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday 6 March, 1840

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

277.2.


TO HENRY COLE1

Friday
 [
6 March, 1840

]

Dear Cole

The responsibility thus devolving wholly on me I must take till Monday
to consider. But I will be prepared to give you an answer positively on
that day.2

Ever yours

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [51]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 14 1840

Ex. Off.

William Cabell

Cabell, William

281.1.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Ex. Off.

April 14 1840

Private

My dear Sir

On my return here2 your note of the 19th ulto respecting P.C. 2674 was
shewn to me.

The reasons for keeping the paragraphs respecting the Institution Fee in
the Political Department are, first, that the former correspondence on
the subject has been in that Department. Secondly that the question to
be at present decided is a Mysore question exclusively & it was not the
intention of the Chairs3 that the decision should be considered as
prejudging in any degree the question respecting the abolition of the
Institution Fee in our own territories—which would in some measure at
least apparently be the case if these paragraphs were sent to India in
the Legislative or Judicial Departments.

For my own part, believing that an Institution Fee is everywhere
objectionable & that the arguments in Cameron’s admirable report4 are
conclusive everywhere I should be happy to see the abolition made
general but the Court, at present, are certainly not prepared for such a
measure.

ever truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

25th April 1840

India House

John Mitchinson Calvert

Calvert, John Mitchinson

284.1.


TO JOHN MITCHINSON CALVERT1

India House

25th April 1840

My dear Calvert

I have hitherto kept in view the physiological maxim inculcated in the
Edition: current; Page: [52] conclusion of your note to me, & I should
probably have allowed myself a few more days of gestation if I had not
wished to ask your opinion as to a certain matter. I had arranged with
the undertaker, McDowell,2 that the grave should be built up to a
certain height above the ground: that being done, an iron railing round
it would have been unnecessary & expensive.3 On the very morning of the
funeral McDowell informed me that the rector would not allow the grave
to be built up as high as we had intended—& when I saw it, I found the
gravestone quite on a level with the surface of the earth. Had I known
this previously I would have had an upright, not a flat gravestone: but
the mischief being done, I wrote to McDowell to express my wish to erect
an iron railing round the grave, to which he replies that the rector
objects to that too, & he recommends my writing to Mr Coope
himself.4—Now it is on this that I wish to ask your advice, viz. as this
Coope seems a queer customer, whether there is any use in applying to
him at all & if so, what is the best mode of doing so—whether directly
by letter, or in any more circuitous mode: & whether any of my friends
at Falmouth would be likely to mend the matter by interesting themselves
in it.

We are again all assembled here, & all tolerably well. I have written
once to Sterling since I arrived,5 but have not heard from him, as
indeed I did not expect. I have a “pretty considerable” quantity of
business on my hands here at present & my head is rather confused, which
must account for my writing so trumpery a letter—

ever yours truly

J.S. Mill

I hear good accounts of Cunningham’s performance from the Foxes as well
as from you.6 There is no hurry about sending it. I have remitted the
ten guineas for him to Mr Robert Fox, as I had forgotten C.’s christian
name & feared the bankers might not know to whom to pay it. Bullmore is
paid.7

Edition: current; Page: [53]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1st May 1840

India House

John Mitchinson Calvert

Calvert, John Mitchinson

285.1.


TO JOHN MITCHINSON CALVERT1

India House

1st May 1840

My dear Calvert

First, let me thank you for taking so much trouble about the affair with
Coope.2 We have finally determined that the thing had better remain as
it is; although McDowell is much to blame for having told me positively
that the matter could be arranged as we at first ordered it; but for
which assurance, I should have chosen one of the numerous other spots in
the burial ground the choice of which he offered me & in respect to some
of which the objection derived from the necessity of passing over the
place to get beyond it would not have had existence. But it is too late
to remedy this now. A headstone would be absurd unless for the purpose
of an inscription; & an inscription twice over would be almost equally
so.

Sterling is here, as you know, & I have seen as much of him as his
engagements allowed. We do not think he is so well as when he was at
Falmouth, but there seems no decided change for the worse. He still
coughs more than one likes to see. I dined along with him on Tuesday,
with the Sterling Club,3 where I saw for the first time your friends
Samuel and Robert Wilberforce,4—with whom, especially the latter,
Sterling had a controversy touching the purposes of Christianity, the
essential Christianship of whosoever acknowledges in Christ the
model-man, & the bad effect upon most minds of dwelling more upon any
set of means than upon the end, viz. individual holiness, very beautiful
to hear, & very edifying to the rest of us, & to me particularly
valuable as helping me to a clearer knowledge of what is in such minds
as those of the Wilberforces on such subjects. This discussion went off
into one as to whether philosophy tended—or should tend to make men
believe more, or less, W. maintaining the former & S. the latter view;
the Wilberforces both contending that philosophy enables one to give
credit not only to all the Bible miracles but to a considerable
scantling of the legends of saints & even of the Pagan prodigies
besides.

You said in one of your letters to me, that Sterling’s departure & mine
had closed your philosophical season. I might almost say that the loss
of Sterling & you had suspended mine, for till now when I have him again
for a few days I have Edition: current; Page: [54] thought but little on
any of the topics on which we used to converse. I have indeed written no
small number of pages on subjects of great importance viz. the “affairs
of the Guicowar” and the “disputes between the Rao of Cutch and certain
Wagur chiefs”5—with one considerable advantage over the more speculative
topics which I have sometimes written about, that I can foresee much
more exactly the effects with which my lucubrations will be attended. It
would be vastly more agreeable if in writing on Bentham or Coleridge to
a host of review readers6 one could adopt the “Do this” style, with a
prospect of being obeyed. (At this crisis I have made a great blot lower
down the page, which I hope you will impute to the liveliness of my
feelings.) My evenings have been employed in the tedious task of
revising old review articles for republication7—taking the sharpness, or
rather tartness, out of some of them, & alas! sacrificing some splendid
passages because I find they are ignorant nonsense! but what goes to my
heart most of all is, spoiling the music of some of my most rhythmical
periods by the painful necessity of substituting one foot of truth for
two of error or exaggeration: while the feelings which inspired the
sentences being clean gone, any attempt to re-modulate them would only
give rise to choice specimens of lumbering affectation. But as Swift
would say, “as the old saying is, an ounce of sense is better than a
pound of sound.”8

A propos of review articles, if it comes in your way do read Stephen’s
review (in the last Edinburgh) of the writings of Isaac Taylor of Ongar,
author of the “Natural History of Enthusiasm.”9 It is in great part made
up of two verae historiae, viz. first a supposed Biography of the
author, written twenty years hence, & next a supposed Autobiography by
him, relating the particulars of his posthumous existence, & how he gets
on in the sun, which it appears is to be the scene of our Edition:
current; Page: [55] next stage of existence. Our souls no doubt continue
to gravitate, while the centrifugal force perishes with our material
integuments.

Sterling tells me you have been seen to eat “a potatoe”—if that is the
cause of your not being in force, those are right who say that potatoes
are poison, as is natural to the plants of the genus Solanum, natural
family Solanaceae &c. &c.10 I presume you add to your potatoe what
Carlyle speaks of as “an unknown condiment named Point.”11 If you go to
Penzance pray go to Lemorna Cove, the Logan stone, the Land’s End, & St
Just & pray do not go to Kynance, for I do not want to be the only
person who has not been there. It will be very pleasant to see you in
town.

ever yours truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

21 May 1840

Ex. Off.

William Cabell

Cabell, William

287.1.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Ex. Off.

21 May 1840

Private

My dear Sir

In the Political PC 2695 which either has been or will immediately be
sent to you from the Court in the official form, you will find two
material variations from the paragraphs which were originally sent to
you. One is on the subject of the proposed reform of the Jyepore Army by
the substitution for the greater part of it of a force under British
officers:2 this the Court are disposed to encourage provided it can be
done without an abuse of our superior power; & on the whole I may say
the Court are much more favourable than they had been until recently to
Lord Auckland’s view on the subject of bringing the armies of the native
states under our control as Edition: current; Page: [56] opportunities
offer,3 provided we avoid what would have been the effect of the
proposed Oude Treaty viz. to make a prince pay a second time for what he
had paid the full value for already.

The second alteration is in the paragraph respecting a misstatement by
Moosherraf Begum of Joura affecting the character of Major Borthwick.4 I
enclose Copy of a Memorandum by Sir H. Willock,5 concurred in by Mr
Edmonstone, which will explain to you the reason of the alteration or
rather omission in this instance.

yours ever truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

26 May 1840

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

287.2.


TO HENRY COLE1

[before
26 May 1840

?]

Dear Cole

I have read all the notices, & if certain corrections are made which I
have suggested I think none of them will be any discredit to the review.
Whether they will be of any use to it is a matter on which I retain my
original opinion.2

J.S.M.

Edition: current; Page: [57]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday 29 May, 1840

I.H.

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

289.1.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

I.H.

Friday
 [
29 May, 1840

]

My dear Carlyle

Can you & Mrs Carlyle2 come to Kensington on Wednesday? not to dinner if
you would rather not, but as early in the evening as you can. Barclay
Fox & his father & mother & sisters will probably come at some time or
other in the evening but I hope you will come whether they do or not.

ever faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

12 June 1840

Ex. Office

William Cabell

Cabell, William

290.1.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Ex. Office

12 June 1840

My dear Sir

I am requested by Mr Edmonstone to send you a second memorandum on the
Rohilla jageer of Rampore,2 which he has prepared in conformity to the
desire expressed in your note to Mr Melvill3 of the 27th ulto. He also
desires me to say that it would have been prepared sooner, but that
other business claimed his prior attention.

Ever yours, etc

(signed) J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [58]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

13 June 1840

Ex. Off.

William Cabell

Cabell, William

290.2.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Ex. Off.

13 June 1840

My dear Sir

I have just discovered to my great mortification that by some gross &
untraceable blunder in this office, the Guicowar PC which was borrowed
in consequence of the last arrivals was sent to the Board again verbatim
the same as before, instead of a greatly altered PC which I prepared &
which the Chairs2 sanctioned. Nothing can now be done but to send at
once the altered paragraphs to you, which ought to have been sent a
month ago, & I apologize for the needless trouble occasioned to you by
one of the absurdest pieces of official negligence I have ever known of.

Yours ever truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday 14 June, 1840

I.H.

Robert Were Fox

Fox, Robert Were

290.3.


TO ROBERT WERE FOX1

I.H.

Monday
 [about
14 June, 1840

?]

My dear Sir

Nichol bids me “tell Mr Fox that he will do me a great service by taking
the construction of that instrument entirely into his own hands & making
it what he thinks it ought to be. I do not at all care for a few
pounds.”2

Calvert is staying near Sevenoaks with his convalescent sister,3 & bids
me tell you that his absence there prevents his calling upon you.

ever yours truly

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [59]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday July 1840

India House

293.1.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

India House

Thursday
 [after
July 1840

?]

My dear Sir—

Mr Hickson will be very happy to receive your article, & it will reach
him if addressed W.E. Hickson Esq. care of Mr Lunford, East Temple
Chambers, Whitefriars Street.2

very faithfully yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

2d Septr 1840

Ex. Off.

William Cabell

Cabell, William

294.1.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Ex. Off.

2d Septr 1840

My dear Sir

The Rampore papers will be taken into consideration immediately. The
Governor General2 takes Mr Edmonstone’s view as to the expediency of
continuing the Jageer in the Rohilla family3 but has adopted, apparently
without much examination, a different opinion from Mr Edmonstone as to
the eventual rights of the Oude State.

Every truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

2d Septr 1840

Ex. Off.

William Cabell

Cabell, William

294.2


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Ex. Off.

2d Septr 1840

My dear Sir

The reference has been made to the Company’s Counsel and the Queen’s
Edition: current; Page: [60] Advocate General,2 but as yet we have not
received their answer. It was not supposed that the paragraph would be
affected by it & any additional instructions can be sent hereafter if
required.

While I am writing I will say one word respecting the Board’s addition
to paragraph 64 of PC 2810, respecting the Bhonsla’s villages in the
Nizam’s country.3 It strikes me that the plan suggested by the Board
would never answer. We could manage the villages of a native prince &
pay over the revenues to him, because he can trust us—besides he must.
But they never trust one another, & there is no instance among them I
believe of a joint property in which the agents of both sharers do not
exercise a right of joint management. It must end therefore in our
managing the villages for both governments; which neither would like.

Would it not be better to refer to the Govt of India as a general
question, the possibility of negotiating an arrangement by which the
double Revenue agency might be avoided?

ever truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

29th Septr 1840

Ex. Off.

William Cabell

Cabell, William

296.1.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Ex. Off.

29th Septr 1840

My dear Sir

With reference to the India Political P.C. 2810, & to the paragraphs in
it which relate to the Bhonsla’s Deshmooky rights in the Nizam’s
territory;2 in addition to the remarks which I took the liberty of
privately communicating to you on the subject of the proposed
commutation of those rights, it may be added that no such commutation
could possibly satisfy the Nagpore Raja.3 It is not the money, but the
tenure, as an ancient family possession, that he is solicitous about; &
no money grant would compensate for the cession of a privilege venerated
for its antiquity.

There is another alteration made by the Board in the same P.C. which
appears founded on a misapprehension; I allude to the subject of the
Title offered by Shah Edition: current; Page: [61] Shooja to Sir C.
Wade4 which it would seem the Board conceive to be of the nature of
those honours which can only be accepted by express permission of the
Sovereign. This applies to Orders, Decorations etc but not to Titles,
which have been very often conferred upon Company’s Servants without any
other mention than that of their own Government at Calcutta. The King of
Delhi5 used to create, almost as a matter of course, the officer who was
the organ of communication with him, a something ool Moolk or ood Dowla
etc etc.

ever yours truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

14 Jany 1841

Ex. Off.

William Cabell

Cabell, William

308.1.


TO WILLIAM CABELL1

Ex. Off.

14 Jany 1841

My dear Sir

With reference to your note dated this day2 respecting para 8 of PC
2954; I had not overlooked the opinion of Mr Sutherland3 which you
mention; but it appeared to me that the reasons originally given for
transferring the Kunkraj Zillah to the charge of the Agent at
Pahlunpore,4 were strong, & the only valid reason against it seemed to
be that mentioned by Capt Lang5 in p. 34 of the Colln, which is of a
temporary nature and depending upon the fact the Pahlunpore Agent is at
present virtual manager of the Pahlunpore country.

Believe me, my dear Sir
 Very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [62]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Friday 11 June, 1841

I.H.

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

321.1.


TO HENRY COLE1

I.H.

Friday
 [
11 June, 1841

]

Dear Cole

I hope you will come to the Kensington Anti Corn Law meeting at the
King’s Arms on Tuesday evening at half past five.2

yours ever

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

8th July 1841

India House

Richard Bentley

Bentley, Richard

322.1.


TO RICHARD BENTLEY1

India House

8th July 1841

Mr Mill presents his compliments to Mr Bentley and has the pleasure of
inclosing a letter which he has just received from Professor Nichol on
the subject of the proposition which he made some time ago through Mr
Mill respecting the copyright of his astronomical & other writings.2

Edition: current; Page: [63]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

16th Jan 1842

Ex. Off.

Thomas N. Waterfield

Waterfield, Thomas N.

339.1.


TO THOMAS N. WATERFIELD1

Ex. Off.

16th Jan 1842

My dear Sir

I answer your questions respecting Draft 356 under considerable
disadvantages from not having the Collection to refer to. But I think I
can answer them tolerably correctly.

The reason why I draw a distinction between the Myhee Caunta division &
the other ceded possessions is that Capt. Carnac then Rest at Baroda who
negotiated the treaty2 says expressly in his letter of 16th August 18173
“The cession does not include any part of the dues from the Myhee Caunta
division including Pahlunpore & Ballasmore which remain with the
Guicowar under his accession to the late Treaty with H.H. the Paishwa.”4
The Ghans Dana from the M.C. division must therefore be deemed to have
been distinctly & purposely withheld from us. It appears however that
under the Partition Treaty between the Guicowar & the Peshwa the G.
never had really any right to this Ghans Dana & therefore his not
waiving a claim which was never well grounded, did not constitute any
reason for our paying him the exactions in question. Still, we have paid
them & are therefore estopped from disputing the right.

But in regard to the other ceded possessions the G. did not himself
claim to have any right to Ghans Dana subsequently to the Treaty, & if
he had any clearly alienated it in our favour by the Treaty. If
therefore we had ever paid Ghans Dana (which we did not) it would be no
disputable point but a manifest oversight & would not therefore, I
conceive, have been binding upon us after we found out that he had
expressly renounced the claim.

ever yours

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [64]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wedy 23 Feb., 1842

I.H.

342.1.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

I.H.

Wedy
 [
23 Feb., 1842

?]

I find scarcely anybody is going tomorrow whom you would probably care
to see, except Peacock & Dr Royle.2

As you were doubtful before, this will probably decide you, & it
therefore decides me—in the negative.

J.S.M.

If you have not engaged your name to any visitor for the Pol. Ec. club
next Thursday will you give it to Charles Buller & me for Monckton
Milnes?

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

13th April 1842

India House

John William Parker

Parker, John William

352.1.


TO JOHN WILLIAM PARKER1

India House

13th April 1842

My dear Sir

On further consideration of the suggestion I threw out in my last note
to you, on the subject of gratis copies of the book on Logic, I do not
think it would be quite fair to you in the shape in which it first
occurred to me.2 What I am now inclined to propose is that whatever
copies I wish to give away may be debited to me at trade price, & in the
event of there being any profit, that the half profit which you so
liberally offer may be set against those copies, & if there be a balance
against me I shall be happy to pay it. If there should fortunately be a
balance on the other side of the account I have no desire to receive it,
but am perfectly ready without any such Edition: current; Page: [65]
condition to engage that if there be another edition you shall have the
refusal of it on the terms you propose.

ever yours

J.S. Mill

What time will suit you best for beginning to print?

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

26th Septr 1842

India House

John William Parker

Parker, John William

372.1.


TO JOHN WILLIAM PARKER1

India House

26th Septr 1842

My dear Sir,

The page2 will I think do very well, except that there is not quite
margin enough for the quantity of letterpress, but that I suppose will
be amended.

I have returned the proof to your office, corrected, & shall be able to
go on steadily.

I have been requested by two gentlemen to have the sheets sent to them:
the one wishes to translate the book into French,3 the other is under
engagement to review it in the Edinburgh Review.4 As they are both
living abroad I can only send to them as opportunities occur & as I also
wish to have the sheets for myself as they are struck off, I shall be
much obliged if you will direct three sets to be sent to me regularly.

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [66]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

12th October, 1842

India House

John Mitchell Kemble

Kemble, John Mitchell

374.1.


TO JOHN MITCHELL KEMBLE1

India House

12th October, 1842

My dear Sir

If you are still of the same mind in regard to Mr Potter’s article on
Socrates, would you be kind enough to leave it at the publisher’s for
him?2

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

February 1843

Thomas Carlyle

Carlyle, Thomas

386.1.


TO THOMAS CARLYLE1

[
February 1843

]

I send what I can, viz. Bentham, my father, Brougham, & four others,
which you can send if you think Varnhagen will care for them, viz. Ram
Mohun Roy, Sir Alex. Burnes, Lords Lansdowne & Palmerston.2

Yours ever

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [67]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

December 1843

William Empson

Empson, William

415.1.


TO WILLIAM EMPSON1

[
December 1843

]

Sir—

When I requested the Editor of the Ed. Review to insert a contradiction
of the assertions in the article on Bentham in the October number, I did
not ground my request on relationship, nor did I use the terms father &
“son”—the word father, where it occurs in the letter, was inserted by Mr
Napier2—I was actuated solely by a sense of justice, & your polite
acknowledgment of regret for any pain you have caused me in no degree
alters my opinion of the merits of the article in question.

I am Sir your obt Servt

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

29 Jany 1844

Ex. Off.

Thomas N. Waterfield

Waterfield, Thomas N.

420.1.


TO THOMAS N. WATERFIELD1

Ex. Off.

29 Jany 1844

My dear Sir

With reference to Mr Stark’s letter to me on the subject of PC 41942
(respecting the proposed Pension Fund for the Nizam’s local officers) it
seems to me there is a misapprehension respecting the nature of the
proposition which is now before the Court.

There will not, in the present plan, be any annual subscriptions from
the Edition: current; Page: [68] officers, no more than there are to the
Civil Annuity Fund in Bengal,3 which is the model that has been followed
in the proposed arrangements. The fund will be formed by the Nizam’s
annual contribution & its interest, together with the payment which each
officer will make on accepting the annuity viz one half its computed
value.

In reality the plan is simply one by which the Nizam’s Govt would grant
pensions to the local officers, not gratuitously but on payment of one
half their value4 computed at 9 per cent interest which is a very low
rate compared with that which the Nizam’s Govt habitually pays:5 & even
at that rate it could only cost the Nizam (according to the McGriffith
Davies calculations) a few hundred rupees a year over & above the 12000
RS which his Govt has already expressed willingness to pay.6

I apprehend that there would be in the nature of the case an implied
guarantee on the part of the British Govt to the intent, that if the
Nizam promised this boon to the officers he would not afterwards break
his promise without a breach of faith with us. But the engagement would
be so little onerous that there would be small temptation to break it.7

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

9th April 1844

Examiner’s Office

427.1.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

India House

9th April 1844

I certify that the education of George Grote Mill2 has been under my
exclusive Edition: current; Page: [69] superintendance during the last
seven years, with the exception of short intervals: that his conduct &
character have always been excellent & that his acquirements
considerably surpass the average of well educated youths.

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

22d Aug. 1844

India House

John Mitchell Kemble

Kemble, John Mitchell

438.1.


TO JOHN MITCHELL KEMBLE1

India House

22d Aug. 1844

My dear Mr Kemble

I accept very thankfully the additional time which you give me.2

Masson is I think a young man of great promise & even the faults of his
stile are not of a discouraging kind—but he is not yet out of his
apprenticeship. If you return his article I will offer to edite it for
him & make it if possible admissible.3

I have some, but a very slight knowledge of Thommerel,4 but I do not
know where he is to be found at present. Four years ago his address at
Paris was 34 Rue des Postes.

Very truly yours

J.S. Mill

J.M. Kemble Esq

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

30th Decr. 1844

I.H.

John Austin

Austin, John

447.1.


TO JOHN AUSTIN1

Extract B

I.H.

30th Decr. 1844

My dear Austin

I have been hoping for some time to hear from you finally about the
pecuniary Edition: current; Page: [70] matter & get it finally settled,
& I have thought it might be facilitated by my sending you a statement
of the various receipts & disbursements in case the principle you adopt
for fixing the Interest should require them. [See other side]2

(The rest of the letter regards some of the items & does not require to
be copied.)

Very truly yours

J.S. Mill

_Receipts_
_Payments_
22 July ’36
3791.
6.
7
22 July 36
100.
0.
0
23
605.
16.
11
198.
0.
8
27
47.
2.
6
23
31.
10.
0
18 Nov.
47.
5.
0
7.
12.
10½
7 Dec.
95.
2.
9
14.
14.
4½
10
4.
0.
0
8.
3.
10
12
.
2.
0
24
54.
9.
6
22
324.
6.
6
24
31.
6.
0
24
9.
9.
0
27
11.
12.
11
10 Jany ’37
47.
2.
6
28
1.
7.
9
5 Feby
312.
9.
6
18 Nov.
17.
11.
8
27 Jun
9.
10.
0
19
1.
13.
4
10 Jun
2.
19.
4
26
6.
16.
5
19
3.
19.
0
1 Dec.
41.
14.
0
25 May ’38
95.
5.
0
3 Jny 37
1.
9.
0
1 Aug.
47.
2.
6
21
35.
14.
0
18 Dr.
94.
12.
0
2 Mar.
4.
4.
2
5 July ’39
16.
16.
0
27
9.
13
94.
5.
0
10 June
39.
14.
4
22 Nov.
94.
12.
0
29 July
21.
0.
0
20 Jny ’40
47.
2.
6
8 Aug.
13.
10.
0
23 Ap^r^
16.
7.
3
19
15.
0.
0
30 Ap^r^
5.
0.
0
7 Nov.
41.
16.
0
8 Aug.
47.
2.
6
14 Dec.
81.
15.
2
3 July ’41
47.
2.
6
12 Jny ’38
80.
5.
6
26 July
47.
2.
6
18 June
2.
0.
4
10 July ’42
47.
2.
6
17 Oct.
7.
15.
0
18 July
47.
15.
1
19 Dec.
14.
0.
0
20 July ’43
45.
15.
1
5 July ’39
5.
5.
1
17 July ’44
45.
15.
1
19 Oct.
7.
16.
0
21 Aug.
94.
12.
0
9 Jny ’40
1.
1.
6
21 Nov.
13.
10.
0
5 May
1.
10.
0
Still to be rec’d
89.
7.
7
22 June
2.
10.
6
£6382.
13.
9
4 July
1.
4.
6
3 Feby ’41
20.
4.
9
9 June
34.
6.
6
10 Jny ’42
10.
14.
0
3 Feby
10.
10.
0
19 Feby ’42
10.
16.
0
1 Mar.
10.
10.
0
21 Mar.
10.
10.
0
22 Apl.
10.
10.
0
20 Aug.
10.
10.
0
20 June
10.
10.
0
21
1.
1.
6
5 Sept.
1.
5.
4
10 Feby ’43
6.
0.
0
17 Mar.
3.
0.
0
2 June
4.
6.
0
30 Oct.
2.
13.
0
6 Feby ’44
2.
0.
0
9 June
2.
0.
0
13 Sept.
2.
0.
0
1069.
0.
0

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

India House

John Austin

Austin, John

447.2.


TO JOHN AUSTIN1

A

India House

Tuesday*

My dear Austin

After my interview with you I have never felt much doubt as to what
Kindersley’s2 opinion would be; but I should like to know why the
Interest is fixed at 4 per Cent, a rate which certainly cd not have been
obtained in the 3 per cents, since it implies their price to be 75. When
as you are aware they have been during the whole period varying only
from about 90 to 100, their present price.

It is necessary also to determine how the Interest is to be calculated.
Is it to be made up to the end of each year & added to the principal,
i.e. is compound Interest to be given? or, is Interest to be charged
upon each item from the date of its receipt? Is a balance in hand to be
allowed &c. &c.

Yours ever

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [72]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1st March 1845

India House

John Hamilton Thom

Thom, John Hamilton

455.1.


TO [JOHN HAMILTON THOM?]1

India House

1st March 1845

My dear Sir

An elderly lady2 from whom I once submitted to you some manuscripts for
publication, which did not suit you, having heard of your new Magazine
has asked me to offer to you the inclosed papers for it.3 I have not
read them but I know her to be a meritorious person & very much in want
of anything, however small, which she might be able to earn by her pen.

Very truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday 26th Augt [1845]

India House

468.1.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

India House

Tuesday
26th Augt [1845]

My dear Sir

Having just returned to town I have found your note—written I know not
how long ago, as there is no date or postmark. Will you be kind enough
to inform me whether the letter you ask me to write will still be
useful.

Very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [73]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wedy 24 Oct., 1845

India House

Henry Reeve

Reeve, Henry

473.1.


TO HENRY REEVE1

India House

Wedy
 [after
24 Oct., 1845

]

My dear Reeve

I have quite given up dining out, but I hope to see both you & Beaumont2
at the India House.

I am afraid the letter which will be written to the Govt of India about
Capt. Taylor will be virtually this—“do as you please, on your own
responsibility. We praised Capt Taylor but we did not mean you to keep
him unless you like.”3 However as his removal is suspended, I do not
think there is much danger of its taking effect.

Yours ever truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 26 1847

73 Eccleston Square

James Hutchinson

Hutchinson, James

508.2.


TO [JAMES?] HUTCHINSON1

73 Eccleston Square

June 26 1847

Mr Mill presents his compliments to Mr Hutchinson, & begs to mention
that he is much obliged by his interesting work having been transmitted
to him, but that Mr Mill’s department being wholly unconnected with the
subject, Mr Mill did not Edition: current; Page: [74] immediately direct
his attention to Mr Hutchinson’s communication for which he begs that he
will have the goodness to excuse him.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

15 Nov. 1847

India House

John William Parker

Parker, John William

513.1.


TO JOHN WILLIAM PARKER1

India House

15 Nov. 1847

Dear Sir—

Not having received any answer to my note of the 27th of last month, I
suppose it must have miscarried. If you have received it, I must request
an immediate answer to it.

Yours truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

31st August 1848

India House

Thomas Story Spedding

Spedding, Thomas Story

530.1.


TO THOMAS STORY SPEDDING1

India House

31st August 1848

Dear Sir

I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your pamphlet on the Poor Laws, & of
the very flattering letter which accompanied it.2 I am much gratified
that you should have found in my Political Economy, or in my other
writings, anything which appeared to you to deserve being so spoken of.

Your pamphlet, and particularly the concluding letter of the series,
contains much in which I heartily concur, & which I think likely to be
very useful.3 Of all contained in it, the thing which seems to me
especially valuable is the strong recognition of the very early & very
low state of advancement in which civilized society now is, compared
with what may one day be realized, & may already be reasonably aimed at.
It is probable that a greater amount of alteration in existing opinions
& institutions, than you contemplate, would be included in my idea of
Edition: current; Page: [75] this possible & desirable improvement; but
I am happy to find that we completely agree in thinking that neither
individuals nor classes can expect permanently to retain any power or
influence except by taking a lead in promoting this great object.

On the more especial subject of the pamphlet, I sympathize entirely in
the feelings which make you desire that the conditions of relief should
be made less onerous to those who wish to maintain themselves, but
cannot, than to those who can, but will not.4 But in regard to the
ablebodied I can see at present no means of sifting the one class from
the other, except by making the conditions such that no one will accept
relief who can possibly do without it. I suspect that the present poor
law is the best possible, as a mere poor law; that any nearer approach
to abstract justice is not to be had in a poor law, & must wait for a
revision of social arrangements more fundamental than poor laws. I think
it likely that society will ultimately take the increase of the human
race under a more direct controul than is consistent with present ideas;
in which case an unlimited “droit au travail”5 for all who are born, as
well as many other things, would not be the chimeras which they seem to
be in the present state of opinion & feeling.

I am, Dear Sir
 Yours faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday September 1848

India House

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

530.2.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

India House

Thursday
 [
September 1848

?]

My dear Chadwick

I delayed sending you the notice you asked for because I rather fancied
Edition: current; Page: [76] (erroneously as it now appears) that its
anonymousness might be inconsistent with the intentions you had in
asking for it.

ever yours

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [77]


ADDITIONAL LATER LETTERS
 1849-1873

Edition: current; Page: [78] Edition: current; Page: [79]


Additional Later Letters

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

13 June 1849

East India House

Hugh Stark

Stark, Hugh

16A.


TO HUGH STARK1

East India House

13 June 1849

Mr Mill presents his compliments to Mr Stark & by desire of the Chairman
& Deputy Chairman2 transmits in P.C. a draft in duplicate of a Report by
the Political & Military Committee respecting the case of Mr Alexander
Maclean.3 I collection containing 49 pages accompanies the Draft.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

22 June 1849

Thomas N. Waterfield

Waterfield, Thomas N.

16B.


TO THOMAS N. WATERFIELD1

[?
22 June 1849

]

In Maclean’s Case, the Chairman thinks that the course which the Court
have taken, is a middle course—in as much as Mr Maclean’s position in
being compelled to resign, and retire with disgrace, although not a rich
but a ruined man, is very different from that of a servant retiring on
an independence at his own choice. The annuity, if he gets it, will, I
fancy, benefit nobody but his creditors. No other middle course seemed
possible, except to dismiss him, and give him a pension from the
Court—which could not have been charged on the Annuity Fund, and this
was deemed objectionable.

Edition: current; Page: [80]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

21st Jany 1850

India House

John William Parker

Parker, John William

23A.


TO JOHN WILLIAM PARKER1

India House

21st Jany 1850

Dear Sir—

I regarded your insertion of an attack on an article which had appeared
in Fraser,2 as a favour done to me rather than as the opposite, & I
think it quite unfair that I should be paid for it—I therefore return
the cheque with thanks & am

yours truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 4. [1852]

India House

John William Parker

Parker, John William

78A.


TO JOHN WILLIAM PARKER1

India House

May 4. [1852]

Dear Sir

I was not aware that you wished for a letter today & have not had time
to write one, but I will send a few lines tomorrow.2 I am

yours truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 8. 1852

East India House

John Chapman

Chapman, John

87A.


TO JOHN CHAPMAN1

East India House

Nov. 8. 1852

Dear Sir

The beginning of the session2 seems so little likely to afford materials
or an Edition: current; Page: [81] occasion for writing on general
politics before the time when anything intended for your next number
must go to press, that I have given up for the present all thought of
the article I spoke to you about.3 I write as soon as possible after
making up my mind, that there may be no chance of putting you to any
inconvenience.

I am Dear Sir
 yours truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday 27 February, 1854

East India House

Frederick J. Furnivall

Furnivall, Frederick J.

136A.


TO FREDERICK J. FURNIVALL1

East India House

Monday
 [
27 February, 1854

]

Dear Sir

I am much obliged to you for the lists of Cooperative Associations. What
amount of foundation is there for the statements in Lechevalier’s
pamphlet, which tend to throw doubt on the indication which the number
of Associations appears to give, of a corresponding amount of progress
in the Cooperative cause?2

Do you possess any information respecting the French associations of
later date than that in Feugueray’s book?3 I have none at all recent, &
it would take a considerable time to obtain any which I could rely on.

I am yrs very truly,

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [82]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

27 Févr 1854

India House

Jean Gustave Courcelle-Seneuil

Courcelle-Seneuil, Jean Gustave

136B.


TO JEAN GUSTAVE COURCELLE-SENEUIL1

India House

27 Févr 1854

Monsieur—

Votre lettre du 26 Octobre et votre Traité des opérations de banque2 me
sont parvenus à mon retour d’Italie, près de trois mois après leur
envoi. Veuillez n’attribuer qu’à cet absence le retard que j’ai mis à
témoigner mes remerciements à un écrivain que j’avais appris à connaître
et à estimer par ses nombreux articles dans le journal La République, et
qui a fait beaucoup d’honneur à mon Traité d’Ec. Pol. en s’occupant de
le traduire.3

C’est bien aujourdhui le temps de lire et de penser pendant qu’il n’est
plus possible d’agir; et puisque le pays dont l’Europe attend des leçons
d’amélioration sociale se trouve momentanément frappé d’impuissance
pratique, il est à désirer que les bons esprits s’y occupent comme vous
de perfectionner les théories. Je trouve dans votre livre des vues très
éclairées sur le crédit. Vous en signalez bien sa véritable importance,
tandis que vous réduisez à une juste mesure les notions vagues et
exagérées sur sa puissance créatrice qui ont été la partie la plus
faible de plusieurs systèmes socialistes. Vous établissez ensuite
contrairement aux idées reçues la supériorité d’un régime de liberté. Il
y a bien quelques questions sur lesquelles je ne suis pas d’accord avec
vous, mais connaissant mon Ec. Pol. vous n’avez pas besoin que je vous
les indique du reste. Ce caractère en quelque sorte professionel de
votre ouvrage devant lui donner de nombreux lecteurs parmi les hommes
d’affaires, il me semble très propre à former une opinion publique
éclairée sur une classe d’intérêts très débattus aujourdhui et jusqu’ici
peu compris.

Agréez Monsr l’expression de ma plus haute considération amicale.

Edition: current; Page: [83]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday Feb.-Mar. 1854

I.H.

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

137A.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

I.H.

Monday
 [
Feb.-Mar. 1854

?]

My Dear Chadwick

I know that some years ago in consequence of Mr Finlaison’s calculations
& other considerations which were so fully set forth in your article on
Life Annuities2 the Govt made some alterations in their system on that
subject. Can you inform me where I can obtain the most recent account of
their regulations & of the terms on which annuities are now granted on
lives?

Very truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

5 April 1856

Examiner’s Office

258A.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

5 April 1856

Honorable Sirs,

The number of the Officers employed in conducting the correspondence in
this Office having by the Court’s resolution of the 28th ult been
increased by one, and there being at present no room in which the
additional Officer can be accommodated, I respectfully request the
sanction of your Honorable Committee to some arrangement by which an
additional room may be provided.

I take this opportunity of bringing to the notice of your Honorable
Committee the inconvenience occasioned by the want of a waiting room or
other vacant room in the office. It frequently happens that permission
is granted by the Chairman to gentlemen in the Honorable Company’s
Service or others, to consult the official records either for public or
private purposes, and there is at present no place in Edition: current;
Page: [84] which they can make use of such permission except the
compound of the Clerks in the Office.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

6 May 1856

Examiner’s Office

258B.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

6 May 1856

Honorable Sirs,

One of the two extra offices not having been included in the general
order for painting the rooms and Offices of this Department passed by
your Honorable Committee on the 29th of August last, and the present
being a convenient opportunity for putting that Office into the same
condition with the other offices, I have requested the Clerk of Works to
prepare an Estimate for that purpose, and I respectfully recommend that
it may receive the sanction of your Honorable Committee.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

Examiner

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

24th May 1856

Examiner’s Office

258C.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

24th May 1856

Honorable Sirs,

I beg most respectfully to lay before you a letter which has been
addressed to me by the Registrar of the Book Office2 reporting the
death, on the 19th instant, of John Howell, one of the messengers in
that Department, and to state that I consider it necessary that the
vacancy should be filled up.

Edition: current; Page: [85]
I have the honor to be, with the highest respect, Honorable Sirs
 Your most faithful and obedient humble servant

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

2nd June 1856

Examiner’s Office

258D.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

2nd June 1856

Honorable Sirs,

I most respectfully have to represent that the new room ordered by the
Honorable Committee for Mr Kaye2 is now completed, and to solicit that
provision of the necessary furniture may be sanctioned.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs,
 Your most faithful and obedient servant

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

2d June 1856

Examiner’s Office

258E.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

2d June 1856

Honorable Sirs,

I most respectfully solicit your attention to the accompanying letter
which has been addressed to me by Mr Waud the Registrar, respecting the
completion of the basement floor of the House for the reception of the
Honorable Company’s records under his charge, and asking the sanction of
the Committee in his suggestions connected with the removal and final
arrangement of the books.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs,
 Your most faithful and obedient servant

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [86]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

2d June 1856

Examiner’s Office

258F.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

2d June 1856

Honorable Sirs,

I most respectfully beg leave to lay before you a letter addressed to Mr
Waud by A. Howell requesting that the salary of his late father,2 who
died on the 19th Instant may be continued to the widow for the current
quarter.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs,
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

10th June 1856

Examiner’s Office

258G.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

10th June 1856

Honorable Sirs,

In obedience to the instructions given in the Minute of your Honorable
Committee dated the 4th instant, I have the honor to report that the
following parties have been selected to assist in moving and arranging
the portion of the Records, intended to be deposited in the basement
floor viz

Writer: Mr Wharton Rundall,2 who has been employed before.

Labourers:
Wm Hare,
I. White,
Thos Baker,
Philip Slater, }
Warehouse pensioners
Francis Brown, }
Charles Chedzoy, }
John Young, }
George Mitchell, pensioner messenger
Edd Rock, Assistt fire-lighter
Thos McKennie . . . do . . .

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs,
 Your most faithful & obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [87]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

16th June 1856

Examiner’s Office

258H.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

16th June 1856

Honorable Sirs,

In obedience to the orders of your Honorable Committee of the 26th March
1845, requiring a report of the cases of such of the Extra Clerks and
Writers as are employed either on duties formerly discharged by
established clerks or on duties distinct from copying, I have the honor
respectfully to state that since the last report made by the Examiner on
the subject, dated the 9th June 1845, Mr Charles Bell and Mr Frederick
Charles Danvers have been employed in the manner above specified, the
former in the Judicial Department since the year 1847; and the latter in
the Public and Public Works Departments since the year 1853;2 and I
respectfully request that the employment of Messrs Bell and Danvers as
now reported, may be sanctioned by the Honorable Committee.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs,
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

9th September 1856

East India House

260A.


TO THE SECRETARY TO THE BOARD OF CONTROL1

East India House

,

9th September 1856

Secret.

Sir,

I have laid before the Secret Committee of the Court of Directors2 Mr
Danby Seymour’s letter of the 20th ultimo,3 with its enclosure from the
Under Secretary of State for the Foreign Department,4 communicating the
modified proposal of the Edition: current; Page: [88] French Government,
of which Captain Pigeard is the bearer,5 with respect to exchanges of
territory in India; and desiring to be informed of the opinion of the
Secret Committee on that proposal.

The arrangement which was understood to have been accepted by the French
Government in 18556 provided for the cession of all the French
possessions in India except Pondicherry, as well as of such part of the
territory attached to that settlement as lies outside a certain proposed
boundary; Her Majesty making over to France all British territory lying
within that boundary, and the nation which should be a gainer in revenue
by the double transfer making to the other a pecuniary compensation
calculated at twenty years purchase.

The French Government now disavows the assent which it was supposed to
have been given to this arrangement, and desires to limit its cessions
to the Pondicherry villages outside the proposed boundary, together with
the settlements of Chandernagore and Yanoon, and the French
Establishments at Calicut and Masulipatam; retaining the valuable
possessions of Maké and Karical, and the factories at Surat, Patna,
Cossimbazar, Dacca, Balasore and Jugdea. And these more limited
transfers the French Government proposes that Her Majesty should receive
as a full equivalent for the cession of the British territory within the
proposed Pondicherry boundary, no pecuniary compensation being made
payable as in the former Draft from the gaining to the losing nation.

As a reason for omitting this last stipulation, it is affirmed by
Captain Pigeard that the possessions which the French Government
proposes to cede would be worth more to the British Government than the
amount of the revenue which those possessions at present yield to
France. While the Secret Committee admit that to a certain, though a
moderate extent, this estimate may be well founded, they must observe
that the French Government also would derive from the acquisition of
villages inconveniently intermixed with its territory a benefit far
exceeding the mere revenues of those villages: and it appears from Lord
Cowley’s letter to Lord J. Russell dated 31st January 1852,7 that the
French Colonial Minister at that time8 even expressed his willingness
“to accept less than he gives, because he shall receive a compensation
in the suppression of the expenses of the French outlying
establishments.”

The Committee consider the question of an interchange of Indian
possessions to be one which is more important to French than to British
interests. Nevertheless, Edition: current; Page: [89] and although the
French Government withdraws the most valuable part of the cessions
originally contemplated, the opinion of the Committee is in favor of
accepting those which are now offered, if the French Government will
consent to receive in exchange territories of equivalent pecuniary value
in the neighbourhood of Pondicherry; but the Committee are decidedly
adverse to purchasing those transfers by cessions of greater value,
because they do not consider the acquisition as of sufficient political
importance to be worth any sacrifice of revenue; and also because by
making over to France all the territory which she desires for the
consolidation of her Pondicherry possessions and the rectification of
her boundary, the British Government would lose the power of hereafter
offering an equivalent likely to be accepted for the cessions, formerly
contemplated, but now withheld.

I am, Sir,
 Your obedient servant,

(Signed) J.S. Mill.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

9th September 1856

Examiner’s Office

260B.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

9th September 1856

Honorable Sirs,

I have the honor to lay before you a letter from Mr Waud, the Registrar,
enclosing a Petition to your Honorable Committee from the four
Messengers attached to the Registrar’s Department (Henry Thomas Drew,
James Tarrant, John Lee Turner, and Edwin Norris) praying to be granted
a gratuity to remunerate them for the extra-work imposed on them by the
recent re-arrangement of a considerable portion of the Company’s
Records, together with the expenses they have incurred. Mr Waud bears
testimony to the severe labour entailed on the Petitioners, to the
extra-time during which they have been employed, to the extra expenses
entailed on them, to the strenuous exertions made by each man to assist
in carrying out the arrangement, and recommends the prayer of the
Petitioners to favorable consideration.

I beg leave respectfully to support the recommendations of Mr Waud, and
humbly submit that the indulgences solicited may be granted to the
Petitioners.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs,
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [90]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

16th September 1856

Examiner’s Office

260C.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

16th September 1856

Honorable Sirs,

I most respectfully lay before you a Memorandum prepared by Mr Prideaux2
in obedience to the Chairman’s3 commands, in which he submits his
opinion of the merits and services of Mr Wm Peters, a writer in this
office, and recommends his case for favorable consideration.

And in consequence of the representations made to me of the zeal,
intelligence and ability with which Mr Peters has discharged his
official duties, I beg leave to express my concurrence in the views of
Mr Prideaux.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs,
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 30 [1856]

Blackheath

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

262A.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath

Sept. 30 [1856]

Dear Sir

Will you write and fix a day when you will come down to Blackheath and
dine and stay the night, when we shall have an opportunity of talking
over the subject of the Logic.2 If you will call on me at the India
House (Examiner’s Office) before four o’clock we can go down by the
railway together.

I wrote to you at Vienna only last Saturday in reply to your letter,3
which I found on my return to England after an absence of two months.4

Edition: current; Page: [91]
Are you acquainted with Dr. Arnold Ruge, who is now living at Brighton?5

I am Dear Sir
 yrs truly,

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wednesday 1 Oct., 1856

Blackheath Park

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

262B.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath Park

Wednesday
 [
1 Oct., 1856

]

Dear Sir

I shall be disengaged tomorrow, at any time you like to come and shall
be very glad to see you. There are trains, hourly, which stop at the
Blackheath station.

If tomorrow should not suit you, Friday, or any other day (except
Saturday afternoon) will be equally convenient to us.

I am Dear Sir
 yours very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 3 [1856]

East India House

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

262C.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

East India House

Oct. 3 [1856]

Dear Sir

If equally convenient to you, will you allow me to fix Monday instead of
tomorrow?

I have desired Messrs Parker to send to you in Finsbury Square the new
edition of the Logic which contains some additions likely to interest
you.2 I had ordered it to be sent to Vienna, but was fortunately in time
to stop it.

I am Dr Sir
 very sincerely yrs

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [92]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

20th October 1856

Examiner’s Office

262D.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

20th October 1856

Honorable Sirs,

I beg most respectfully to represent to you that the great pressure of
business in this office has brought about an accumulation of work which,
in spite of every exertion, cannot be got through without some increase
to the present strength of the Extra Department. Under these
circumstances I submit to you the propriety of authorizing the
employment, as a temporary measure, of two extra writers in this office
for a period of six months;2 in order to form a judgment at the
expiration of that time, whether any and what permanent addition to the
number of Writers may be required.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

24th October 1856

East India House

Thomas N. Waterfield

Waterfield, Thomas N.

262E.


TO THOMAS N. WATERFIELD1

East India House

24th October 1856

Secret.

Sir,

I have had the honor to receive and lay before the Secret Committee your
letter dated the 22nd instant,2 enclosing copies of letters from
Captains Ring and Green offering to proceed on service to Herat,3 and I
am desired by the Secret Committee to state in reply that three officers
having already received orders to proceed to Herat, the Committee do not
think it at present advisable to add to the number.

I am, Sir,
 Your most obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [93]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

October 28th 1856

East India House

Thomas N. Waterfield

Waterfield, Thomas N.

262F.


TO THOMAS N. WATERFIELD1

East India House

,

October 28th 1856

Secret.

Sir,

I have had the honor to receive and lay before the Secret Committee your
letter dated the 10th instant,2 transmitting for any observations which
the Committee might desire to make, a copy of a letter in which the
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs3 expresses the opinion of Her
Majesty’s Government that it might be advisable to take possession of
Mohummerah for the purpose of increasing the pressure upon Persia.4

Since receiving your letter the Secret Committee have endeavored to
procure the best information within their reach bearing on the question
therein adverted to. The information which they have been enabled to
obtain is comprised in the following documents, copies of which I have
the honor to annex.

A Memorandum by Lieutenant Colonel Hennell, formerly Resident in the
Persian Gulf.5

A Chart of the Korun river prepared from actual Survey by Lieutenant
W.B. Selby of the Indian Navy,6 and transmitted to this country by the
Bombay Government as an inclosure in their letter to the Secret
Committee dated 10th June (No. 45) 1845.

A Memorandum by Sir W.F. Williams of Kars, Bart.7 who as Commissioner
for the settlement of the boundary between Turkey and Persia, resided
for a considerable time at Mohummerah and in its vicinity.

Having thus put the Board and through them Her Majesty’s Government in
possession of all the information they themselves possess, the Committee
refrain from expressing any opinion on the course which it may be most
expedient to adopt.

As connected with Lieutenant Colonel Hennell’s Memorandum I am directed
to transmit two copies of a Sketch made by that Officer from Memory, of
the country Edition: current; Page: [94] adjoining Bushire on the South
side.

I am, Sir,
 Your obedient Servant,

(Signed) J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

18th November 1856

East India House

263B.


TO THE SECRETARY TO THE INDIA BOARD1

East India House

,

18th November 1856

Secret.

Sir,

In reply to Sir George Clerk’s letter of the 14th instant,2 requesting
the opinion of the Secret Committee on a modified proposal of
territorial exchanges with the French Government,3 I am directed by the
Secret Committee to state that they are not in possession of information
enabling them to judge to what extent the financial result of the
territorial arrangement in question would differ from that of the
arrangements formerly contemplated. As far however as the Committee
possess the means of forming an opinion, they are disposed to think that
the unreserved relinquishment of all the French possessions in India
with the exception of Pondicherry and its districts, would be an object
worth purchasing by the cession to France of the additional territory
near Pondicherry, included within the widest of the boundary lines
marked in the Map; which according to the desire of the Board is
returned herewith.

I am, Sir,
 Your obedient Servant,

(Signed) J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

November 26th 1856

East India House

Thomas N. Waterfield

Waterfield, Thomas N.

266A.


TO THOMAS N. WATERFIELD1

East India House

,

November 26th 1856

Secret.

Sir,

I have laid before the Secret Committee your letter of the 21st instant2
Edition: current; Page: [95] requesting to be informed whether the
Committee would object to a proposal considered likely to be made by the
French Government, that the value of the addition to be made to the
district round Pondicherry shall be one eighth or one sixth of the value
of the addition which would have been made to that district under the
Convention formerly proposed to France.3

I am directed by the Committee to observe in reply that the annual
revenue of the British Villages which would have been ceded to France by
the Convention formerly proposed was (as pointed out in their letter of
27th June 1855)4 Rupees 1,30,485.9.3 but that the Committee were not
then, and are not now acquainted with the value of the French Villages
which, by the same Convention would have been ceded to Great Britain.
Unless that value be such as to be a considerable set off against the
large amount of revenue which it was proposed to cede, the Committee are
disposed to think that the addition of one sixth, or even of one eighth,
to the cession, would render very doubtful the expediency, in a
financial point of view, of the exchange.

The Committee moreover are disinclined to extend any farther the area
laid down in the last proposal of the French Agent, as shewn in the Map.

I am, Sir,
 Your obedient Servant,

(Signed) J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

24th December 1856

Examiner’s Office

269A.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

24th December 1856

Honorable Sirs,

I beg to submit to the favorable consideration of your Honorable
Committee a Medical Certificate and a letter from Mr Morgan, the father
of Mr H. Morgan, a Writer in this Office, applying for further leave of
absence in consequence of continued indisposition.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [96]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

13 January 1857

Examiner’s Office

269B.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

13 January 1857

Honorable Sirs,

Your Honorable Committee is aware that systematic arrangements are now
in force under all or most of the Indian Governments for the destruction
of useless records. I venture to suggest that a similar arrangement is
highly desirable with regard to that portion of the records of this
office which consists of Duplicate Collections.

The transmission of Collections from India commenced in 1831, and they
have always been transmitted in duplicate: one copy of each Collection,
after their subjects have been disposed of by Despatches to India,
remaining with the Board of Commissioners. The duplicate Collections are
very serviceable until the arrival of the Books of Consultations, which
are often considerably in arrear. They are also useful, though in a less
degree, for some time longer, by saving the trouble of searching the
Indexes, or the delay of borrowing the original Collections from the
Board. But after a certain lapse of time, references to them become
infrequent, and while their rapidly increasing mass is an encumbrance to
the office, they answer no useful purpose except occasionally to save
the delay and expense of transcription when papers of old date are
required for the Honorable Court of Proprietors, or called for by the
Houses of Parliament.

I beg therefore to propose that measures be taken for the destruction,
(with the exception to be presently stated) of all duplicate Collections
bearing an earlier date than that of the 1st January 1852; and that
hereafter, at the end of each year one year’s duplicate Collections be
disposed of in a similar manner so that only those of the five years
last expired may at any time remain.

The only exception which it seems necessary to make from this
destruction, is in the case of papers which may appear likely to be
required at some future period by Parliament or the Proprietors: and I
recommend accordingly that the Chief Clerk in each of the several
Departments of this Office be directed to take such general cognizance
of the Collections previously to their destruction as may enable him
under instructions from the Examiner to select for preservation such of
them as may seem worth retaining for that use.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs,
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [97]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

13th January 1857

Examiner’s Office

269C.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

13th January 1857

Honorable Sirs,

In the early part of the present year, the Court was pleased to add one
to the number of the Assistants to the Examiner,2 in consequence of a
necessity created chiefly by the extraordinary growth of the business
devolving upon the Assistant in charge of the Public Department.

Since that time the Department has been divided into two branches, one
of which retains the original name, and the other is the Public Works
Department3 each being under the charge of a separate Assistant. No
addition however was at that time made to the number of Clerks in the
office, nor was any separation effected between the Clerks attached to
the two branches: and the business of both continues to be carried on by
the same Clerks who formed the Establishment of the Department before it
was divided.

I beg to represent to your Honorable Committee that the business which
had outgrown the powers of a single Assistant Examiner, equally exceeds
those of the number of Clerks which was sufficient under circumstances
entirely different from the present; and that in consequence,
notwithstanding the great efficiency of the gentlemen who conduct the
correspondence of the two Departments, the business of both still
remains considerably in arrears.

I therefore respectfully submit for consideration that such provision be
made for the increased business devolving on the Clerks in the
Departments, as your Honorable Committee may deem advisable. The
subjoined statement exhibits the present distribution of Clerks among
the several Departments of the office.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [98]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

26th January 1857

East India House

Thomas N. Waterfield

Waterfield, Thomas N.

270A.


TO THOMAS N. WATERFIELD1

East India House

,

26th January 1857

Immediate

Sir,

Having laid before the Secret Committee your letter of this day’s date,2
I have received their instructions to acquaint you in reply for
communication to the Commissioners for the Affairs of India, that the
Secret Committee are of opinion that the Government of Madras will be
able to place one Regiment of Native Infantry at the disposal of Her
Majesty’s Government for immediate service at Hong Kong,3 on receiving
an emergent requisition to that effect. In the event of this requisition
being sent the Committee would suggest that the Government of Madras may
be apprised that the Regiment will be brought back to Madras as soon as
the necessity for their employment on Foreign Service has ceased.

The Secret Committee understand that the whole of the expenses attending
this re-inforcement will be borne by Her Majesty’s Government.

I have the honor to be, &c,

(Signed) J.S. Mill

T.N. Waterfield Esqre.

&ca &ca &ca

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

26th January 1857

East India House

Thomas N. Waterfield

Waterfield, Thomas N.

270B.


TO THOMAS N. WATERFIELD1

East India House

,

26th January 1857

Secret

Sir,

I have had the honor to receive and lay before the Secret Committee your
letter dated the 22nd instant, enclosing a letter from Mr Hammond dated
the 21st instant, on the subject of the postal communications with the
Persian Gulf during the present War with Persia;2 and I am desired to
state in reply that the Committee Edition: current; Page: [99] concur
with Lord Clarendon in opinion that, the best postal communication for
Government purposes will be from Bagdad viâ Constantinople, and that
Lieutenant General Sir James Outram3 will therefore be apprised of the
arrangement and instructed to send to Her Majesty’s Ambassador4 a short
summary of any important intelligence, which could be put into cypher at
the Embassy and so forwarded by telegraph, while on the other hand any
similar communication which it might be wished to send from England to
overtake the dispatches, could be sent from the India Board to the
Foreign Office, where it would be put into cypher and addressed to Her
Majesty’s Ambassador, who would then forward it by the Tatar proceeding
with the dispatches.

I am also desired to suggest that Captain Kemball5 should be instructed
to forward by Tatar to Constantinople all despatches from Lieutenant
General Sir James Outram on receipt.

I am, Sir,
 Your most obedient Servant,

(Signed) J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

January 28th, 1857

East India House

Thomas N. Waterfield

Waterfield, Thomas N.

270C.


TO THOMAS N. WATERFIELD1

East India House

January 28th, 1857

Mr. Mill presents his compliments to Mr. Waterfield, and transmits to
him a copy of Mr. Andrew’s “Memorandum on the establishment of Postal
Communications between England and the Persian Gulf,” dated January the
23rd 1857,2 received from Sir Jas Melvill K.C.B.3 on the 24th instant.

Edition: current; Page: [100]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

30th January 1857

East India House

Thomas N. Waterfield

Waterfield, Thomas N.

270D.


TO THOMAS N. WATERFIELD1

East India House

,

30th January 1857

Secret

Sir,

I am instructed by the Secret Committee to acknowledge your letter of
the 27th instant,2 transmitting for any observations which the Committee
may wish to make, a copy of a letter from the Under Secretary of State
for the Colonies,3 requesting that a Vessel of the Indian Navy may be
sent to the Kooria Mooria Islands for the purpose of protecting the
persons to whom the Queen has granted permission to take Guano from
these islands.4

I am directed by the Committee to suggest in reply that the contents of
Brigadier Coghlan’s letter of the 19th of December last, No. 23, be
communicated to Mr. Labouchere.5

The Board is aware from that letter that in the opinion of the Officer
most likely to be well informed on the subject, the cession of these
Islands to Her Majesty by the Imaum of Muscat is a nullity,6 as they
were not his to dispose of. At all events, the beneficial enjoyment of
them, and of the Guano produced in them, has resided from time
immemorial in the Arabs of the Coast; whose rights whether acknowledged
or not, it would, the Committee submit, be neither politic nor just to
overrule by force, while Brigadier Coghlan appears to anticipate little
difficulty in obtaining an amicable cession of them.

I am directed to request attention to the injurious consequences which
the Brigadier predicts from any renewal of the attempt to take forcible
possession of these islands, and in conclusion I am desired to observe,
that the same causes which, in Mr Labouchere’s opinion, make it
inconvenient to employ one of Her Majesty’s Ships of War on the proposed
service, are applicable in an equal degree to the Indian Navy, and there
is every reason to believe that in consequence of the Edition: current;
Page: [101] Persian Expedition it would be impracticable for the Bombay
Government to detach a Vessel for the purpose desired by Mr. Labouchere.

I am, Sir,
 Your most obedient Servant,

(Signed) J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

31st January 1857

East India House

270E.


TO THE SECRETARY TO THE INDIA BOARD1

East India House

,

31st January 1857

Secret.

Sir,

I am commanded by the Secret Committee to acknowledge the receipt of Mr
Waterfield’s letter of the 22nd instant,2 forwarding for their
consideration, copies of certain documents on the subject of the
stipulations to be made with the Shah of Persia at the cessation of the
present hostilities.3

The only remarks which it appears necessary for the Committee to make
refer to the second Article of the proposed Commercial Treaty.4 It is
suggested by Sir Justin Sheil that there may be “in India various
commodities which are classed as contraband and the importation of which
is prohibited; such, perhaps, as Opium.”5 I am directed to state that
there are no prohibitions of the description referred to in the Customs
laws of British India, and that it does not therefore seem requisite, on
that account, to modify the language of the Article in question, in the
manner proposed in the letter from the Committee of Privy Council for
Trade, dated the 22nd instant.

The Secret Committee concur in the view taken by the Lords of the
Committee for Trade in respect to the omission from the same Article of
the word “European,” as applied to the “most favored nation,”—if such
omission would, as stated by Sir Justin Sheil, have the effect of
admitting goods imported into Persia by British Merchants at the lower
rate of 4 per cent, at which goods imported by Turkish traders are
admitted under Treaty; but the Committee are not aware why Turkey is
less to be regarded as a European power than Russia, both countries,
although Edition: current; Page: [102] possessing large territories in
Asia, having their respective seats of Government in Europe.6

I am, Sir,
 Your most obedient servant,

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

22nd April 1857

Examiner’s Office

283A.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

22nd April 1857

Honorable Sirs,

In October last year your Honorable Committee were pleased to authorize
the employment of two extra writers in this office for a period of six
months.

That period will expire this day;—but as the business of the extra
office still continues without material diminution, I respectfully
submit the propriety of retaining the services of the same two writers,
Messrs Rundall & Upton,2—for a further period of six months,—their
conduct during the past period having been unexceptionable.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs,
 your most faithful & obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 11th 1857

East India House

George Russell Clerk

Clerk, George Russell

283B.


TO GEORGE RUSSELL CLERK1

East India House

,

May 11th 1857

Secret.

Sir,

I have had the honor of receiving and laying before the Secret
Committee2 your Edition: current; Page: [103] letter of the 2nd
instant,3 enclosing a paper by Captain Pigeard4 conveying what the Board
consider the ultimatum of the French Government as to the contemplated
exchange of British and French possessions, and requesting the opinion
of the Committee on the expediency of accepting the proposition as
therein stated.

The present proposal differs from the one which immediately preceded it,
in relinquishing a triangular piece of land, (of the extent or value of
which the Committee have no information) which in the former proposal
formed part of the territory to be ceded by the British Government.

The Committee observe that in M. Pigeard’s paper, the cessions to be
made by France are stated to be Chandernagore, Yanoon and Maha, with the
factories of Masulipatam and Calicut, while M. Pigeard also states that
the French Establishments in India would be reduced to two; (viz
Pondicherry and Karical). M. Pigeard appears to overlook the possession
by France of several other factories, at Surat, Patna, Cossimbaza,
Dacca, Balasore and Jugdea, and possibly elsewhere. The Committee have
always regarded the relinquishment by France of all such outlying
possessions as a sine qua non of the proposed exchange.

Assuming that these factories are to be included in the cession, and
that the French possessions in India will really be limited to
Pondicherry and Karical, the Committee are of opinion that the proposal
made by M. Pigeard might be accepted provided that on a reference to the
Government of India no objection should be made to it by that authority.

The enclosures in your letter are herewith returned.

I am, Sir,
 Your obedient servant,

(Signed) J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 13th 1857

Thomas N. Waterfield

Waterfield, Thomas N.

283C.


TO THOMAS N. WATERFIELD1

May 13th 1857

Secret.

Sir,

I am directed by the Secret Committee to request, that you will be
pleased to obtain the consent of the Right Honorable the Commissioners
for the Affairs of India to the employment, in the Secret Department, of
Mr John Henry Willock and Edition: current; Page: [104] Mr Thomas
Alexander Riddell, Clerks in the Examiner’s Office, on their taking the
prescribed Oath.

I am, Sir,
 Your obedient servant,

J.S. Mill

T.N. Waterfield Esqre

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

9th June 1857

East India House

George Russell Clerk

Clerk, George Russell

283D.


TO GEORGE RUSSELL CLERK1

East India House

,

9th June 1857

Secrét

Sir,

I am instructed by the Secret Committee to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter dated the 29th ultimo2 requesting the opinion of the Secret
Committee on the suggestion by Lieutenant Burton, in a letter addressed
by him to the Geographical Society for the establishment of a British
Agency at Berbera.3

I am directed to observe that this suggestion had already been made, in
a more legitimate manner, by Lieutenant Burton, in his report on Berbera
addressed to the Political Agent at Aden4 on the 22nd February 1855, and
was examined by the Governor of Bombay5 in a Minute dated the 19th March
following. Lord Elphinstone for reasons which appear conclusive to the
Committee, considered every mode of accomplishing the object proposed by
Lieutenant Burton, inadmissible, except one which he described as
equivalent to “taking possession of the place”; and it is hardly
necessary to say that the Committee would consider any attempt to
establish a political, and as its necessary accompaniment, a Military
Station, on the African Coast, as in the highest degree objectionable.

I am commanded to add, that the Articles of Peace and Friendship
concluded with the Somalis in November 1856, and quoted in your letter,6
oppose an additional obstacle to the entertainment of the proposal. For
inasmuch as those Edition: current; Page: [105] Articles stipulate that
we shall have the power to send an Agent to reside at Berbera during the
fair, for the purpose of seeing that the provisions of the Agreement are
observed, they by necessary implication preclude us from maintaining an
Agent there at any other period, or for any other purpose.

The Committee, I am directed to add, entirely agree in the observation
of the Board respecting the impropriety of Lieutenant Burton’s conduct
in addressing to the Geographical Society criticisms on the political
measures of the Government of India.

I am, Sir,
 Your most obedient servant,

(Signed) J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

20th July 1857

Examiner’s Office

286A.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

20th July 1857

Honorable Sirs,

I most respectfully request that your Honorable Committee will be
pleased to grant the temporary assistance of a labourer during the usual
leave of absence granted the Messengers attached to this Department.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

11 August 1857

Examiner’s Office

286B.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

11 August 1857

Honorable Sirs,

I have the honor to report the following circumstances which have
occurred in connection with John Whatmough a Messenger under the
Assistant Registrar in the Book Office2 attached to this Department.

Edition: current; Page: [106]
About six months since Whatmough, who was carrying a bundle, was stopped
by a Detective Officer at 6 o’Clock on a Sunday morning; and the bundle
being examined, was found to contain “old books torn up.” In
consequence, however, of the explanation Whatmough gave, the Officer
allowed him to “pass on.”

On Saturday the 1st of August, Whatmough was again met by the same
Detective who had met him on the former occasion. He had, on this
occasion, in his possession “a parcel wrapped up in brown paper.” Having
asserted that the paper was given to him by Mr Atkins, he was confronted
with that gentleman who denied the statement. He was thereon taken
before the sitting Magistrate at Guildhall, examined, and remanded.3 On
a subsequent occasion he was again brought up, and, on the re-hearing of
the charge against him, he was committed for trial at the ensuing
Sessions and is now awaiting his trial.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

11th August 1857

Examiner’s Office

286C.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

11th August 1857

Honorable Sirs,

With reference to the Order of the Honorable Court dated the 18th of
February 1857 for the destruction of old and useless duplicate
Collections,2 I now lay before your Honorable Committee a report from
the Chief Clerk in this Department shewing that effect has been given to
the Court’s instructions.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [107]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

11th August 1857

Examiner’s Office

286D.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

11th August 1857

Honorable Sirs,

In laying before your Honorable Committee a letter from Mr Atkins,
Assistant Registrar under this Office, representing the necessity of
whitewashing the rooms occupied by his Department, and of effecting some
minor improvements I have the honor to state that from personal
inspection I can confirm Mr Atkins’ representations, and I beg to
recommend that his proposals be carried into effect.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

20th August 1857

East India House

George Russell Clerk

Clerk, George Russell

286E.


TO GEORGE RUSSELL CLERK1

East India House

,

20th August 1857

Secret.

Sir,

In reply to your letter dated the 19th instant, I am directed by the
Secret Committee to state that they have no objection to the adoption of
Mr Murray’s2 proposal for conferring an honorary step of rank on Major
Taylor and Lieutenants Clerk and Hardy3 while employed on a Mission to
Herat.4 I am, Sir,

Your most obedient servant,

(Signed) J.S. Mill

Sir George Clerk

&ca &ca &ca

Edition: current; Page: [108]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 5. 1857

Blackheath

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

292.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath

Oct. 5. 1857

Dear Sir

On receiving your letter of the 30th September I made enquiry as to the
conditions of eligibility to the medical service of the East India
Company, and I regret to say that no foreigner can be admitted into it
unless he is first naturalized. I confess I do not see why this
restriction should exist in the medical service. In the civil and
military services there are obvious reasons for it. The restriction does
not exist in the educational service, and several of your countrymen
(among others a son of the great Liebig)2 are Professors in the
Government Colleges in India. If an appointment of that kind would suit
your friend’s3 qualifications and wishes, he might perhaps succeed in
obtaining one, as the education department is in a state of rapid
growth, and good teachers of science are continually wanted.

Accept our condolences on the loss of your father.4 We hope your
sister,5 who was ill when we last saw you, is now better. I am much
interested in what you say of your literary undertakings, and should be
glad to hear more about the philological articles you mention.6 Do they
contain the speculation you told me of, connecting Protagoras with the
authorship of one of the Hippocratic treatises?7 aI have nearly finished
an Essay “on Liberty” which I hope to publish next winter.8 As the
Liberty it treats of is moral and intellectual rather than political, it
is not so much needed in Germany as it is here.a

Edition: current; Page: [109]
If you visit England in spring we shall be happy to see you, and to
renew our interesting conversations.

I am Dear Sir
 Very truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

14th October 1857

Examiner’s Office

293A.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

14th October 1857

Honorable Sirs,

In April last your Honorable Committee were pleased to authorize the
re-employment of two extra writers in this Office for a period of six
months.

That period will expire on the 22d instant: but as the business of the
extra Office still requires their assistance, I respectfully submit to
you the expediency of retaining the Services of the same two writers,
Messrs Rundall & Upton,2 for a further period of six months,—their
conduct during the past period having been unexceptionable.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

21st October 1857

Examiner’s Office

293B.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

21st October 1857

Honorable Sirs,

It being necessary for the discharge of the duties of the Public and
Ecclesiastical Departments that a Writer should be appointed to assist
the Established Clerk in the Office duties of those Departments, in
place of Mr. Alexander Ward now retired from the Service, I beg
respectfully to request that Mr. John Downton may be Edition: current;
Page: [110] relieved from the copying duties hitherto performed by him
and appointed to the duties hitherto discharged by Mr. Ward, on the
allowances usual in such cases.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 25, 1858

Examiner’s Office

299A.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

Jan. 25, 1858

Honorable Sirs,

I beg to submit for the favourable consideration of your Honorable
Committee, a letter which has been addressed to me by Mr Hawkins,2 one
of the Assistant Examiners, enclosing an application from Mr Charles
Bell,3 one of the Writers in this Office who perform the duties of
Established Clerks, to be either placed on the Establishment on his
present allowances, or to have his allowances consolidated, as has been
done in several cases of a nature similar to his own.

The letter appended to the application will prove to your Honorable
Committee, what I can also state from my personal knowledge, that Mr
Hill,4 under whom Mr Bell served for nine years, considered his services
to be highly valuable, and his qualification to be of a superior order;
and I join with Mr Hawkins in regarding Mr Bell as well worthy of any
mark of consideration which may be bestowed on him by the Honorable
Court.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [111]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

February 10th, 1858

East India House

Thomas N. Waterfield

Waterfield, Thomas N.

299B.


TO THOMAS N. WATERFIELD1

East India House

,

February 10th, 1858

Secret.

Sir,

I am directed by the Secret Committee to request, that you will be
pleased to obtain the consent of the Right Honorable the Commissioners
for the Affairs of India to the employment, in the Secret Department, of
Mr John Stewart Oliphant, a Clerk in the Secretary’s Office, and of Mr
Frank Mangles, a Clerk, and Mr Richard Upton, a Writer, in the
Examiner’s Office, on their taking the prescribed oath.

I am, Sir,
 Your most obedient servant,

J.S. Mill

T.N. Waterfield Esqre

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 1858

Examiner’s Office

306A.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

April 1858

Honorable Sirs,

In October last your Honorable Committee were pleased to authorize the
reemployment of two extra writers in this office, for a period of six
months.

In December last, one of the two extra writers, Mr. W.I. Upton,2 was
appointed a permanent Writer in another Office,—and for some time, one
temporary writer only was employed. Mr. Richard Upton, one of the
regular Writers, having been subsequently removed from the body of the
office to the Secret department, a second temporary writer was again
urgently required, and Mr. W.C. Fidler was engaged for the unexpired
term already sanctioned. That period will expire on the 22nd instant,
and as the business of the office still requires their assistance, I
respectfully submit to you the expediency of retaining their Services
for such further period as may be required.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs,
 Your most faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [112]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

23rd April 1858

East India House

309A.


TO THE SECRETARY TO THE INDIA BOARD1

East India House

,

23rd April 1858

Secret.

Sir,

I have laid before the Secret Committee of the East India Company2 Sir
George Clerk’s letter of the 20th instant,3 inviting the observations of
the Committee on the letter from the Government of India dated the 8th
ultimo,4 respecting the proposed exchange of territory in India between
the British and French Governments: and I am directed to state in reply
that the Committee entirely concur in the opinions expressed by the
Government of India, and in their recommendation that the proposed
Convention should be concluded, with the slight modification suggested
in paragraph 2 of the letter from the Government of India, and the
verbal correction indicated in para 3. I am, Sir,

Your obedient Servant,

(Signed) J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

22 June, 1858

309B.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

[ca.
22 June, 1858

]

Honorable Sirs,

I beg to lay before your Honorable Committee the accompanying Petition
which has been placed in my hands by the Messengers in the Book Office.

I have the honor to be, Honrble Sirs
 your most obedient servant

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [113]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

3rd August 1858

East India House

Thomas N. Waterfield

Waterfield, Thomas N.

321A.


TO THOMAS N. WATERFIELD1

East India House

,

3rd August 1858

Secret.

Sir,

I have received and laid before the Secret Committee your letter dated
the 28th ultimô forwarding for any remarks the Committee might desire to
make, a letter from Her Majesty’s Minister at the Court of Persia2
respecting the composition and the allowances of the Commission about to
proceed to Herat, and I am directed to state in reply that the Committee
have no objection to make to any of the arrangements recommended by Sir
James Outram.3

I am, Sir,
 Your most obedient Servant,

(Signed) J.S. Mill

T.N. Waterfield Esqre

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

24th August 1858

Examiner’s Office

323A.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

Examiner’s Office

East India House

24th August 1858

Honorable Sirs,

I have the honor to submit, for the favorable consideration of your
Honrble Committee, a Memorandum placed in my hands by Mr Prideaux,
Assistant Examiner of India Correspondence, bringing to notice the
Services rendered, in addition to those required from him in the
discharge of his ordinary Official Duty, by Mr William Peters, an
Established Clerk in the Revenue Department of this Office. Under an
Order of the House of Commons, he has been, for a considerable time,
employed in selecting from a vast mass of correspondence, documents
illustrative of the measures taken by the East India Company for
increasing the Edition: current; Page: [114] quantity or improving the
quality, of the supply of Cotton from India,2 for the use of
manufacturers in this Country.

In order that the Return to the requisition of the House of Commons
should be made as extensively useful as possible, to those who were
likely to consult it, Mr Peters has devoted much time and labour to the
arrangement, under distinct heads, of the matters treated of in the
papers; so as to render them easy of reference;—and he has, moreover,
carefully corrected the proof sheets, during their passage through the
Press.

I desire to add that I concur in Mr Prideaux’s testimony in favor of Mr
Peters.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs,
 With the greatest respect,
 Your faithful and obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

Examiner of India Correspondence

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

24 Aug. 1858

323B.


TO THE FINANCE AND HOME COMMITTEE1

[ca.
24 Aug. 1858

]

Honorable Sirs

I beg to lay before your Honorable Committee an application from Mr
Atkins, Deputy Registrar in the Book Office, to be allowed to retain the
services of William Spence, an Assistant Messenger in his Department,
who has been called on to take the duties of Messenger, but whose
knowledge of his present duties renders him more useful in his existing
position than in that to which he would be transferred. I therefore
submit the request of Mr Atkins to the favorable consideration of your
Honorable Committee.

I have the honor to be, Honorable Sirs
 your most obedient Servant

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [115]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 30. 1858

East India House

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

324.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

East India House

Aug. 30. 1858

Dear Sir

aI bhave received your letter of the 21st,2 andb have been interested by
the information as to your papers in the Rhenish Museum.3 I was
disappointed however at your not saying anything of your historical work
on Greek philosophy,4 which I expect will be very valuable, not only by
throwing new light on historical points, of which there are always a
great number to be cleared up by any competent enquirer, but also by
exhibiting the speculations of the ancients from the point of view of
the experience philosophy, a thing hardly yet attempted, and least of
all in your country.

I have no objection to your annexing to the Logic any part of the
controversy with Whewell5 which you think likely to be useful. There are
not many defences extant of the ethics of utility, and I have sometimes
thought of reprinting this and other papers I have written on the same
as well as on other subjects.a6

We were glad to hear of the improvement in your sister’s health.7 With
regard to my own, which you kindly enquire about, there is nothing
alarming in it, but I require a long recruiting, not so much from work,
as from the confinement of an office, which has made it advisable for me
to decline the position offered me in the new government of India.8 I am
Dr Sir

yrs very truly

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [116]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 29. 1858

Blackheath Park

Jacob Waley

Waley, Jacob

336A.


TO JACOB WALEY1

Blackheath Park

Nov. 29. 1858

Sir

Having been absent, I only received your note two days ago. I am at
present little capable, and little disposed, to apply my mind to such
subjects. But I owe you an acknowledgment, as your note shews that you
have entered intelligently into a train of reasoning which it is
impossible to make anything of without a real capacity for these
enquiries, and a real application of mind to them. It is always a
satisfaction to a writer on any scientific subject to find such readers.
As to the particular point on which we differ,2 it makes, as you justly
remark, no difference in the result, as the conditions of the
international demand finally decide the terms of international exchange,
whatever may be the effect of the improvement in the first instance. But
I still think I was right, as the result of an improvement in any
article brought to a given market must surely be, in the beginning, to
cheapen it relatively to all articles previously sold in that market. I
am Sir

Yrs faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 26. 1859

Blackheath Park

William Stebbing

Stebbing, William

376A.


TO WILLIAM STEBBING1

Blackheath Park

March 26. 1859

Dear Sir

Your note has only just reached me. If my doing so can be of any use to
you, I cannot possibly have any objection to state, that from such
consideration as I had time to give to your Analysis of my Logic,2 it
appeared to me not merely well, but Edition: current; Page: [117]
extraordinarily well done. I was surprised to find so much of the
meaning so well packed into so few words. I am

yrs very faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 31. 1859

Blackheath Park

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

381.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath Park

March 31. 1859

Dear Sir

About the 1st of February a copy of the little book2 was sent to the
friend mentioned by you,3 but I unluckily omitted writing to let you
know. Perhaps you will kindly inform me by letter addressed à Saint
Véran près Avignon, Vaucluse, France, whether it has reached you. If
not, another copy shall be sent, in any way you direct.

aThe book has had much more success, and has made a greater impression,
than I had the smallest expectation of.

We4 shall be at Avignon for some time,a and shall probably remain abroad
at least a year. bI hope to hear from you sometimes at that place, as I
am very desirous to know how your various literary projects go on.b I am

yours very sincerely

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 26, 1859

Saint Véran, near Avignon

John William Parker

Parker, John William

388A.


TO JOHN WILLIAM PARKER1

Saint Véran, near Avignon

April 26, 1859

Dear Sir

The subject of the diminution of the value of gold is not one on which I
feel disposed to write, as it requires a minute investigation of details
with which I am Edition: current; Page: [118] not at present well
acquainted, and I have not access here to the sources of information.
The best paper I have seen on the subject was in the Journal of the
Statistical Society of Dublin, and was written by Mr Cairnes, the
Whately Professor of Pol. Economy at Dublin University.2 Perhaps he
might be induced to write again on the subject for Fraser.3

I thank you for the inclosures you sent which I was well pleased to see,
though none of them proved very important or interesting.

If you should think there is sufficient demand for the pamphlet to
warrant a second edition, I should like the part of the article in
Fraser which relates to Hare’s book, subjoined by way of Appendix.4 I
should not like simply to reprint the pamphlet as I wrote it before I
had seen Hare’s book; while it would be troublesome to recast it as
completely as would be necessary to incorporate Hare’s ideas. If you
should at any time be disposed to adopt this plan, I will send you a few
words of preface.

Your correspondent Mr Smythe’s5 original suggestion is as old as the
hills.

yrs very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 16. 1859

Saint Véran, près Avignon

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

392.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Saint Véran, près Avignon

May 16. 1859

Dear Sir

I am now at the above address and shall be here for some time to come;
and as the war between France and Austria2 makes it uncertain whether
any letters will be forwarded, the only sure way I have of corresponding
with you is through my Edition: current; Page: [119] publishers, Messrs
J.W. Parker and Son, 445 West Strand, to whom please address any letter
you may favour me with. aI am rather anxious to hear from you, not
knowing whether you have received the sheets of the little book, and in
case you have, whether you still have any idea of translating it. I
should much prefer you to any other translator who is likely to offer,
but I have always thought it probable that you might have good reasons
against undertaking it, and that some other part of Germany might be
more suitable for bringing the book3 before the German public. In
addition to an offer which was made through Messrs Parker, I have lately
received one under the signature of Eduard John, Justizrath, at
Marienwerdera in Prussia,4 bwhob writes like a competent person, and
chas sent me a portion of a translation actually executed; but as it is
in the German Manuscript character, which I do not read fluently, I am
not at present able to judge of its merits.c Do you know anything of
this gentleman, and would you advise me, in case the undertaking should
not suit yourself, to close with his offer?

dI could write much about politics, but think it more prudent to wait
for some better opportunity; though I certainly do not side with France
in this miserable war, which I condemn as strongly as any Austrian can.d

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 11. 1859

Saint Véran, near Avignon

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

398.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Saint Véran, near Avignon

June 11. 1859

Dear Sir

aI sincerely condole with you on the unhappy events which have caused
you so much pain and disturbance of mind. The delay in answering my
letter has occasioned no inconvenience, and since you are willing to
translate the little book,2 or rather have by this time actually done
so, I desire nothing better than to Edition: current; Page: [120] leave
it in your hands, and certainly should not think of giving the
preference to any other translator. I have no objection to the omission
of any part or the whole of the note to which you refer, nor of the
sentence binb page 9,3 though in the latter case I have not been able to
discover what there is which renders it more unsuitable for publication
than all the rest of the chapter. Perhapsa you think csome words in it
may be understood as a declaration against Kingly government, but
nothing of the sort was intended, nor did it occur to me that any one
dwouldd think so. The only opinion expressed or implied is in favour of
free political institutions, and even that is but incidental. But I do
not think the retention of the sentence of any importance.c

When you next do me the favour to write, it would interest me to hear
something of your other literary projects. I am Dear Sir

Yours very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 14 août 1859

Saint Véran, Avignon

Henri Bordère

Bordère, Henri

408A.


TO HENRI BORDÈRE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

le 14 août 1859

Mon cher Monsieur Bordère

Je vous remercie beaucoup de votre aimable lettre. L’échantillon du
Myosotis n’était pas, en effet, suffisant pour reconnaître l’espèce, à
moins qu’elle ne vous fût déjà très bien connue. Maintenant j’envoie un
meilleur échantillon et je serai bien aise si, par un hasard heureux, je
puis vous offrir une plante que vous ne possédiez pas. Cela ne pourrait
être que si vous n’avez jamais herborisé à Panticose,2 car je trouvai la
plante dans le village même, à côté de la route.

L’ami à qui je compte m’adresser pour le catalogue des plantes
britanniques ne Edition: current; Page: [121] sera à Londres que dans
quinze jours.3 Je lui écrirai sans délai pour le prier de vous
l’expédier.

votre dévoué

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 24. 1859

Saint Véran, Avignon

Samuel Lucas

Lucas, Samuel

430A.


TO SAMUEL LUCAS1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Dec. 24. 1859

Dear Sir

If your letter of November 28 had reached me before, instead of long
after, that of December 2, I could have done nothing better than to have
referred you to Mr Kaye as the fittest person to write such a
biographical sketch of Mr Elphinstone as you required.2

I was glad to hear that you have a share in the editorship of “Once a
Week.” It is a good literary connexion, and may lead to other things.
With regard however to your proposal on the subject of writing for it, I
have so many calls on my time, and I have so much in hand which tasks to
the utmost all my capacity of writing, that I cannot hold out any
prospect of my being able to do what you suggest.

I am Dear Sir
 yours faithfully

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [122]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 11. 1860

Blackheath

Herbert Spencer

Spencer, Herbert

443A.


TO HERBERT SPENCER1

Blackheath

Feb. 11. 1860

Dear Sir

I have not the smallest objection to your making the use you propose of
my name, or indeed any other use.2 I considered my consent to that as
included in becoming a subscriber. The names in your note are very good
ones & I hope you will have many more of the same high character.

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 17 mai 1860

Amélie les Bains

François Auguste Marie Mignet

Mignet, François Auguste Marie

460A.


TO FRANÇOIS AUGUSTE MARIE MIGNET1

Amélie les Bains

Pyrénées Orientales

le 17 mai 1860

Monsieur

Je viens de recevoir votre lettre du 28 avril, dans laquelle vous
m’avertissez que l’Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques de
l’Institut m’a nommé un de ces correspondants pour la section d’Economie
Politique en remplacement de mon excellent ami M. Tooke.2

Veuillez, Monsieur, servir d’interprète auprès de l’Académie, à mes
sentiments de respectueuse reconnaissance. De tous les honneurs qui
pourraient m’arriver, il n’y en a pas un auquel je pourrais être plus
sensible qu’à celui qui m’associe au plus illustre de tous les corps
savants. Ce sera pour moi un nouveau motif d’essayer de me montrer de
plus en plus digne de cette distinction, en continuant de travailler
consciencieusement aux sciences dont l’Académie s’occupe, et qui
aujourdhui Edition: current; Page: [123] importent encore plus que les
sciences physiques à l’amélioration et même au bien-être matériel de
l’humanité.

Permettez-moi enfin, Monsieur, de profiter de cette occasion pour vous
témoigner, à vous personnellement, la haute estime que je professe
depuis longtemps pour vos écrits et pour votre caractère.3

J. Stuart Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 8 avril, 1861

Blackheath Park, Kent

François Auguste Marie Mignet

Mignet, François Auguste Marie

487A.


TO FRANÇOIS AUGUSTE MARIE MIGNET1

Blackheath Park, Kent

le 8 avril, 1861

Monsieur

Je suis au moment de publier un Traité du Gouvernement Représentatif,2
dont un exemplaire vous sera promptement expédié, avec prière de le
soumettre à l’Académie.

Je n’ose croire que l’ensemble des opinions exposées dans cet ouvrage
obtiendra l’assentiment général de l’Académie. Mais j’espère qu’elle
m’accordera sa sympathie, que je suis beaucoup plus sûr de mériter; et
quel que puisse être son jugement sur l’ouvrage, j’ose dire qu’elle y
trouvera un désir vrai d’envisager les questions de tous les côtés, sans
parti pris de part ou d’autre.

J’ai l’honneur d’être, Monsieur, avec les sentiments les plus
distingués,

votre dévoué serviteur

J. Stuart Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 18, 1861

Saint Véran, Avignon

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

487B.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Saint Véran, Avignon

April 18, 1861

Dear Sir

I am sorry to say I have mislaid the address you gave me, and I am
afraid this Edition: current; Page: [124] note may not reach you. If you
receive it, will you kindly let me know how to address you in future,
and in particular how to send you a copy of a volume I have just
published on Representative Government.2

I was much surprised a short time ago to learn from a review which was
sent to me, that a translation of the “Liberty” has been published in
Germany.3 I know nothing of the translator, who neither had, nor asked
for, any authority from me.

In the uncertainty whether what I write will reach you, I say no more at
present.

I am Dear Sir

Very truly yours

J.S. Mill

I propose remaining here till the beginning of June.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 24. 1861

Avignon

Nassau W. Senior

Senior, Nassau W.

492A.


TO NASSAU W. SENIOR1

Avignon

May 24. 1861

Dear Senior

As far as I have power over the paper by Tocqueville in the London and
Westminster (if I have any such power) I most willingly consent to its
being made use of in the manner you propose.2 I believe however it will
be found that the article, though in itself of very great interest, is
superseded by the volume “L’ancien régime et la révolution,”3 of which
it may be said to be, as far as it goes, the first draft.

If we could but have your volumes of Tocqueville’s conversations! Some
time or other, doubtless, they will be published.4

I am very desirous to read your book on Education, which I suppose is
the separate report Chadwick told me of, and I am glad it has the
dimensions of a book.5 Please send it, not here, but to Blackheath Park,
as I expect to be there early Edition: current; Page: [125] in June. My
full address here is Saint-Véran, près Avignon, Vaucluse, but your
letter came duly, though directed simply Avignon, France.

I am Dear Senior
 very truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 3, 1861

Blackheath Park

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

494A.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath Park

Kent

July 3, 1861

Dear Sir

About three months ago I published a volume on Representative Government
of which one of the first copies would have been sent to you, had I not
unfortunately forgotten and mislaid your address.2 I wrote to you from
Avignon a note directed only to Herr Theodor Gomperz, in Wien, on the
bare chance that it might reach you, but I suppose it did not. On
returning from the South I have for the first time been able to make a
regular search for the address you gave me, and have fortunately found
it. I have therefore directed my publisher to send you a copy without
delay.

I was vexed to find, from a German Review which was sent to me, that a
translation has been made into German, I know not by whom, of the little
volume on Liberty.3 Had my consent been asked, I should not have given
it, unless I had heard from you that you had abandoned the intention you
at one time had of translating the book. But as I made no reservation of
the right of translation, my consent was not necessary. Indeed I do not
even know that England has any convention on the subject with the German
States.

I should much like to hear from you respecting yourself, and your
literary and other doings and projects. I am Dear Sir

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [126]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 8 août 1861

Blackheath Park, Kent

André Cochut

Cochut, André

503A.


TO ANDRÉ COCHUT1

Blackheath Park, Kent

le 8 août 1861

Monsieur

Quand j’eus l’honneur de vous voir à la réunion de la Société d’Economie
Politique,2 vous avez eu la bonté de m’offrir des renseignements sur
l’état actuel des associations ouvrières. Je tiens beaucoup à être bien
informé sur ce sujet, d’autant plus que je m’occupe actuellement de la
révision de mon traité d’Economie Politique pour une édition nouvelle;3
et comme nul autre en France n’est plus compétent, je crois même que nul
n’est aussi compétent que vous en cette matière, ce serait une véritable
obligation que je vous aurais si vous vouliez bien me donner les
renseignemens en question, ou m’indiquer le moyen de me les procurer.

Ne sachant pas votre adresse, je vous écris par l’intermédiaire de M.
Guillaumin.4

Veuillez agréer, Monsieur, l’expression de mes sentiments les plus
distingués.

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 12. 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

Catherine Helen Spence

Spence, Catherine Helen

527A.


TO CATHERINE HELEN SPENCE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Jan. 12. 1862

Dear Madam

I received your letter at this place, but the pamphlet you did me the
favour to send has not been forwarded, and I do not expect to see it
until I return to England.2 Edition: current; Page: [127] I therefore
suggest your making other arrangements for sending the pamphlets to Mr
Helps and Mr Buckle;3 neither can I, in general, undertake to forward
papers. I have read your letters in the Adelaide newspaper,4 and found
them a very clear and useful statement of Mr Hare’s plan and its merits.
You will be glad to hear, if you have not already heard it from himself,
that Mr Hare thinks very favourably of your pamphlet. It is much to be
desired that the attempt to bring the plan before your House of
Assembly, should be repeated.5 The question is sure to be advanced by
discussion. It is decidedly making progress in many other parts of the
world besides England and Australia.

I was not aware that, as you say, the association with my name is likely
to bring discredit on the plan in South Australia, and I am sorry to
hear that you think so: if it is so, however, you do judiciously to
avoid it. I suppose I am to understand the sentence in your letter which
includes giving the suffrage to women in the category of “absurdities”
as ironical.

I am Dear Madam
 yours very faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 15. 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

Caroline Wells Dall

Dall, Caroline Wells

527B.


TO CAROLINE WELLS DALL1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Vaucluse, France

Jan. 15. 1862

Dear Madam

I had the honour of receiving at this place, your letter of November
1st: but as the book you were kind enough to send,2 does not seem to
have found its way to my Edition: current; Page: [128] publishers,
Messrs Parker, along with the letter, I am as yet ignorant even of its
subject. But I cannot doubt that one who expresses so strong an interest
in the memory of her whom I have lost, is a participator in her and my
opinions, at least on the one point which, with us both, was and is the
most fundamental of all. You ask for information respecting her. About
two years ago, in reprinting from the Westminster Review her article
headed “Enfranchisement of Women,” to be included with some of my own
writings in a collection entitled “Dissertations and Discussions,” I
prefixed a few paragraphs, containing what I felt prompted to say, and
as much as I thought suitable to be said, to those who were personally
strangers to her.3 Only those who knew her can appreciate how vain it
would be to attempt to convey in words an impression of a character so
rich and various as hers. It is the object of my life to express in my
writings as much as I can render of the thoughts and sentiments which
she inspired.

I am Madam
 very faithfully yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 22 janvier 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

Gilbert Urbain Guillaumin

Guillaumin, Gilbert Urbain

529A.


TO GILBERT URBAIN GUILLAUMIN1

Saint Véran, Avignon

le 22 janvier 1862

Mon cher Monsieur

J’apprends de M. Dupont-White que sa traduction va paraître très
prochainement.2 Outre l’exemplaire que je vous ai prié d’envoyer, pour
mon compte, à M. Auguste Picard3 je vous prie de vouloir bien en envoyer
un autre à M. le capitaine d’artillerie Célestin de Blignières,4 Rue de
Madame, 40.

Je vous ai expédié, il y a quelques semaines, par mandat de poste, avec
le prix de plusieurs livres, le montant de mon abonnement au Journal des
Economistes pour Edition: current; Page: [129] l’année suivante. Le
numéro du 15 janvier ne m’est pourtant pas encore parvenu. Je pars le 29
janvier pour voyager en Grèce, mais comptant revenir ici avant de passer
en Angleterre, je vous engage à envoyer toujours le Journal à
Saint-Véran comme auparavant.

Ma fille se recommande aux souvenirs amicaux de Mademoiselle
Guillaumin,5 et je vous prie, mon cher Monsieur, d’agréer mes
salutations amicales.

J.S. Mill

M. Littré a écrit pour le Journal des Débats des articles sur mon livre
et sur les livres de M. Dupont-White.6 Oserai-je vous prier, lorsqu’ils
auront paru, de m’envoyer les numéros qui les contiennent? Adressés
Poste Restante à Athènes, ils me trouveraient jusqu’au milieu ou à la
fin de mai. Je vous en rembourserai à la première occasion.

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 25. 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

John William Parker

Parker, John William

529B.


TO JOHN WILLIAM PARKER1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Jan. 25. 1862

Dear Sir

Many thanks for the cheque, and for your attention to my wishes about
the separate copies.2 We shall not be able to leave till the 30th, so
that I can have a day’s more proofs.3 Anything posted on Tuesday will
reach me before I start. And anything sent so as to be delivered here by
the 12th (to make sure of which, it would have to be posted not later
than the 9th if a letter, or the 8th if anything printed) will reach
Athens by a private hand, as soon as I shall myself. I should therefore
like the February Fraser to be sent here in the usual manner. The
separate copies may remain with you for the present, as I may perhaps
think of some more Edition: current; Page: [130] persons to whom I
should wish copies sent. Newspapers from Australia, and the Séances et
Travaux de l’Académie,4 may wait for the present.

After the 9th, please direct Poste Restante, Athens, till further
notice. Any letters with “to be forwarded” written on them, I should
wish sent there. Any others may be sent here, to wait for my return. If
there is a book post to Athens, I should be obliged by your sending the
March and April numbers of Fraser by it: if not, please send them here
as usual.

I inclose the list of persons whom I wish to receive copies of the new
editions of the Logic and Political Economy;5 all expenses of carriage
to be at my charge. Please remember to have “from the author” written in
all of them. I am, Dear Sir

yrs very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 11. 1862

Athens

Charles Edward Trevelyan

Trevelyan, Charles Edward

538A.


TO CHARLES EDWARD TREVELYAN1

Athens

June 11. 1862

My dear Sir Charles

Professor Villari, of the University of Pisa, a very valued friend of
mine,2 is in England on a mission from the Italian Government to collect
information useful to Italy on the subject of public education. He is
particularly interested in the question of competitive examination,
which has been mooted in Italy also, with a practical object. The manner
in which you have laboured in that cause,3 and the inestimable
obligations which it owes to you, have emboldened me to think that an
opportunity of serving it further might be agreeable to you, and that I
might venture to give Mr Villari an introduction to you. You will find
him a highly favourable specimen of a country in which all liberal
Englishmen now feel so deep an interest; and there are, Edition:
current; Page: [131] I should think, few persons whose opinions on
Italian affairs are better worth having, as well as on many other
subjects. Among other writings of merit, Mr Villari is the author of an
interesting and valuable life of Savonarola.4

I am my dear Sir Charles

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 12. 1862

Athens

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

538B.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Athens

June 12. 1862

Dear Sir

My daughter and I have been travelling in Greece and purpose to take
Pesth and Vienna in our way back. I should be very sorry to be in your
neighbourhood without seeing you, and you would much oblige me if you
would write a line to me, directed Poste Restante Constantinople (where
we shall be in a month from this time, and perhaps sooner) to tell me
whether you expect to be in Vienna, or where else, during the month of
August. Hoping for the pleasure of seeing and conversing with you at
that time, I am Dear Sir

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 17. 1862

Saint Véran, Avignon

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

554.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Sept. 17. 1862

Dear Sir

aWe have now been more than a fortnight in this quiet harbour, after our
blongb journey, and are fully enjoying its peacefulness. We did not see
so much of the Alps as we expected after leaving Ischla: the ascent of
the Schaffberg the next day was very pleasant, but the rain which set in
on that very evening kept us three days within doors at Salzburg, and
then only intermitted long enough to enable us to see Edition: current;
Page: [132] Berchtesgaden and the Königsee, which came up to our highest
expectations. By the time we reached Gastein, the rain had come again,
and the place being quite full, we did not remain. Had we done so, we
could not have made a single excursion, so rainy did the weather become,
and we had no more fine weather, except one day at Innsbrück. What is
more, we have found rainy weather here also, which usually does not set
in till the latter half of October. cI am doing little at present but
reading up the French and English reviews. But since I arrived I have
written and sent off an article on the American question (à propos of Mr
Cairnes’ book) which will be in the Westminster Review next month.2 A
very interesting series of notes on America and on the war have been
published this summer in an English periodical (Macmillan’s Magazine)
and are, I see, lately reprinted as a volume, under the title of “Six
Months in the Federal States”: the author is a Mr Dicey, who had within
the last two years published a book on Rome and Italy.3 He writes very
judiciously, as well as with right feeling, on the whole subject, and
what he says respecting the people of the North, being evidently a
faithful transcript of what he has seen and heard, ought to have some
influence. The Times, as might be expected, is as bad as ever, and even
more undisguised in the expression of its bad wishes. It let out,
however, a curious admission the other day—that whatever might be in
other respects the issue of this war, it must lead to the destruction of
Slavery.4 This will be true if the North succeeds; but if the South
should be successful, I expect the very reverse. In Europe things appear
to be going on well, as far at least as mental progress is concerned.
This is very visible in the higher order of writers in France; among
whom I invariably remark that what is bad in thought or sentiment is
found chiefly in the publicists who had made themselves known before
1848, and that the dgeneral toned of those who have risen into notice
since that time is both higher in morality, and more philosophic ine
intellect. The Garibaldi affair is very painful, but it has ended as
little mischievously as perhaps it could have done.5 It has at least
given Louis Napoleon no pretext for intervention, Edition: current;
Page: [133] and less excuse than ever for keeping his troops in Rome;6
while Garibaldi, it is to be hoped, is still reserved for better times.
If it also destroys Rattazzi,7 that will be another benefit arising from
it.c

I have found Dr Schiel’s letter;8 it is dated Frankfurt. Let me hear
from you now and then.—fWith our compliments to your sister I am

yours very gtrulyg

J.S. Mill

P.S. I had written the preceding before I received yours.f We have, as
you see, arrived safely, and hI should have written before, had I
thought you would have felt any such anxiety as you mention on our
account.9 It will always be a pleasure to me to hear from you: let me
know what you are doing and thinking, and how the political affairs of
your country are proceeding. I can assure you that however little
expression I may habitually give to such a feeling you are one of the
few persons whose friendship I value, and whom I would gladly see
asserting an influence on the current of public affairs.h

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 14. 1862

Blackheath Park, Kent

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

564.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath Park, Kent

Dec. 14. 1862

Dear Sir

aI am here, and in good health, anda I will not wait for the further
letter which you promise, before saying how glad I shall be to see you
in January, and thanking you Edition: current; Page: [134] as well for
the kind and friendly feelings shewn in your letter as for the very
interesting information contained in it. I am particularly glad of what
you have been doing on the subject of the Principle of Contradiction, as
I have commenced writing something2 to which a full understanding of
that subject is indispensable, and I do not feel that I have yet
thoroughly mastered it. Your account of Austrian politics is very
valuable, and I thank you for the American news, which, as you
anticipated, was entirely unknown to me. The paper giving an account of
my article in Fraser reached me duly.3 I am much gratified that you
thought the article worth so full an abstract even for Germany, though I
am almost ashamed of the very flattering terms in which you spoke of it
and of me.

I am very glad that you are so far advanced with the Logic, and I return
your paper of questions duly filled up. I am much interested also with
your Herculanean speculations. bEn attendant your further letter I am,
Dear Sir

yours very truly

J.S. Millb

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dez. 62

Dez. 62

1. Will you kindly allow me to apply to you even now for such
information and advice, as I am unable to get from any other quarter and
also to signify this fact, the assistance given me by you both on the
title-page by calling the translation executed: Mit Genehmigung und
unter Mitwirkung,4 of the Author, and in the preface, where this
cooperation is to be more strictly defined and limited to what it really
is?

Certainly.

2. The fallacies of Simple Inspection5 have always been a stumbling
block to me, not the thing but the name you have chosen to designate
them. I had translated the words by “Trugschlüsse der einfachen
Wahrnehmung,” but this word, the equivalent of Perception has too
special a meaning to be used in so wide a sense. Would it falsify or
distort your meaning to call them “Trugschlüsse des unmittelbaren
Bewusstseins,” that is “Fallacies of Consciousness”? If being the
distinctive property of this tribe of fallacies is to
be—wrong—inferences which are mistaken for self-evident or intuitive
truths, this designation might perhaps fit them?

The description seems a good one, and in any case you are the best
judge.

Edition: current; Page: [135]
3. You will probably not object to my omitting the note at the foot of
I, p. 36 and for other reasons the foot-notes I p. 108-9 and I p.
343-4?6 I confess, I ask such questions as these chiefly in order that I
may be able to declare, without untruth, that no note has been omitted
without your express permission. In the text nothing has been omitted,
except untranslateable passages, viz. those which refer to peculiarities
of the English language or of single terms and their acceptations.

All these suppressions are very proper.

4. I p. 4, l. 15 fr. bel. “sanctioned by high authorities”7 refers to
the term, not to “an extension of the term”?

To “an extension of the term.”

5. I p. 308, l. 17 fr. bel. “an assertion involved in the meaning of
terms”8 = concerned with the meaning &c, not = implied in the meaning
&c? In other words I am not quite sure whether that expression is an
equivalent of “an identical proposition” or of “a mode of defining” &c
which follows.

A definition is, in my sense of the terms, an “identical proposition.”
But it is of no consequence which of the phrases is used as either will
fit my idea.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Tuesday 1863

Blackheath

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

571A.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

Blackheath

Tuesday
 [
1863

?]

Dear Chadwick

The statistics you refer me to would be of great use to me. How are the
“Miscellaneous Statistics of the United Kingdom for 1862” to be got?2
Are they on sale anywhere,

yrs in haste

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [136]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1863-64

571B.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

[
1863-64

?]

La prospérité et le bonheur de la Grèce seront assurés du jour que son
peuple saura imposer à ses hommes politiques l’obligation de s’occuper
des intérêts matériaux et moraux de la nation.

J. Stuart Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 20. 1863

Blackheath

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

589A.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath

Feb. 20. 1863

Dear Sir

I think it is as well to send you at once an introduction to Mr Grote,
which can be presented whenever it happens to be convenient. If he
should not be at his town residence when you call, you could leave the
note with your card and address, when he would probably write to let you
know when he would be disengaged. I am, Dear Sir

ever yours truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 20. 1863

Blackheath Park

589B.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE SPECTATOR1

Blackheath Park

Feb. 20. 1863

Mr J.S. Mill presents his compliments to the Editor of the Spectator,
and Edition: current; Page: [137] encloses for any use which the Editor
may be able to make of it, some valuable remarks on Austrian politics,
extracted from a letter which he lately received from a very able,
highly cultivated, and high principled Austrian.2

Mr Mill cannot omit the opportunity of expressing the very high
estimation, both moral and intellectual, in which he holds the
Spectator, under its present management.3

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 25. 1863

Blackheath Park

James Edwin Thorold Rogers

Rogers, James Edwin Thorold

594A.


TO JAMES EDWIN THOROLD ROGERS1

Blackheath Park

Feb. 25. 1863

Dear Sir

Many thanks for your kind invitation, but I am quite unable to spare
time for the visit you propose.2

The extension of the middle class examinations to both sexes would
indeed be an important improvement.3

The system of farming which you mention4 differs from the metayer system
in its characteristic feature, the division of the produce. That the
landlord should provide the stock and implements is a matter of
necessity in a state of things in which the tenant cannot; unless, as in
Ireland, both parties are willing to dispense with anything which can be
called stock or implements at all. In this point of view, the beginning
and ending of the system you mention must be among the landmarks in the
progress of society in England.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [138]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 4. [1863]

Blackheath

John William Parker

Parker, John William

595A.


TO JOHN WILLIAM PARKER1

Blackheath

March 4. [1863]

Dear Sir

I yesterday sent you a list of persons to whom I wish to have copies
sent, in my name, of the Utilitarianism,2 and I now write to request
that you will also send to Max Kyllmann Esq. Manchester3 twelve copies
of the second edition of “Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform.”

I am Dear Sir
 yrs very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 4, 1863

Blackheath

Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant Duff

Duff, Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant

595B.


TO MOUNTSTUART ELPHINSTONE GRANT DUFF1

Blackheath

March 4, 1863

Dear Sir

I am glad that the editorship of the National Review is in what you
consider competent hands2 though want of time and the greater urgency of
other claims have obliged me to decline Mr Pearson’s proposal.

I do not like to ask my friends to come to this distance for the very
little time I can spare to them, but if you should happen to be coming
into this neighbourhood I should at any time be happy to see you.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [139]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 5. 1863

Blackheath Park

Charles Henry Pearson

Pearson, Charles Henry

595C.


TO CHARLES HENRY PEARSON1

Blackheath Park

March 5. 1863

Dear Sir

I think very favourably of the National Review, and consider it and its
writers as an important element in the mental progress of this country;
but I have so many other calls on me and so little time at my disposal
to meet them, that it is quite impossible for me to undertake the
article you propose, or to come under any new literary engagement
whatever.

Periodical writing of any kind is with me only an exception.

I am Dear Sir
 yrs very truly

J.S. Mill

C.H. Pearson Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 21 mars 1863

Blackheath Park, Kent

François Auguste Marie Mignet

Mignet, François Auguste Marie

600A.


TO FRANÇOIS AUGUSTE MARIE MIGNET1

Blackheath Park, Kent

le 21 mars 1863

Monsieur

J’ai chargé mon éditeur de vous adresser par la poste un petit volume
sur la morale de l’utilité,2 dont je vous prie de vouloir bien faire
hommage en mon nom à l’Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques de
l’Institut.

Je sais, Monsieur, que les opinions énoncées dans cet opuscule ont peu
ou point d’approbateurs dans l’Académie, et que le seul genre de succès
qu’il me soit permis d’espérer pour lui auprès de cet illustre corps,
est celui d’être regardé comme ayant une certaine valeur en qualité de
simple discussion. Mais je sais aussi que les membres de l’Académie sont
trop éclairés pour ne pas reconnaître que la discussion conscientieuse
et réfléchie des grandes questions de l’humanité fait toujours jaillir
quelque lumière.

Agréez, Monsieur, l’expression de ma haute et sincère estime, et de ma
considération la plus respectueuse.

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [140]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wednesday 25 Mar., 1863

Blackheath

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

603A.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath

Wednesday
 [
25 Mar., 1863

]

Dear Sir

Mr Fawcett,2 who is going to the meeting tomorrow,3 undertakes to get an
admission for you; so if you will come here and take your dinner with us
we will go together afterwards to the meeting, calling on Mr Fawcett by
the way.

If anything should prevent you from coming here, Mr Fawcett’s address is
16 Spring Gardens Charing Cross and if you will go there at half past
seven I will meet you there. But I hope to see you here.

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday 11 June, 1863

Blackheath

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

617.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath

Thursday aevga
 [
11 June, 1863

]

Dear Sir

M. Louis Blanc2 bbeing unable to come tomorrowb, has fixed to dine with
us on Sunday (at five). We shall therefore hope to see you and Mr
Wessel3 on Sunday cinstead of tomorrowc.

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [141]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 14. 1863

Blackheath Park

James Edwin Thorold Rogers

Rogers, James Edwin Thorold

617A.


TO JAMES EDWIN THOROLD ROGERS1

Blackheath Park

June 14. 1863

Dear Sir

You have done very rightly and judiciously, and I am glad to be spared
the crowd and turmoil of the present occasion. I should be a little
ashamed, too, as well as surprised, at being thought sufficiently
orthodox when Kingsley is not.2

I think with you that both American and French affairs look more
hopeful. The French elections must startle the wise journalists and
others who have been affirming for years that the French like and demand
despotism, though they knew all the while that the French had no means
(except a general election) of publicly shewing dislike to it.3

In America the pertinacity of the Free States gives me great confidence
in their ultimate success, and I have always thought that this war and
all its circumstances were very likely to elevate the national
character, as well as to stir up thought in the more cultivated minds,
in a way that there seemed little hope of before. I am Dear Sir

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 24. 1863

Blackheath

Thomas Bayley Potter

Potter, Thomas Bayley

637A.


TO THOMAS BAYLEY POTTER1

Blackheath

Aug. 24. 1863

Dear Sir

Allow me to thank you for the present of game which you have been kind
enough to send.

All the recent American news is most cheering, and there now seems
little ground of fear for the future. I wish I could see signs of a
corresponding improvement in English opinion on the subject. It is still
the working classes and Edition: current; Page: [142] the greater as
well as better part of the literary class, against all other classes,
with comparatively few noble individual exceptions. The Union and
Emancipation Society counts a great number of these among its promoters,
and it has done excellent service by its interesting and important
publications.2 If the Society wants, or whenever it does want, a renewal
of subscriptions, I beg you to let me know, and I will again send my
mite. I am, Dear Sir

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

T.B. Potter Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 25 août. 1863

Blackheath Park, Kent

Josephine von Wertheimstein

Wertheimstein, Josephine von

639.


TO JOSEPHINE VON WERTHEIMSTEIN1

Blackheath Park, Kent

le 25 août. 1863

Madame

aPardonnez-moi de n’avoir fait jusqu’ici aucune réponse directe à la
lettre que vous avez bien voulu m’écrire.2 Je croyais mieux remplir
votre désir en écrivant à celui qui est, à juste titre, l’objet de notre
commune sollicitude. J’écrivis sans délai, mais comme depuis lors je
n’ai pas eu de ses nouvelles, je n’ose presque pas lui écrire de nouveau
sans avoir préalablement demandé à vous ou à M. Wessel dans quel état
d’esprit il se trouve maintenant. En même temps je remplis le devoir de
vous assurer directement à quel point nous partageons votre peine et
votre inquiétude. Vous vous êtes servie, Madame, dans votre lettre
d’expressions de reconnaissance très au-delà de mon droit. Je serais
trop heureux de pouvoir les mériter, mais jusqu’ici je ne vois presque
rien que j’aie fait pour lui. S’il y a quelque chose que j’aurais pu
faire, c’eût été peut-être de lui donner, par des preuves d’estime, la
confiance qui lui manquait en lui-même. Ces preuves d’estime, il les a
eues, non seulement de moi mais de M. Grote, et je le crois sincèrement,
de tous ceux qui l’ont connu ici. Cela n’a servi bdeb rien quant à
présent, mais il faut croire que cela ne sera pas perdu dans l’avenir.
J’ai reconnu cdansc lui, dès le commencement, une haute capacité
intellectuelle: cette Edition: current; Page: [143] impression est allée
toujours en s’accroissant, tandis qu’une connaissance plus intime y a
ajouté une véritable estime morale. Ce n’est que plus tard que j’ai
reconnu chez lui cette extrême sensibilité aux impressions pénibles, qui
le rend en même temps très susceptible de souffrance et peu accessible
aux consolations. En lui écrivant je m’efforce toujours dded le décider
à en chercher dans les hauts travaux intellectuels dont il est si
capable, et dans la carrière utile et honorable qu’il peut remplir dans
le monde de l’intelligence comme dans celui des intérêts sociaux. Si
j’ai quelque pouvoir sur son esprit, je ne me lasserai pas de l’exercer
dans ce sens: et, ses autres amis aidant, nous finirons peutêtre par
réussir.a

Je dois à M. Wessel des remerciments dont je vous prie, Madame, d’être
l’interprète auprès de lui. eS’il est encore avec vous je lui aurai une
véritable obligation toutes les fois qu’il voudra bien nous donner des
nouvelles de son ami.e Nous partons incessamment pour Avignon, où nous
resterons jusqu’au commencement de l’année prochaine.

Veuillez, Madame, agréer l’hommage de mes sentiments les plus
distingués.

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 17. 1863

Saint Véran, Avignon

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

644.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Sept. 17. 1863

Dear Sir

aLet me begin by saying how much I rejoice to hear that you are better
both in health and in spirits, and are vigorously at work, with a result
satisfactory even to yourself, which is always the most difficult thing
to a good writer.

Let me next thank you, which I do bveryb sincerely, for telling me
frankly what you have conc your mind against me. The only way to clear
up misunderstandings is to speak plainly about them, and some of the
impressions which seem to have been made upon you are such as if you had
not told them to me, I certainly should never have guessed. I feel as
strongly as you do the ludicrousness of your having to ask me what I
have seen to make me entertain I know not what mean opinion of you, and
I wonder that what you feel to be so ridiculous, you should nevertheless
have thought to be probable. I may in my turn ask you, what you have
seen in me Edition: current; Page: [144] which made it likely that,
absolutely without cause, I should have formed an unfavourable opinion
of one for whom I have professed, and continue to profess, so much
esteem and regard? As to the idea that any intimate friend of mine, or
any person deriving information from me, has spread any reports or
communicated any impressions disadvantageous to you, I am sure, since
you say it, that you yourself fully believe it, but I tell you with the
same frankness you have used to me, that I disbelieve it totally.

Surely, too, I may well be surprised that you should think anything of a
bad joke about Vienna, which I have not the smallest recollection of
making, but which, I am quite sure, had not the slightest reference to
you? I can only have meant, that the next time we went to Vienna there
would perhaps be something new to be seen there.

My letter from Avignon2 was quite another thing, and knowing as I now do
the state of your feelings, I can well understand your being pained by
it. But you must recollect that I did not dthen knowd what I know now,3
and it never entered into my head that your object in coming was to say
anything particular, which you thought you had not had an opportunity of
saying before. I thought that you simply desired to see the place and to
see us, and in so doing I neither thought you obtrusive, nor imagined
that you expected anything but what your knowledge of our friendship for
you perfectly entitled you to expect. But knowing that my time was much
occupied, I feared you might be disappointed; and it seemed right to let
you know that I could not give you so full and free an invitation to
come whenever it might be convenient to you, as I had done in England;
and to tell you so before you had undertaken so long a journey under
what might have been a mistaken impression that I had more leisure for
seeing friends here than in England. I thought I was using a freedom
which I could not have taken with a mere acquaintance, but which I ewase
even bound to use with a friend.a

To speak now of a pleasanter subject; your publisher4 has no need to
take any steps for obtaining authority to publish a translation of the
Utilitarianism. I am the sole owner of the copy right, and neither I nor
my publisher has made any reservation of the right of translating that
or any other of my works. But as you wish for a declaration that you
have my concurrence and sanction for translating it, I give you such a
declaration with much pleasure. As you have not told me in what language
it should be written, I write it in English, but will repeat it in
French if Edition: current; Page: [145] desired. I expect both pleasure
and benefit from the essay of your own which you intend prefixing to
it.5

With our kind regards to your sister and to Mr. Wessel, I am, Dear Sir

yours very sincerely

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 24 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

John Plummer

Plummer, John

671A.


TO JOHN PLUMMER1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Jan. 24 1864

Dear Sir,

I thank you for your two letters, and their various inclosures, by which
I have been much interested. I hope that your connection with the Sydney
Morning Herald2 will continue as satisfactorily as it has begun. I have
read all your articles in the Penny Newsman3 some of which I liked very
much and I have little doubt that I shall like your Essay on Colonies;
but I will, as you desire, criticize it freely.4 I do not, any more than
you, agree entirely with Mr Goldwin Smith.5 I think that a Edition:
current; Page: [146] sort of modified federation between a mother
country and colonies may be usefully maintained as long as neither party
desires to separate.

Do not send anything more to this address at present, as we return to
England in a fortnight.6 I need hardly say that we shall be glad to see
you at Blackheath when you are in town and it is convenient to you to
come.

With our kind remembrances to Mrs Plummer, I am,

very sincerely yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 26, 1864

Saint Véran, Avignon

671B.


TO THE GARDENERS’ CHRONICLE AND AGRICULTURAL GAZETTE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Jan. 26, 1864

I have just seen in a newspaper a piece of intelligence which I
earnestly hope is not true, but which is stated so circumstantially that
I fear there must be some foundation for it.2 The statement is, that the
Royal Horticultural Society intends offering three prizes for the three
best herbaria of every county in England, and three additional prizes,
for the best of these best. If this most inconsiderate resolution has
really been taken, I am sure it must have been in the absence of those
members of the Council who have any real sympathy with British Botany.
If it be carried into effect, the present year 1864 will be marked in
our botanical annals as the date of the extinction of nearly all the
rare species in our already so scanty flora. If the extirpation of these
rarities had been the direct object of the Society, they could have done
nothing more effectual than by inviting, not simply three botanists in
every county, but all the dabblers in plant collecting, a race whose
selfish rapacity certainly needs no additional stimulation, and all of
whom may think they have a chance of one of these prizes, and holding
out to them a positive inducement to hunt out all the rare plants in
every part of the country and to carry off all they find, or destroy
what they do not carry off, in order that not only they may themselves
possess the plants, but that their competitors may not. Already our rare
Edition: current; Page: [147] plants are becoming scarcer every year.
You are, no doubt, aware how rapidly, for example, the rare Kentish
Orchids are disappearing. The Royal Horticultural Society is proposing
to treat rare plants as King Alfred treated wolves,3 and this under the
profession of encouraging local botany—as if local botany could be
encouraged by destroying that on which it feeds, or as if anyone were
likely to begin studying the science in hopes of collecting a good local
flora in a single summer. All local botanists will be thrown into
consternation by this project, and, if it is not yet too late, I am sure
they would all join in entreating you to use your good influence towards
stopping so destructive a scheme.4

J.S.M.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 25. 1864

Blackheath

George Grote

Grote, George

683A.


TO GEORGE GROTE1

Blackheath

March 25. 1864

My dear Grote

I inclose a copy of M. Barrère’s printed testimonials.2 They will shew
you how successful he is considered to have been as a teacher; which
must tend greatly to make his judgment a good one as to the questions
which test acquirements.

He is one of the very few French teachers in England who are teachers by
profession and not from accidental circumstances; and the Society of
French Teachers in London has shewn its opinion of him by putting him
first on the list of its Vice Presidents, M. Cassal, your late Examiner,
being President.3

With our kind regards to Mrs Grote—I am yrs ever truly,

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [148]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 7. 1864

Blackheath Park, Kent

Maxwell Tylden Masters

Masters, Maxwell Tylden

689A.


TO MAXWELL TYLDEN MASTERS1

Blackheath Park, Kent

April 7. 1864

Mr J.S. Mill presents his compliments to Mr Masters and if Mr Masters is
disposed to join in the accompanying representation to the Council of
the Horticultural Society,2 and has not already signed another copy,
requests the favour of his signing and returning it either to the
undermentioned address or to Professor Babington, Cambridge.3

Many of the most distinguished botanists have already either given or
promised their signature.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 12, 1864

B[lackheath] P[ark]

James Fitzjames Stephen

Stephen, James Fitzjames

690A.


TO JAMES FITZJAMES STEPHEN1

B[lackheath] P[ark]

April 12, 1864

Dear Sir—

You have put to me a question which it is very difficult, or rather
impossible, to answer satisfactorily. There is no one living of whom I
would venture to affirm beforehand that he might be expected to write
such a treatise on the fundamental problems of religion & morals that it
would be good for him to give up a profession he likes & change his
plans of life rather than not write it. I should expect confidently that
if you threw your whole mind into writing such a book, or indeed any
other book which you are at all likely to write, it would, at the least,
contain a great deal that would be valuable. But it deserves
consideration whether even the best book that could be written in our
day, on morals & religion Edition: current; Page: [149] generally, would
do more good than may be done by the continual illustration & discussion
of the leading points of those subjects, in connection with particular
speculative or practical questions. For such discussion you have a
decided talent, & it would afford the materials of many books as well as
periodical writings. However this may be, the question is one which no
one but yourself can decide. It is my creed that any one who can do
anything, of an intellectual kind, well, is usually a better judge than
other people what he can do best, & what it is of most use for him to
attempt.

We leave for Avignon before next Sunday, but after our return I shall be
happy to have any discussions you may desire with you.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 26. 1864

Blackheath Park

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

700.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath Park

June 26. 1864

Dear Sir

I have delayed writing, in hopes that I should, long before this, have
heard from you of your intended publication;2 but aI have now been so
long without news of any kind from you, that I much wish to know how you
are in health, and how you are going on in all respects.3 You would be
very much mistaken if you thought that I feel less interested in you, or
less desirous to hear from you, than before the painful circumstances
which were the subject of our latest correspondence. If these
circumstances make any difference, it is the contrary way. And, besides
my interest in you, I feel a strong interest in what you do. I believe
you to be capable, as few are, of doing important things both in
philosophy and in erudition—the former of a kind specially required at
the present time, and perhaps even more so in Germany than elsewhere:
and I am anxious that such a capacity should be turned, as much as
possible, to the benefit of the world.

I have little to tellb which regards us. Our life has been going on in
the usual manner. I have been working hard at my book on Hamilton,4 and
it is now well Edition: current; Page: [150] advanced towards
completion. You are one of the most competent judges of such a book, and
one of those whose approbation of it I most desire.

I lately saw M. Littré5 at Paris, and in conversing with him on the
state of German philosophy, I mentioned your name. I was glad to find
that he is in correspondence with you, and to the extent of his
opportunities, appreciates you justly.a

I am Dear Sir
 ever sincerely yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 11, 1864

Blackheath

William Dougal Christie

Christie, William Dougal

713A.


TO [WILLIAM DOUGAL CHRISTIE]1

Blackheath

Aug. 11, 1864

Dear Sir

I thank you for the volume on Brazil.2 I am far too deeply interested in
the slavery question not to have attended to what is going on respecting
it in Brazil as far as I had the means. I have read all the letters
signed C (not doubting that they were yours)3 as well as all those of
your antagonist,4 and the comparison has strengthened the impression I
already had that you are entirely in the right. But there is a strong
party in England now who will always give slaveholders their good word
in spite of all evidence. It is no wonder you have against you those who
are again trying to induce England to renounce the attempt to check the
African slave trade.5 But the Daily News ought not to join with them,
and, I am convinced, would not, if better informed.

Edition: current; Page: [151]
You are very usefully doing what you can to inform it better. I am

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 29. 1864

Avignon

Prescott, Grote

Grote, Prescott,

720A.


TO MESSRS. PRESCOTT, GROTE & CO.1

Avignon

Sept. 29. 1864

Dear Sirs

Be pleased to receive my quarterly payment from the India Office due
today, and oblige

yours very truly,

J.S. Mill

Messrs Prescott, Grote & Co

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 24. 1865

Blackheath

John Russell

Russell, John

758A.


TO JOHN RUSSELL1

Blackheath

Feb. 24. 1865

Dear Lord Amberley

I send you the letter from my friend Mr Kyllmann2 which I mentioned to
you the other day. Since the receipt of it, I have received another,
which I also enclose, because I think it alters the aspect of matters
considerably and I doubt altogether whether Mr Kyllmann’s plans will be
carried out for some time to come. But they are for the future: and I
think you will be interested in seeing that there is a considerable
following for them among the younger leaders of the working men.

As you will see that I was asked to take an active part in the intended
movement, it may be well to say that I have refused to join in demanding
the suffrage for all men, to the exclusion of women, and required also a
writing and cyphering qualification, and Hare’s system.3 I am, Dear Lord
Amberley

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [152]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 30. 1865

Saint Véran, Avignon

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

806.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Saint Véran, Avignon

April 30. 1865

Dear Sir

aI have delayed thanking you for the first number of your Herculanean
series,2 in hopes that I should have been able to say something about
the work itself. I have, however, been so busy, that I have not yet had
time to do more than read your Preface and Introduction and merely
glance at the Greek text. What you say of it, however, proves it to be,
at the very least, a highly important and novel contribution to the
history of Greek thought; and I look forward with great pleasure to
making a real study of it at some not distant time.

But, interesting as such labours are, you are capable of things much
more valuable than such mere editorial work. I cannot wish that you
should leave unfinished what you have so well begun, but I shall be glad
when the time comes to which you seemed to be looking forward in your
last letter, now some months ago.a In the same letter you promised me a
longer one, which I hope will not be much longer delayed; though, by my
own delay in writing to you, I have almost lost the right to say so.

bI hope, before this, you have received the book on Hamilton, and also
the first of two articles which I have written on Comte’s philosophy.
The second article is in print, and I expect to be able to send it to
you before it is published in England.3 I shall be well content if you
are half as well pleased with these, as you are sure to be with Mr
Grote’s book on Plato.4 This is nearly all printed, and I have read most
of it; and both in point of learning and of thought it comes up to my
highest expectations. It cannot, I think, fail to produce a great effect
in Germany, where the thoroughness of his knowledge of the subject will
be much better appreciated than by an unlearned public, which can only
take it on trust.b

With our kind remembrances to your sister and to Mr Wessel, believe me
ever

yours most truly

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [153]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 15. 1865

Avignon

William Stanley Jevons

Jevons, William Stanley

819A.


TO WILLIAM STANLEY JEVONS1

Avignon

May 15. 1865

Dear Sir

I did receive, and thought that I had acknowledged, the copy you were
kind enough to send of your work on Logic.2 I read it attentively, and
the only knowledge I have of Prof. Boole’s system is derived from it.3
My impression was, that there is great ingenuity and power of
consecutive thought, both in the system itself, and in your modification
of it. But you are quite right in supposing that I do not see, in the
result attained, any value commensurate with the mental effort. I look
upon it as I do upon Mr De Morgan’s elaborate system of numerically
definite propositions and syllogisms: as a remarkable feat of mental
gymnastics, capable of being very useful in the way of a scholastic
exercise, but of no considerable utility for any other purpose.4

I did not make any mention of Mr Boole in my book on Hamilton, the book
being quite long enough as it was. But if you, or any other of Mr
Boole’s admirers,5 should make the book an occasion for raising any
discussion on the point, I shall be very well pleased.

I am Dear Sir
 yours very faithfully

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [154]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 18. 1865

Mont Doré les Bains

James Fitzjames Stephen

Stephen, James Fitzjames

833A.


TO JAMES FITZJAMES STEPHEN1

Mont Doré les Bains

June 18. 1865

Dear Sir

Of the articles you mention, the only ones I distinctly recollect are
those on Newman and Merivale, and of those I well remember that I
thought highly.2 What points there were, if any, on which I differed
from you, I could not say from present recollection. But I should
suppose that the amount of thought, not of a commonplace kind, which
they contain, and their applicability to existing and important
controversies, would quite warrant their republication. I will however
look at them again. I have most of the numbers of Fraser for the last
few years, and could probably turn to all the articles you mention.3

I am glad that you have thoughts of standing at the election, and should
be much pleased by your success.4

I hope to see you at the Club on the 7th,5 when we may perhaps be able
to arrange a walk or a talk before you go on circuit.

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [155]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 1. 1865

Blackheath

Alexander Bain

Bain, Alexander

839A.


TO ALEXANDER BAIN1

Blackheath

July 1. 1865

Dear Bain

I arrived here yesterday quite unexpectedly, finding it impossible any
longer to resist the pressure put upon me by the Westminster Committee
to shew myself to my supporters, and to the electors generally.2 In
consequence I find occupation cut out for me for almost every evening up
to Friday,3 and the remainder of my time will not be more than enough
for preparation. I might perhaps manage to have a walk with you in the
Park on Tuesday afternoon if convenient to you: otherwise I shall be
obliged to put off seeing you till Friday, by which time I hope my
troubles will be over. We hope you and Mrs Bain4 will dine with us on
Sunday the 9th at six. During the week following I shall be more at
leisure, for the election is to be on Tuesday the 11th.

ever yours truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 13. 1865

Blackheath Park, Kent

James Alfred Cooper

Cooper, James Alfred

844A.


TO [JAMES ALFRED COOPER]1

Blackheath Park, Kent

July 13. 1865

Sir

I received your letter, and the volume of the British Controversialist
long after date, being absent from Avignon at the time, and it was still
longer before I had Edition: current; Page: [156] time to examine the
notices relating to myself,2 or to answer your letter. There are in the
notices a greater amount of authentic details than I could at all have
expected, mixed however with some considerable inaccuracies which I
should have been glad to correct, had I not been prevented from doing so
in time for the number of the Controversialist which you designated for
receiving the correction.

I have hitherto thought that my System of Logic is not of a sufficiently
popular character to call for a popular edition.3 The subject, however,
is open to consideration. I am, Sir

very faithfully yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 15. 1865

Blackheath

William Longman

Longman, William

846A.


TO WILLIAM LONGMAN1

Blackheath

July 15. 1865

Dear Sir

I thank you for your congratulations and will endeavour to send enough
of the Logic2 to begin printing from at the earliest time possible.

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 11. 1865

[Blackheath Park]

John Watkins

Watkins, John

862AA.


TO JOHN WATKINS1

[Blackheath Park]

Aug. 11. 1865

Dear Sir

My dislike of the majority of the photographs is no disparagement to the
Edition: current; Page: [157] photographer, as I am much pleased with
those I think successful.2

I am leaving town very soon,3 and am so extremely busy that I cannot
possibly find time for another sitting during the interval. But is there
any hindrance to taking a fresh photograph of the photographs
themselves? It is surely often done from engravings.

If it would be any accommodation to you I can dispense with some of the
200 copies. Fifty of each will be quite enough for the present, and I
can order others when I want them; going without, in case they are not
to be had. You are also welcome to take as many as you like from the
cameo.

I will return both the framed portraits, as I do not desire to keep the
one in profile, though I quite approve of it.

I thank you for the likeness of Mr Hughes.4

I am dear Sir
 yours very faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Watkins, Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 14. 1865

Blackheath Park

Phebe Lankester

Lankester, Phebe

865A.


TO PHEBE LANKESTER1

Blackheath Park

Aug. 14. 1865

Dear Madam

I have now the pleasure of inclosing a few photographs,2 of which I
request your acceptance for yourself and any friends who have done me
the honour to take interest in the election and to whom you may think
fit to offer them.

I am Dear Madam
 very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Mrs Lankester

Edition: current; Page: [158]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 22. 1865

Prague

Arthur John Williams

Williams, Arthur John

872B.


TO ARTHUR JOHN WILLIAMS1

Prague

Sept. 22. 1865

Dear Sir

I have only just received your note of the 7th inst. I am very desirous
of promoting the abolition of the remaining exclusions of evidence, and
will certainly support in Parliament any movement for that purpose.2 But
it is out of my power to attend the approaching meeting of the Social
Science Association3 or to write a paper on the question, nor can I
even, at present, think of any person to whom I could advise you to
apply.4 Very few persons except lawyers have turned their attention to
the question. I am, Dear Sir

yours very faithfully

J.S. Mill

A.J. Williams, Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 12. 1865

Avignon

Henry Wentworth Acland

Acland, Henry Wentworth

895A.


TO HENRY WENTWORTH ACLAND1

Avignon

Dec. 12. 1865

Dear Sir

Your letter has been forwarded to me here, but without the Oration2 and
the other works which you have been so kind as to send,3 and which I
shall doubtless Edition: current; Page: [159] find at Blackheath when I
return there. I am much obliged to you for them, and will not fail to
read them as soon as time permits.

You will have found in Comte a broad enough statement, certainly, of the
negative doctrine respecting Final Causes,4 but very little argument,
for he seemed to imagine that the question had been set at rest by
others before him.

I am
 yours very truly

J.S. Mill

Dr Acland

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 4 janvier 1866

Avignon

Jules Ernest Naville

Naville, Jules Ernest

903A.


TO JULES ERNEST NAVILLE1

Avignon

le 4 janvier 1866

Monsieur

Je vous remercie de bon coeur d’avoir bien voulu m’envoyer votre
rapport,2 que je trouverai sans doute à mon retour en Angleterre pour
l’ouverture très prochaine du parlement, et que je lirai avec le plus
vif intérêt. Cet intérêt sera vivement partagé par M. Hare l’auteur réel
de la grande et féconde idée3 qui a porté tant de lumières dans mon
intelligence comme dans la vôtre. Sans exagération, cette idée a relevé
mes espérances et dissipé mes principales craintes pour l’avenir du
genre humain.

Je savais déjà, Monsieur, que je n’avais pas l’avantage d’être d’accord
avec vous en matière de philosophie. Je n’en mets que plus de prix à
l’accord qui existe entre nous sur l’une des plus graves questions de la
science politique. Je me flatte d’ailleurs que si nous différons sur
quelques-uns des principes les plus généraux, nous tirons souvent
peut-être de nos principes différents les mêmes conclusions. Depuis
longtemps je pense et je dis que la pratique dépend bien moins de la
philosophie première que de la seconde—des axiomata media de Bacon:4 et
il Edition: current; Page: [160] m’arrive souvent d’avoir un grand
nombre de ceux-ci en commun avec des philosophes qui les acceptent
d’intuition tandis que j’y arrive par raisonnement.

Agréez, Monsieur, l’expression de ma haute estime et de mon sincère
dévouement.

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 28. 1866

Blackheath Park

Thomas Havlin

Havlin, Thomas

910A.


TO THOMAS HAVLIN1

Blackheath Park

Jan. 28. 1866

Dear Sir

I enclose one of the photographs for which you do me the honour to
express a wish; and in reply to your other request, [breaks off].

I am, Dear Sir

yours faithfully

J.S. Mill

Thomas Havlin Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 31. 1866

Blackheath Park

Edwin Arnold

Arnold, Edwin

914A.


TO EDWIN ARNOLD1

Blackheath Park

Jan. 31. 1866

Dear Sir

It is a very tempting offer to place the great circulation of the Daily
Telegraph at my disposal for so important a purpose as the one you
mention. As a mark of confidence in me, it deserves my thankful
acknowledgment, and I cannot be supposed to be ill affected to a journal
which gave me such able and powerful support at the Westminster
election. But it is totally impossible for me to have any personal
connexion with a paper which takes the part the Telegraph does on the
Jamaica question.2 Not only every principle I have, but the honour and
character of England for generations to come, are at stake in the
condign punishment of the Edition: current; Page: [161] atrocities of
which, by their own not confession, but boast, the Jamaica authorities
have been guilty; and I cannot, while that question is pending, select
as my official organ on another subject, a paper with which, in a matter
of such transcendant importance, I am at open war.3

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Edwin Arnold Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 3. 1866

Blackheath

914B.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Blackheath

Feb. 3. 1866

Dear Sir

I return the article from the Scotsman2 which is excellent.

Do you know what are Neate’s3 opinions on the subject? If they are
right, he would be a very fit man to make the first move.

I am Dear Sir
 yrs very truly

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [162]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wednesday Feb.-Apr. 1866

Ralph Bernal Osborne

Osborne, Ralph Bernal

914C.


TO [RALPH BERNAL?] OSBORNE1

Wednesday.
 [
Feb.-Apr. 1866

?]

Mr Mill presents his compliments to Mr Osborne and incloses a gallery
order for Monday next, having given his order for every day this week.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 16. 1866

Blackheath Park

920A.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Blackheath Park

Feb. 16. 1866

Sir

I have had the honour of receiving your note of yesterday’s date, but
considering the great pressure of applications for admission for the
Speaker’s gallery, which on all occasions of interest are much more
numerous than can possibly be complied with,2 I am afraid I cannot
undertake to make an application in favour of a gentleman who is neither
a personal acquaintance nor a constituent.

I am Sir
 yrs very faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 18. 1866

Blackheath Park

William Longman

Longman, William

920B.


TO WILLIAM LONGMAN1

Blackheath Park

Feb. 18. 1866

Dear Sir

I thank you and Mrs W. Longman for your kind invitation, but I find it
Edition: current; Page: [163] absolutely necessary at present to decline
all evening engagements.

I am much obliged to you for the promptitude of your answer on the
subject of Count Gurowski’s work.2

3I should be glad to have copies of the Political Economy, Liberty, and
Representative Government4 (Library Editions) sent, free of charge, to
the “Durham Cooperative Institute” No 6, Claypath, Durham.

I am Dear Sir
 yours very truly

J.S. Mill

William Longman Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 22. 1866

Blackheath Park

William Corrie

Corrie, William

921A.


TO WILLIAM CORRIE1

Blackheath Park

Feb. 22. 1866

Dear Sir

I have had the honour of receiving your note inviting me on the part of
the Sheriffs of London to dine with them in the House tomorrow (Friday)
and I will with much pleasure avail myself of their kind invitation.

I am Dear Sir
 yours faithfully

J.S. Mill

William Corrie Esq.

Edition: current; Page: [164]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 15. [1866]

Blackheath Park

John Nicolaus Trübner

Trübner, John Nicolaus

933A.


TO [JOHN NICOLAUS TRÜBNER]1

Blackheath Park

April 15. [1866]

Dear Sir

I have a small packet of books and documents2 which I am desirous of
sending to the Hon. S.S. Cox, Senator now or lately for Ohio, at an
address in New York. Would it be convenient to you to forward it? or
would you kindly suggest to me the best mode of doing so?

I am Dear Sir
 yrs very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 4, 1866

Blackheath Park, Kent

940A.


TO THE TRUSTEES OF OWENS COLLEGE1

Blackheath Park, Kent

May 4, 1866

Such of Mr. Jevons’s writings as I am acquainted with give evidence of
decided originality, much knowledge and mental vigour, and an unusual
degree of precision of thought and investigation.

His essay on the Gold Question2 was the first starting point of the
important series of discussions which has changed, and, it may now
almost be said, settled the opinions of instructed men on the subject.

Edition: current; Page: [165]
The merit of his investigation of the “Coal Question” can hardly be
rated too highly.3

His “Logic of Quality”4 showed extraordinary familiarity with and power
over Formal Logic, and if I had a fault to find, it would be that the
expenditure of power was greater than any result to be obtained by that
mode of employing it would sufficiently remunerate.

Of Mr. Jevons’s teaching powers I can say nothing; of these, however,
the authorities of Owens College can judge from their own experience.
But as regards his knowledge both of Logic and of Political Economy, so
far as the whole can be judged from a part, I should form a very high
estimate of it.

J. Stuart Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 21. 1866

Crowcombe, Somerset

William Dougal Christie

Christie, William Dougal

949A.


TO WILLIAM DOUGAL CHRISTIE1

Crowcombe, Somerset

May 21. 1866

Dear Sir

No subject connected with the representation is of greater practical
importance than bribery and election expenses, and I hope that a great
and united effort will be made by reformers on the subject.2 But
Gladstone, in introducing the Franchise Bill, was understood to give an
express promise to take up this subject when he has done with the other,
and he certainly shewed a very strong feeling of its importance.3 It
seems to me, therefore, that the time which he indicated for himself, is
the best time for us; and it is probable that he will then be willing
and desirous to listen to any suggestions on the matter from persons
whom he respects.

Edition: current; Page: [166]
If the grouping of boroughs has the effect you apprehend, it will still
further strengthen our argument. But as far as I am able to foresee, I
rather expect from it a contrary effect.

I am sorry you are not member for Cambridge, but I hope you will find
another seat after the Reform Bill passes if not before.4 I am, Dear Sir

yrs very truly

J.S. Mill

W.D. Christie Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 21, 1866

Blackheath Park, Kent

G. Harvey

Harvey, G.

949B.


TO G. HARVEY1

Blackheath Park, Kent

May 21, 1866

Dear Sir

Although very much occupied I have, with difficulty, found time to read
the pamphlet which I am indebted to you for sending me. It has not,
however, persuaded me to agree with you; but I cannot possibly undertake
to discuss so intricate a subject with you in a letter.

I do not know to what article on Money your letter refers as I have
never published any article with that title.

J.S. Mill

G. Harvey Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 30. [1866]

Oliver Wendell Holmes

Holmes, Oliver Wendell

952A.


TO OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES1

May 30. [1866]

Dear Sir

It is unlucky that you are engaged on the days on which I am free. The
best proposal I can now make for any day previous to the 8th would be,
for you to come to the dinner of the Political Economy Club next Friday,
June 1. There will be Edition: current; Page: [167] several persons
there whom you may like to see, and I hope to be able to leave the House
for a part of the evening to go there.2 If you will come to the House of
Commons soon after ½ past 5, we will go together, or, if I am prevented,
my friend Professor Fawcett will be happy to go with you to the Club.
Please let me know in the course of Thursday whether you will come. I
am, Dear Sir

yrs very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 1. 1866

Joshua Toulmin Smith

Smith, Joshua Toulmin

955A.


TO JOSHUA TOULMIN SMITH1

June 1. 1866

Dear Sir

Thank you for your note. I am aware that in this country and in all
others whose laws were originally founded on the feudal principle,
landed possessions were held subject to, and even as a provision for,
public duties, and that the idea of absolute property in land is
essentially modern. You, however, as a Constitutional lawyer, know
infinitely more on the subject than I do, and I shall be very glad to
have the opportunity of consulting you when I again have occasion to
touch on the point.

The other fact you mention, that the expenses of elections were once a
public charge, is new to me, and will be a most telling point to bring
forward when that subject is before Parliament, which it is sure, very
shortly, to be.2 When that time comes, I should be very glad indeed to
be able to produce a copy of the writ and read parts of it to the House.

I am with many thanks, Dear Sir
 yours very truly

J.S. Mill

Toulmin Smith Esq.

Edition: current; Page: [168]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 2. 1866

Blackheath

Oliver Wendell Holmes

Holmes, Oliver Wendell

956A.


TO OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES1

Blackheath

June 2. 1866

Dear Sir

I inclose an introduction to Mr Herbert Spencer, and am only sorry that
you are not able to meet him at my house.2

I hope that we shall dine together at the House of Commons, if not on
Tuesday, on some other day before you go.3

I am Dear Sir
 yours very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

16 June. 1866

Blackheath Park

James Beal

Beal, James

961A.


TO JAMES BEAL1

Blackheath Park

16 June. 1866

Dear Sir

Mr Hickson would like before he gives evidence, to see the evidence
which has already been given.2 As he will be one of our most valuable
witnesses, and as I have no second copy of the evidence, I should be
glad if possible to send him the copy, a portion of which you have.
Would you therefore, if not using it, be kind enough to send that
portion either to me at the House, or addressed to himself “care of
housekeeper, East Temple Chambers, 2 Whitefriars Street”—in the latter
case giving me a note of the numbers you have sent, that I may know if I
supply him with all the remainder.

We are doing little good in Ayrton’s Committee.3 Vestry clerks and
chairmen Edition: current; Page: [169] are coming up one after another
to celebrate the admirable working of their own system, and we want
people who from their own knowledge can testify to the contrary.

I wish I could have been at the discussion in your Committee4 on
Thursday, but the time (in the middle of a Reform debate with a division
possible at any moment) made it impracticable.5 I have had some talk
with Mr. Beggs6 which I hope to be able to supplement by some talk with
you.

I am Dear Sir
 yours very truly

J.S. Mill

James Beal Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sunday 9 July, 1866

Blackheath Park

Joseph William Crompton

Crompton, Joseph William

968A.


TO JOSEPH WILLIAM CROMPTON1

Blackheath Park

Sunday
 [
9 July, 1866

]

Dear Sir

On returning home yesterday evening, I heard that you had had the
trouble of calling. I shall be engaged all tomorrow forenoon, but if you
could come to the House of Commons about five oclock, I have no doubt I
should be able to see you. If you cannot do this, perhaps you would be
so good as to write.

I am Dear Sir
 yrs very truly

J.S. Mill

Rev. Joseph Crompton.

Edition: current; Page: [170]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 20. 1866

Blackheath Park

William Smith

Smith, William

973A.


TO WILLIAM SMITH1

Blackheath Park

July 20. 1866

Dear Sir

Monsieur Barrère, a much esteemed and valued friend of mine, is a
candidate for the headship of the International School which is to be
founded at Paris, by the Committee of which you are a member.2 Monsieur
Barrère’s attainments, his great experience as a teacher both in France
and in England, and his general character and disposition, all of which
can be most amply vouched for, would render him, I should think, a
highly fit person for conducting such a school, and a most likely person
to make it succeed. M. Barrère would be happy to give you in a personal
interview, all possible information respecting his antecedents, and his
qualifications for the post.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Dr William Smith.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

25 July. [1866]

Blackheath

William Longman

Longman, William

976A.


TO [WILLIAM LONGMAN]1

Blackheath

25 July. [1866]

Dear Sir

I duly received your remittance and the accounts—with which I have great
reason to be satisfied.

If any thing should occur to me which I wish to say to you before you
go, I will either write or call on you.

very truly yrs,

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [171]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 5. 1866

Blackheath Park

George Jacob Holyoake

Holyoake, George Jacob

982A.


TO GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE1

Blackheath Park

Aug. 5. 1866

Dear Sir

It is quite possible that occasions may at some time or other arise when
I might be glad to have the pages of the Working Man open to me for the
purpose of addressing things directly to the working classes; but it is
impossible for me to make any promise or hold out any prospect of my
doing so; for the quantity of work devolving upon me, even independently
of Parliament, is already much greater than I can do with complete
satisfaction to myself. The work awaiting me for the approaching recess
is enough to occupy the whole of my time, and I cannot at present look
forward to any period when I shall have leisure for any new engagements.

I am Dear Sir

yrs very truly

J.S. Mill

G.J. Holyoake Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 30. 1866

Barcelonette, Basses Alpes

Walter Lowe Clay

Clay, Walter Lowe

992A.


TO WALTER LOWE CLAY1

Barcelonette, Basses Alpes

Aug. 30. 1866

Dear Sir

I am glad that there is to be a discussion at the meeting of the Social
Science Association respecting Extradition Treaties, and I think the
opinions and feelings which such a discussion is likely to evoke may
have a useful influence on the decision of Parliament next year.2 But it
is quite as much out of my power to write a Edition: current; Page:
[172] paper on the subject as it is to attend the discussion, having
work to do which must be done before the reassembling of Parliament and
which will require all the intervening time.3 I am Dear Sir

yours very faithfully

J.S. Mill

Rev. W.L. Clay.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 2. 1866

Avignon

Elizabeth Malleson

Malleson, Elizabeth

999A.


TO ELIZABETH MALLESON1

Avignon

Oct. 2. 1866

Dear Madam

I wish every possible success to the Working Women’s College; but,
independently of my absence from England, it would be quite incompatible
with other very pressing occupations for me to attend and take part in
the proceedings at the Meeting on the 19th; much more to prepare so
important a thing as an inaugural address.2 Regretting my inability to
give a more satisfactory answer, I am, Dear Madam

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Mrs F. Malleson.

Edition: current; Page: [173]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday [1867?]

Blackheath Park

John Morley

Morley, John

1017A.


TO JOHN MORLEY1

Blackheath Park

Kent

Saturday [1867?]

Dear Mr Morley

If you are not engaged tomorrow, we shall be very glad to see you. We
dine at five, and there is a train from Charing Cross at four. I am,

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 24. 1867

Avignon

The Reporter Of

Of, The Reporter

1023A.


TO THE REPORTER OF THE GLASGOW HERALD1

Avignon

Jan. 24. 1867

Mr Mill presents his compliments to the Reporter of the Glasgow Herald,
has received his note dated the 19th, and will take care that a printed
copy of his Address reaches the Herald on the 1st of February.2

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 22. 1867

John Malcolm Forbes Ludlow

Ludlow, John Malcolm Forbes

1046A.


TO JOHN MALCOLM FORBES LUDLOW1

Feb. 22. 1867

Dear Sir

As far as I have any voice in the matter, I think it not only
unobjectionable, but Edition: current; Page: [174] most desirable, that
you should help Mr Scott to put into a proper shape his very enlightened
views on the reform of the municipal government of London.2 I will take
an opportunity of speaking to Mr Beal on the subject, but I think there
can be little doubt of his assent. I am, Dear Sir

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

J.M. Ludlow Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 23. [1867]

John Malcolm Forbes Ludlow

Ludlow, John Malcolm Forbes

1046B.


TO JOHN MALCOLM FORBES LUDLOW1

Feb. 23. [1867]

Dear Sir

Since I wrote to you, I have seen Mr Beal, and he not only entirely
approves of your giving your assistance to Mr Scott, but greatly desires
that you would do so. I am, Dear Sir

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

J.M. Ludlow Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 4. 1867

Blackheath Park

Andrea Crestadoro

Crestadoro, Andrea

1051A.


TO ANDREA CRESTADORO1

Blackheath Park

March 4. 1867

Dear Sir

I beg to apologize for having so long delayed to express my thanks to
yourself and to the Chairman of the Library for the gift of your
excellent Catalogue.2 I have desired my publishers to send two or three
of my books which are not already in the Edition: current; Page: [175]
Library and of which I request its acceptance.3 There are others which I
shall have the pleasure of sending as soon as they are reprinted.4 I am,
Dear Sir

yours very sincerely

J.S. Mill

Dr Crestadoro

&c &c

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 6. 1867

Blackheath Park

George John Graham

Graham, George John

1054A.


TO GEORGE JOHN GRAHAM1

Blackheath Park

March 6. 1867

Dear Graham

I will with the greatest pleasure do what you request.2

With regard to my not going into what is called society, I should not do
so even if I had time for it, for as it is neither duty nor pleasure,
neither work nor recreation, there is no reason why I should. But seeing
you is quite another thing, and would be a real pleasure. Unfortunately
the work I am now overladen with, is not like writing a book or an
article, but is made up of bits and scraps, and cannot be done in the
way you kindly offer, so that I do not see my way to being able to
accept your invitation.

I am glad you are going to retire while you have good work in you, and
the power of enjoying it. I have always regretted that capacities like
yours should have been wholly engrossed by duties which did not require
the highest of them.3

I am Dear Graham
 ever yours truly

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [176]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Thursday 28 Mar., 1867

Henry Studdy Theobald

Theobald, Henry Studdy

1070A.


TO HENRY STUDDY THEOBALD1

Thursday evg
 [
28 Mar., 1867

]

Dear Sir

I inclose a note to my old and excellent friend M. d’Eichthal, the best
friend I have left at Paris after the many whom death has taken away.2
He has access to most people that could help you and to most things that
would interest you and I am sure of his hearty good will to any friend
of mine.

I am Dear Sir
 yours very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 21. 1867

Saint Véran, Avignon

James Beal

Beal, James

1075A.


TO JAMES BEAL1

Saint Véran, Avignon

April 21. 1867

Dear Sir

I am sorry that I did not receive your note before leaving England, but
as soon as I get back I will send you the minutes of evidence, and there
need not be any hurry about returning them.2 The Committee will meet on
Tuesday the 30th to consider the Resolutions and it is probable that
they will only report Resolutions instead of making a regular Report.3
So much the better, as Ayrton4 is not likely to make the Edition:
current; Page: [177] Report we want. I shall be prepared to move for
leave to bring in your Bills as soon as they are ready.5 I am, Dear Sir

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

James Beal Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 29. 1867

Blackheath Park

Henry Wyndham Phillips

Phillips, Henry Wyndham

1076A.


TO HENRY WYNDHAM PHILLIPS1

Blackheath Park

April 29. 1867

Mr Mill presents his Compliments to the Honorary Secretary of the
Artists’ General Benevolent Institution, and regrets his inability to
accept the invitation with which he has been honoured to attend the
Anniversary Festival.2

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 24 [1867]

Blackheath Park

Katherine Louisa Russell

Russell, Katherine Louisa

1084A.


TO KATHERINE LOUISA RUSSELL1

Blackheath Park

May 24 [1867]

Dear Lady Amberley

Many thanks for your kind invitation. I should really like to look in
upon you any evening, but I do not like rushing in just at dinner time
and leaving almost before dinner is over. I am afraid the new
arrangements in the House for Tuesdays and Fridays will make it more
than ever difficult to come to your nine o’clock reception, as that will
be the time when the House will resume its sittings and get at once to
its principal business.

Edition: current; Page: [178]
The division was a great triumph, and especially Mr Bright’s voting with
us.2 We should have had near 100 votes if all had been present who have
told me that they would have voted with us if they had not paired, or
been too late. I am, Dear Lady Amberley

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 23. 1867

Blackheath Park

Alfred W. Burnett

Burnett, Alfred W.

1103A.


TO ALFRED W. BURNETT1

Blackheath Park

June 23. 1867

Dear Sir

In answer to your note, received yesterday evening, I beg to say, that
while I am most sensible to the honour of having been thought of to
represent so enlightened a body as the University of London, yet as long
as the electors of Westminster wish to retain me as their
representative, I should not think of leaving them for any other
constituency.2

I am Dear Sir
 yours very sincerely

J.S. Mill

Alfred W. Burnett Esq

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 21. 1867

Blackheath Park

John Malcolm Forbes Ludlow

Ludlow, John Malcolm Forbes

1112A.


TO JOHN MALCOLM FORBES LUDLOW1

Blackheath Park

July 21. 1867

Dear Sir

Many thanks for your note. I shall give my notice tomorrow for Tuesday
week.2 Edition: current; Page: [179] I was only waiting to be sure that
I should have all the necessary materials before that date.

I shall feel obliged to reinsert the clause providing for the election
of the Chamberlain &c. by the Common Council of London and not by the
Common Hall of the City. I also propose to insert, among the officers so
elected, the Common Sergeant.3

I am sorry the Draft of the Bill was given (by Mr Beal) to the Star
without ampler warning. The article in the Star was well meant,4 but
indiscreet as to the City, and its ascribing your note (notwithstanding
the initials) to me, was hardly excusable even by the haste with which
leading articles are written. I have been thinking of writing to Chesson
to correct the blunder.5 Do you think that desirable or not?

Adhesions seem to multiply in all quarters. I am Dear Sir

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

J.M. Ludlow Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 25. 1867

John Malcolm Forbes Ludlow

Ludlow, John Malcolm Forbes

1118A.


TO JOHN MALCOLM FORBES LUDLOW1

July 25. 1867

Dear Sir

I think you are right as to the inexpediency of writing to Chesson.2

Mr Beal did not get his copy of the Draft Bill from me. I suppose he
must have got it from the Chamberlain.3 The copy you gave me has not
been out of my possession. The one which was sent to the papers was the
Draft as altered by the Chamberlain, by the omission of a clause which,
as I mentioned to you, I intend to restore.

I have received from Beal a proof of the Memorandum.4 It is marked
“Confidential” and shall not go out of my hands. I am Dear Sir

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

J.M. Ludlow Esq.

Edition: current; Page: [180]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 31. 1867

Blackheath Park

Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant Duff

Duff, Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant

1122A.


TO MOUNTSTUART ELPHINSTONE GRANT DUFF1

Blackheath Park

July 31. 1867

Dear Sir

I have only just heard that you are a member of the constituency of the
London University.2 Some of the electors especially those interested in
sanitary and in educational questions, are desirous of proposing Mr
Chadwick as a candidate.3 I have long been very desirous that he should
be in Parliament as his great knowledge of many difficult administrative
questions and his fertility of practical resource, combined with his
great industry and public spirit, would make him useful in a way much
wanted, and in which few, if any, are capable of being equally so. I am
anxious that you should have an opportunity of considering his claims,
if possible before making up your mind to support any of the other
candidates. I hope to be allowed to say more on the subject when I meet
you at the House. I am Dear Sir

Yours very truly

J.S. Mill

M.E. Grant Duff Esq. M.P.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 3. 1867

Henry Sidgwick

Sidgwick, Henry

1127A.


TO HENRY SIDGWICK1

Aug. 3. 1867

Dear Sir

The questions mooted in your letter of July 28 are very important, and
extremely difficult if not impossible to decide by a general rule,
without many allowances for Edition: current; Page: [181] differences of
position which point out to different persons different paths of
usefulness. As you say, it is absurd to refer each man to his individual
conscience since the very question is, what his conscience ought to
prescribe. While I sympathize fully in your perplexities, I do not know
when I should be able to fix a time for discussing them at length,
either viva voce or in writing: but I would endeavour to find time for
reading the statement you speak of, and for giving some sort of opinion
respecting it. I am, Dear Sir

yours very sincerely

J.S. Mill

Henry Sidgwick Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 4 août 1867

Blackheath Park

Frédéric Passy

Passy, Frédéric

1128A.


TO FRÉDÉRIC PASSY1

Blackheath Park

Kent

le 4 août 1867

Veuillez excuser, Monsieur, le retard involontaire de ma réponse à votre
trop flatteuse lettre du 17 juillet. Le mouvement d’opinion qui a donné
lieu à la formation de la Ligue Internationale de la Paix a toutes mes
sympathies.2 Il appartenait à la France de prendre l’initiative d’un
pareil mouvement. J’applaudis de tout mon coeur aux efforts des hommes
éminents qui ont fondé la Ligue, et je me félicite de l’honneur qu’ils
me font en désirant mon adhésion. Cette adhésion leur est toute acquise,
et je vous engage, Monsieur, de vouloir bien inscrire mon nom au nombre
des Sociétaires.

Veuillez agréer, Monsieur, l’hommage de ma très haute et très
respectueuse considération.

J. Stuart Mill

Edition: current; Page: [182]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 13. 1867

House of Commons

Edwin Carton Booth

Booth, Edwin Carton

1137A.


TO EDWIN CARTON BOOTH1

House of Commons

Aug. 13. 1867

Dear Sir

It is scarcely possible for me to appoint any interviews at present with
certainty of being able to keep the engagement, but if it is convenient
to you to call on me at the House of Commons on Thursday or Friday while
the House is sitting, I should be happy to see you. I am, Dear Sir

yours very faithfully

J.S. Mill

E.C. Booth Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 17. 1867

Blackheath Park

Thomas Joseph Haslam

Haslam, Thomas Joseph

1139A.


TO THOMAS JOSEPH HASLAM1

Blackheath Park

Kent

Aug. 17. 1867

Dear Sir

Excuse the delay in acknowledging your valuable letter of July 29. Your
report, and that of Mr Webb,2 are not encouraging as to the immediate
prospects of the Women’s Suffrage movement in Dublin; but though it may
not be yet time to organise a Society there, it is all the more
desirable to obtain as many adherents as possible from Ireland to the
Society of which I have the pleasure of inclosing the papers. Besides
the Executive Committee of ladies whose names you will see,3 the
Edition: current; Page: [183] Society consists of a General Committee
who are the constituency and subscribe a guinea a year, and of ordinary
members subscribing a shilling. If the Society might have the benefit of
your name and Mrs Haslam’s in either capacity, it would give me very
great pleasure.

Several Irish Liberal members of Parliament have already joined the
General Committee, among other Messrs Maguire, Blake, O’Beirne, Sir John
Gray, and Mr Pollard Urquhart.4

I am well acquainted with your pamphlet,5 which is very good as it is,
though I have no doubt that any addition or alteration which you would
now make would still further improve it. I regret extremely that the
state of your health is such as you mention, and I hope that rest and
abstinence from unnecessary nervous and cerebral excitement will in time
reestablish it.

I am Dear Sir
 yours very sincerely

J.S. Mill

T.J. Haslam Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 26. 1867

Avignon

John Pentland Mahaffy

Mahaffy, John Pentland

1152A.


TO [JOHN PENTLAND MAHAFFY]1

Avignon

Oct. 26. 1867

Dear Sir

Absence from England and accident combined prevented me from receiving
your letter of Sept. 7 until two or three days ago, much too late to
enable me to be of any use with reference to the appointment of a
Professor on the 5th of October.2

Had I received your letter in time, I would willingly have given you a
statement Edition: current; Page: [184] in writing that though my view
of philosophy is extremely different from yours, you appear to me
qualified to state your own with clearness, comprehensiveness, and
force, and with candour towards adversaries, and that I think your
translation and commentary on Kuno Fischer’s book a valuable addition to
the literature of philosophy.3 I am, Dear Sir

yours very sincerely

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 27. 1867

Avignon

William Rossiter

Rossiter, William

1152B.


TO WILLIAM ROSSITER1

Avignon

Oct. 27. 1867

Dear Sir

I should be glad to see a good Working Men’s College established, either
in South London or anywhere else,2 but I should not like to connect my
name with any particular project of the kind unless I knew and had well
considered its plan of teaching and scheme of management, and unless my
occupations permitted me to take part in, or at least to keep myself
well informed as to the mode in which it was carried on.3 I am, Dear Sir

yours very faithfully

J.S. Mill

Wm Rossiter Esq.

Edition: current; Page: [185]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 26. 1867

Avignon

Henry Sidgwick

Sidgwick, Henry

1160A.


TO HENRY SIDGWICK1

Avignon

Nov. 26. 1867

Dear Sir

Owing to absence from England I did not receive your paper on Tests2
until long after it was sent, and had to wait much longer before I could
give it proper attention. I think it an exceedingly fair and clear
statement of many of the considerations and counter considerations which
really exist in the minds of conscientious men and influence their
personal behaviour in the matter of Tests. And I agree with you in
thinking that an ethical theory—a fixed moral principle, or set of
principles—respecting the bindingness of the obligation of a test, would
be very desirable. But it seems to me that such fixed principles cannot
be laid down for the case of Tests by itself; that the question requires
to be taken up at an earlier stage, and dealt with as part of the much
larger question, What, on the principles of a morality founded on the
general good, are the limits to the obligation of veracity? What ought
to be the exceptions (for that there ought to be some, however few,
exceptions seems to be admitted) to the general duty of truth? This
larger question has never yet been treated in a way at once rational and
comprehensive, partly because people have been afraid to meddle with it,
and partly because mankind have never yet generally admitted that the
effect which actions tend to produce on human happiness is what
constitutes them right or wrong. I would suggest that you should turn
your thoughts to this more comprehensive subject. You possess several,
far from common, qualifications for dealing with it: a strong
conscientious interest in it, and the power of representing to yourself
clearly and distinctly, without prejudice or partiality, the pro’s and
con’s of a moral question. There is therefore good reason to hope that
your meditations on the subject would not be unfruitful. Apart from this
more general subject of consideration, there would be little use in any
remarks that I could make on the special question of Tests; the
discussion of which, in the way in which you have treated it, cannot
perhaps be carried, with any useful result, much further than you have
done. I am Dear Sir

yours very sincerely

J.S. Mill

Henry Sidgwick Esq.

Edition: current; Page: [186]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 1. 1867

Avignon

Anton Dohrn

Dohrn, Anton

1160B.


TO [ANTON DOHRN]1

Avignon

Dec. 1. 1867

Dear Sir

I have no doubt of the sufficiency of your reasons for postponing the
translation of my Address, and had not the smallest notion of
complaining of it. With regard to your Preface, you are at full liberty,
so far as I am concerned, to put anything you please into it; and
criticisms on the German Universities as tried by the standard laid down
in the Address, would be very appropriate. The faults of the German
Universities are not comparable in badness to those of the English, but
that they have many grave faults I am quite prepared to believe, and
there can scarcely be a more useful service than to point them out. And
just because the German Universities are more learned and more
scientific than the English, they are likely to be more imbued with the
prejudices of commonplace learned and scientific men, who are generally
quite ignorant of everything out of their particular Fach, and are
almost as insensible to the value of large general ideas as the
practical men of common life. I am, Dear Sir

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 4. 1868

Avignon

Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant Duff

Duff, Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant

1186B.


TO MOUNTSTUART ELPHINSTONE GRANT DUFF1

Avignon

Feb. 4. 1868

Dear Sir

I have received the inclosed letter relating to Heligoland,2 but my
hands are so Edition: current; Page: [187] full that it is impossible
for me to enquire into the subject, and ascertain what ground exists for
the complaints, which, however, on the shewing of the letter, have a
just claim to be heard. It occurs to me that with your extensive
knowledge of continental affairs, you may possibly know something about
the condition and government of Heligoland, or that you may not be
indisposed to look into the matter. It would be a kindness to the
Heligoland people if you would do so; for these small dependencies have
seldom any one in Parliament who has any connexion with them, or feels
at all concerned in their being justly treated.

I am Dear Sir
 yours very truly

J.S. Mill

M.E. Grant Duff Esq. M.P.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 15. 1868

Blackheath Park

Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant Duff

Duff, Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant

1188A.


TO MOUNTSTUART ELPHINSTONE GRANT DUFF1

Blackheath Park

Kent

Feb. 15. 1868

Dear Sir

I thank you, both for myself and the Heligoland people, for your
willingness to look into their case. I have written to them to the
effect of your letter, and have given them your address, an[d] I shall
be very happy to communicate with you on the subject whenever you think
it may be useful. I am, Dear Sir

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

M.E. Grant Duff Esq. M.P.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 16 février 1868

Blackheath Park, Kent

Jules Ernest Naville

Naville, Jules Ernest

1189A.


TO JULES ERNEST NAVILLE1

Blackheath Park, Kent

le 16 février 1868

Monsieur

J’ai, en effet, reçu la brochure que vous avez eu la bonté de
m’envoyer,2 et je l’ai lue avec la plus vive satisfaction. Je ne l’ai
pas lue dans un esprit de critique, et comme il y a déjà quelque temps
de là, je ne saurais dire si j’y ai remarqué, ou non, Edition: current;
Page: [188] des choses susceptibles de dissentiment, mais je puis
assurer que s’il y en a, elles ne sont pas importantes, qu’elles ne
touchent à rien d’essentiel dans la question, et ne sont pas de nature à
attérir l’admiration que j’éprouve pour la manière dont vous soutenez
cette grande et importante lutte.

La formation d’une association à Zurich est très importante. L’adhésion
d’un ci-devant vice-roi du Caucase3 est intéressante comme hommage à la
verité des principes que nous soutenons; bien qu’on ne voie guère de
quelle manière on pourrait en faire l’application aux institutions de la
Russie.

La nouvelle idée fait des progrès ici comme ailleurs, et elle ne
manquera pas de profiter des discussions qui seront nécessairement
soulevées par l’application imparfaite et bornée qu’on a faite de la
représentation des minorités dans la loi de Réforme.4 Le principe est si
évidemment juste et raisonnable dans tous les systèmes politiques, que
pour être accueilli il n’a vraiment besoin que d’être discuté.

Agréez, Monsieur, l’assurance de ma haute et respectueuse estime et de
mes sentiments amicaux.

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 22. 1868

Blackheath Park, Kent

Gustav Cæhn

Cæhn, Gustav

1191A.


TO GUSTAV CÖHN1

Blackheath Park, Kent

Feb. 22. 1868

Dear Sir

There is a great want of any means of obtaining a complete view of the
progress of the Cooperative System in this country, and I often do not
myself know where to go for the latest information. The person that I
know of, who has taken the most pains to get together a connected view
of the cooperative system both in this country and others, and who, I
believe, is in possession of the most general information on the
subject, is my friend Mr W.T. Thornton (23 Queen’s Gardens, Hyde Park,
London)2 who, I do not doubt, would be willing to communicate with you
on any points on which you may desire information. If he is not able to
do so, the only other persons that I can think of who might be of use to
you in your enquiries are Mr Henry Pitman, editor of the Cooperator, and
Mr E.O. Greening, Edition: current; Page: [189] editor of the Industrial
Partnership Record.3 I am Dear Sir

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Dr G. Cöhn.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 24. 1868

Blackheath Park

Richard Davis Webb

Webb, Richard Davis

1194A.


TO RICHARD DAVIS WEBB1

Blackheath Park

Feb. 24. 1868

Dear Sir

When I got your former letter on my pamphlet,2 I imagined it to refer
more particularly to the copy I had directed to be sent to you by the
publisher; but from your note just received I am doubtful whether it has
been sent to you. Will you kindly inform me whether you received it,
that I may make a complaint to Longman if he has omitted to send it.

A copy was also ordered to be sent to Mr Haslam.

I am obliged to you for the report of the Conference.3 The Dublin
Corporation, like most other Corporations, seems to require much looking
after.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J.S. Mill

R.D. Webb Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 26. 1868

Blackheath Park

R. Henry Tabouelle

Tabouelle, R. Henry

1195A.


TO R. HENRY TABOUELLE1

Blackheath Park

Kent

Feb. 26. 1868

Monsieur

Je suis très flatté de l’approbation que vous avez bien voulu accorder à
ma Edition: current; Page: [190] brochure sur l’Irlande, et j’accepte
avec plaisir votre proposition de la traduire en français.2 Je n’ai
aucune condition à faire, ne désirant en tirer aucun bénéfice
pécuniaire. S’il vous plaisait de me faire voir votre traduction avant
de la faire imprimer, j’y jeterais volontiers un coup d’oeil.

Agréez, Monsieur, l’expression de ma considération très distinguée.

J.S. Mill

Monsieur R. Henry Tabouelle

etc. etc.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 26. 1868

Blackheath Park

1195B.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Blackheath Park

Feb. 26. 1868

Dear Sir

I thank you for the notices,2 but beg you not to take the trouble of
sending any more. I had already seen all those you sent. I am

yours faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Feb. 29. [1868]

Blackheath Park

Thomas Hughes

Hughes, Thomas

1197A.


TO THOMAS HUGHES1

Blackheath Park

Kent

Feb. 29. [1868]

Dear Mr Hughes

The adjournment of the House defeats our scheme of having a Bribery
meeting on Monday, but I shall be happy to attend one on any day you can
arrange, either before or after the assembling of the House.2 I am, Dear
Mr Hughes

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [191]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 24. 1868

Blackheath Park

John A. Elliott

Elliott, John A.

1210.


TO JOHN A. ELLIOTT1

Blackheath Park

Kent

March 24. 1868

Dear Sir

aIf my circumstances permitted me to help all who want aid, or even all
authors who want aid; and if I had the pleasure of knowing anything of
yourself otherwise than through your writings, the repugnance I feel to
the opinions expressed in those writings would very likely be no bar to
sympathy and interest in your individual self. But as my own motive for
writing has always been the desire to defend and to excite sympathy for
that which I hold to be the highest of all causes, that liberty against
which the system of Slavery is the deepest outrage, I can never see any
attempt to hold up slaveholders to sympathy without deep regret.a And I
think that even to mention such virtues as they may possess, without
accompanying that mention with an expression of abhorrence of their
vices, is to deprave the sentiments and confuse the judgment of the
public.

Were I in any way peculiarly called upon personally to aid any one
engaged in doing this, I should do it, but I should do it with regret.
Were there no one else in this country who shares your opinions, I might
think myself personally called upon; but while you say that nine tenths
of the English public are of your way of thinking, it seems to me that
even had I the pleasure of your personal acquaintance, it would be to
those nine tenths that you would justly look for sympathy, which such
little aid as it could in any case be in my power to give should be
reserved for those who have fewer friends. It is not, therefore, from
any want of interest in yourself, or want of sympathy with you as a
struggling author, but from my deep sense of the moral value of all
literary work, that I felt myself obliged to reply as I have done to
your letter: and I am Dear Sir

yours very faithfully

J.S. Mill

John A. Elliott Esq

Edition: current; Page: [192]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 25, 1868

Blackheath Park

Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant Duff

Duff, Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant

1228A.


TO MOUNTSTUART ELPHINSTONE GRANT DUFF1

Blackheath Park

Kent

April 25, 1868

Dear Mr Grant Duff

The deputation from Heligoland has arrived, and is at Kroll’s Hotel,
America Square. They have probably informed you of their arrival: in any
case I have referred them to you. Their names are Payens, Heckens, and
Stoldt.2 I am

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

M.E. Grant Duff Esq. M.P.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 26. 1868

Blackheath Park

William Dougal Christie

Christie, William Dougal

1229A.


TO WILLIAM DOUGAL CHRISTIE1

Blackheath Park

Kent

April 26. 1868

Dear Mr Christie

I have gone through all the amendments you sent and I like them all.2
Which of them I shall move, and by whom get others moved, I cannot yet
determine.

I have not yet received your paper from the Pall Mall Gazette.3 Probably
the editor4 means to make use of it.

Serjeant Pulling has sent me clauses (apparently identical with those he
published in the Law Magazine) providing for an enquiry into every
election before the return of the writ.5 It would be difficult to make
these enter into the plan Edition: current; Page: [193] of the
Government Bill, but it may be good to put them on the paper and invite
a discussion on them.

I hope Aberdeen will get its second member and return you.6

ever yours truly

J.S. Mill

W.D. Christie Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 28 [1868?]

Blackheath Park

Robert Harrison

Harrison, Robert

1230A.


TO [ROBERT HARRISON]1

Blackheath Park

Kent

April 28 [1868?]

Mr Mill presents his compliments to the Librarian and begs that Adam
Smith’s Theory of Moral Sentiments may be sent to him here without delay
if it is not out.2

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 19. 1868

Blackheath Park

William Rossiter

Rossiter, William

1239A.


TO WILLIAM ROSSITER1

Blackheath Park

Kent

May 19. 1868

Dear Sir

I should like to be present at Mr Plummer’s lecture,2 but on Monday
evening Edition: current; Page: [194] between 8 and 9 the House will
probably be in the middle of the proceedings in Committee on the Scotch
Reform Bill with divisions constantly impending,3 and it is therefore
unlikely that I can attend, and certain that I cannot take the chair. I
am most happy to hear of the success of the Institution and particularly
of the School.4 I am Dear Sir

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Wm Rossiter Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 27. 1868

William Rossiter

Rossiter, William

1246A.


TO WILLIAM ROSSITER1

May 27. 1868

Dear Sir

I am happy to hear that Mr Plummer’s lecture, which I regret not to have
been able to attend, went off so successfully.2

I am much gratified by your wish to be on the Election Committee. I have
sent your note to Dr Brewer, who is taking an active part in organising
the Committee.3 You are aware that I do not myself take any part in the
arrangements.

I send by Book Post a copy of my pamphlet on Ireland,4 which I perceive
that Messrs Longman have omitted from the books which I desired them to
send for the College. I am Dear Sir

yrs very truly

J.S. Mill

W. Rossiter Esq.

Edition: current; Page: [195]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 13. 1868

Blackheath Park

William Dougal Christie

Christie, William Dougal

1259A.


TO WILLIAM DOUGAL CHRISTIE1

Blackheath Park

Kent

June 13. 1868

Dear Mr Christie

Nothing could be more fortunate than that Alderman Lusk has influence at
Greenock.2 One of the subjects which he takes greatest interest in, is
the Diplomatic Service, and I had only to tell him of the great use you
would be of on that subject, to secure his warm support for your
candidature. He knows most of the people of importance at Greenwich on
the liberal side, and has promised to give me on Monday a letter to be
given by yourself to his brother,3 which will ensure your being
introduced to them. It would, I think, be well if I were to introduce
you personally to him, which I can do at almost any time you like to
come to the House as he is a very constant attendant.

From your note, I suppose what I had better say to Mr Gladstone is
simply to express a hope that no rival candidate will be put up for
Greenock.4

It is now pretty certain that the Bribery Bill will not be abandoned.
Some of the advanced Liberals have been in communication with the
Government and have offered a deputation of liberal members to Disraeli
if it would help him: and if there is one, I think it will be a very
strong one.5 Nobody whom I have asked has refused to join in it.

I am Dear Mr Christie

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

W.D. Christie Esq.

Edition: current; Page: [196]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 18 [1868]

Blackheath Park

Thomas Hare

Hare, Thomas

1260A.


TO THOMAS HARE1

Blackheath Park

Kent

June 18 [1868]

Dear Mr Hare

I inclose a letter which will interest you, and which can be best
answered either by yourself or by the Provisional Committee in course of
appointment.

ever yours truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1 July, 1868

Peter Alfred Taylor

Taylor, Peter Alfred

1265AA.


TO [PETER ALFRED] TAYLOR1

[
1 July, 1868

]

Dear Mr Taylor

I am obliged to go off to Stansfeld who is ill at home, to consult
respecting the extradition report which is to be considered in Committee
tomorrow.2 I have not been able to get a pair3 and must therefore return
here before going to the Edition: current; Page: [197] Committee. Will
you kindly apologise for me to the Committee4 and ask them to go on to
business without me and I will come as soon as I can.

yrs ever truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 17. 1868

Avignon

1280A.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Avignon

Aug. 17. 1868

Dear Sir

I beg to acknowledge your letter of Aug. 2.2

Mr Charles Austin was an early friend of mine3 but I have for a long
time past seen so little of him, that I could not undertake to say what
Mr Austin’s political opinions now are; nor, since I understand that he
is reluctant to come forward as a candidate for Parliament, should I
feel entitled to urge him to do so, even if I had more knowledge than I
have of his present opinions. I am, Dear Sir

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 25. 1868

Avignon

Henry Mitchell

Mitchell, Henry

1282A.


TO HENRY MITCHELL1

Avignon

France

Aug. 25. 1868

Dear Sir

I regret that your letter was not received at my house until after I had
left England for the Continent.2 I wish that my acquaintance with
distinguished men of your Edition: current; Page: [198] profession were
such as to give me greater means than I have of promoting the objects
for which you have come to Europe. What little I am able to do is to
send you the two inclosed letters of introduction. One is to Mr Tite,
M.P., by profession an architect (he built the Royal Exchange) but who
is an important member of the Metropolitan Board of Works, and can give
you full information about their drainage and other operations.3 The
other is to my particular friend Mr Thornton, the Secretary in the
Public Works Department of the India Office, who knows everything that
is doing in India in the way of public works, and can place you in
communication with the chief authorities on the subject as connected
with India, and probably with others. I have written privately to Mr
Thornton and I am sure you will find him most desirous to give you every
assistance in his power. I am Dear Sir

yours very sincerely

J.S. Mill

Henry Mitchell Esq.

I do not know Mr Tite’s private address, but you can find it in the
Court Guide or the Post Office Directory.4

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 27. 1868

Avignon

J.H. Hodges

Hodges, J.H.

1295A.


TO J.H. HODGES1

Avignon

Sept. 27. 1868

Dear Sir

I beg to acknowledge your communication of the 12th inst. requesting me
to become a member of Mr Baxter Langley’s Committee with a view to his
being returned for Greenwich if a vacancy should be created by Mr
Gladstone’s being elected for that borough but not requiring the seat.2

I warmly applaud Mr Baxter Langley’s public spirited conduct in
withdrawing in favour of Mr Gladstone; but, while the present election
is pending, and I am a Edition: current; Page: [199] member of Mr
Gladstone’s Committee, I prefer not to join the Committee of any other
candidate. I am, Dear Sir

yours very sincerely

J.S. Mill

J.H. Hodges Esq

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

17 Oct., 1868

Mary Carpenter

Carpenter, Mary

1305A.


TO MARY CARPENTER1

[before
17 Oct., 1868

]

Dear Madam

I am not able to join your deputation,2 but I thank you for your
pamphlet3 and for your valuable efforts to improve the very defective
jail management of India. You will no doubt be listened to [line torn
off in MS] same respect and attention which you have so justly met with
from the local Governments.

I am Dear Madam
 yours very truly

J.S. Mill

Miss Carpenter

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 7. 1868

Blackheath

1322A.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Blackheath

Nov. 7. 1868

Dear Sir

I do not know of any book on the Employment of Women except one of Mrs
Jameson’s entitled Communion of Labour.2 The line of argument most
relevant to the subject, is the advantage to women of developing their
faculties, and to the Edition: current; Page: [200] world of getting all
that women can do; and the resemblance of the system of restricting
particular occupations to one sex, to the old caste and guild systems
which restricted them to certain classes and families. One of the
American advocates of women’s rights has put the case strongly and well
by saying that the present system endeavours to do the whole
intellectual work of the world with only half its brains.3 I am

yours very faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 12. [1868]

Blackheath

Caroline Lindley

Lindley, Caroline

1326A.


TO CAROLINE LINDLEY1

Blackheath

Nov. 12. [1868]

Dear Miss Lindley

I thank you most heartily for taking the trouble to procure so much
precise information respecting the Birkbeck Schools.2 I hope to have
many occasions for making good use of it.

I heard yesterday from Helen:3 she is well and in spirits.

Ever, dear Miss Lindley
 yours most truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 19 [1868]

Blackheath Park

Caroline Lindley

Lindley, Caroline

1331A.


TO CAROLINE LINDLEY1

Blackheath Park

Nov. 19 [1868]

Dear Miss Lindley

Many thanks for your kind present and for your kind enquiries about my
cold. I Edition: current; Page: [201] am glad to say it is much better,
and will probably be gone by tomorrow. I am very thankful for your very
friendly invitation, but I have so many things to do just at the last,
before going away for a longer time than I expected2 that I hope you
will excuse me if I deny myself the pleasure of passing an evening with
you.

Ever, dear Miss Lindley
 yours truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 28. 1868

Avignon

George Washburn Smalley

Smalley, George Washburn

1337A.


TO GEORGE WASHBURN SMALLEY1

Avignon

Nov. 28. 1868

Dear Sir

Your letter gives me very great pleasure, for it is doubly an honour to
receive such expressions of interest and sympathy from one of your
country. You have gone through a harder fight than we are likely to face
here, and the heroism with which it was fought by the noble minded men
of America through all the long years of danger and difficulty, and
finally through the sharp crisis of the war, makes the Liberals of all
other nations look up to the advanced party in America with respectful
admiration. Like yourself I was somewhat surprised and a little hurt at
the line the Daily News thought fit to take, but there are reasons to
suspect that there may have been personal causes for this, for I thought
it my duty to support in one place a candidate who was the rival of a
gentleman who, I am given to understand, has influence with the Daily
News, and this may have aroused a little unpleasant feeling, which, as I
have no reason to suppose it is shared by many persons connected with
the paper, we must hope will blow over when the election excitement is
past.2 For my own part, my regret was only at seeing a paper which
Edition: current; Page: [202] had stood so bravely by the advanced cause
in so many great questions, shewing on this occasion less generosity of
spirit than the Daily Telegraph, or even perhaps, the Times. I am, Dear
Sir

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

G.W. Smalley Esq

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 27. 1868

Avignon

John Chapman

Chapman, John

1369A.


TO JOHN CHAPMAN1

Avignon

Dec. 27. 1868

Dear Sir

I think it of very great importance to free and enlightened thought in
politics and philosophy, that the Westminster Review should be
maintained in existence, and without any change in its long established
character as an organ always open to the thoughts of the most advanced
thinkers, and training the minds of the younger men to appreciate new
ideas. During the whole term of its existence, now 45 years, it has
fulfilled this office. Its disappearance would leave a sad blank in our
periodical literature, and would be a severe blow to advanced thought
and to the education of future thinkers. With regard to the management
of the Review by its present proprietor and editor, knowing as I do the
great difficulties it has had to struggle with, and the inferiority, as
compared with many other reviews, of the inducements it could hold out
to writers, I have been as much surprised as pleased at the high level
of merit it has been able to maintain. This could only have been
effected by a devotion of time and energy to the purpose, on the part of
the editor, which does great honour to his public spirit, and
establishes on his part a strong claim to the gratitude of the friends
of advanced opinions and independent thoughts, and after the proofs he
has given, for a number of years and under great difficulties, of his
fitness to conduct such an organ, I hope that he may find such
assistance as may enable him still to carry it on, and may afford him an
ultimate prospect of some recompense for his sacrifices, other than the
consciousness of having made them. I am, Dear Sir

very sincerely yours

J.S. Mill

Dr Chapman

Edition: current; Page: [203]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 23. 1869

Avignon

Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant Duff

Duff, Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant

1383A.


TO MOUNTSTUART ELPHINSTONE GRANT DUFF1

Avignon

Jan. 23. 1869

Dear Mr Grant Duff

I hear from the Mauritius sad details of the distress there,2 with which
I do not doubt you are very much better acquainted than I am. Perhaps
you may not be as well aware that among a portion at least of the
English there, there is a feeling of uneasiness as to the probable
action of the local Government in case of disturbances, which seem very
probable. The disturbances at Réunion3 may add to the probabilities of
something of the sort at the Mauritius, and the example set by the
Government in the one place is not a salutary one for the Government in
the other. The inhabitants of the Mauritius are understood to be
peculiarly peaceable, and very manageable by gentle means: but there
seems to be a sort of apprehension lest the Government should not take
as gentle means as might be desired in case any difficulties should
arise. When I remember the reiterated warnings which were received at
the Colonial Office before the events in Jamaica,4 and that a hint from
home to the Government might have saved such a quantity of suffering, of
disgrace, and of embarrassment to everybody concerned, I venture to
trouble you with these few lines to say that whether these apprehensions
with regard to the Mauritius are well or ill grounded (which I do not
know) I know them to be entertained by Englishmen in a respectable and
responsible position.

I cannot conclude without expressing the pleasure it gave me to see you
appointed to a post where there is so much opportunity of exercising
useful influence.5 I am, Dear Mr Grant Duff

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

M.E. Grant Duff Esq. M.P.

Edition: current; Page: [204]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 22. 1869

Josephine Butler

Butler, Josephine

1397.


TO JOSEPHINE BUTLER1

March 22. 1869

Dear Madam

It would be a very superficial view that could suppose that the
permanent improvement of the social, industrial, and economic condition
of women can be altogether separated from their claim to political
rights. At all times political rights have been the only real security
for the permanence of progress in social, industrial, and economical
matters: and in the present age, the grant of political rights to any
class, or even the demand for their admission to those rights, is the
most effectual way of securing better consideration for their interests
in all other respects. It does not, however, follow from this that it is
equally the duty of every one who desires to improve the condition of
women, to engage specially in the task of claiming political rights for
them: and therefore, although I could not concur with Dr von Hetzendorf2
in considering the political enfranchisement of women as of but little
consequence (if indeed he does consider it so) the advice he gives
appears to me, with one exception, exceedingly judicious. aI am of
opinion that every kind of effort, whether social or political, in
favour of women, should be encouraged, so long as it is earnest and
genuine; and I am persuaded that those who are in earnest will
inevitably be led by experience to see the absolute necessity of
political enfranchisement as both the foundation and the safeguard of
human worth and happiness.a As regards the details, the earnest minds of
each nation are the best judges for that nation. They have but to be in
earnest, and to work with all their hearts, and they cannot do wrong.
The one point to which I have referred as that on which I differ from Dr
von Hetzendorf, is the suggestion to subordinate the whole organisation
of the Vereine to one centre. This is the French system, in too many
things: England and Germany have progressed by leaving freer play to the
varieties of local character and circumstances. What is judicious for
Berlin may not be so for Leipzig or Vienna. It is better that the zeal,
the earnestness, and the sense of responsibility, of the enlightened
persons of each locality, should exhaust itself in doing to the very
uttermost all that lies to its own hand to do, and that it should not
waste its energy in guiding the hands of others. I am Dear Madam

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

Mrs Butler

Edition: current; Page: [205]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 23. 1869

Blackheath Park

Theodor Gomperz

Gomperz, Theodor

1413.


TO THEODOR GOMPERZ1

Blackheath Park

March 23. 1869

Dear Mr Gomperz

aI am not sure whether, when I last wrote to you, I mentioned the work
in which I was engaged, of preparing a new edition of my father’s
“Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind” with notes,2 bringing up
the subject to the latest improvements in psychology. This is now
complete, and the notes, to which Mr Grote has contributed, and in which
Mr Bain has given, in a condensed form, the most important thoughts of
his systematic treatises,3 form, I think, a very valuable addition to
the original work. I hope you have received the copy I directed the
publisher to send.a

I do not think that my portion of the notes4 can well be included in the
collected German edition, as they would seldom be intelligible if
separated from the work to which they belong.

bHow is the editionc proceeding?b I have just received an agreeable
evidence of the demand for it, in the shape of a proposal from a Dr
Bingmann,5 encouraged, as he says, by two professors of Moral Philosophy
in the Universities of Tübingen and Berlin, to translate
“Utilitarianism,” and after that, the Logic and others of my writings. I
have informed Dr. Bingmann of the edition in progress (which he did not
seem to have heard of) and have told him that there is no opening for
another translator, unless you should be disappointed in some of your
arrangements.

When you write to me, which I hope will be soon, I beg you to give me
news of your sister, whose sad loss we were so grieved to hear of.6 I
am, Dear Mr. Gomperz

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [206]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 7. 1869

Avignon

Charles Bradlaugh

Bradlaugh, Charles

1426A.


TO CHARLES BRADLAUGH1

Avignon

May 7. 1869

Dear Sir

I am very glad to hear that you will be able to help the petitioning in
favour of Women’s Suffrage so greatly. I have mentioned the fact to Mrs
Peter A. Taylor, Aubrey House, Notting Hill,2 and I am sure that if you
will kindly put yourself in communication with her, she will be very
glad of your help in extending the operations of the Women’s Suffrage
Society in new directions.3 I am, Dear Sir

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

Charles Bradlaugh Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 17, 1869

A[vignon]

James Fitzjames Stephen

Stephen, James Fitzjames

1431A.


TO JAMES FITZJAMES STEPHEN1

A[vignon]

May 17, 1869

I am very glad to hear that you intend to answer Lecky on
Utilitarianism.2 It is a subject which finds an active & doughty
champion in you. From what I hear it seems that Lecky’s ideas on it are
both superficial & confused. He has been so useful in popularizing some
good ideas that it is a pity he is not only commonplace but even of an
antiquated form of commonplace in others; unluckily he is not the only
useful & clever man I know in this predicament.

I am not surprised that you do not find time to read the Analysis.3 I am
often Edition: current; Page: [207] surprised at the great industry you
exhibit but I shd like to see a review of the Analysis by yourself & the
book as originally written without the aid of the notes is almost a
necessary foundation for efficient thought both in law & politics, for
which the doctrine of the Assn of Ideas as there developed is
all-important.

I shall be in England early in July & shall be happy to see you if you
think you can derive either pleasure or profit from the society of such
very decided believers in progress.4

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May, 1869

James Johnston Shaw

Shaw, James Johnston

1440A.


TO JAMES JOHNSTON SHAW1

[after
May, 1869

]

I thank you sincerely for your remarks on my “Examination of Hamilton”
and I will not fail, in any further revision of the book, to give them
the attention they deserve. The confusion between the two meanings of
inconceivable is almost universal, and Hamilton is certainly not free
from it.2 I may, therefore, very possibly have been misled by it in my
interpretation of some passages of his writings. But I think my argument
against Whewell holds good in either sense.3

The concluding paragraph of your letter gives me great pleasure,
especially your agreement with my opinions on the great question
discussed in my new book.4 There is, I am convinced, no subject now
under discussion on which the improvement of the human race more
essentially depends.

Edition: current; Page: [208]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 15. 1869

Avignon

1447A.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Avignon

June 15. 1869

Dear Madam

Your letter has been forwarded to me here, and I beg to thank you for
your kind intentions in regard to reviewing my book. What you have seen
announced is not a Congress, but a meeting of the London Women’s
Suffrage Society, at which only members will be present. I am, Dear
Madam

yours very faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 6. 1869

Blackheath Park

Anton Dohrn

Dohrn, Anton

1454A.


TO ANTON DOHRN1

Blackheath Park

Kent

July 6. 1869

Dear Sir

I regret that there should be so much delay in bringing out the German
edition of my entire writings, and I give my full consent to your
publishing the translation, as soon as you please; merely reserving the
right of the publishers of the complete edition to include it (or
another translation) afterwards in their series.2 I am, Dear Sir

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Dr Anton Dohrn

Edition: current; Page: [209]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 9. 1869

Blackheath Park

George Campbell

Campbell, George

1457A.


TO GEORGE CAMPBELL1

Blackheath Park

Kent

July 9. 1869

Dear Sir

I have had the pleasure of receiving your note; and your paper on the
Irish land question2 has been one of the first things I have read after
my return here.3 I need hardly say that I agree with all your
principles, and (as far as I can judge) with your details too.
Englishmen who know India are the men who can understand and interpret
the social ideas and economic relations of Ireland. They are not the
slaves of English technicalities, and they know that the English form of
property in land is neither a law of the universe nor an immutable
principle of morality. The Cobden Club could not have done a more
sensible thing than to ask you to give them the benefit of your Indian
experience;4 and I wish they would publish this very instructive paper
also. In any case, I trust it will be published.

You seem to think that there is some difference of opinion between us on
the subject, but I can see none. You think that my proposal would give
more to the landlords than the value of their property: but what I
proposed was, that there should be a Commission to adjudicate what the
present income and future prospects of the estates was really worth to
the landlords, in order to give them that; not a farthing more.5

Will you excuse my suggesting the omission of one word (p. 43, last
line) the word “woman”?6 This would be but justice, for women are often
most energetic and successful managers of estates in India. I am Dear
Sir

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

George Campbell Esq.

Edition: current; Page: [210]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 16. 1869

Blackheath Park

Henry Johnston

Johnston, Henry

1459A.


TO HENRY JOHNSTON1

Blackheath Park

Kent

July 16. 1869

Dear Sir

I am much honoured by the wish of the Directors of the Glasgow Athenaeum
to include me in their arrangements for the delivery of Lectures, but I
regret that my occupations do not admit of my sparing the time necessary
for the preparation of a lecture. I am, Dear Sir

yours very faithfully

J.S. Mill

Henry Johnston Esq

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 26. 1869

William Rossiter

Rossiter, William

1463A.


TO WILLIAM ROSSITER1

July 26. 1869

Dear Sir

I am quite willing that my approbation of Parks for the children of the
poor should be made known anywhere;2 but I would rather not be announced
as receiving subscriptions, if for no other reason than that I am often
absent from England. I am, Dear Sir

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Wm Rossiter Esq.

Edition: current; Page: [211]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug 7. [1869]

William Fraser Rae

Rae, William Fraser

1466A.


TO WILLIAM FRASER RAE1

Aug 7. [1869]

Dear Mr Rae

Can you come down and dine with us on Sunday Aug. 15 at five o’clock?

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

W.F. Rae Esq

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 17. 1869

Henry Villard

Villard, Henry

1471A.


TO HENRY VILLARD1

Aug. 17. 1869

Dear Sir

This letter will be given to you by my friend Mr W.F. Rae,2 who, as
warmly interested in the political and social questions of our time, and
a frequent and valuable writer respecting them,3 on the side of advanced
opinions, has many great points of common interest with you. Mr Rae goes
to America for the double purpose of acquiring information respecting
the practical working of your Patent Laws, in order to help towards
improving ours, and of adding to his general knowledge of America; and
any aid that can be given him for either object will not fail to be
useful to the public. I am, Dear Sir

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Henry Villard Esq.

Edition: current; Page: [212]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 5. 1869

Avignon

Mary Carpenter

Carpenter, Mary

1474A.


TO MARY CARPENTER1

a
Avignon

Sept. 5. 1869

Dear Miss Carpenter

You are welcome to make any use you like of my letter to you,2 but I do
not feel that what the Duke said,3 which I repeated to you in my letter
to the best of my memory verbally, was sufficiently explicit to amount,
to my mind, to a promise, and therefore I should not like to write to
the Chief on such an assumption. I agree with you most cordially as to
the welcome that the Chief and the Ranee4 ought to receive here, and
will lose no opportunity of using any influence I have to secure it. If
the Duke of Argyll was more explicit to you than to me, or if what he
said to me appears to you explicit I am very happy to hear it, and think
you cannot do better than convey it to the Chief. But as the Chief can
scarcely so well judge of the exact meaning of the terms used as we can,
the responsibility of the precise interpretation to be put upon the
Duke’s words rests witha bus: and I own that to me they do not seem
quite as decisive as might be desirable, seeing how important it is that
the Chief and the Ranee should not come over here under a mistaken
impression.

If it is your wish, and you are quite sure that it would be the wish of
the Chief and the Ranee, I will write to the Duke, and ask him whether
what he has said may be reported to them as a promise.

My daughter begs to be kindly remembered, and I am, Dear Miss Carpenter

very truly yours

J.S. Millb

Edition: current; Page: [213]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 9. 1869

Avignon

Edward Williams Byron Nicholson

Nicholson, Edward Williams Byron

1476A.


TO EDWARD WILLIAMS BYRON NICHOLSON1

Avignon

Sept. 9. 1869

Dear Sir

In answer to your letter of Aug. 28 I beg to say that I should be happy
to become an annual subscriber to the projected Magazine.2 I am

yours very faithfully

J.S. Mill

E.B. Nicholson Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 23. 1869

Avignon

Henry Villard

Villard, Henry

1492A.


TO HENRY VILLARD1

Avignon

Oct. 23. 1869

Dear Sir

You are aware of the favour with which the majority of the popular party
in Great Britain regard the vote by ballot at parliamentary elections,
as a means of restraining bribery and intimidation and the increased
interest which this question has assumed through the recent extension of
the suffrage.2 The writer of the inclosed letter3 and some of his
friends are anxious to obtain information that can be depended on,
respecting the practical working of vote by ballot in the countries in
which it exists by law. Their own opinion, like mine, is unfavourable to
it; but their desire is to find the truth, whatever it may be; and the
vague impressions current in Europe give no real knowledge of the ballot
in America even as it exists by law, much less of the mode in which it
is actually conducted, and the advantages and disadvantages which are
found in practice to attend it. You would oblige me very much, and would
do some public service, if you could kindly Edition: current; Page:
[214] supply my correspondent with any of the information which he
desires, or refer him to any sources from which he could procure it. I
am Dear Sir

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

Henry Villard Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Dec. 31. 1869

Avignon

George Campbell

Campbell, George

1508A.


TO GEORGE CAMPBELL1

Avignon

Dec. 31. 1869

Dear Sir

I am late in thanking you for the gift of your volume on Ireland,2
because it came to me a short time ago in a parcel from England, and
owing to the pressure of other occupations I have only just finished
reading it. I wish it was in the hands of everybody who will have any
voice in the decision of the Irish Land question, for I have read
nothing that comes near it in the fullness and clearness of the
knowledge it communicates of the real “situation” in Ireland. There is
nothing like Indian experience for enabling men to understand Ireland.
Those writers in the newspapers who have some understanding of the Irish
question are those who, like one of the editors of the Spectator,3 know
something of India. My own official knowledge of Indian matters has
greatly helped me to put the right interpretation on Irish phenomena. I
wonder how long it will take the English people to find out, that the
Indian service is their best, or rather their only, good school for
administrators; and to make the use they might make of that service for
difficult work in other parts of the empire. Lord Metcalfe and Sir J.P.
Grant4 are already cases in point.

I am not so clear about the details of your proposed measure, though I
agree fully in its principles, and think it quite reasonable that lands
which are at present administered on the English system, the landlord
making the improvements, and no tenant right or claim to compensation
for loss of occupancy being ever Edition: current; Page: [215]
recognised—where, in fact, the coproprietorship of the tenant never
existed, or has been extinguished—should remain as they are, on the
footing of contract only.5 But I have great doubts of the possibility of
meeting the justice of each separate case by the award of a Commission,6
even with the aid of the general instructions laid down in your letter
of Nov. 29.7 I should fear that a decision as to what had or had not
been the “ordinary practice of any district, locality, or estate”8 would
continually fail to give satisfaction; first, on account of the
difficulty of settling what amounts to “ordinary practice”, and next,
because a very large proportion of the discontent of the tenantry is on
the part of those who have not yet succeeded in establishing any custom
in their favour; and these, if your plan is adopted, will find
themselves cut off from hope. I am not shaken in my belief that the land
difficulty is a knot which cannot be untied, and will have to be cut.—By
the way, your principal objection to the plan I proposed rests on a
mistake.9 I proposed giving the landlords more than their present net
rent, but not more than the present selling value of their estates,
since that includes allowance for prospective increase as well as for
present income.10 I never dreamed of giving them a larger compensation
than the amount of consols equivalent to that selling value. No wonder
you disapprove of the proposal, when you think it would enable landlords
to obtain from the State double the present value of their property.

I am Dear Sir
 very truly yours

J.S. Mill

George Campbell Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 24. 1870

Avignon

George Campbell

Campbell, George

1521A.


TO GEORGE CAMPBELL1

Avignon

Jan. 24. 1870

Dear Sir

It gives me great pleasure to find that, after due explanations, your
opinion and mine differ so little, indeed, as far as I perceive, not at
all. I have no doubt that your plan would work to the ends you intend by
it, if the Commission were an entirely Edition: current; Page: [216]
unprejudiced one. But all the probabilities are that it will be a
Landlords’ Commission. All Englishmen of the higher ranks who have not
learnt better things in Ireland or India, have their prepossessions
strongly on the side of landlordism. The best that is to be hoped is
that the Commission would represent liberal landlordism: but you know
how little that amounts to, Lord Dufferin is considered a liberal
landlord.2

It will give me pleasure to talk over these matters with you, and Indian
matters too, after my return to England, which will be in March. I have
not forgotten the kind offer you made when I was in the House of
Commons, to furnish me with information, an offer of which, coming from
you, I was well able to appreciate the value: and though I am no longer
in the House, I can still make profitable use of facts that I can rely
on, whether about India or Ireland. I am3

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 24. 1870

Avignon

John Malcolm Forbes Ludlow

Ludlow, John Malcolm Forbes

1521B.


TO JOHN MALCOLM FORBES LUDLOW1

Avignon

Jan. 24. 1870

Dear Sir

Your letter2 was forwarded to me from England. I received it the day
before yesterday, and should have answered it before, but I have been
incapacitated from work by a very bad cold.

I think you not only perfectly fit for the office of Registrar of
Friendly Societies but probably superior to any one likely to be a
candidate.3 The office is one for which your knowledge of the working
classes and of their Associations is a valuable preparation. And as to
practical ability, no one who goes carefully through the Municipal Bills
would think that the man who drew them can be deficient in it.4 In all
the conversations and discussions I had with you respecting those Bills,
the part you took was that of a careful, cautious, foreseeing practical
mind. If my saying as much in a letter for the purpose could be of any
use to you, I should be most happy to do it. But I greatly doubt not
only its being of any use, but Edition: current; Page: [217] its not
being positively detrimental to you. I must in frankness admit that I
fully agree in your impression that Mr Lowe probably looks upon you as a
sentimentalist.5 I do not doubt it. But I think you are under a mistake
if you do not think he looks upon me as a sentimentalist of quite as
deep a dye; if indeed he thinks there can be anything to choose between
different degrees of such imbecility. I am afraid that a testimonial
from me to your practicality would be to him a testimonial from a blind
man in favour of a man with one eye. Nor would it be much better if I
gave testimony to your powers as a metaphysician or political economist.
None of these are matters on which Mr Lowe would think me capable of
aiding his judgment. I only know one man whose testimony in your favour
would have much weight with Mr Lowe, and that man is Mr Lowe. Although I
doubt whether there exists the man whose judgment would have any
intellectual weight with Mr Lowe, it is just possible that some
practical influence might be exerted by influential members of the
electoral body of the London University, or by his superiors in the
Cabinet. I think Mr Lowe would give an office to a competent man if he
could find one; but seeing that it is a thousand chances to one that he
thinks none of the candidates fit, such trifles as parliamentary or
electoral or cabinet influence might decide him where he thinks there is
very little to choose. I am, Dear Mr Ludlow

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

J.M. Ludlow Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 27. 1870

Avignon

Frank Harrison Hill

Hill, Frank Harrison

1522A.


TO FRANK HARRISON HILL1

Avignon

Jan. 27. 1870

Dear Mr Hill

I saw the article in the Daily News on the case of Policeman Smith, and
felt very much obliged to you for getting the subject noticed.2 I
understand that the Home Edition: current; Page: [218] Office is
inquiring into the case. If the result be favourable, the article in the
Daily News and other notices in the press will have greatly contributed
to it. In any case, a considerable degree of public approbation has been
deservedly directed against the magistrate and his dictum.

I am glad that, while you still continue to write for the Daily News,
there is at the same time a prospect of your being relieved from the
mere drudgery of the occupation, and obtaining leisure for other
pursuits.

Your account of Cairnes is cheering, and accords with others which we
have received.3 He himself never takes a sanguine view of his condition,
but there is ample proof how much of his health and strength he must
have recovered, in his ability not only to deliver his lectures, but to
write such an article as that in the Fortnightly, which, independently
of its merits in point of thought, seems to me quite a model of
philosophic stile and expository talent.4

I have read, I believe, all Rae’s letters,5 for the Daily News generally
reaches us at some time or other; but ever since the pretence began of
not examining foreign newspapers,6 we do not get them till after
ridiculous delays, and not unfrequently a later newspaper before an
earlier. The exact reason I do not know, but it is certain that an
announcement that a thing will not be done is generally, in France,
followed by its being done more than before; as an announcement that it
will be done is, in like manner, followed by neglect to do it. I do not
know how much depends on the higher authorities, and how much on the
subordinates; for in every system of arbitrary government the chiefs
find it necessary or convenient to give the underlings their full share
of the arbitrary power, and indeed cannot well enforce on them, duties
to the public which they themselves habitually violate. One has only to
live in a country arbitrarily governed (as France has been under all its
governments) to know how utterly mistaken is the idea that a despotic
government is a vigorous one.

We are much pleased that you like my daughter’s article.7 With our kind
remembrances to Mrs Hill,8 I am, Dear Mr Hill

Yours very truly

J.S. Mill

F.H. Hill Esq

Edition: current; Page: [219]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 15. 1870

Blackheath Park

James Edwin Thorold Rogers

Rogers, James Edwin Thorold

1547A.


TO JAMES EDWIN THOROLD ROGERS1

Blackheath Park

Kent

April 15. 1870

Dear Mr Rogers

I thank you very much for the present of your Adam Smith.2 I have read
the Preface, but have not yet made myself acquainted with your notes,
which, though they do not occupy much space, seem to go over a good deal
of ground. I rather think that I differ from you on some important
points; but the old generalisations of political economy are now found
to require so much modification, that our opinions may possibly draw
nearer together when duly compared.

Thanks for your invitation to visit Oxford. There is no place which at
present interests me more, or which seems to be undergoing a more
salutary transformation. But I have seen only just enough of it in the
body, to have been much impressed by its beauty and imposingness. I
certainly did not write any of my books there, nor did I ever take up my
abode in Oxford for more than a day or two at a time. I am, Dear Mr
Rogers

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

June 3. 1870

A[vignon]

M. Maltman Barry

Barry, M. Maltman

1562A.


TO M. MALTMAN BARRY1

A[vignon]

June 3. 1870

Dear Sir—

In reply to your communication of May 18 I beg to say that my
occupations do not admit of my undertaking to examine & give an opinion
& advice respecting manuscripts intended for publication.2

Edition: current; Page: [220]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

23 July, 1870

1583A.


TO THE GENERAL COUNCIL OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN’S ASSOCIATION1

[after
23 July, 1870

]

“highly pleased with the address.2 There was not one word in it that
ought not to be there; it could not have been done with fewer words.”

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 27. 1870

Blackheath Park

William Trant

Trant, William

1587A.


TO WILLIAM TRANT1

Blackheath Park

July 27. 1870

Dear Sir

I have received your letter of July 16,2 and I sympathise in the
opposition to an impost which the legislature has plainly declared its
purpose of abolishing:3 but it is impossible for me to contribute
pecuniarily to every public object in which I sympathise, and I would
recommend that application should be made to some of those who took the
lead in the popular movement against Church Rates. I am Dear Sir

yours very faithfully

J.S. Mill

Wm Trant Esq.

Edition: current; Page: [221]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

July 29. 1870

Blackheath Park

Caroline Lindley

Lindley, Caroline

1587B.


TO CAROLINE LINDLEY1

Blackheath Park

July 29. 1870

Dear Miss Lindley

Since you ask my opinion as to whether it is most advisable that your
nephew Robert2 should go up again for examination, or that he should
join his father and brother and commence at once the practical study of
his intended profession under the advantageous circumstances of being
directly under his father; so far as I am able to judge, this last
appears to me greatly preferable. Should he even succeed at the
examination, this success if attained in a single year, could probably
be only the result of strenuous cramming, and the time so occupied would
be almost lost time in respect to his real mental development. Many
youths fail at examinations, as examinations are commonly conducted,
merely because they are not quick in catching up and recollecting
detached points, and cannot give themselves the appearance of knowing a
subject unless they know it thoroughly. This may be Robert’s case, and
if so, he cannot too soon begin to learn that which it is necessary he
should know thoroughly, and his knowledge of which can be tested by
results instead of by questions on a paper: and if he begins at once, he
will probably enter with strong interest upon the new kind of work, and
take it up with spirit and vigour. If, on the contrary, he goes up for
examination again and should unfortunately suffer a second defeat, the
discouragement may be such as to paralyse his energies for a long time
to come: while, if he succeeds, the moral consequences may not be at all
desirable; for if he is a steady thoughtful youth, he may know very well
that he has only succeeded by coaching, and may have learnt a lesson not
at all conducive to thoroughness and earnestness in the work of life. If
the real intellectual advantages of the University education are
desired, I am of opinion that several years should be given to attaining
them; so that the successful passing through the examination may prove,
not readiness of wit, nor power to burthen the memory with a mass of
matter for a short time, but thorough and familiar acquaintance with the
subjects of the examinations. To have passed the examination is, to my
mind, and, I know, in the opinion of many of the examiners, far from a
conclusive test of having passed through the really useful discipline of
education. The examiners may do what they can to make it so, and yet
fail, if parents encourage the system of forcing youths hurriedly on. A
thorough and well grounded professional education is of more value to
the habits of mind than a hasty and superficial university one. Of
course when there is time for both, it is well to Edition: current;
Page: [222] have both; but I think a superficial training of any sort is
a distinct disadvantage both to the moral and intellectual progress of a
growing mind: and when I speak of hurried and superficial, it must be
borne in mind that that which might not be hurried for one character may
easily be so for another. I am, Dear Miss Lindley

yours very sincerely

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 24. 1870

Blackheath Park

1594A.


TO THE PEOPLE’S GARDEN COMPANY1

Blackheath Park

Kent

Aug. 24. 1870

Dear Sir

I beg to acknowledge your letter of Aug. 19.

The object of the People’s Garden Company2 is excellent, but I abstain
on principle from connecting my name with any enterprise, either
philanthropic or pecuniary, the conduct of which, for want of time to
attend to it, I am unable to be responsible for. I am, Dear Sir

yours very sincerely

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 15. 1870

Blackheath Park

Charles Sharp

Sharp, Charles

1599A.


TO CHARLES SHARP1

Blackheath Park

Kent

Sept. 15. 1870

Dear Sir

I beg to acknowledge your letter of the 13th instant.2

I feel much interested by what you tell me respecting the Liverpool
Institute, and highly honoured by the wish of the Directors that I
should take the Chair at their Edition: current; Page: [223] annual
meeting in November next.3 But the demands on my time and exertions have
made it necessary for me, as a rule, to decline invitations of that
nature. I am Dear Sir

Yours very sincerely

J.S. Mill

Charles Sharp Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nov. 15. 1870

Blackheath Park

Henry Wentworth Acland

Acland, Henry Wentworth

1609A.


TO HENRY WENTWORTH ACLAND1

Blackheath Park

Kent

Nov. 15. 1870

Dear Sir

I am much obliged to you for the opportunity of reading your Memoranda.2
I am glad to find that the Sanitary Commission are likely to report in
favour of a comprehensive measure; though I doubt whether the Poor Law
Administration should be included in the duties of a Minister of Public
Health, as it seems to me quite sufficient in itself to occupy a
ministerial department.

I never was more astonished at anything I have read in print about
myself, than when I saw the writer against Poor Laws in Macmillan not
only claiming me as of his way of thinking, but actually putting forth
his proposition for abolishing the Poor Law as taken from me.3 I am
entirely of the opinion expressed in my Political Economy, that a Poor
Law, giving the destitute a right to relief (on terms more onerous than
the condition of the independent labourer) is a necessary part of a good
public administration.4 I have even been strengthened in this opinion by
all Edition: current; Page: [224] that has come to my knowledge
concerning the effects of the public charities in a country where there
is no legal right to relief, and where most of the evils produced by our
poor law administration when at its worst, flourish exuberantly without
the accompanying benefits. I am, Dear Sir

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Dr Acland

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 27 Decembre 1870

Blackheath Park

émile Louis Victor de Laveleye

Laveleye, émile Louis Victor de

1624A.


TO ÉMILE LOUIS VICTOR DE LAVELEYE1

Blackheath Park

le 27 Decembre 1870

Cher Monsieur

Je ne saurais trop vous remercier pour M. Cairnes et pour moi-même.

Si j’avais eu avec moi mes numéros de la Revue des Deux Mondes, je
n’aurais pas eu besoin de m’adresser à votre complaisance; mais
malheureusement ces numéros sont à Avignon.2

Je vous remercie également de vos renseignements sur les sources à
consulter, dont j’ai fait part à M. Cairnes.3

Je n’ai pas connaissance du nouveau projet du Cobden Club. Je présume
que le Club se propose de publier un volume d’Essais sur les moyens
d’empêcher la guerre dans l’état actuel du monde. Sans rien préjuger sur
ce qu’il y aurait à dire sur cette question, il me semble qu’elle est
loin d’avoir été suffisamment approfondie; et qu’un écrivain qui a
étudié autant que vous l’histoire moderne et la politique générale
pourrait remplir très utilement le cadre que le Club vous propose.4

Agréez, cher Monsieur, l’expression de mon estime et de mon dévouement.

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [225]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 2, 1871

Blackheath Park

Charles Bradlaugh

Bradlaugh, Charles

1627A.


TO CHARLES BRADLAUGH1

Blackheath Park

Kent

Jan. 2, 1871

Dear Sir

Should you be able to send me the letter which appeared in the Bury
Times?2 I should then be able to tell you explicitly whether I wrote the
letter, and under what circumstances. I am, Dear Sir

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Jan. 7. 1871

Blackheath Park

Charles Bradlaugh

Bradlaugh, Charles

1631A.


TO CHARLES BRADLAUGH1

Blackheath Park

Kent

Jan. 7. 1871

Dear Sir

The letter which you have sent to me, from the Bury Times, was written
by me, on the 9th of November last;2 and is correctly printed, with the
exception of the substitution of the word even for ever in the fourth
line; which does not, however, substantially alter the sense. Having
referred to the letter from Mr. King to which mine was an answer,3 I
find it says, that the writer had several times, of late, in public
meetings, heard my name, and the names of other persons, “Lord Amberley
and others,” associated with the “Elements of Social Science,”4 and
referred to as Edition: current; Page: [226] commending it: and he then
asked, whether, when he again heard my name thus used, he should be at
liberty to say that the representation is incorrect.

This is the only information I have received that I am represented as
commending the book; and I have never heard either yourself or any other
person mentioned, either expressly or by implication, as having so
represented me. I am, Dear Sir

yours very faithfully

J.S. Mill

Charles Bradlaugh Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 14. 1871

Blackheath Park

William Rossiter

Rossiter, William

1642AA.


TO WILLIAM ROSSITER1

Blackheath Park

Kent

March 14. 1871

Dear Sir

I am much obliged by your kind offer of a copy of your book,2 and have
read with pleasure the pages you have sent. I should be happy to see
you, but I have so many demands on my time that I do not find it
possible at present to fix a time for our meeting. I am Dear Sir

yours very sincerely

J.S. Mill

W. Rossiter Esq.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 6. 1871

Blackheath Park

Benjamin Waugh

Waugh, Benjamin

1654A.


TO BENJAMIN WAUGH1

Blackheath Park

Kent

April 6. 1871

Dear Sir

I do not know whether you may have already received a copy of the
inclosed protest;2 but I should be much gratified by being the means of
procuring your Edition: current; Page: [227] signature to it. It is
particularly wished to obtain the signatures of ministers of religion,
and of members of the medical profession; and in the former case, it is
desirable to add to the signatures the statement of the denomination to
which those signing it belong. If I am under a mistaken impression in
believing that your sympathies in this matter are on the same side as my
own, I must beg you to excuse the trouble to which I have put you. I am
Dear Sir

Yours very truly

J.S. Mill

Rev. B. Waugh

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 7. 1871

Blackheath Park

Duncan Mclaren

Mclaren, Duncan

1654B.


TO DUNCAN MCLAREN1

Blackheath Park

Kent

April 7. 1871

Dear Mr McLaren

The Committee for the Scott Centenary had already done me the honour of
asking me to be present at the celebration,2 but I have been obliged to
answer them that my occupations and engagements do not allow me to avail
myself of the invitation. I am, Dear Mr McLaren

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

May 28, 1871

Blackheath Park

1667B.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Blackheath Park

Kent

May 28, 1871

Dear Sir

I have not myself taken any part in editing Mr Buckle’s posthumous
works, nor have I written, nor do I intend to write, any Memoir of him.
His posthumous works Edition: current; Page: [228] however are being
prepared for the press by my step daughter, Miss Helen Taylor, and will
probably be published, with a short Memoir, in the course of next year.2
The publishers will be Messrs Longmans, Green, and Co, who, we
understand, have made arrangements with an American publisher.3 I am,
Dear Sir

Yours very faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 9 [187]1

Lucerne

Pierre Augustin Rouvière

Rouvière, Pierre Augustin

1673A.


TO PIERRE AUGUSTIN ROUVIÈRE1

Lucerne

Aug. 9 [187]1

Monsieur—

J’espère arriver à Avignon en quelques jours d’ici et j’ai alors besoin
d’un médicament dont je vous envoie copie de l’ordonnance. N’ayant pu
obtenir ce médicament en Suisse où il paraît qu’on ne se sert plus du
pareira2 je crains qu’il n’en fut peut-être de même à Avignon et dans ce
cas je vous engage à vouloir bien en procurer à Paris ou à Marseille. On
m’ordonne d’user de ce remède deux fois par jour pendant un temps
considérable.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug. 9. 1871

Lucerne

Auguste von Littrow

Littrow, Auguste von

1673B.


TO AUGUSTE VON LITTROW1

Lucerne

Aug. 9. 1871

Dear Madam—

I am very happy to learn from your testimony that there is already
Edition: current; Page: [229] a widely spread interest among German
women for the cause of the political & social equality of the sexes. I
am much honoured by your wish that some words of approval from myself
should be prefixed to the work you have prepared on “die Zukunft der
Deutschen Volksschule,”2 but I have thought it right to lay down to
myself as a rule, never to give my public recommendation to any work
which I have not read.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Aug 23. 1871

A[vignon]

Hodgson Pratt

Pratt, Hodgson

1674A.


TO HODGSON PRATT1

A[vignon]

Aug 23. 1871

Dear Sir—

I beg to acknowledge your letter of July 27 which owing to my absence
from England has only just reached me.

Your desire for an organization to give true information to England &
France respecting one another & to correct mutual misapprehensions is
very laudable.2 But I believe that the information which it would be
possible to supply, especially on the French side, would be, in the vast
majority of cases, false information. The monstrous absurdities which
have been & still are believed even by highly educated people in France,
& the multitude of mere lies which are invented, circulated, & generally
credited here respecting what takes place in France itself, would make
it impossible for any French Committee to supply England with that
authentic information which they themselves would seldom possess. Things
are a little better in England, but even if an English Committee were
able to lay before the French people the exact truth, no part of it
would be believed except what agreed with the national prejudices or
party prepossessions of each person. For these reasons, I hope too
little from your experiment to be willing to take part in it, though I
shd be most highly gratified if it were successful.

Edition: current; Page: [230]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Sept. 4. 1871

A[vignon]

P.L. Mills

Mills, P.L.

1676A.


TO P.L. MILLS1

A[vignon]

Sept. 4. 1871

Dear Sir—

Your note of the 17th ulto has been forwarded to me here. I only
received while at Luzern one letter which was not intended for you and
this I returned personally to the Luzern post office. I shd add that the
letter in question did not bear your name on the cover.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 9. 1871

A[vignon]

George Gill

Gill, George

1684A.


TO GEORGE GILL1

A[vignon]

Oct. 9. 1871

Dear Sir—

I beg to acknowledge your letter of Sept. 28 & your tract on Tenant
Right.2 I have read both of them with interest but it is out of the
question that I shd make an application to Mr Gladstone tending to
procure for you any pecuniary benefit. I have made it a rule not to use
influence with any Govt for such a purpose even if I possessed it, & to
this rule I could not make you an exception even if I were competent to
judge of the inventions referred to in your letter.

I return the pamphlet as I infer from your letter that you have not at
present any other copy.

Edition: current; Page: [231]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 9 octobre 1871

Avignon

1684B.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Avignon

le 9 octobre 1871

Monsieur

Votre lettre du 18 septembre m’a été envoyée de Londres, mais votre
brochure ne m’est pas encore parvenue.2 Je n’ai pourtant pas besoin
d’attendre son arrivée pour vous témoigner ma profonde sympathie pour
les opinions dont votre lettre m’apprend qu’elle est l’expression. Rien
ne me donne plus d’espérance pour l’avenir de la France, que le
mouvement qui se montre pour l’autonomie de la personne humaine et pour
le gouvernement républicain, fédératif: et je ne doute pas que je ne
trouve dans votre brochure, comme j’ai trouvé dans votre lettre, de
nouveaux motifs d’encouragement à ce sujet.

J’apprends avec plaisir que vous avez collaboré à la traduction de mes
volumes de Mélanges.3 Je vous donne à vous et à M. Boirac4 pleine
liberté de vous qualifier de traducteurs autorisés par moi. Seulement je
vous prie de vouloir bien avertir le lecteur que je n’ai pas vu la
traduction; non pas assurément par méfiance de son mérite, mais parce
que, n’ayant pas le loisir de la lire et de l’examiner, je trouve juste
d’en laisser l’honneur et la responsabilité à qui de droit.

Agréez, Monsieur, l’assurance de ma considération distinguée et de mes
sentiments amicaux.

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 10. 1871

A[vignon]

James Keappoch Hamilton Willcox

James Keappoch Hamilton

1685A.


TO JAMES KEAPPOCH HAMILTON WILLCOX1

A[vignon]

Oct. 10. 1871

P.S. as you say that Mr Leverson2 has printed notes of mine by way of
testimonials Edition: current; Page: [232] for the office of President
of a College,3 it is well you shd know that I never gave him my
permission to do so, & moreover that the notes were all written before
the occurrences which led to his leaving England. I have no knowledge of
those occurrences, nor have I any opinion as to whether they are at all
discreditable to him, but I could not have given him anything of the
nature of a recommendation for such an office without knowing more about
these transactions than I do.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 10. 1871

A[vignon]

Arthur Patchett Martin

Martin, Arthur Patchett

1685B.


TO ARTHUR PATCHETT MARTIN1

A[vignon]

Oct. 10. 1871

Private:

Dear Sir—

I thank you for your letter of the 22nd of April last. The information
it contains relating to the politics of Victoria is very interesting, as
to me much of it was new.

I entirely agree with you that compulsory & secular education is the
most important of all questions for Australia. If this can be obtained,
& successfully worked, all other questions will, in a country like
yours, very soon come right of themselves. It is to be feared that the
new ministry, having a Catholic though one of the best of Catholics at
its head,2 will do all it can to discourage this movement. As for
state-assisted immigration, whether it is desirable or not it clearly
ought not to be carried into effect in opposition to the public opinion
of the colony. But I have always thought that the unoccupied lands of
Australia were prematurely given up to the governments of the several
colonies, & ought to have been reserved as the property of the empire at
large until much greater progress had been made in peopling them. The
renunciation of them was by no means a necessary consequence of the
introduction of responsible government. The step, however, cannot be
retraced & it is to be hoped that the principle of the State being the
sole landlord may be adopted in Australia so far as respects
unappropriated land while there still remains a great quantity of land
in that condition.

I cannot agree with Mr Higinbotham3 in his idea that the legislature shd
consist Edition: current; Page: [233] of only 40 or 50 members, elected
by the whole of the colony as one constituency, & largely remunerated.
Forty or fifty are too few for a deliberative assembly, & too many for
an administrative board, neither is it desirable that the legislature
should administer; & if men are paid two or three thousand a year merely
for legislating, they will think themselves bound to earn their salary
by legislating a great deal too much. Besides, so long as Hare’s system4
is not adopted, the uniting of the whole electorate as one body would
deprive all minorities of even the imperfect representation which the
accidents of local opinion give them & the majority alone would be ever
heard in the legislature.

As to the question of separation, my conviction is, that it shd rest
entirely with the Australian people, & that our Govt & Parlt shd exert
no pressure either way. A time will of course come when the Australian
colonies, feeling strong enough to defend themselves unassisted against
any attack, will think the power of England to involve them in her wars
without consulting them, an evil more than equivalent to the advantage
of English protection. I confess that I shd reject separation, but I do
not think that the federal principle can be worked successfully when the
different members of the confederacy are scattered all over the world; &
I think the English people would prefer separation to an equal
federation.

I hope your university will soon follow the example of the university of
Sydney & that of Chicago, in the admission of women.5 At Chicago even
the law school has lately been opened to them on exactly the same
conditions as to male students.6 Their admission to serve on juries in
the Territory of Wyoming has been, according to the testimony of the
Chief Justice who had opposed it,7 eminently successful.

Pray give my compliments to Mr Rusden.8 It is very fortunate for
Victoria that it contains persons of such enlightened political opinions
as yourself, Mr Rusden & Mr Gresham.9

Edition: current; Page: [234]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Oct. 25. 1871

A[vignon]

Auguste von Littrow

Littrow, Auguste von

1690A.


TO AUGUSTE VON LITTROW1

A[vignon]

Oct. 25. 1871

Dear Madam—

I thank you for your pamphlet2 which I have read with great interest &
which seems to me both well argued and well written. You have confined
yourself to a single item in the large subject of justice to women; but
that one item is of very great importance; & you have the advantage in
that instance, of making out what seems to be a case of necessity, since
from your statements it appears that unless women are admitted to a
large share in the work of public teaching, the popular education which
is the glory of Germany is in danger not merely of remaining stationary
but even of degenerating. I congratulate you cordially on your valuable
contribution to the cause both of women & of education & I hope it is
not the only one which they are destined to receive from you as a
writer.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 10 Decembre 1871

Avignon

Mlle Guillaumin

Guillaumin, Mlle

1699A.


TO MLLE GUILLAUMIN1

Avignon

le 10 Decembre 1871

Mademoiselle

Il n’y a presque pas de changements dans la dernière (la septième)
édition de mes Principes d’Economie Politique.2 Mais la traduction a été
faite, si je ne m’y trompe pas, sur la troisième édition, et il a été
fait assez de changements depuis lors pour qu’il me semble désirable que
le traducteur en tienne compte.3

Ma fille se recommande particulièrement à vos bons souvenirs. Elle a été
beaucoup fatiguée, sans quoi elle se serait donné le plaisir d’aller
chez vous en passant par Paris.

Edition: current; Page: [235]
Veuillez agréer, Mademoiselle, l’expression de ma considération la plus
distinguée.

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

29 Jan., 1872

Auberon Herbert

Herbert, Auberon

1704A.


TO [AUBERON HERBERT]1

[
29 Jan., 1872

]

I have read your letter with warm interest and sympathy, & the practical
effect on my mind would be to wish that you would pursue the plan that
has suggested itself to you, because it would, whatever its result, be
one of those moralizing influences of which there are so few & of which
the world wants so many; & also because the fact that it has suggested
itself to you makes you the fit person to carry it out.

The only point in which I do not agree with you is the impression that
the present time is a time of crisis. I have always felt very strongly
the truth of St. Paul’s saying, “Behold now is the acceptable time:
behold now is the time of salvation.”2 As every day of our lives is a
new year’s day, so the more one reads history & watches one’s own time,
does it appear to me that every time is a time of crisis: & perhaps
those times in which it appears the most on the surface are the least so
in fact; for it is the silent workings in men’s minds which are the true
crises of history. Connected with my disagreement, if I have understood
you rightly, on this point, is my deep agreement with you on the want
now beginning to be felt of new, high, & definite, moral
purposes—purposes capable too of inspiring lasting enthusiasm. But I
think that it will never be possible to work on any great scale on the
minds of the working classes, excepting by the same means & at the same
time that we work upon the minds of the earnest & intelligent among
other classes. In the present state of education & civilisation, working
men of native energy & talent are open to the same influences as other
people: & the most lasting effects upon the more commonplace characters
in their own rank will be produced by these men, & not by their social
superiors, however devoted & earnest.

I look upon it as the great work now to be done, to build up a system of
morals capable of inspiring enthusiasm & satisfying the intellect. My
own belief is that Edition: current; Page: [236] this will be a
development of Xtianity, properly understood; that it must be a
development from the state at which we are now arrived, worked out by
many minds, for that it is a task far beyond the powers of any one; &
that we are all contributing to it,—bringing stones as it were to the
building of the temple, when we attempt to clear up any high point of
morals or philosophy or science, inasmuch as truth will be the great
object of our new system, & the world is beginning to learn how precious
truth is in little things & in great. Thus it seems to me that your plan
might do much, as tending both to love of truth & to human sympathy: but
that lasting progress in the moral nature of all classes must come by
the same means, & that we can only hope for it to come very gradually.

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 20 Decembre 1872

Avignon

1767A.


TO THE JOURNAL DES ÉCONOMISTES1

le 20 Decembre 1872

Abonnement au Journal des Economistes pour l’année 1873

de la part de

J. Stuart Mill

Avignon

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

le 5 février 1873

Tournon (Ardèche)

1773A.


TO THE HOTEL WINDSOR1

Tournon (Ardèche)

le 5 février 1873

M. J.S. Mill prie M. le maître de l’Hotel Windsor2 de lui garder le
petit apartement à l’entresol sur la rue pour vendredi soir le 7
février, ou si cet apartement est pris de lui donner un autre
appartement sur la rue. M. Mill compte arriver vendredi vers 6½ h du
soir et prie qu’il y ait du feu et qu’un diner fut préparé pour son
arrivée.

Edition: current; Page: [237]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

March 15, 1873

Victoria Street S.W.

Leonard Henry Courtney

Courtney, Leonard Henry

1784A.


TO LEONARD HENRY COURTNEY1

10, Albert Mansions

,

Victoria Street S.W.

March 15, 1873

Dear Mr Courtney

Will you do us the pleasure of dining with us here at seven o’clock on
Friday next, March 21st? I am, Dear Mr Courtney

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

April 1873

Victoria Street S.W.

Moncure Daniel Conway

Conway, Moncure Daniel

1795A.


TO MONCURE DANIEL CONWAY1

10 Albert Mansions

Victoria Street. S.W.

[early
April 1873

]

Dear Mr Conway

It would have given my daughter and myself great pleasure to have dined
with you and Mrs Conway,2 and to have met Mr Emerson and his daughter;3
but we have a long standing engagement to dine with Mr and Mrs Cairnes4
on the 12th. I am, Dear Mr Conway

very truly yours

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [238] Edition: current; Page: [239]


UNDATED LETTERS

Edition: current; Page: [240] Edition: current; Page: [241]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

No. 1.


TO HENRY COLE1

Dear Cole

After seeing you I remembered a prior dinner engagement which in an
unfortunate hour I made & should have written to you about it, but that
from what Grant told me I concluded there was no chance for this
Wednesday.

It is provoking, but pray try to fix some other day.

Yours ever

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

India House

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

No. 2.


TO HENRY COLE1

India House

Wedy.

My dear Cole—

I presume this2 is printed only for private use. If it were to appear in
any newspaper or be otherwise published I should wish my name for
various reasons to be struck out.

As it stands, I have no correction to make in what you make me say, as I
have no objection to the substance of it & it only purports to be your
report of a conversation. If I were speaking for myself I should state
my opinion in rather different words, but that, if it is sure not to be
published, is immaterial.

I have not shewn it to Peacock or Melvill3 & had rather not to the
Edition: current; Page: [242] latter—therefore I should not save you any
trouble by becoming your medium of communication with the former.

Yours faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

I.H.

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

No. 3.


TO HENRY COLE1

I.H.

Wedy.

Dear Cole

If I were you I would for the sake of apparent fairness cite rather than
describe the “ambiguous” letter from Hume,2 & I would avoid the words
hallucination or monomania. It seems to me that if you also suppressed
the whole of the concluding paragraph you would not at all weaken the
effect. All which is there said is so completely suggested by the
previous paragraph that you do not strengthen the impression by adding
anything more.

Perhaps also the short note, which is as it were the “lie direct” had
better be omitted.

Yours ever

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Henry Cole

Cole, Henry

No. 4.


TO HENRY COLE1

Thursday

Dear Cole

If the article is to be made up it is I conclude only to save time & not
to preclude alterations afterwards. But I shall see all about it today.

Ever yours

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [243]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday 1834

India House

Edwin Chadwick

Chadwick, Edwin

No. 5.


TO EDWIN CHADWICK1

India House

Monday
 [after
1834

]

Dear Chadwick,

It appears that your official frank is of no validity quoad postage to
or in India—Even the President of the Board of Control sends his India
letters here to be franked by the Chairman, Deputy Chn or Secretary who
alone have the power of franking—& whom I hardly like to ask to frank
anything larger than a letter since I cannot say that it is for strictly
official purposes. Perhaps there may be an opportunity of sending by a
private hand.

yours faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

John Temple Leader

Leader, John Temple

No. 6.


TO JOHN TEMPLE LEADER1

Dear Leader

I have great pleasure in introducing to you Mr Fox, whom I need not say
that you ought to know, & that he ought to know you—I am desirous on
every account to make him and you acquainted, & should probably have
taken another opportunity, if one had not presented itself on which you
may possibly be of use to him. He will explain in what way—

Ever yours truly

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [244]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Nassau William Senior

Senior, Nassau William

No. 7.


TO NASSAU WILLIAM SENIOR1

Dear Senior

I will duly account to Chapman for the cheque.2

I go into town daily at the usual time—about ¼ before 9.3

yours faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday Apr. 1836-Mar. 1840

I.H.

No. 8.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

I.H.

Monday
 [
Apr. 1836-Mar. 1840

]

My dear Sir

The L. & W. review will be published about the end of this month. If
there is any little thing which you could do for it there is still room,
& it would give me much pleasure.

ever yours

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Wedy 1836 and 1846

Ex. Off.

No. 9.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Ex. Off.

Wedy
 [between
1836 and 1846

]

My dear Sir

Mr Bonham’s2 application has been received & is with the Financial
Edition: current; Page: [245] Department (Mr Thornton).3 Nothing has yet
been done respecting it.

Yours faithfully

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

1851

Mr. Stone

Mr. Stone

No. 10.


TO MR. STONE1

[summer; probably before
1851

]

Dear Sir

I am extremely sorry to hear that you are unwell—and still more sorry
that you sat up waiting for me—especially as I was a little behind my
time; I was too late partly by being too early, and partly by making too
much haste—according to the old proverb.

I shall leave town for a few weeks on Friday night—if we could finish
this matter first it would be better, but if it would task your health
or your convenience in the least, we will wait till I return—which I
shall regret the less, as it will be somewhat inconvenient to myself to
come here tomorrow evening—however I think I could come.

Yours ever

J.S. Mill

A note addressed to me at the India House, early tomorrow, will reach me
in time. I leave at four.

Edition: current; Page: [246]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

thursday Aug. 1858

I[ndia] H[ouse]

Catherine Stanley

Stanley, Catherine

No. 11.


TO CATHERINE STANLEY1

I[ndia] H[ouse]

thursday
 [before
Aug. 1858

]

Dear Mrs Stanley—

I would come to you tomorrow evening with great pleasure but I am
engaged, I am afraid for all the evening.

yours ever

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Monday Aug. 1858

I.H.

No. 12.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

I.H.

Monday
 [before
Aug. 1858

]

My dear Sir

I will certainly have the pleasure of attending the celebration2 on the
25th July.

Yours truly

J.S. Mill

Edition: current; Page: [247]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

Saturday. Dec. 1859

Saint Véran, Avignon

William Charles Bonaparte Wyse

Wyse, William Charles Bonaparte

No. 13.


TO WILLIAM CHARLES BONAPARTE WYSE1

Saint Véran, Avignon

Saturday.
 [after
Dec. 1859

]

Dear Sir

Though very busy, I shall be happy to see you and your two friends:2 I
shall be in town this afternoon about three, and will have the pleasure
of calling on you then if convenient to you. If not I shall be glad to
see you here between two and three o’clock on Monday. I am

yours very truly

J.S. Mill

John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

No. 14.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Dear Sir—

I very much recommend writing as an occupation of leisure, & as a means
of self-improvement, but not as a profession, or in the hope of making
money by it. The very best writers have almost always to wait many years
before they attain the reputation which procures lucrative literary
employment. If you like to send me your essay, I will willingly read it,
but however high my opinion of it may be, I cannot recommend it to
editors, from which even in the case of personal friends I find it
necessary to abstain. I see no objection to a young writer himself
offering his writings to editors or publishers. He must expect to be
generally unsuccessful, & will do well to persevere in writing & to be
content with such chance successes as may offer themselves.

Edition: current; Page: [248]
John Stuart Mill

Mill, John Stuart

No. 15.


TO AN UNIDENTIFIED CORRESPONDENT1

Gentlemen—

I have received from you an acknowledgment of the receipt of my notice
for Policy No. [blank] but no acknowledgment of my Policy No. [blank] &
of the fact that you have received the original policies Nos. & all of
which came under the same cover as the notice No. [blank] receipt of
which you have acknowledged. I shd be obliged therefore by receiving an
acknowledgment in form of the original policies of both numbers.